TWO TREATISES.

The First, Concerning Reproaching and Censure: The Second, An ANSWER to Mr
SERjEANT's Sure-footing.

To which are annexed THREE SERMONS Preached upon several Occasions, and very
useful for these Times.

By the late Learned and Reverend WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, and sold by William Oliver, in Norwich. MDCLXXXIV.

TO THE Most Reverend FATHER in GOD, WILLIAM By DIVINE PROVIDENCE LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, HIS GRACE, Primate of all ENGLAND and Metropolitan;
and one of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council,
May it please Your GRACE,
I Humbly present to your Grace's Patronage, some Remains of an excellent
Person, for whom Your Grace was pleased to express a great value while he
lived, and whom You are still pleased, upon all occasions, to mention with
great kindness. Had he lived to have published any of these Discourses himself,
he would have chosen no other Patron; and had he lived a little longer, he
would have found, that he had needed no other. For since some may wonder, that
so great a Man should go off the Stage with no greater Character, than one of
the Town-Preachers at Lyn Regis; it is fit the World should know, that Your
Grace, who is the peculiar Patron of modest and neglected Worth, designed
better things for him.

That great honor I have for Dr. Falkner's Memory, to whose wise instructions
I owe that little Knowledge I have attained to, would easily have persuaded me
to have given the World a more particular account of his Life, which was
adorned with as many eminent Virtues, as I believe this last Age can show in
any one man. But though distance of place could not interrupt our
Correspondence nor our Friendship, yet it has for many years deprived me of the
familiarities and intimacies of his conversation, which give the truest
Character of any man; and I dare not undertake a work, wherein I can neither
serve my Friend, nor satisfy the World.

As for these posthumous Treatises, he designed only the first of them for the
Press, which concerns Reproaching and Censures; which he observed, was grown so
common a fault, that it is generally thought to be none: and therefore in the
first Part, he shows the great Evil and Sinfulness of it, and how
irreconcilable it is with a true Christian Spirit. But then he considered,
that as men, who are most guilty of this vice, have no sense of it themselves;
so they are very apt to charge those with it, who are not guilty. Whoever has
had the courage and honesty to reprove the Schisms and Factions, that are among
us, and to censure the errors and miscarriages of the several Sects and Parties
of Christians, have been branded with the ignominious name of Railers, and
Revilers, and Accusers of the Brethren; and therefore in his Second Part, he
shows, that such just and sober Censures as these, which are designed to
convince men of their errors and mistakes, are so far from being a fault, that
they are a necessary duty. And because some men are transported with such an
intemperate zeal, that they do not impartially consider, what is truly
blameworthy in those, who differ from them, but censure and condemn, at all
adventures, whatever is said or done by men of such a Party or Character; He
proposed to himself, particularly to consider the several Sects and Professions
of Christians, and what it is, which deserves reproof and Censure in them:
which he has done with great Candor and Judgment, but did not live to perfect
it. For we have no reason to doubt, but the Presbyterians should have had their
share too, as well as the other Sects amongst us, but either that Part was not
done, or it was lost, for no Remains could be found of it.

As for his Answer to Mr. Serjeant's Sure-Footing, that was written many years
since, and designed by him for the Press; but by that time he had finished it,
he found that work done to his hand by a very excellent Pen, which put an end
to that Controversy, and therefore he laid it by without any intention to make
it public. But since his Death, some of his Friends have had other thoughts of
it, and indeed, it is so useful a Discourse, that though there is no need of a
new Answer to Sergeant, since the Publication of Dr. Tillotson's Rule of Faith,
yet I believe it will not be unacceptable to Learned men.

He penned very few Sermons in long hand, which, I suppose, is the reason, why
there are no more published. These that are, besides the usefulness of the
several Subjects, may serve as a specimen of his plain and pious way of
instructing the people.

My Lord, I should be very ungrateful, should I neglect this opportunity to
make my public acknowledgements to Your Grace for those extraordinary favors
I have so lately received from You; on which the ease and comfort of my life
does so much depend, that I am for ever bound to implore the Divine Majesty to
bless Your Grace with all happiness and prosperity in this life, and with the
rewards of an exemplary Piety and Virtue in the next, which is the hearty
Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Grace's most dutiful Servant, William Sherlock.

A TABLE OF THE AUTHOR's CONTENTS.
OF REPROACHING and CENSURE. The First Part,
Concerning the irregular Excesses, and great Sinfulness, of uncharitable
Evil-speaking: especially of Superiors.
CHAP. I. SOME preparatory considerations, concerning the evil of Reproaching.
Page 1 CHAP. II. The excessive disorders, and unreasonable extravagancy of
speaking evil, when men give way to their passions and uncharitable temper,
manifested especially from the Censures our Savior underwent. Sect. 1. The
best deserving persons, are often under obloquy and undeserved Censure. p. 12
Sect. 2. Who are apt to be prevailed with to be guilty of the sinful
reproaching others, and how far this sin becomes spreading and contagious. p 24
Sect. 3. The monstrous and unreasonable strangeness of those censures, which
have been unjustly charged on the most innocent and excellent men, and
particularly on our blessed Lord and Savior himself. p. 32
CHAP. III. The manifold sinfulness, and severe punishment of reproaching and
speaking evil, especially against Superiors. p. 56 CHAP. IV. Contumelious
evil-speaking in general; and all irreverent and disrespectful behavior,
toward Rulers and Governors, is contrary to the life of Christ; in those
things, wherein we are particularly commanded to imitate his Example: and S.
Paul's carriage, Acts 23.3, 4, 5. considered. p. 76
The Second Part,
Concerning the usefulness of a sober Censure of such Parties or persons, who
practice evil, or propagate falsehood; with an enquiry into some different
parties, who make profession of Christianity.
CHAP. I. TO speak against evil persons and practices duly and discreetly, and
to the just discrediting and disparaging bad Principles and Doctrines, is
reasonable and good; with an account of what Rules are here to be observed. p.
121 CHAP. II. The Principles and Practices, maintained in the Church of Rome,
are such as deserve severe Censure and a note of infamy. Sect. 1. The Romish
Church and its Doctrines, and the putting them in practice, is chargeable with
great disturbances, mischievous to the peace and order of the World. p. 141
Sect. 2. The Doctrines maintained in the Church of Rome, and the Constitutions
therein established, are great hindrances to holiness of life, and true
devotion in Religion, and comply very far with Wickedness and Debauchery. p.
159 Sect. 3. Those Doctrines and Practices are publicly declared and asserted
in the Church of Rome, and are by the Authority thereof established, which are
highly derogatory to the just honor and dignity of our Savior. p. 186 Sect.
4. Of the public allowance or injunction of such things amongst the Papists,
as either debase the Majesty of God, or give divine honor to something else
besides God. p. 214 Sect. 5. Integrity too much neglected, and Religion so
ordered and modelled, by many Doctrines and Practices in the Church of Rome, as
to represent a contrivance of deceit, Interest and Policy. p. 241
CHAP. III. Of our Dissenters, where some of the different sorts of them are
first particularly considered, and then follows a more general consideration of
them jointly. Sect. 1. Of Quakers. p. 262 Sect. 2. Of the Fifth Monarchy men,
and the Millenary Opinion. p. 275 Sect. 3. Of Anabaptists. p. 279 Sect. 4. Of
Independents. p. 292

An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's Discourse Entitled, Sure-Footing in Christianity.
THE first Discourse examined, showing what properties belong to the Rule of
Faith. p. 321 Answer to Disc. 2. showing, that the two first Properties of the
Rule of Faith, do agree to Scripture. p. 330 An Answer to his third Discourse,
showing, that the three next Properties of the Rule of Faith, are agreeable to
Scripture. p. 349 An Answer to the fourth Discourse, showing, that the two last
Properties of the Rule of Faith, do agree to Scripture. p. 367 An Answer to the
fifth Discourse, inquiring into Tradition, and showing, that none of the
Properties of the Rule of Faith, agree to it. p. 383 An Answer to his sixth
Discourse, showing, that he has given neither Demonstration, nor probable
Reason, to manifest Tradition indefectible a priori. p. 404 An Answer to his
seventh Discourse, concerning Heresy. p. 416 An Answer to his eighth
Discourse, showing, that uninterruptedness of Tradition, is not proved a
posteriori. p. 433 An Answer to his ninth Discourse, showing, that the way of
Oral Tradition in the Church, has not so much strength as other matters of
Humane Authority. p. 451 Answer to his Corollaries. p. 460 An Inquiry after,
and Examination of, the consent of Authority to the foregoing Discourse. p. 468
Sect. 1. An Inquiry what is declared the Rule of Faith by the Scriptures. p.
469 Sect. 2. What the Synod of Lateran owned for the Rule of Faith. p. 473
Sect. 3. Of the Council of Sardica, and what it owned as the Rule of Faith. p.
476 Sect. 4. What was owned as the Rule of Faith, by the second Council of
Nice. p. 478 Sect. 5. What were the grounds of the Catholic Faith asserted
against Arianism, in and at the time of the first Nicene Council? p. 484 Sect.
6. What was received as the Rule of Faith, at the time of the second General
Council at Constantinople? p. 486 Sect. 7. What was owned as the Rule of Faith,
at the time of the third General Council at Ephesus? p. 487 Sect. 8. What was
owned as the Rule of Faith, at the time of the fourth General Council at
Chalcedon? p. 489 Sect. 9. Of the Rule of Faith, acknowledged by the Fathers,
and first of Coelestine. p. 491 Sect. 10. What was the Rule of Faith, owned by
Irenaeus? p. 492 Sect. 11. What was owned by Origin as the Rule of Faith? p.
497 Sect. 12. What was the Rule of Faith owned by Tertullian? p. 501 Sect. 13.
What Clemens Alexandrinus held as the Rule of Faith? p. 506 Sect. 14. What was
owned as the Rule of Faith by Athanasius? p. 507 Sect. 15. What was owned as
the Rule of Faith, by S. Basil? p. 510 Sect. 16. What was by S. Austin
accounted the Rule of Faith? p. 512 Sect. 17. What Petrus Chrysologus owned as
the Rule of Faith? p. 515 Sect. 18. Answering the remainder of his Discourse.
p. 516

Sermons Preached upon several Occasions.
A Sermon Preached at Lyn S. Margaret 's, at the Bishop's Visitation, October.
15. 1677. on 2 Cor. 5.18. -- And has given to us the Ministry of
Reconciliation. p. 523 A Sermon Preached at Norwich, March 2. 1678. on Joel
2.12. Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your
heart. p. 555 A Sermon Preached on S. Matthew. 5.20. For I say unto you, That
except your Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. p. 577
OF REPROACHING AND CENSURE.
The First Part:
Concerning the irregular Excesses, and great Sinfulness, of uncharitable
evil-speaking; especially of Superiors.
CHAP. I.
Some preparatory considerations, concerning the evil of Reproaching.
1. REligion has that general influence upon the life of the pious man, that
it commands and governs his thoughts and affections, his words and actions. But
where the true rules of piety are neglected, very many indulge themselves, in
great disorder and miscarriages, in every one of these particulars. Among other
things, a strange licentious liberty is taken, by no small number of men, in
speaking injuriously, and casting reproaches and unreasonable censures upon
others, contrary to the rules of our Christian profession; yea, even upon men
of the best principles, and the best lives, and not sparing our Rulers and
Governors, in Church and State.

2. And this evil temper has so far insinuated it self, Evil speaking a vice
dangerously prevailing at this time,
and is become so spreading, and so open and manifest; that I account it one of
the prevailing vices of our days. And when men are ashamed to own many other
sinful practices, or to show any approbation of them; as of drunkenness,
swearing, uncleanness, oppression and such like; uncharitable speeches of
others, are entertained with a secret delight and pleasure, and often with open
expressions of satisfaction. And this shows the great defilement of this sin,
which not only prevails on the passions and affections, by corrupting and
disordering them; but it also debaucheth, and perverteth the very inward
principles of Conscience it self. I wish that with respect to very many
persons, we had not now just cause, to take up the complaint of Naz. Or. 1.
(...), and it ought to be reproved, and checked,
Gr. Nazianzen, concerning the time he lived in, That that man was best
esteemed of, not he who being governed by the fear of God, durst not speak an
idle word, but he who speaks the most contumeliously against others, either
openly or by sly intimations.

3. And therefore I shall now design to speak somewhat, which may manifest the
great evil of this uncharitable behavior, especially toward our Superiors,
and may be sufficient to warn men against it. Such an undertaking as this, is
very agreeable to that particular Apostolical direction, and precept of S.
Paul; who charged Titus in the work of his Ministry, Tit. 3.1, 2. to put men in
mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be
ready to every good work. To speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, but
gentle, showing all meekness to all men. Whatsoever esteem some persons will
have, of such instructions and truths as these are; the Apostle with respect
hereto commands Titus, v. 8. these things I will that thou affirm constantly;
and further declares in the end of that verse, these things are good and
profitable unto men. And it must needs be a fit season, and very requisite, to
declare against any sin, when it is grown to that height, that men will openly
avow it, and become bold and confident in the practice of it, without shame or
regret. And that what I shall speak of this Subject may be the more carefully
regarded, Some preparatory considerations proposed.
I shall in my entrance upon it take some notice (which I shall afterward,
further pursue) of the great hurt and danger of this sin, and its being
inconsistent with piety, and true holiness and Religion. The tongue, S. James
says, is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison, Jam. 3.8. and therefore it is
no little mischief which proceeds from the ill government thereof.

4. Uncharitable reproaches are, First, 1. Reproaching is contrary to the
highest and best examples, set before us in the Scripture,
Unsuitable to the best and highest examples, which the Scripture proposes for
our imitation; and contrary and hateful to the wisest and most excellent
persons. But it is most reasonable for us to follow such examples, since such
persons who are of clearest knowledge, and free from all passionate and sinful
inclinations, can most perfectly discern good, and are fitly qualified to make
the best choice. But this disorder is so far opposite to true goodness, that
though rash men may not duly observe the evil thereof, yet as an evident
conviction of the great sinfulness contained therein, especially in reproaching
Governors, S. Jude tells us that Michael the Archangel when contending with
the Devil, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, Jude 9. And yet
inconsiderate and passionate men dare venture on this sin without fear, though
a person of so great wisdom and knowledge as the Archangel, durst not do it,
and though the Apostle and the Holy Ghost himself, propose his example, as a
manifest condemnation of such transgressors. And those pious Christians who
have been best acquainted with the Spirit of Christianity, have accounted (as
every man ought to do) this instance to be of great force. Hence Hieron. in
Tit. c. 3.
S. Hierome from this instance of the Archangel, urges the necessity of a
careful practice of that Christian duty, to speak evil of no man. And when S.
Peter had observed, what a daring presumption some evil men were arrived unto,
that they were not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, he in like manner adds, 2
Pet. 2.10, 11. whereas Angels which are greater in power and might, bring not
railing accusations against them before the Lord: and we should do the will of
God on Earth, as it is done by them in Heaven. Agreeably to these we have the
great example of our Lord and Savior, which is proposed for our imitation, 1
Pet. 2.23. Who when he was reviled, he reviled not again. And besides these
things, we may discern how much the holy God disliketh, and is displeased with
this evil practice, by his laws and precepts condemning it, and by the
threatenings he has denounced, and the punishments he will inflict upon those
who are guilty of this sin; but of these I shall discourse more hereafter.

5. But this evil practice is very agreeable to the temper and disposition of
the evil spirit: and thereupon Basil. Ep. 75. Chrysostom. Hom. de Diabol. Tentat.
Andr. Caesar. in Apoc. c. 34. and is a great compliance with the Evil one.
ancient Writers have accounted the name of (...) a calumniator, to have been
very properly given to him. For pride, uncharitableness, promoting mischief,
and departing from truth, all which things are manifestly joined together in
this sin, do make up very much of the nature of the evil one. These things
therefore are both pleasing to him, and a considerable resemblance of him. And
indeed the Devil has done a great part of his work in the world, by this very
practice; and it becomes every Christian, to detest the following his example,
and the carrying on his work. The first transgression of mankind, was
occasioned, by his misreporting, and misrepresenting the intentions of Gods
Government, and his laws. And one of the most effectual means, whereby Satan
has hindered the greater progress of the Christian Religion, especially in the
Primitive times, when Religion it self continued incorrupt; was by defaming
both our holy Religion, and them who heartily embraced it, and by prevailing
upon a great part of the world to believe much evil concerning it, and
entertain great prejudices against it. To this end such calumnies were
invented, and spread abroad, as that the assembling of Christians together to
partake of the holy Eucharist, were meetings to perpetrate villainies, in
murdering and eating of an Infant, and practicing uncleanness, as many of the
Writers of the first Ages have declared, who have refuted such notorious
slanders. And the Christians themselves were aspersed as men of inflexible
obstinacy, and a perverse will: and this even Plin. Ep. l. 10. Ep. 97.
Pliny charge them with, who vindicates them from the forementioned crimes.
They were also reputed Atheists, as Just. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr declares, because they owned not the Gentile Idolatry, And many
other things of like nature might be added. Whereas if Christianity had been
generally represented, and apprehended in its genuine excellencies, its amiable
purity and truth, and its Divine Authority; it would have commanded a more
general submission among men. But by the wiles of Satan, and the malice of his
instruments, such calumnies were spread abroad, that it was in its first
manifestation every where spoken against, Act. 28.22.

6. Secondly, 2. It is inconsistent with true Holiness,
The practice of this sin is inconsistent with true piety and integrity of
heart. For as the fruit shows the nature of the tree; so an ill-governed tongue
is a plain evidence of a corrupt heart, and speaks passion and uncharitableness
to prevail there, where meekness and love should take place. This our Lord
testifies, Mat. 12.34, 35. Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth
evil things. And this is that which the usual observation of the world has
testified; as Hierocl. in Pyth. Carm. p. 140. (...).
Hierocles declared, men speak either good, or evil, sutably to the contrary
inclinations of their minds. There is indeed some difference here, between the
evil and the good heart. The man of a malicious spirit, may sometimes speak
fair, and smoothly even unto flattery, and a wicked man may speak good words,
and act the hypocrite; and the reason of this is, because an evil heart may
incline the man to dissemble and speak falsely; but such words though they carry
a fair appearance, are evil words, because full of fraud, unfaithfulness and
dissimulation. But where the heart is good and upright, there true integrity
prevails; and though an evil man may in many outward things, speak and do as
the good man does, out of hypocrisy, and still continue wicked; no good man
can speak and do evil things, according to the practice of the sinful and
vicious person; and whosoever does so, must be really wicked; because goodness
and uprightness, both hate all counterfeiting and dissembling, and all other
compliances with sin and evil.

7. and speaks a prevalency of sin.
But there is so much evil and wickedness contained under this sin of defaming
others, that a great part of the testimony which the Apostle gave, of the Jews
being estranged from true goodness and piety, and being under sin, is included
herein. He declares from the writings of the Old Testament, Romans 3.13, 14, 15.
Their throat is an open Sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit,
the poison of asps is under their lips. Whose mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness. Their feet are swift to shed blood, etc. Now the sense of most part
of these words, is plainly contained in this sin I am declaring against. And
when the Apostle mentions their mouth being full of cursing, it may be worthy
our observation, that contumelious speaking against and reproaching others,
does in some degree, really include in it, the true and proper nature of
cursing; it being a plain declaration of the persons wishing and desiring evil,
to him of whom he speaks. And what S. Paul adds, that their feet are swift to
shed blood, even this is frequently the natural effect of the same sin. For
when men by evil speaking, especially of their Superiors, have wrought
themselves and others, into a greater dislike of them, and hatred toward them,
how often this has fomented fierce passions, and wrought dispositions to
cruelty, and put men upon insurrections and forwardness of shedding blood; the
Histories of all times, and the remembrance of this last Age in our own Nation,
will give undeniable evidence. Now such a temper, (which gives an apparent
indication, that they who practiced such things, were turned aside from God,
and the ways of piety,) cannot be thought reconcilable with the holiness, and
purity of the Christian Religion.

8. Thirdly, This practice is mighty dangerous, 3. It exposes the offender to
condemnation.
with respect to men's great and eternal interests. Many are too neglectful in
calling themselves to an account for their words, but God has assured us, that
at the great day he will take an account of them, and will not then allow that
liberty, that men now give themselves in evil speaking, but even this sin may
be sufficient to bring upon them eternal condemnation. Our Lord has declared,
Matt. 12.36, 37. That of every idle word, men shall give an account in the day
of Judgment. For by their words, they shall be justified; and by their words,
they shall be condemned. And these words of our Savior, are so solemn and
weighty, as laying down a rule of proceeding, in the future judgment and
condemnation; that they ought not to be slighted and disregarded, but to be
seriously pondered, and considered. Many of the ancient Writers, interpret this
Text concerning such words as were not useful and profitable to edification.
Thus S. Basil, S. Hierom, Greg. Magnus, and others. And Iren. ad^^ Haeres. l.
4. c. 31.
Irenaeus mentions them as such a Doctrine of our Savior, whereby he advances
and exalts the Christian Religion, and the rules and precepts thereof. And it
is thence inferred, that if such words which are not of use to good, shall be
under the heavy condemnation of the great Day, much more those which are
contumelious, and include evil.

9. But this strict interpretation, Mat. 12.36. Concerning every idle word,
explained.
would deny Christians the liberty of ordinary conversation, and that freedom
of familiar speaking, concerning common affairs, which is necessary thereunto,
and it cannot well be thought that our Savior, whose yoke is easy, would lay
such a severe restraint upon his Disciples, under pain of eternal damnation.
And therefore the notion entertained by Grotius, and Dr. Hammond, that by every
idle word, is understood every false and evil word, (including what is
unseemly, and unbecoming Sobriety) is the much more probable sense of our
Saviors speech; and the account they give of it, is very reasonable and
considerable. And this is a sense that wants not the authority of some of the
Ancients. Thus Theophylact expounds these words, and so does also S.
Chrysostom, both upon S. Matthew, and Chrysostom. Sermon. 62. in Paralyt.
elsewhere. And Eus. praep. Ev. l. 1. (...).
Eusebius declares, that upon account of these words of our Savior, the
Christians would not admit either any lie, or any reproach, nor any filthy, nor
any unseemly word.

10. This sense is also agreeable to the manner of the Scripture expression, in
diverse other places, where it speaks of things, and words hurtful and evil,
under such phrases, as most directly signify their being not useful. Thus S.
Paul calls such words, as turn men from piety, (...), empty or vain words,
Ephesians. 5.6. and (...), empty or vain babbling, 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 2.16. and the
expressions of an empty word, and an idle word, are not much unlike; but under
that phrase the Apostle evidently intends, wicked and sinful words. So when the
Idols of the Gentiles are often called vanities, as Act. 14.15. and the adhering
to them, a becoming vain in their imaginations, Romans 1.21. it is not only
intended that these things are void of goodness, but that they are things
abominable. So the Apostle intends, that it will be of pernicious consequence
to men, when those who watch for their souls, give up their account with grief,
when he only expresses it to be unprofitable, Heb. 13.17. And the Holy
Scripture calls the works of darkness unfruitful, when it designs them to be
accounted hurtful, Ephesians. 5.11.

11. And this interpretation of these words of our Lord, accords very well with
the truth delivered in other Scriptures, that revilers and liars, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, and that his Religion is vain, who bridleth not his
tongue. It is very suitable also to the occasion, on which our Savior spoke
these words, which was the Pharisees defaming his Miracles, and him in working
them; as if he did them by Beelzebub. And therefore this speech has a
particular respect to words of calumny; The sad doom of Reproachers hence
observed.
and speaks the heavy doom of such persons, as please themselves with speaking
evil of others, when Christ himself shall come to judge. Let every Christian
therefore stand in awe of this threatening of our Lord, and carefully observe
that precept of S. James, Jam. 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as those that
shall be judged by the law of liberty. Both our words and actions will be
hereafter judged, according to that Gospel, which passes a Sentence against
reproaching expressions. And the Gospel is such a law of liberty, that besides
other advantages, they who will seriously mind their duty, may under it, and by
the grace thereof, be set free from the power and rule of their passions and
lusts: and therefore the serving these under the grace of the Gospel, is
utterly inexcusable.

12. Fourthly, 4. A pious government of the tongue, is an excellent Christian
perfection.
The good and pious government of the tongue, is a very considerable perfection
in the practice of Religion. For this manifests such a person, to have gotten
the victory over the passions, and disorderly motions of his mind, which are
apt in others to discover themselves by rash words; the tongue being a quick
and glib mover, and often forward to express any prevailing irregular
discomposure of the Spirit. Hence Jam. 3.2. If any man offend not in word, the
same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body. But these words
of that Apostle must be so understood, as to speak particularly the perfection
of him, who thus behaves himself, upon the true principles of Christianity. For
it must be acknowledged, that passionate and reproachful words, may be
suppressed in some, by the advantage of their natural temper, of mildness and
courteousness, which does not much incline them to this sin, whilst they live
in the practice of others. In others they may be restrained by the rules of
policy and subtilty, and a strong resolution in the managing of some design;
and much may be done in others by mere rational and Philosophical
considerations. There are many instances among the ancient Philosophers, and
their followers, of such persons as gained a considerable mastery of their
passions, and a great command of their words and actions. Among others,
Socrates was a rare instance hereof, if he came any thing nigh that admirable
character, that Xenoph. Memor. l. 1. p. 710. (...).
Xenophon gives him, That no man ever saw Socrates do any action, or heard him
speak any word, that was contrary to Religious piety, or unholy. This was
mighty considerable, though we understand it, only with respect to the rules of
morality, admitted under the Pagan Philosophy. And it is unbecoming Christians,
to come short of such examples, when their Religion does so wonderfully go
beyond all the principles, of Ethnic Philosophy.

13. Where this is wanting, the Christian spirit has not had its due effect.
Christianity tends to bring men into a lively sense of the only true God; to a
clear knowledge of that excellent revelation, delivered by our Savior; it
guides unto that universal purity, which excludes all the Idolatry, and other
vices, which the most refined Paganism did admit; it shows obedience to its
precepts, to be of the highest concernment imaginable; from the plainest
manifestation of the great account, and judgment to come, and the future state
either of endless glorious perfection, or of intolerable torment. And it also
most expressly manifests the great necessity of well governing the tongue, both
as to the practice of Religion, and the obtaining everlasting happiness; and it
affords the aids and grace of the Holy Spirit, to assist and enable us, to the
performance of all those duties, it injoyns upon us. Now this Religion cannot
be received in any considerable degree, by them who entertain the practice of
evil speaking and reproaching; which is contrary and opposite to it, to the
author of it, and to the obtaining the good it proposes to its followers. But
where the true fear of God, and a conscientious regard to all the rules of the
Christian life, have prevailed, for the well-ordering of the tongue; it may be
expected that they will have a like power and efficacy, for the government of
the whole man. And where this member is disordered, it becomes an incendiary,
and as a pestilential Contagion, spreads abroad venom and evil: and in S.
James's expression, it sets on fire the course of nature, and it is set on fire
of hell; who also says it is a world of iniquity, and defiles the whole body,
Jam. 3.6. And the Great miscarriages of the tongue, which in that Chapter are
complained of, with diverse earnest and emphatical expressions, appear plainly
to be the censuring and speaking evil of others, and the promoting and exciting
strife and contention.

CHAP. II.
The excessive disorders, and unreasonable extravagancy of speaking evil, when
men give way to their passions and uncharitable temper, manifested especially
from the Censures our Savior underwent.
SECT. I.
The best deserving persons, are often under obloquy and undeserved Censure.


1. Of the great disorder of an ill-governed tongue, in censuring and
reproaching. 2. Of the sinfulness of this practice, and the great guilt thereof.

2. First, The tongue is such an unruly evil, as S. James calls it, Jam. 3.8.
that when men indulge themselves in uncharitableness, and censoriousness, it
puts them upon the contriving, Censoriousness is unruly, and wonderfully
extravagant,
or pursuing the most unaccountable, and unreasonable calumnies and slanders.
Good Hezekiah shall fall under the lavish revilings of a Rabshakeh; and his
reformation excellently and piously performed, will be condemned as impious.
And Christianity it self was made a matter of reproach by Saul, whilst he was a
blasphemer, a persecuter, and injurious, and by many others who professed
themselves enemies unto it: and the Christians in general were spoken of as
evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.12. But we cannot better discern how ungovernable and
extravagant the censorious and uncharitable tongue is, than by considering the
instances of our blessed Savior, and other excellent men. Even the Holy Jesus
when he conversed upon Earth, escaped not the sharp and bitter reproaches of
reviling tongues, though he deserved no censure, nor gave any just occasion for
any. The persons considered who bear reproach.
And therefore what he and other good men met with, will abundantly manifest
the strange unruliness of a defaming temper, which is contained under no
bounds, and limits of truth, justice or charity.

3. This may especially appear by our enquiring into three things: 1. What the
great excellencies were, notwithstanding which he and the best of men have
suffered reproach? 2. Who those persons were by whom they were reviled and evil
spoken of? 3. What some part of the accusation and charge was, which they drew
up against him; and other pious men?

4. Qu. 1. What were the great excellencies of our Lord, Christ himself, and
the most worthy persons not secure from it.
and other good men, notwithstanding which they underwent reproach? And these
were so exceeding eminent in him, and manifested by such full and undeniable
evidence; that it may be just matter of wonder, that they should not be
generally admired, and that all who conversed with him, should not mightily
reverence him. Hence Orig. cont. Cells. l. 1. (...).
Origin was of opinion, that even on this account our Lord might forbear to
answer any thing before Pilate, to the false Witnesses who appeared against
him, because his pure and innocent life was a sufficient confutation of their
false testimony. It must indeed be acknowledged, that no other person upon
Earth, ever was so excellent as he was. But hereupon the considering how he was
treated among men, is so much the more convictive evidence, that it may be the
lot of the most worthy men, to be traduced and defamed in the World. And if
this was the Masters portion; it is the less to be wondered, if any of his
Servants meet with the same; and as himself had said, if they call the master
of the house Beelzebub, how much more will they call them of his household?
Mat. 10.25.

For,

5. First, He was the most holy person. He did no sin, neither was guile found
in his mouth, 1. Persons signally pious and good, are often evil spoken of.
and yet he was reviled, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23. Innocence and purity in the highest
measure, (yea even in him above all measure) are no sufficient security, for
the avoiding censures. But if the best and most holy men, will not seek to
comply with the humors of them, who are eagerly bent to serve their errors,
even this their firm and steadfast uprightness and integrity, shall turn to
their reproach. And there is so much hurry and fury in disordered passions,
that it is as reasonable to expect, that a storm and tempest should avoid every
fruitful tree, as that uncharitable and undeserved censures, should not be
fixed upon any good men, Satan will find some matter of reflection to cast upon
Job, though God himself gives him this character, that he was a perfect and
upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil. Even while the Scribes and
Pharisees were in great vogue, with the people, and highly admired by them; the
blessed Jesus, whose holy life and doctrine might recommend him, to every man's
conscience, was despised and rejected. And the true Prophets who were sent
before our Lord, were hated, reproached, and their name cast out as evil, Luke
6.22, 23. whilst the false Prophets, who complied with the disordered
inclinations of the people, were so acceptable to them, that all men spoke well
of them, v. 26. The best and most faithful and sincere men, deserve a general
applause; but they so rarely meet with any thing like it, that our Savior
declared, woe be to you when all men speak well of you, Luke 6.26.

6. And since the progress of Christianity, the most excellent persons have in
the several ages of the Church, often undergone the most undeserved calumnies,
from other professed Christians. Thus Athan. Ap. ad Constant. and alib.
Athanasius was falsely charged by his adversaries, with disloyalty, with
sacrilegious irreverence, to the most holy Mysteries of Christianity, with
uncleanness, cruel acts of violence, and other such like heinous crimes; from
all which, he cleared himself to the shame and confusion of his accusers. S.
Basil in several of his Basil. Ep. 33, 75, 79, 86, etc.
Epistles, takes notice of the various and injurious aspersions, which were
cast upon him, even of so high a nature, that he was reported to be a
blasphemer and a madman. And the like might be observed concerning Gr.
Nazianzen, S. Austin, and diverse other persons of incomparable worth, and
singular eminency in the Christian Church. And it is a thing too frequent and
obvious, that when the Professors of Christianity, are divided into different
parties and interests, they who are the worst spirited men, are forward to act,
as enemies do in war; if they know any man of the greatest worth, who is of the
opposite side, if he be within their reach, they will especially endeavor to
wound and strike at him. But such things show how far they are gone aside from
true Christianity, while they pretend to be zealous for it.

7. But the truly pious man, though so far as concerns his detractors, and
those who are misguided by them, he is grieved, and affected with tender pity
and compassion, to see how Satan beguiles and ensnares them, to their own hurt;
yet so far as concerns himself, he can bear the undeserved censures of his
integrity with inward comfort and peace, and an indisturbed mind. Yea he can,
as S. Paul did, take pleasure in reproaches, 2 Cor. 12.10. upon the great
encouragement given by our Savior himself, Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when
men shall revile, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against
you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward
in heaven. Thus Aug. cont. Jul. l. 1. c. 1.
S. Austin begins his Book against Julian the Pelagian, in telling him, that he
should not speak the truth, if he should say he did contemn and not regard the
slanders and reviling words, which Julian had uttered against him; for they
were matter of joy to him, so far as concerned himself; but they administered
occasions of sorrow so far as concerned Julian, who wrote them, and those who
were seduced and deceived by him. But they who allow themselves to desame the
best men, will be far from finding comfort at last in these practices; since he
that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just; even they both are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15.

8. Secondly, 2. Men who are most serviceable to the world, and do most good in
it, are often misrepresented.
The Holy Jesus was one, whose business and care it was, wholly to do good, and
yet met with much contumelious reproach. He came to make all eternally happy,
who would be guided by him; and took the most effectual course, for the
complete accomplishing the true advancement of man, and managed the designs of
goodness to the best and highest purposes. He came to recover man from a sad
and dangerous estate; and his promoting the great welfare of men was manifest,
from the holiness of his doctrine, which wonderfully purified the minds of men;
and from the outward acts of his power being employed for good, in casting out
Devils, healing all that were diseased, and such like excellent works. And he
was as Cl. Alex. Strom. l. 1. (...).
Clemens Alexandrinus speaks (with some allusion to the name Jesus, as if it
had been from (...), to heal) one that heals and cures both the bodies, and the
souls of men. Yet he who went up and down doing good, was evil spoken of. Such
were the unkind returns, which his greatest kindness and care met with! And
this is frequently the fate of the most useful and serviceable men in their
generations.

9. Evil and mischievous men deserve to be accounted infamous by all, and to be
severely punished also. But they are under gross mistakes, who set themselves
against their most faithful friends, as if they were their chiefest enemies;
and yet this is very common among men When the Apostles of our Lord, used their
utmost endeavors and diligence, to acquaint men with the truth of Religion, to
turn them from Satan to God, and to make them happy; and to that end had
undergone many dangers, necessities, difficulties and sufferings; they were
still so far defamed and reproached, as to be accounted as the filth of the
world, and the off scowring of all things. And when David's ruling Israel, was
managed with that faithfulness and prudence, that the Holy Ghost testified,
that he fed them according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by
the skilfulness of his hands, Psalm. 78.72. Yet by the smooth tongue, and subtle
insinuations of Absalom, his government was wholly misrepresented, as if he had
taken no care of justice and righteousness, 2 Samuel 15.3, 4. And the people
hereby became so deluded, that Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel,
v. 6.

10. And besides many other instances, And so has the infinitely good God been
spoken against.
which might easily be given in the History of the World; it is remarkable that
when God himself had framed man after his own Image, given him the Dominion of
other Creatures, and planted him in a Paradise and place of delight and
pleasure; there wanted not an accusation against him, and his government, as if
he intended to keep man in an unreasonable subjection, and to debar him of that
perfection of state which he might otherwise have obtained, Genesis 3.5. And when
he had given that admirable instance of his care, and favor toward Israel, in
bringing them out of Egypt, with a mighty hand, and guiding and feeding them
miraculously in the Wilderness, by his wonderful power; yet how often did they
speak against God in the desert, even whilst he was following them with his
goodness: Wherefore there is much of truth, in what was observed by de
beneficiis l. 1. c. 1, etc.
Seneca, that among all the great vices, which prevail in the world, there is
none more frequent, than to want a grateful sense of the receiving of good. And
though as he observes, the fierce wild beasts, as the Lion and the Elephant
express a kind apprehension of the benefits and good, which they receive from
those who take care of them, yet even among men there are those, qui pessime
loquuntur de optime meritis, who defame that which deserves the highest
commendation.

11. From these instances I have given, it may appear, what an unaccountable
thing it is, to be led by, or even to give heed unto, This unreasonable sin is
pernicious to the practisers.
the aspersions and defaming expressions of unruly tongues, which oft-times
speak licentiously against the Heavens, and against the most deserving men upon
Earth. But the evil and danger of these practices, is as considerable, as the
disorder, folly and unreasonableness, of them. In every one of the instances I
mentioned, it went very ill with the evil-speaker. They who spoke against God
in the wilderness, were smitten with various dreadful judgments, and they
perished in the Desert. Our first Parents who were beguiled, to hearken to
suggestions, against the Laws and Precepts of their Maker in Paradise, were
dispossessed of their Eden, and brought great calamities on themselves, and
upon all their posterity to this day. Absalom and they who were persuaded by
him into an undeserved ill opinion of David, and were drawn in to oppose his
government, were destroyed; and a very great slaughter followed of the men of
Israel. And all those who despised our Savior and his Apostles, and their
Doctrine, deprived themselves thereby, of the admirable benefits of that great
salvation.

12. Thirdly, 3. The defaming tongue gives not due reverence to those who have
divine authority,
Our Lord was one, who came invested with the highest authority, which was
fully attested; and yet he was disrespected and dishonored. He was sent from
God, and what he spoke and acted was in his name. The authority of God
deserves, and commands reverence from men, and it is a presumptuous boldness,
to treat such persons without due honorable respect, whose office and business
is appointed and ordained of God, and where themselves bring sufficient
evidence of this Divine Authority. He who honors a Prince, will express a
reverent demeanor to all those, who act in managing any high office, in his
name, and by his special commission. And where there is a true honor and fear
of God, it will engage an hearty respect, for all those who are established by
him. But such is the wild extravagancy of a disorderly tongue, led by the heat
and violence of passion, that it so far casts off the sense of God and his
fear, as to dare rashly to vent it self, against those persons, toward whom
God himself has particularly enjoined, and required an honorable esteem, and
awful reverence.

13. The blessed Jesus was the only Son of God, and his mission from God was
sufficiently evidenced, by the Prophecies, which were accomplished in him; by
the testimony of S. John Baptist, of the Angels, and of the voice from Heaven;
by the heavenliness and Divine Character of his Doctrine, and by all the mighty
miracles, which he wrought. From hence even Josephus (whose words have been
observed, by diverse very ancient Christian Writers) spoke of him with that
honor and esteem, that he calls him Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 18. c. 4. (...).
a wise man, if it be fit to call him a man. Yet he who came in his Fathers
name, was rejected and reviled; and they resolvedly despised him, and censured
his person, and the miracles which they beheld, and the power by which he
wrought them; while they might plainly enough discern, that he was sent from
God, and that his Miracles were Divine. And this strange refractory
perverseness in their deportment against him and his works, and the testimony
of the Holy Spirit in them has been Amb. de poenit. l. 2. c. 4. Athanas. in
illud, Quicunque dixerit verbum contra filium hominis, etc.
justly esteemed, to be the main thing contained in the sin against the Holy
Ghost. And that behavior must needs contain in it a very high guilt, which
excludes so much obstinacy against God. And his Apostles were not only defamed
by the false Apostles, but Diotrophes also prateth against them with malicious
words, 3 John 10.

14. Now both Ministers in the Church, and Governors in the Kingdom, are also
established by Gods Authority, and an honorable deportment toward them is
strictly enjoined by the Sanctions of his Law. neither to Secular, nor
Ecclesiastical Governors.
When our Savior sent forth not only the Apostles, but even the Seventy
Disciples, he declared unto them, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me;
and he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises
him that sent me. And the authority of secular Governors is so great, that the
powers that be, are ordained of God: whosoever therefore resists the power,
resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. And so far as the laws of God prevail on the minds and
tongues of men, they will check and silence rash and defaming expressions
against them. S. Paul mentions this, as one of those precepts of the law, which
lay a strict obligation upon Christians, under the Gospel, Act. 23.5. Thou
shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people. Yea, the commands of God will
not allow so much, as an uncharitable thought, Eccl. 10.20. Curse not the King,
no not in thy thought.

15. Tertullian gave a true account, of the rules of Christianity, and of the
temper and spirit, of the ancient primitive Christians of his age, who endured
heavy sufferings; when he declares, that Apol. c. 36. and ad Scap. c. 2.
our Religion allows not us, to desire, act, speak, or think evil toward any,
much less toward Governors, This contrary to the primitive Christian
simplicity,
whom we must honor and reverence, as appointed by God. But it is a just
matter of lamentation, that the divine authority of Governors, is little
regarded among many men, who profess Christianity; which is a great testimony,
that true Religion and a sense of God is not duly entertained. That in our age,
a very great part of men are forward, rashly to censure and speak
dishonourably, both against secular rulers, and the Bishops and Ministers of
the Church, is a thing so plain and obvious, that observing men cannot but take
notice of it, and pious and good men are heartily grieved at it. And this
misbehaviour toward the pious Bishops of the Church, was also many ages since
observed, and complained of; and the ill effects thereof were in some measure
provided against, by the Canon of a Council. Constant. c. 6.
General Council, when discords and divisions prevailed in the Church. And such
calumnies, as Balsamon there observes, Satan does much endeavor to soment and
cherish.

16. Thus Corah and his company, were forward with presumptuous confidence, but
agreeable to the presumption of Core.
to speak against Moses their chief Ruler, and Aaron the Priest, slandering and
opposing them; and this pleased the Congregation of Israel, who were too ready
to comply with them. But this was so provoking to God, and so pernicious to the
Israelites, that there were many exceeding severe punishments, inflicted by God
upon the Israelites for these offenses. For, Numb. 16. the earth opened its
mouth, and swallowed up Corah and his company; the fire from the Lord, consumed
those men, who intruded themselves into the office of the Priest, to offer
Incense; and a dreadful plague brake out upon the Congregation, and destroyed
suddenly fourteen thousand and seven hundred; but was stayed by Aarons making
atonement. And these things are so far written for our examples, that
wherever the like sins are committed, under the time of Christianity, they
are as evil and destructive, as they were under the law of Moses; since the
Gospel gives particular precepts, for the honoring Superiors, and threats
upon the neglect of them; and S. Jude declares, concerning such disobedient
persons, who swerved from the true Spirit of Christianity, and despise
dominion, that they perished in the gainsaying of Core, Jude 11.

17. Fourthly, 4. Men of the sweetest and meekest behavior, are roughly dealt
with by virulent tongues.
Our Savior was a person of admirable meekness, but neither did this preserve
him from detraction and calumny. He had no proud and haughty carriage, he
injured no man, by word or deed, nor gave them any just provocation. It is
frequent in the world, that words and actions of strife and contention, do
kindle more strife, though they ought not so to do. If a storm be begun, one
wave will raise another; but in a perfect calm, to see the Sea grow boisterous
of it self, is somewhat unusual. And whereas a fiery fierceness of temper, is
apt to kindle heats and disturbances, it was observed in the writings of the
Jewish Authors, that the result or end of meekness (...)
is welfare, peace and quiet; and so it frequently is, both to man's self, and
to them with whom he converseth: but it was much otherwise in the practice of
the Jewish Nation, toward him who was the great pattern of meekness,
gentleness and patience.

18. Indeed it is sinful for any Christians, Licentious expressions not
justified when occasioned by provocations;
to give way to their passions, and unbecoming expressions, though they meet
with provocations. These provocations are temptations laid before them, but
their Religion teaches them, to beware of and reject temptations, and not to
yield to them, and suffer themselves to be overcome, and prevailed upon by
them. Even when the Israelites provoked Moses, so that he spoke unadvisedly
with his lips it went ill with him, Psalm. 106.32, 33. And when S. Paul was
smitten, contrary to the law, Act. 23. he in that case, acknowledges the
obligation of this duty, Thou shall not speak evil of the ruler of thy people.
And the Doctrine of Christianity obliges its Professors, to love their
enemies, to bless them which curse them, and to pray for them who despitefully
use them, and persecute them. The precepts of some of the Plat. in Crit. Maxim.
Tyr. Diss. 2.
Ethnic Philosophers went so far, as to condemn the returning injuries to
them, from whom we receive wrong: and some rare instances there are among
Pagans, of some who declared they would, and others who actually did, treat
them with much kindness, who had greatly injured them. But the doctrine of our
Savior, appears to have gone higher, than the rules which their wisest men
prescribed, in enjoining as a necessary duty the exercise of love, kindness,
doing good unto, and praying for our enemies.

19. But that Religion which will not allow of passion, and reviling, where
there may be some considerable occasion given; will much more detest it, in
such cases, where there is truly no such occasion. but are more unreasonable
when without any occasion given.
For this most clearly shows such men, to be much more hurried and commanded,
by a swelling rage and tumult of disorderly affections; than by the Christian
temper, the precepts of our Lord, and the Spirit of God, who is a Spirit of
meekness and peace. But though meekness, which is calm and inoffensive, be far
from deserving any censure or ill will; yet where men give the reins to their
tongues, even the eminent practices thereof, though never so undeservedly, will
be ill treated and defamed. Our Savior was of that mild behavior, that he was
not for calling for fire from Heaven, to consume such as would not receive him;
nor was he pleased with those his chief Apostles, who were inclined to such
fierceness. And when the Jews who would not be persuaded by him, brought misery
upon themselves, he was so far from being pleased with the thoughts of their
calamity, that notwithstanding all their opposition against him, when he
foretold and denounced their destruction, he did this with tender bowels of
pity and compassion, and with inward grief and sorrow for them. He then wept
over the city, and said, Oh that thou had known, even thou, in this thy day,
the things that belong unto thy peace. Indeed he as a faithful teacher reproved
their sins, but he herein acted the part of a friend, as a good governor also
does, in putting a stop to evil by his Authority. Even Rulers prudent executing
wrath on them that do evil, and a smart rebuke of offenders, is very agreeable
to true meekness, and a well-governed measure of anger is here, as Naz. Carm.
Iamb. (...).
Nazianzen calls it, a commendable passion, and none ought to please others in
evil, and to their hurt. Our Lord so observed the regular measures of meekness
and gentleness, that he would not allow his fathers name to be dishonored, his
house and worship to be profaned, and his laws to be violated; but this was
that the Jews would not bear. And Moses also the meekest man upon Earth, was
diverse times complained of, and the Israelites murmured against him. And it is
easy to give other instances, without looking far into History, of them whose
innocent behavior and kind temper, has not kept them off, from being exposed
to censure: and they who could say with Samuel, whose ox, or ass have I taken?
have been so dealt with and aspersed, as if they had been the greatest
contrivers of ruin in the world.

20. Now if all this be duly considered, it will show the strange exorbitancy
of the passionate expressions, and censorious tongues of men, and what great
advantage Satan gains thereby, and into what unreasonable practices, many men
are blindfoldly carried away by this method. For they often reproach the best and
most upright among men; and those who do the most faithful service to God, and
are most useful to the good of mankind; and them who are endued with the
highest authority; and adorned and furnished with the greatest innocence. Sect.
II.
All which is manifest, in the great example of the blessed Jesus, and of many
others the most deserving persons.

21. The Moralists Counsel is here of great and necessary use, to every good
man, that he who will resolve to be honest and upright Senec. Ep. 77. Ad
honesta vadenti, contemnendus est ipse contemptus.
must despise contempt and reproach. And there is the greater reason for this
under Christianity, because we therein have a clear prospect of eternal
happiness, which we must pursue; and are to be followers of our Lord, who in a
greater case than that of reproach, for the joy that was set before him
despised the shame. A good man must be a resolved man.
No other man ever was so pure and excellent as he was, who both by his life
and practice, and by his Doctrine and instruction was, as Naz Orat. 1. (...).
Nazianzene styles him, he who gave the complete perfection to the spiritual
law, and rule of life. But every Christian must so far follow him, and take up
his Cross, as to be willing and resolved to bear such difficulties as these, or
whatsoever else he may meet with, in the practice of his Christian duty: And if
any other men be never so unreasonable in their clamorous censures against him,
he must go on steadily in his pious exercises.

SECT. II.
Who are apt to be prevailed with to be guilty of the sinful reproaching
others, and how far this sin becomes spreading and contagious.
1. The sin of rash evil-speaking, takes great place among the generality of
men;
THe proneness of persons to defame and speak evil of others is such, that it
greatly prevails among multitudes of men; and though it be a very unworthy and
unchristian thing, it takes up very much of the discourse, and converse of a
great part of mankind. Many there are, who being conscious to themselves, that
they deserve censure, are the more ready to blame, and find fault with others,
that themselves may not be thought worse than other men. Some who have little
of real worth, to commend themselves, are the more apt to speak evil of others,
that they may gain to themselves so much respect, as to be preferred before
those whom they defame: but they usually fail in this design, since hereby
those whose reputation they reflect upon, are often provoked to discredit them;
and also they are the more condemned, and the worse thought of by wise and good
men, for this temper of uncharitableness: it being observed by de Offic. lib. 1.
Tully that this manner of discourse, gives the most manifest indication of
viciousness and corruption of manners, in him who utters it, whether it be done
in a way of seeming gravity and severity, or by open scurrilousness, or by
jocular and pleasant facetiousness. And some are so proud and self-conceited,
(though they have little reason for it) that they are not pleased to hear any
man well spoken of but themselves, and think every commendation misplaced, that
is not bestowed upon themselves, and this puts them into a great forwardness of
disparaging others; and this mixed with uncharitableness is the parent of envy,
from whence (as also from all hatred and malice, from whatsoever occasion they
arise) proceeds evil-speaking. And some serve secular interests, by
discrediting others to advance themselves.

2. And others observing how frequent this behavior is among men, comply with
it as a thing in fashion; and for society sake, join in passing the same
censures that others do, merely to gratify the humors, and avoid the censures
of some hot and eager men. And some again have such undeserved hard thoughts of
others, through suspicious misapprehensions, and false constructions of their
words or actions, that they think it just to disparage them. And others, merely
from observing the prevalency of censorious reproaches, and outcries against
some sorts of men; are hereupon apt to conclude, that there is some
considerable reason for all this, and that they ought to do the like, though
they know no evil concerning these persons, nor can lay any thing to their
charge. And these several sorts of men, make up so great a number, that it was
the complaint of an ancient and pious Bishop, of considerable note, Paulin ad
Celant. inter Epist. Hieronymi 14.
that there were very few men who had forsaken this vice: and concerning those
from whom better might be expected, he adds that even they who had gone far off
from other vices, fall into this as into the last snare of the Devil.

3. But since this has respect to the actions and practices of men, we may
best discover how largely this evil is propagated, by observing particular
instances of fact; and none can be given more considerable, than that which
concerns our blessed Savior. Wherefore I shall now enquire, Who they were by
whom he, and other worthy men were reviled?

4. Yet, 1. It is odious to the best of men.
Now First, He was not reviled but reverenced by the best and most holy men,
who observed and obeyed the true rules of Religion. These rendered unto him that
honor and glory which was due to the Son of God, the Messiah and Mediator of
the New Testament, and the Savior of the World. And indeed all rash evil
speaking and reproaching, especially against those who deserve to be highly
esteemed and honored, is much opposite to the reason and conscience of man,
and more especially to the true Christian temper, and both that charity, and
that honesty and integrity, which it so much requires. It is also greatly
contrary to the motions of the Holy Spirit of God, who disposes good men to
the performance of these Christian duties. Hence the Apostle, having commanded
that men grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30, 31. adds, Let all
bitterness and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away
from among you, with all malice. Slandering and reproaching are of the evil
one, and it is part of the character of those worst sort of men, described by
S. Jude, that they are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts,
and their mouth speaks great swelling words. But meekness, patience, humility
and charity, are such great and necessary duties, that those who are sincerely
good, apply themselves to the practice of them. And uncharitable speaking, has
such a contradiction to these and such like duties, that it is very distastful,
and odious to the spirits of such pious men, who have duly considered the evil
of it. S. Austin professed such an earnest and constant dislike hereof, that as
Pos d. de Vit. Aug c. 22.
Posidonius relates, he had, contra pestilentiam humanae consuetudinis, against
the plague or pest of the custom of men in their converse, these two Verses
inscribed upon his table, Quisquis amat dictis absentum rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam indignam noverit esse sibi.
That is, Whosoever pleases himself, to use biting words, against the lives of
absent persons, let him know, that this table is no fit place for his society.
And the same Writer tells us, that he would not with patience, hear any man
speak contrary to this rule of free and familiar conversation. The best men are
not only perfect strangers from, but enemies to this vicious practice; and
every Christian man ought watchfully to take heed of it: and if at any time he
be surprised and overtaken thereby, he so far departs from the rules of his
Religion, and makes himself work for a future repentance.

6. But Secondly, 2. It is frequently entertained by the public vogue of the
multitude.
The common vogue may frequently pass severe censures, upon the best of men.
Even the Holy Jesus was reviled and evil spoken of, by the generality of the
Jewish Nation. It is true, that manifest and open vice, is a thing so shameful,
and so contrary to the common sentiments of reason and conscience, that it is
in all places a blemish to any man's reputation, and a just matter of general
censure. And virtue and goodness considered in the notion of it, and in the
practice also, when rightly understood, go under a general commendation and
applause. But yet such are oft-times the common mistakes of the multitude,
concerning persons, that the best men fall under a suspicion amongst them, of
harboring some secret evil design; and men of the greatest integrity and
simplicity, are charged with being the contrivers of danger and mischief, by
the public voice and clamor of the people. And it is no hard thing for subtle
ill-designing men, or for those who are themselves jealous, to promote these
misapprehensions amongst others. Even the useful undertakings, which wise and
good men prudently manage, with the greatest integrity, are oft-times strangely
misunderstood, and the intent of them strangely misrepresented, to the common
esteem of men. This was so much observed by Socrates, that he declared, as
Xenophon tells us, Xenoph. 2. Memor.
that it is no easy thing, to undertake any work (to wit of a public and
useful concern) without undergoing blame; because it is no easy thing to be
every where free from real fault; or to meet with equal judges where they are
so.

7. it is the more mischievous by reason of its spreading infection.
And there are very many instances, wherein the greater part of the people have
been guilty, in this particular of judging, speaking and acting against their
duty, and in diverse of them Gods displeasure was remarkably manifest. Thus did
the Jews with united votes and clamor, engage against our Lord. Nor was this
only the carriage of the meanest sort of men, who might be thought more rash
and inconsiderate, but even their Elders and chief rulers, and the whole Jewish
Sanhedrin, was of this temper and spirit. And though this gave encouragement
unto others, it was not the better for them but the worse, that this sin
prevailed so universally; for hence proceeded the ruin and misery of the
Jewish Nation to this day, and the forfeiture also of their relation Cypr. Ep.
69.
to God, to Christ, and to his Church. And when after the death of Corah, even
all the Congregation of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, Numb.
16.41. this occasioned a dreadful Plague. And before this the general
discontent against the Conduct of Moses, which appeared in all the Children of
Israel, who resolved to choose themselves a new Governor, and to return back to
Egypt, Numb. 14.4. at the time when they who searched the land of Canaan,
brought an evil report upon it, did provoke God to resolve, that they should
all die in the Wilderness.

8. But in such cases as these, every good man ought to have that generous and
courageous spirit, as not to be daunted or moved, even with public censure.
And he must esteem his approving himself to God, and having the testimony of
his own conscience to his integrity, to be of more value, than the flattering
applauses, of the greatest numbers of men. It was excellently spoken by Chrysostom.
Hom. in Ps. 44.
S. Chrysostom, there is nothing shameful but sin; and if all the world shall
reproach thee, and thou not reproach thy self, there is no shame in all this.
But it is never safe to join with a multitude, either in the doing or speaking
evil. And the state of every offender, when the sin grows common, is upon this
account the more dangerous, because he is hereby the more like to be encouraged
in his sin, and the more unlike to repent of it: and sometimes he may be by
this means so emboldned in evil, as to think it strange that others run not to
the same excess, speaking evil of them. And thus his case is like that of a
man, who is carried away with a fierce and violent stream, which leaves but
little hopes of his escaping drowning. Wherefore it is as reasonable, that men
be careful to avoid spreading vices, as that they should be cautious and
fearful of infectious diseases.

9. Thirdly, This disorder is prone to prevail, 3 It is a sin earnestly
pursued, by many who appear strict and zealous about Religion.
not only among men of careless and negligent tempers; but also among them who
are strict, scrupulous and conscientious in matters of Religion. Thus was our
Master treated with infamous reproaches, by them who were zealous for the
honor of God Such were the Pharisees, and the devouter sort of the Jewish
Nation: such was S. Paul himself before his conversion, being exceeding zealous
for the law, and yet a blasphemer, and injurious. And such were those
unbelieving Jews, to whom S. Paul bears record, that they had a zeal for God,
but not according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. These were members of the Jewish
Church, were strict in many things, both of practice and opinion, and were very
earnest to make Proselytes. And besides the other Sects of the Jews, who all
joined together against our Lord, the holy Scriptures represent none more
vehement, in their oppositions, and reproaches, than the Pharisees, who as S.
Paul declares, were of the exactest and straitest Sect of the Jewish Religion,
Acts 26.5. And though Josephus sometimes prefer the Essens before them, yet he
also tells us, that Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 1. c. 4.
the Pharisees were reputed to be more Religious than other men, and more
strict in their interpretation of the laws. But there was so much pride and
passion, mixed with their zeal, that they were vehement against those, who did
not comply with them, in laying a great stress upon such things, wherein
Religion was not concerned, yea and upon those things al o, which really tended
to the undermining of true piety; and they were eager against them who would
inform them better; and hence they set themselves in opposition against Christ
and his Apostles.

10. Misguided zeal inflameth passions, and sharpneth tongues.
There is nothing that more sharpens the tongues of men against others, than
the mistaken principles of a misguided conscience, which was that, by which the
Jews acted against the Savior of the World, both reviling, and crucifying him.
Hence also before the great Apostle was a convert, he thought he ought to do
many things against the name of Jesus, Act. 26.9. And hence the Apostles and
other Christians, were upbraided, and ill entreated in that high degree, that
they that killed them thought they did God service, Joh. 16.2. And hence diverse
Heretics, and those who were engaged in Errors and Schisms and divisions,
vented many contumelious and reproachful censures, against the true Church, and
its members. So did the Gnostics, Montanists, Novatians, Donatists and others
anciently, and all dividing Sects of later times.

11. For instance, the Donatists raised such high accusations, against the true
Christian Church, as Aug. Ep. 50. and Ep. 162. and passim.
to reject it from being a true Church, and not to own any but themselves to be
the Church of Christ, and thereupon not only rebaptized all others who came to
them, but by savage cruelty and violence, forced diverse to be rebaptized. Sect.
III.
And other reproachers but not in the like degree were embraced by the other
Sects. For all men who have pretended to Christianity (till some late
unreasonable notions in our present age, which discard all obligation to
visible and external Unity, and public communion in the offices of the Church)
have been sensible, that they could never justify their own departure from the
Church, unless they could lay some such thing to her charge, as made their
secession necessary. Among these some were more fierce and furious, who yielded
their conscience to the service of their affections and passions, as too many
of late have done both in the Church of Rome, and of other parties in our late
unhappy times. And when S. Austin with lamentations spoke of the incursions of
the Barbarous Nations into France, Italy, Spain and Egypt, he thought the
inhumane cruelties (some of which he particularly mentions) of the Aug. Ep.
122. Sic vastant Ecclesias, ut Barbarorum fortasse facta mitlora sunt.
Donatists, and especially the Circumcelliones, toward them who held communion
with the Church, were rather more savage, than what was committed by those
barbarous people. And indeed, no rage is fiercer, than that which is enflamed
by an irregular and disordered zeal. And others who continue in a milder
temper, though they abstain from outrages; yet by their misapprehensions, are
engaged in unreasonable censures of the Church, and public order, and of the
Rulers who appoint and establish it.

12. But zeal when not governed by piety, prudence, truth and goodness, and not
allayed with meekness, is like a fire violently breaking out in any part of a
building, which threatens the wasting and ruin of the whole. And it is never
safe to promote or entertain unjust reproaches raised even by zealous men, when
these very things, though they may be popularly taking to engage a party, yet
are they a great blemish to their profession; uncharitableness and rash
censoriousness, being a manifest evidence, of the want of a true Religious
temper, wheresoever it prevails. To this purpose, S. James speaking of that
man, who is wise by the wisdom which descends from above, or who is truly pious
and Religious, directs this wise and good man, Jam. 3.13. to show out of a good
conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom. And he then assures us, that
where there is bitter zeal or envying and strife, this wisdom discendeth not
from above, but is earthly, sensual and devilish, v. 14, 15. But the wisdom
that is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, or persuaded, viz. to what is good, just or reasonable.

SECT. III.
The monstrous and unreasonable strangeness of those censures, which have been
unjustly charged on the most innocent and excellent men, and particularly on
our blessed Lord and Savior himself.
1. The most infamous calumny, sometimes raised against well deserving men.
IN sensible things with which we converse in the world, few men, if any, have
the confidence to lay down assertions, directly contrary to what may be made
manifest and plain, (as to affirm the Sun to send forth darkness, and not
light; or the strait line to be crooked; or the pleasant and delightful
Fountain to be bitter) and if they should, they would find no men of common
understanding so weak as thereby to be imposed upon. But it often happens far
otherwise, in the character which many give of the best men, who are oft-times
not only so far misunderstood, that their excellencies are clouded, and pass
undiscerned to general view; but their pious lives fall under severe censures,
and are represented as ugly and deformed. Thus it happened with many virtuous
Moralists, yea, with Christ himself, and many of his Disciples. And our holy
Religion it self, as well as its author, was on this wise pierced, spit on, and
reviled.

2. This was that, which Xenoph. l. 1. Memorab. primo.
Xenophon could not observe concerning Socrates, without admiration. He says,
he much wondered, that Socrates, who never spoke, or did any thing irreligious,
who had an high reverence for the Gods, and owned them to know all that was
spoken or done, or secretly consulted among men; and so behaved himself, that
if another man shall speak and act as he did, (...), he would both be, and be
accounted, a most devout and Religious person; that he should be so far
misunderstood, that the Athenians should be persuaded, that he had no sober or
worthy thoughts of the Deity. And ibidem.
he accounted it to be a strange and wonderful thing, that when this excellent
man, was even above all other men strictly temperate and continent, (...), and
one who had reduced many others from their lusts and viciousness, he should yet
be misreported, as if he were guilty of the most impure and filthy lusts. And
this instance seemed so strange to Xenophon, that he begins that Book with
declaring, that he had often wondered, how the Athenians could be persuaded, into
this misapprehension. And so might any man do in the like case, when he only
considers what other men ought to do, and will do when they act suitably to
their reason; but the wonder cease, when we observe the strange disorders of
licentious passions, ill designs, and an uncharitable temper; and how apt they
are to impose upon an easy credulity.

3. That the greatest censures, and heaviest reproaches, This carries on the
design of Satan.
should befall the best deserving men, is indeed very unsuitable to them, but
it exceeding well agrees with the designs of the evil one, who promotes these
practices. It was asserted by the ancient Author of the Metaphrasis upon
Ecclesiastes, (whether it be Gr. Nazianzen, or rather Gregorius Thaumaturgus,
to whom Hier. de Scriptor. Eccles. in Theodoro.
S. Hierome, and other ancient Writers, ascribe that Metaphrasis) that calumny
(...), attempts to corrupt and pervert, the generous firmness and constancy of
good men. And this very well agrees with the sense of the Septuagint, in that
place, Eccl. 7.8. to which those words of this Metaphrase had respect. But if
calumny cannot effect this end, the evil one aims at some thing else, which by
this means he more easily obtains, to hinder the success of worthy men, in the
service of God, and Religion, and doing good in the World, and to keep off
others, from piety and virtue.

4. The innocent-primitive Christianity was highly traduced, as if it had been
the most horrid-impiety.
For these ends and purposes, the holy Christian Religion it self, and the
Assembly of its followers, were charged by the Gentiles, with the most horrid,
unnatural, and unreasonable villainy, and impiety. This gave occasion to the
writing sundry excellent Apologetical discourses, on the behalf of
Christianity; as those of Justine Martyr, Athenagoras, Tertullian, Arnobius,
Origin against Celsus, and many others. Diverse of these horrid calumnies are
collected by In Octav. a p. 23. ad 30. Ed. Ox.
Minutius Felix, and of them he says, passim omnes loquuntur, that they were
the general vogue of the Pagan World. And the wicked and false accusations,
then drawn up against the Christians, are comprised and summed up, in these
comprehensive words of Tertul. Apol. c. 2.
Tertullian, Christianum hominem omnium scelerum reum, Deorum, Imperatorum,
legum, morum, naturae totius inimicum existimans; that they accounted the
Christian to be a person guilty of all villainy, and to be an enemy to the
Deity, to the Emperor, to the law, to morality, and to the whole course of
nature. And what worse can be said of the most wretched, debauched and
flagitious person! and what an unruly thing is passionate reproaching, when
thereby the whole body of the best Society in the world, was so monstrously
misrepresented!

5. And the same measure was meted, to the head and Lord of that body also. And
therefore I shall here particularly take notice of several considerable things
in the behavior of the Jews toward our Savior, where the strangeness of
their accusations, may well amaze and astonish an unprejudiced person.

6. How many actions of reproach and contumely did they use toward him; when
they spitted in his face, and smote him with the palms of their hands? which
defamatory acts to a Jew had Tr. Bava. Kam. c. 8.. 6. and Commentar.
L'Empereur. ibid.
great penalties; and these were done in their open Consistory, with many other
expressions of contempt. Their procuring the scourging him, was a public
declaring that he was so great an offender, that he deserved to be put to open
shame: which is manifest from the nature of that punishment, from the
expressions of the Scripture concerning it, and even from the Tr. Maecoth. c.
3. Christ himself was treated with many actions of reproach,
Talmud, which makes it a note of infamy, inflicted upon them, who were guilty
of shameful transgressions. The like especially appears in their desiring him
to be Crucified, which was a kind of death attended with that infamy, as well
as accute pain, that the worst of men, and most abject persons in the Roman
Empire were Sentenced to this death. But none of their Free men might be
condemned to so vile a death, which was by Lact. de Ver. Sap. c. 18.
Lactantius from Cicero noted to be, the punishment for vassals, and not Free
men. And the Jews in after-ages, have used this as an expression of ignominy,
concerning our blessed Savior, when they call him by the name of (...) or he
who was hanged or crucified.

7. And it is probable, that their putting him to death, at the time of their
great and solemn feast, was not only done to expose him to the greater shame,
at so great a solemnity, and public concourse, but that this also might have
some respect to their treating him as a false Prophet. For their Talmud
declares, that a false Prophet was not to be put to death in any other City but
in Jerusalem; and there he must die Tr. Sanhedr. c. 10.
at the time of their solemn Feasts, that all Israel may hear and fear.

8. And after all these things suffered by our Lord among the Jews, it might be
easy to show, that the Gentiles besides their persecutions and verbal slanders
against Christianity, used various real expressions, of great disrespect and
dishonor, toward the Author of our holy Religion, and our Religion which was
established by him. Thus in the time of the Emperor Adrian, the Temple of
Adonis, the Image of Jupiter, and the Statue of Venus, were erected in the
places of our Lords birth, his passion, and resurrection, as An. Eccl. An. 137.
n. 5, 6, 7. and An. 326. n. 28.
Baronius has observed from S. Hierome, and Paulinus. But these and such other
things, are much less to be wondered at, among the Ethnicks and Pagans; and
therefore I shall wave any further prosecution of them, and return to the
consideration of the Jews behavior, toward the holy Jesus.

9. and with various insulting words of fury.
Besides such actions of the Jews, as I above mentioned, there were some verbal
expressions, whereby they reviled him, which spoke their mere fury. Such was
their opprobrious insulting over him, in his bitter sufferings. In yielding
themselves to the rage of their passions, they came to that high degree of
expressing their enmity against him, and contempt of him, that they were not
satisfied with his suffering a cruel death; but beyond all that bloody hands
could act against him, they endeavor that their keen tongues might pierce him
to the heart. Hence they reviled this great Prophet, requiring him when they
smote him, to prophecy who it was that smote him. They derided the King of
Kings, when they arrayed him in a scarlet robe, putting a crown of thorns on
his head, and a reed in his right hand, bowing the knee in mockery, and saying,
Hail King of the Jews. And they despised, the Savior of the World, and the
great high Priest, when in derision toward him upon the Cross, they cried out,
Save thy self and us. Here we may stand amazed to observe, how when great
uncharitableness has possessed the heart, and is let loose in the reproaches
of the tongue, it becomes cruel and fierce, and contrary to God and goodness,
and is apt to be carried on to acts, even of savageness and inhumanity. But
because these things may seem to be done, in a time when they were in a
paroxysm of fury, when they vented an unusual inordinate heat of rage, I shall
consider what accusations, their reproachful tongues laid to the charge of our
Savior, for the most part, when they were in somewhat a cooler temper, and
concerning which they offered some things as a popular proof or at least a
specious pretense, plausibly to insinuate into the vulgar, that there was
somewhat of truth in what they said.

10. First, He was accused, Our Lord and the best men have been accused, 1. Of
want of piety and Religion.
of not having any true piety toward God. He came into the world to do the
will of his Father, and was a perfect example of all holy obedience. He sought
not his own glory, but the glory of him that sent him, and God himself owned
him to be his well beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased. And yet so
maliciously unreasonable was their censoriousness, that the Jews charged him
with being so much an enemy to God, as to debase his honor, undermine his
authority, and speak unworthily of his Majesty. To this purpose, that they
might render him particularly hateful to the Jewish Nation, they decipher him
as an enemy to the divine law. The Jews had deservedly an high honor for
Moses, and the law which was delivered by him, and had a mighty zeal to
preserve the reputation of them. They honored Moses as the most excellent
person, who was in an eminent manner Phil. de Vit. Mosis. l. 3.
a King, a Lawgiver, a Priest and a Prophet, and most excellently discharged
all those Offices. And they had so great a reverence and veneration for their
law, that Philo the Jew (as his words are produced by Eus. praep. Ev. l. 8. c.
6.
Eusebius, out of a Book of his which he Entitled, his Hypotheticks) declares
that the Jews would rather choose to die a thousand times, than to admit of any
thing contrary to the law; and the same Phil. de legate. ad Caium p. 1022.
Author speaks to the same purpose elsewhere. But the holy Jesus who gave the
highest honor to the law, by fulfilling it; and to Moses by accomplishing his
Prophecies, was accused as an opposer of Moses and the law; and to this purpose
was at several times charged with breaking the Sabbath; and the Pharisees
declared, that he was not of God because he kept not the Sabbath day, Joh.
9.16. And he who had that great regard to the Worship of God, and honor for
his Temple, that the zeal of Gods house did eat him up, was reported to be so
averse from the worship of God and Religion, that he was for destroying the
place of Gods Worship and Service, even before he had put an end to the legal
Sacrifices by his perfect oblation.

11. And he was often times accused, of that impious crime of Blasphemy, even by
those very men, who were themselves guilty of Blasphemy, against God, and the
Holy Ghost. This is esteemed an execrable offense among all men, who have any
veneration for the Divine Majesty of God. And among the Jews, it was accounted
so abominable, that the blasphemer must die, and be stoned by all the people;
and the Tr. Sanh. c. 7.. 5.
judge who gave Sentence against him was to rend his clothes; and the same was
to be done also by the witness, who heard the words of blasphemy, as a
testimony of indignation. And this the High Priest did, at the words of the
blessed Jesus, Mat. 26.65. he rent his clothes, saying he has spoken
blasphemy. Yea, even among the Gentiles, a blasphemer of the Deity was thought
worthy of death, and at Ephesus according to the observation of An. Eccles. an.
254. n. 24, 25.
Baronius out of Philostratus, was to be stoned. But the imputing such a thing
as this to the holy Jesus; whose Life and Doctrine was wholly ordered, to
promote his Fathers honor, is as if a Prince's best and most faithful
Subjects, should be so misrepresented, as to be accounted the most disloyal
villainous and treacherous rebels, and the people thereupon should be stirred
up, to set themselves against them, who are their strength and upholders.

12. Noncompliance with rigid mistaken notions, does sometimes occasion the
charge of impiety.
And though the purity of his life, did infinitely outdo any of theirs, and was
without any stain of Sin, yet he must not be owned as a good man, because he
was not in all things so strict, as some of their errors directed them to be.
While they were more severe and rigid, he showed himself more mild and gentle,
even toward Publicans and Sinners, and hence was reviled as their friend. He
had not that reverence for the vow of Corban which the Pharisees had, but
declared against the evil of it, as making void the Commandment of God, which
required a due honor to Father and Mother. Nor had he that opinion of the rest
of the Sabbath day, as to think it not lawful for himself to heal, or for his
Disciples to pluck ears of corn; and he was therefore censured and condemned of
the Jews. And thus it fares in part with others also who are his followers, and
so it frequently has done in the best times of Christianity. Many men have had
such a zeal for their own errors, that if others live the most holy and
angelical lives, in conscientious obedience to the moral laws of God, and in a
pious reverence to all the Christian institutions, and precepts of our Savior,
they will not acknowledge these to be good men, or such as have any true care
of Religion or piety, if they do not join with them in their mistaken notions,
and their practices founded upon those mistakes.

13. On this account the Catholic Church, On this account the Catholic Church
was defamed, as impure and carnal.
and the true members thereof, have oft-times fallen under unjust censures.
When the abetters of the Novatian Schism, declared against second Marriages,
and the admitting those to repentance in the Church, who were lapsed after
Baptism, they so far judged the Catholic Church impure, for practicing
contrary to their errors, that avoiding its communion, they gave themselves the
name of the Cathari, or the persons who were pure. And that themselves were the
authors of this name, whereby they were afterward known, and that they called
themselves thereby, in a way of distinction from the Catholic Christians; has
not only been declared by Dionysius, Alexandrinus, and Theophilus Alexandrinus,
and other private Authors; but it is also affirmed by the Conc. Nic. c. 8.
Conc. Constable. c. 7.
two first general Councils. And after Tertullian declined to Montanism; though
that Sect impiously owned Montanus to be the Paraclete, and this Author of them
was guilty of very great impurities of conversation; he defamed the Catholic
Church, and its members, as being Tert. de Monogam and adv. Psychicos.
carnal, because it allowed of second Marriages, and did not prolong its Fasts,
and stationary abstinence to such late hours of the day, as the Disciples of
Montanus did. And the Donatists in the vehemence of their Schism, upon the like
pretense of greater strictness and rigidness, toward them who had offended,
ran to that height of censure, against those pious Bishops and Christians, who
kept communion with the Church, as to call them Baron. An. 348. n. 38.
Pagans. And the like might be noted concerning others.

14. Zeal when well guided, very useful; but partial or misplaced, hurtful.
Zeal and the greatest strictness of life and conversation, when it is well
ordered and directed, is of excellent use; but a pretending hereto is really
hurtful, when it acts by a mistaken rule. It was the miscarriage of the
Pharisees, that they were earnest and strict about their Corban, but loose and
negligent concerning the fifth Commandment; and showed a great respect to the
Sabbath, but gave not due allowance to works of mercy and charity. Let every
man be as conscientious and strict as he can be, in entertaining all needful
truth, in practicing all the great duties of Religion, and avoiding all evil.
But let not zeal be spent about such lesser things, as are in truth of no
concernment in Religion; nor let any make such measures the standard, to judge
of the piety, either of themselves or others, for then they must miscarry. This
is to act like a man who has some mistaken fancies of the best road, and will
allow none to be skilful travelers, but them who wander with him out of the
right way. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. It is not concerned so much about such
lesser things, of which many men are fond; as about practicing all
righteousness, minding the ways of peace and unity, and being greatly
delighted in the exercises and rewards of the Christian hope and obedience.

15. But that I may prevent the misapprehending what I mentioned, concerning
some of the Jewish errors, above mentioned, I shall here add by way of caution,
that though they were too nice, and vainly strict concerning their Sabbath; it
is a fault amongst us much to be lamented, and needful to be amended, that very
many in our age are too loose, in neglecting a due reverence for the time of
Worship, and the Worship of God it self, as I shall hereafter further note. And
they who neglect the worship of God, whatever party they are of, cannot approve
themselves the faithful Servants of God.

16. Secondly, Our Holy Savior was accused, 2. The worthiest persons have been
often charged with promoting the Devils work, and depraving Religion.
of complying with the Devil, and carrying on his work, and corrupting
Religion. The Devil is so bad, that whatsoever proceeds from him, and whosoever
join themselves to him to serve him, are deservedly hateful. Now our Savior
was manifested to destroy the works of the Devil, and he actually overthrew his
Kingdom. He cast out Devils, and dispossessed them of that outward dominion,
they had over the bodies of many men; and he so vanquished the evil Spirit, and
that Idolatry, sin, and wickedness, which he set forward in the world, that he
gained the victory over the Devil, with respect to that inward dominion,
whereby he had governed the hearts and lives of the children of disobedience.
He also silenced his oracles, whereby he had obtained a great veneration among
the Gentiles. And so admirably did our Lord prevail, against all the power of
Satan, that even Porphyry, an Apostate from Christianity, and Patron of
Gentilism confesses, that from the time that Jesus was honored in the world,
the Gentile Gods (who were no other than evil Spirits) lost their power. As
Eusebius. Pr. Evang. l. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius relates, these are his very words, even in that Book which he wrote
against Christianity, (...), after Jesus was worshipped, none had any sense of
the manifest help of the (Pagan) gods.

17. And yet notwithstanding all this, so unreasonably spiteful were the
reviling tongues of his adversaries, that against all the evidence in the
world, he was charged with acting from the Devil, and promoting his interest.
And when he cast-out Devils, they would not allow this to be otherwise done,
than by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils. The Holy Jesus defamed as acting by
Beelzebub,
Nor was this wicked and blasphemous slander, only some rash, sudden unadvised
words, of some inconsiderable persons; but the Pharisees, says S. Matthew,
Mat. 9.34. and the Scribes, says S. Mark, Mar. 3.22. passed this censure upon
him; and what was thus spoken at one time, was repeated and declared again at
another, Mat. 12.24. And we may discern by this instance, how easily the
greatest calumnies may be propagated, by a zealous and eager party, from one
age to another, and from one place to another. For the Jews in after ages,
still embraced for truth this impudent falsehood, which is taken into their v.
Hor. Hebr. in Mat. 12.24.
Talmud, which contains a collection of the main body of their Traditions and
Opinions. And this wicked and contumelious aspersion of our Lord, though
contrary to the highest evidence, was also endeavored to be spread abroad
among the Pagan Gentiles, insomuch that Orig. cont. Cells. l. 1. Eus. Them. Ev.
l. 3. c. 6.
diverse Christian Writers thought fit to refell the same; and to show the
manifest contradiction, which this carried to the piety of our Saviors
Religion, to the nature of his precepts, to the works which he did, and to the
Spirit and practice of his followers, all which include a manifest opposition
to the evil one.

18. At other times they charged him with being a Samaritan and having a Devil,
and being a Samaritan:
Joh. 8.48. The name of Samaritan was fixed on him, to promote a popular
hatred. The Samaritans rejected the true worship of God at Jerusalem, and
depraved and corrupted Religion, and often manifested a great hatred toward the
Jews. They frequented Mount Joseph. Ant. l. 13. c. 6.
Gerazim as the place of their Worship, in opposition to Jerusalem: and their
despising the true Worship of God at Jerusalem, is observed in the Hor. Heb. in
Joh. 4.20.
Talmud, and sufficiently in the holy Scripture it self. And for the
countenancing their depraved worship, the Samaritan version of the Pentateuch,
as it is now extant, has corrupted the law, and has put in the word Gerazim,
in the place of Ebal, where God commanded an Altar to be made, and Sacrifice to
be offered, Deuteronomy. 27.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Now the name of a Samaritan being odious to
the Jews, they call our Savior a Samaritan, not as if they thought he was so
by his birth, for they admitted him to the Jewish worship as a Jew, and knew
his nearest relations to be Jews: but they would hereby declare, that he had
equally corrupted Religion, and deserved to be as much hated, as the Samaritans
were. And to this purpose was he thus aspersed, though his custom was, to
attend the Jewish Synagogues, Luke 4.16. and he carefully served God according
to the precepts of his Law. But as if this foul calumny was not sufficient,
they further added, that he had a Devil, or that he in whom alone the Godhead
dwelt bodily, was possessed by the evil one. And this wicked slander was
intended, to raise the highest prejudice of the people against him, and to keep
them far enough from being directed by him. And therefore they said, Joh.
10.20. he has a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him?

19. And it may be observed, And in like manner our Reformation, Bishops, and
Ministry have been aspersed with Popery,
how the carriage of many men among us toward his Ministers, the Bishops and
Clergy of the Church of England, does too nearly resemble this behavior, which
I have mentioned of the Jews, toward our Lord himself. Certainly one of the
great works, the Devil contrives to uphold in this last Age of the World, is
the gross corruption of Popery. Our Clergy and Bishops, were very instrumental
in the Reformation, and casting out of Popery: those of our Church Preach and
Write against Popery, so as to make the clearest discovery of the falseness of
their doctrine, and the sin of their practices. These have confuted and baffled
them the most effectually, and with most convictive evidence. These have
plainly laid open in the face of the world, the folly, evil and mischief, of
many considerable things, asserted, and maintained by the Church of Rome, and
have thereby raised the indignation of the Romanists themselves, who look upon
these men to be their most formidable adversaries: and they are indeed the
great bulwark against Popery. And yet because these men are not so weak and
rash, as to run beyond the bounds of truth, and sobriety, into other
unreasonable errors, they must needs be clamoured on, as friends to Popery. And
other men who talk indeed against Popery with great noise, and are real and
earnest in what they say, and some few of them have done useful service herein;
by many who are indeed eager against it:
but most of them speak with much weakness, and many mistakes; whereby they
give great advantage to their adversaries; these must be accounted the chief
and main enemies to Popery, when for the generality of them, the Romanists
themselves have no great fear of the Writings and Arguments of such opposers.
And from these our excellent Reformation meets with virulent censures.

20. I doubt not, as many Jews were against the Devil.
but among the Jews in our Saviors time, there were many besides him, and his
Disciples, who talked much against the Devil, and did indeed hate him, though
in many things through their misguided zeal, they greatly served his interest.
And that the Jews had some among them, who sometimes cast out Devils, is not to
be doubted, from what we read in the Scripture of the Jewish Exorcists, and of
our Saviors appeal to the Pharisees, Mat. 12.27. By whom do your children cast
them out? Antiq. l. 8. c. 2. and de bell. l. 7. c. 25.
Josephus takes some notice of their Exorcisms; but what he writes is of such a
nature, concerning the driving away Devils by some Herbs and charms, that they
who pretended to act against the evil one by these methods, did seem rather to
comply with him. But that some of the Jews, both before and after the coming of
our Lord, did cast out evil Spirits, by the power and in the name of the God of
Abraham, and the God of Israel, is asserted and acknowledged, by Justin. adv
Tryph. Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 2. c. 5.
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and other ancient Christian Writers. But their
undertaking was far from being sufficient, to the overthrow of the Kingdom of
Satan, nor were they always successful and effectual in lesser cases. When the
Sons of Sceva a Jew, and chief of the Priests, undertook to cast out a Devil,
the evil Spirit prevailed against them, and they were not able to stand before
him. But it was he whom the Jews aspersed, as complying with the Devil, who did
abundantly more against, him than they all were able to do; and he spoiled
principalities and powers.

21. And besides all this, though the singular and sinless purity of his life
was admirable, the censorious lips of his opposers, will even upon this be
spitting out Adders poison, Our Lord was accused of encouraging lo^sness of
life:
as if his Religion and life, had not advanced, but debauched the practice of
virtue and morality. It is indeed observed by Cont. Cell. l. 3. p. 132.
Origin, that even those who falsely accused him of many things, never charged
him with any uncleanness of life; and that though Celsus, and some others,
would in general speak against the life of Christ, Ibid. l. 7. p. 369.
they gave not instance of any particular things, which they could blame in
him. But the Jews were so audacious, that though they could not convince him of
any sin; yet by reason of his free, but innocent converse, they condemn him,
Mat. 11.19. as a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, and as one who gave
encouragement to viciousness and sin, being a friend of publicans and sinners.

22. Now the managing such opprobrious calumnies as these, is not only an
unreasonable thing; but is wicked and sinful, and is mighty mischievous and of
very ill consequence to the world, and much serves the ends of the evil one, by
alienating the affections of men, from them who are their best and surest
guides in Religion. I could not but pity the delusions of such a man, Such
false aspersions of pernicious consequence to mankind.
who should be persuaded, that they who would give him the most wholesome diet,
intend to poison him; and therefore he refuses that, and feeds on such
things as are less wholesome, and often on trash, and what is noxious and hurtful.
And he is strangely imposed upon, who is made to believe that those who are his
wisest and faithfullest friends, and really give him the best advice and
counsel, in his affairs and concerns in the world, are persons who design to
cheat him, and to make their own advantages of him; and therefore he casts them
off, and betakes himself to the direction and guidance of others to his real
prejudice. But yet the damage that men may by such means sustain, as to their
bodily health, or the interest of their estate, is not of so much weight and
moment, as those things are which concern them with respect to their souls and
consciences.

23. Thirdly, Our Savior himself (as other innocent persons also) was charged
with acting against the common good, 3. The most serviceable men have often been
esteemed enemies to public welfare.
and the general interest of the Nation; as if he had had so little respect to
the welfare of the Jews, as to intend nothing but ill toward them. And
therefore many of the people in his life time, Joh. 7.12. and the chief Priests
and Pharisees after his death, Mat. 27.63. accounted him a deceiver. And they
spoke of him, as if they could have no due care of themselves, and their own
public welfare, if they did not set themselves against him. And therefore as a
public enemy, he must die that the whole Nation perish not. Hence Joh. 11.48.
If we let this man alone, the Romans shall come, and will take away both our
place and Nation. And these words were the determination of the whole Council
of the chief Priests and Pharisees which were gathered together, v. 47.

24. And there might be some appearance of pretense, for their fear of this
danger, from those known notions which commonly prevailed among the carnal
Jews, concerning the time of their Messiah. For they generally expected, and
promised themselves at his coming, the enjoyment of great delights, and
pleasures in their own land, with a fullness of outward prosperity; and that he
should be a mighty temporal Prince, and all their enemies even the greatest,
should be overcome by him; and should submit themselves to them, and serve
them. And of these apprehensions and expectations of theirs, which are
intimated in the Scripture, a sufficient account has been given out of the
Jewish Writers by Schickard. de Jur. Reg. Heb. c. 6. Th. 20. and Carpzov. ibid.
p. 454, etc Eu^t. Syn. Jud. c. 36. Lex. Rab in (...).
learned men. And it is not improbable that hereupon the High Priests and
Pharisees might suspect, that the Romans, hearing there was now one in Judea,
whom many of them owned to be (what he really was) the true Messiah, and whom
diverse of the people were forward to make their King, and who himself declared
the Kingdom of God to be now nigh at hand; that the Romans, I say, might
hereupon fear a defection, and rebellion of the Jewish Nation against their
Government, and therefore might forcibly come upon them and destroy them,
unless they by opposing and cestroying him, gave public testimony of their
fidelity to the Roman power. But all this was their fond mistake; for his
Kingdom was not of this World; he did nothing to injure their safety, or to
oppose the Roman power, nor did they truly consult their own good, when they
set themselves against him.

25. That which is really the common good, and the true interest and welfare of
a People or Kingdom, is a thing of very great concernment, and so very
desirable, that where this public temporal good can be had without a greater
loss, he who advances it is a person who deserves to be honored and renowned;
but he is a common enemy to mankind, who acts against it. To promote a common
ruin and destruction, is a thing so inhuman, that the Cicer. Philip. 3.
Roman Orator judged him, who could be pleased and satisfied therewith, to have
degenerated from his nature, and to be bereft of humanity, and that he did not
deserve to be reckoned among mankind. Quem discordiae, Really to promote the
common good, is a great part of goodness, and doing good;
(says he) quem caedes civium, quem bellum civil delectat, eum ex numero
hominum ejiciendum, ex finibus. humanae naturae exterminandum puto. But yet
this was much more contrary to the design of our Savior, who came not to
destroy men's lives but to save them; and to the principles, practice and nature
of Christianity, which obliges all not only to be harmless and innocent, yea,
and to be meek and peaceable; but also to undertake actions of kindness, and
charity, and doing good to all. And it may as soon be expected, that an
innocent Sheep should act the part of a wild Beast, in savageness and fury, and
that the Dove should become a Bird of prey, as that he who is truly a good man,
should be (however he may be represented) a contriver of public hurt, evil and
mischief. Whosoever acts any thing, which is against the public interest and
welfare, if he understand the tendency of his own actions, must be a person of
no goodness; but if he understand it not, he must be a person of great
imprudence, being deceived and imposed on, in a business of so weighty a
nature, which a common understanding would easily discern.

26. Yet where there is only a bare pretense and noise, about the common good,
without the real thing, this is often a popular artifice to raise a clamor and
odium, against such persons, toward whom the contrivers of this pretense have
disrespect. but an outward pretense of common good, will suit ill designs.
And thus it has happened in very many cases. This was the method and
artifice, that Corah made use of against Moses, who charged him with having
already done much hurt and mischief to Israel, and being far from doing them
that good he pretended; and that he intended to tyrannize and lord it over
them, thereby to exalt himself; and that this was so evident a thing, their
eyes must be put out if they did not see it, Numb. 16.13, 14. Now nothing could
be more unreasonable, than to imagine such things as these, to be true
concerning Moses, who had brought them out of bondage, under whose conduct they
had passed through the red Sea, had received the law spoken by a voice from
Heaven on Mount Sinai, and written by God himself on the two tables of Stone,
and were constantly fed with Manna from Heaven in the Wilderness. And yet this
strange accusation being a popular thing, and seeming to espouse the interest
of the whole Congregation, greatly prevailed amongst them against Moses.

27. The like calumny was in the first ages of Christianity, The primitive
Christians were accounted public enemies.
charged upon all Christians in general, that they were the cause of all the
public troubles that befell the World. And though this was so exceeding
manifestly contrary to their Religion, yet because this charge was apt to
provoke the rage of the people against them, it was often insisted upon, and much
urged by the enemies of Christianity, for many Ages. When the Goths under
Alaricus, had sacked and wasted Rome, the Pagans charged the Christian
Religion, to be the occasion of that calamity: whereupon S. Austin being
inflamed with a zeal for God, wrote his Books de Civitate Dei, as a defense and
vindication of Christianity, from that calumny, as Aug. Retrac. l. 2. de Civ.
Dei. l. 1. c. 1.
himself testifies. And to confute the like general slander, upon all
occasions prevailing among the Gentiles, Orosius wrote his Books of History, by
the persuasion of S. Austin, designing therein especially Oros. Histor. Praef.
ad Aug.
to give an account of the various calamities which had befallen the World, in
those ages and parts thereof, where Christianity had not prevailed, and been
received. And Tertullian acquaints us, that in his time, if any thing
whatsoever happened in the World, contrary to its general welfare, flourishing
and prosperity, the general cry among the Pagans presently was, Tert. Apol. c.
4.
Christianos ad leonem, that the Christians should be devoured, by being
exposed to the Lion, that thereby the cause of common miseries might be removed
by their destruction. And Cont. Cells. l. 3. p. 120.
Origin speaks much to the same purpose.

28. And such have frequently been the unaccountable censures, and outcries,
against the most excellent and deserving persons, as if they were the enemies
to the general welfare of the people, among whom they lived. But nothing could
be more unjust and unreasonable, than to imagine any such thing as this, in the
case of our blessed Savior. If instructing men in the truth, and the right
ways of Religion, and the will of God; if promoting well-doing, and the
practice of piety; if the taking care of the things that please God, and make
him their friend; and if the exercises of humility, meekness, peace and love,
be the way to ruin and destroy a Nation, then might our Savior and his
Religion, be the occasion of the ruin of Kingdoms; and so may also his
Ministers and the Clergy that follow his steps. But in truth it was the Jews
opposing him and his Doctrine, which was the cause of their ruin. Our Lord
with tears and compassion foretold their misery, because they knew not the time
of their visitation, Luke 19.43, 44. And after they had rejected the counsel of
God, and bid defiance to his Anointed, and gratified their malice, in
Crucifying the Lord of life; that God who according to his especial promise,
had whilst they served him, kept their enemies from desiring their land at the
time when all their Males went up to serve him, Exodus 34.24. which might seem
to leave all the other parts of Judea destitute of any defense; he now suffered
the Romans to invade them, and shut them up Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 5.
at the time of the Passover (at which time they Crucified our Lord) and to
destroy them. But had they hearkened to our Savior, they had thereby every way
taken care of their common good: he would not only have saved their souls from
destruction, but also have preserved their City, and would have gathered
Jerusalem, as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but they would
not: and therefore their house was left desolate, Mat. 23.37, 38. And in other
cases, it is easy to apprehend, how much they act against the true public
interest, The promoters of this censure, are really enemies to the common good.
who are the fomenters of such reproaches, against them who are faithful in the
land, as if they were the chief opposers of its good. It is obvious to every
eye, that if an enemy can prevail so far by his subtilty as to persuade a
people, that those men who truly are the best and wisest Commanders, are
persons who resolve to destroy their Army, and comply with their enemies; and
hereupon they are laid aside, upon presumption that it is not safe to trust
them; he has done much of his work, and gone a great way toward the obtaining
a conquest over them, by first prevailing upon their indiscretion, and unjust
jealousy and suspicion.

29. Fourthly, 4. The best men are also accused of ill designs against
Governors.
They accused our Savior, that he was no friend to Caesar, but one who stood
up against him. And therefore they told Pilate, Joh. 19.12. If thou let this
man go thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever makes himself a King, speaks
against Caesar. Now to oppose Government, is a great Crime; and the nature of
the Rulers authority, and the commands of God, require honor, reverence, and
obedience to be yielded thereto. Princes and Magistrates are sometimes in
Scripture called Gods: and that precept of the Law, Exodus, 22.28. Thou shall not
revile the Gods; is in the Margent of our Translation referred to rulers and
Judges, and so it is expressed in Verse. Sir. Arab. Pers. chapter paraphr. Nothing
is more unreasonable, than this charge was, against our Savior.
many other Translations: nor can it well be understood, as some would have it,
of the Gentile Deities, which ought to be detested!

30. But though this charge was openly pleaded, at his arraignment, it was as
notoriously false, as any of the other things abovementioned. It was not
possible that he who was King of Kings, and by whom Kings reign, should be an
enemy to that Authority, which he himself upheld; or that he who came into the
World, to advance the honor and dignity of his Father, should set himself
against those Powers, which were his Ordinance, and Established by him. It
could not be supposed, that a person of that singular integrity, which every
where appeared in him, who had sharply reproved the Pharisees, for asserting
such Doctrines as made void the fifth Commandment, should himself be guilty, of
giving an example of the same fault, and in an higher degree. Nor could there
be any reasonable pretense, that he who was so great a friend to all mankind,
whose life practiced, and whose openly declared Doctrine enjoined, an universal
love even to enemies; that he should be an enemy to Caesar, who was the
Minister of God for the good of men, and under whose Government peace, and
property and order, was in some considerable measure established in the World.
Upon such considerations as these, the ancient Tertul. Apol. c. 28, 29, 30, 31,
32. ad Scap. c. 4.
Apologists for Christians, under Pagan Emperors, declared it impossible, for
him who was a Christian, to be an enemy to the Emperor, when he might not be
an enemy to any man upon Earth, and was particularly obliged, to reverence him
whom God had constituted. And the same consideration will show, that they who
are enemies to their Princes and Superiors, and are opposers of Government,
cannot be truly Christians.

31. But it is here observable, that this accusation was only a crafty fetch,
intended wholly to serve a present turn, that by pleading this, they might
possess Pilate, with a prejudice against him, and make it appear necessary that
he should condemn him, or else not show himself faithful to Caesar, in that
Office which was committed to him. And that upon this accusation, On this
accusation our Lord was condemned, as an enemy to Caesar.
and for this cause, Pilate Sentenced him to be Crucified, is evinced from the
Title written upon his Cross, Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews, which
both S. Matthew, and S. Mark call his accusation, Mat. 27.37. Mar. 16.26. And
that for this thing, he was condemned to die, was noted by S. Hierome, Hier in
Mat. 27.
who yet declares, that he could not sufficiently admire, that when they had
suborned false Witnesses, nullam aliam causam invenirent interfectionis ejus,
quam quod rex erat Judaeorum, they could find no other cause to put him to
death, than his being the King of the Jews. And for a further confirmation that
this was the ground on which he was Crucified, it is observed and sufficiently
cleared by Annot. on Mar. 15. b.
Dr. Hammond, that it was the usual custom of the Romans, on this manner, to
give a public signification of the crime, for which any man was punished. And
it may be noted from S. John, that till it was urged, that Pilate could not be
Caesar's friend if he let Jesus go; and that whosoever makes himself a King
speaks against Caesar, Pilate was desirous to have released him, Joh. 19.12.
But when he heard this saying, he sat down in the Judgment Seat, and delivered
him to be Crucified, v. 13, -- 16.

32. But yet this accusation was not charged upon him by the Jews, out of any
true kindness they had for Caesar, but only out of malice and enmity against
the blessed Jesus. The name of Caesar, as was noted by Tertullian, Tert. Apol.
c. 28.
was more sacred and inviolable amongst the Romans, than any of their Gods, and
therefore to charge him with opposing Caesar, was the most likely way for them
to obtain their end; and therefore when they brought him before Pilate, this
was the accusation which they then urged against him, Luke 23.1, 2. But though
at this time they pretended themselves well affected to Caesar, This was
managed by those ^ who were no friends to Caesar.
and concerned for the securing his Authority; yet in truth neither the
Pharisees, nor the other Jews, had any real kindness for him, and were desirous
if they knew how, to shake off his authority. And at this very time, they could
show themselves friends to Barabbas who had made insurrection against the peace
of the Government, and had committed murder in the Insurrection. And they knew
well enough that Jesus had enjoined men their duty to Caesar.

33. The Governors and Clergy of our Church, have in some things met with a
kind of proceedings, somewhat like this. There are persons, who are not very
eminent for loyalty themselves, The like accusation against other innocent
persons.
who know our Clergy to be faithful Subjects, and friends to the King, and to
teach others the same; and yet they will endeavor to charge them, with
undermining the Kings Authority, and encroaching upon the Rights and Royalties
of the Crown. But let such persons consider, what sincerity they use in such
things as this, and whether besides the uncharitableness, which appears in
these actings toward others; they do not offer violence to themselves, and act
against the inward sense of their own consciences. Thus were the primitive
Christians defamed as if they opposed the Majesty of the Emperor, Tertul. ad
Scap. c. 2.
Circa Majestatem Caesaris infamamur; though the Christians of that age had
never been guilty of any acts of rebellion, and neither thought nor spoke
unworthily of their Rulers. And S. Paul was called a pestilent fellow, and a
mover of Sedition, Act. 24.5.

34. And now I have thus far discoursed, of the exorbitant extravagancies of a
reproaching tongue, I here declare, that it is not my design in this Chapter,
Hence we are watchfully to take heed of joining in reproaching others;
to charge even such men, who are too much overtaken with some degree of this
sin, as if they were arrived to that height and excess, which I have here
described. But the things I aim at are, First, To warn all men, against giving
the reins to uncharitable censure and reproach; since this evil practice is
that, which Satan has made great use of in all the Ages of the World, as the
first and chief means, to oppose all the ways of true piety and goodness. And
hereby he has done great mischief in the World: the oppositions which both
Christ, and Christianity, and all good men met with in the world, have
proceeded very much from this cause; and the violence and persecutions which
the primitive Christians underwent, was the consequent hereupon. And we may
hence discern also, into what strange exorbitancies men may be led, though they
come not up to the highest extravagancy, if they yield their tongues to be
governed by their own passions, or by the unjust clamours of other men, against
them who should govern, and the being influenced by such passionate censures.
guide, lead and direct them; since our Savior who was the most excellent
guide that ever the World had, and the most innocent person, was so highly
defamed, and so injuriously aspersed with unreasonable calumny.

35. Secondly, I intend hereby to manifest, how much courage, stedfastness and
constancy, is necessary for the sincerely pious man. It may be the portion of
any such person whomsoever, Unreasonable censures are to be courageously
undergone,
in his speaking and doing well, to be misrepresented, and exposed to calumny
and slander. Our great Master has foretold, that his servants must in this
particular expect the same measure, which himself received. But let no good man
be dismayed, if he be thus treated in the World, but let him be steadfastly
resolved to pursue his duty, and to be unmoveably upright and conscientious,
whatsoever respect or disrespect, he may meet with among men. Whoever is made
more remiss in well-doing, or whose spirit is royled and discomposed by
undeserved censures, does hereby fall into temptation, and the snare of the
evil one: but he that resolvedly holds fast his integrity, and runs with
patience his Christian race, amidst all these oppositions, this is the man who
rightly discharges the duty of a Christian, and takes up his Cross and
follows his Lord.

36. And it is infinitely better for any man, being the pious man's advantage.
to fear the censure of the greatest part of the World, in well-doing, than to
neglect what may please God, and do good to men; since hereby he gains the
blessing of Christ. Our Savior declared, Luke 6.22. Blessed are ye, when men
shall reproach you, and cast out your name as evil for the Son of man's sake.
Rejoice ye in that day and leap for joy; for behold your reward is great in
Heaven. Wherefore though a clear and good reputation and general esteem, is
useful and desirable to a good man, because it gives him many advantages of
doing good in his generation, yet if in the faithful and prudent management of
his duty, he meets with hard measures, from the uncharitable expressions of
other men; it may justly so far as concerns himself, rather affect him with joy
than disturbance. Yea, with respect to these words of Christ, which I have now
mentioned, the Author under Epist. ad Oceanum.
S. Hierom's name, thinks it a thing desirable, to be reproached and evil
spoken of, Quis non maledici desideret, (says he) ut mereatur Christi nomine
laudari, and coelesti copiosaque mercede munerari? This also was a mighty
satisfaction to S. Austin, who declared that whilst he opposed the Donatists,
Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 7.
he underwent sharp and opprobrious reproaches, from the enemies of the glory
of Christ, but then reflecting upon the blessing, in this case pronounced by
our Lord, he adds, Quisquis volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit mercedi
meae; he that willingly lessens my reputation, does unwillingly add to my
reward. But he who is turned aside from the paths of goodness, by the slander
of men, is guilty of greater rashness and imprudence, than that traveller, who
takes a journey of great concernment to his life and estate, and yet will stop
his course, or go out of his way, if he discerns the wind to blow upon him.

CHAP. III.
The manifold sinfulness, and severe punishment of reproaching and speaking
evil, especially against Superiors.
1. HAving showed the unreasonable proceedings of a reviling tongue, and how
unruly an evil it is, I shall now add some further general considerations,
concerning the greatness of the sin of reproaching others, especially our
Superiors. And in this Chapter I shall show two things, First, How many great
sins are contained in it: and Secondly, What a dreadful punishment is denounced
against the practisers of it. Wherefore,

2. First, This is a complicated and multiplied sin, and so comprehensive an
evil, that very many great transgressions are contained and linked together in
it. S. Basil seems to think, that a reproaching Spirit Bas. in Esai. c. 2.
might be the beginning of all sin in the world; which may well be accounted
true, if we consider it with respect to God, and include under it that
disposition of mind from whence it flows. Uncharitable evil-speaking includes
very many great sins.
For the closing with that temptation, whereby the Serpent reproached the
infinitely good God, was that which brought sin and ruin on mankind. And it
may well be thought, that the original transgression of the fallen Angels, was
their having ill thoughts of the highest good, and thereupon being forward to
depart from God, and to draw others from him into the same defection. And this
is the very root of reproaching, or that disposition of spirit from whence it
arises.

3. And this ought to be the more detested, because the exercise of this sin,
includes in it many heinous offenses. Now though one single sin, which any
person willingly and wilfully pursues, is sufficient to manifest him void of
the fear of God, and estranged from the Christian life; yet where the evil
heart can readily choose, and the conscience suffer, many notorious sins to
prevail, without being either so watchful, as to observe them; or so faithful,
as to raise all the powers and faculties of the soul, to oppose them; here is a
mind and conscience, so much the more grossly defiled and vitiated. His
condition is like that of the man into whom the unclean Spirit entering, takes
with him seven other Spirits, who enter in, and dwell there. And as that body
is in a bad condition, in which diverse dangerous diseases are reigning; so that
soul cannot be in any safe condition, where many great sins do rule and govern
it. And it is considerable in this case, that a defaming temper, and the
neglect of forsaking it by repentance, always include a voluntary choice, and
therefore has in it, as all other sins of choice have, a want of reverence to
God and his laws. And besides this,

4. First, It contains under it an opposition to, 1. It is inconsistent with
Christian love,
and neglect of the great command of love. It was our Saviors Doctrine, that
among all the precepts given by God in the Old Testament, that of loving God
with all the heart, was the first, and the other of loving our Neighbor, the
second which is like unto it. And the wisest men among the Jews, have owned and
acknowledged the same truth. Phil. de Charitate; (...).
Philo speaking of the love of men, esteems it so nearly allied unto Religion
toward God, that he calls it its Sister and Twin. And it can be no small sin
to live in the breach of so great a Commandment. This duty is so particularly
pressed, and inculcated by Christ, on all his Disciples, and so great Motives
are superadded to the force this Commandment had before, that it appears under
the Gospel as a new Commandment, which every Christian must obey, following the
example of our Lord. But to reproach others is to act contrary to love; for
this intends hurt, and to lessen the esteem of others, and cast some blemish
upon them, and the defamer pleases himself, for the present, in so doing. But
charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13.5. and he who truly loves any man, and is his
real friend, cannot hear him unjustly evil spoken of, with any delight and
satisfaction, but is troubled at it, and is so averse from joining in the same
himself, that so far as he fairly and honestly can, he will vindicate his
reputation; and plead his cause. Yea, charity will act with that seriousness,
on the behalf of a friend, that as Max. Tyr. Diss. 10. (...). especially, when
it respects the Ministers of God, in Church or State.
Maximus Tyrius observes, it will even work through places not passable, and
easily overcome things that are dreadful.

5. But when censures and calumnies are raised, against the Ministers and
Governors of the Church, there are two other ways, whereby they greatly offend
against the duty of love; the one with respect to the love of God, in promoting
his honor; and the other with regard to the love of men, unto whom these
reproaches are published. For these things tending to lessen their reputation,
are so far as they take place, like to hinder the success of their labors, and
of their Ministerial Office. And the offender who commits this sin
considerately and advisedly, so as to discern the large consequents of it, must
be one who for the gratifying his passion, is willing to become instrumental,
that the work of God and the happiness of man, both which are committed to the
care of the Ministry, should not prosper, and have their desired effect. And
this great good is really hindered by this sinful practice, whether men will
consider it or no. And there is much of the like evil in defaming or speaking
reflectively against our Secular Governors, since they also are the Ministers
of God to man for good.

6. Secondly, The reproaching Superiors is a breach of the fifth Commandment.
For therein honor and reverent respect is commanded to all Superiors; 2. It
is a great breach of the fifth Commandment, to speak evil of Rulers,
and this is necessary for the upholding their just Authority. But to reproach,
is not to honor, but to dishonor and vilify them. And though our natural
Parents be the nearest to us, on whom we have a more particular dependence, and
from whom we have a more especial care: yet Governors and Rulers are chiefly
to be honored, because they are set by God in an higher station, and have a
larger portion of his Authority committed to them, and as Gods Ministers, are
appointed for a more comprehensive benefit, and extensive good to mankind, and
are common Parents, to govern and take care of those, who are under them in
civil Societies. Hence Phil. de Decalog. p. 76.
Philo not amiss observed, that the fifth Commandment being placed, as between
the duties to God and man, had great respect to both; and that he who breaks
this Commandment, will be condemned at both these two tribunals, that of God
and that of man: (...), of irreligion toward God in the Divine Tribunal, and
of enmity toward men in the humane. And though this may be truly said of
almost all other transgressions, yet it appears more eminenly, in the breach of
this Commandment. And it adds to the force of this precept, that the Doctrine
of Christianity does mightily enforce it, and strictly require us to honor the
King, and all who are over us either in the Church or State.

7. And it is worthy of our serious consideration, which is a special
Commandment with promise.
that the Apostle for the enforcing obedience to this fifth precept of the
Decalogue, gives it this Character, Ephesians. 6.2. that it is the first
Commandment with promise; or it is a great and chief command, unto which God
annexed a special and signal promise. And thus much I think the Apostle to
intend by these words. When our Savior declared, which was the first
Commandment of the law, Mar. 12.28, 29, 30. the phrase first, does not there
refer to order, but to excellency; as is manifest from v. 31, and v. 33. and
therefore the question which in S. Mark is expressed, which is the first
Commandment? is in S. Matthew, which is the great Commandment? Now the fifth
Commandment is therefore manifested to be a great, and very considerable
Commandment, because to that alone, of all the precepts of the Decalogue, God
was pleased to affix a peculiar and excellent promise. For that declaration of
Gods kindness, in the end of the second Commandment, that he shows mercy unto
thousands of them that love him, and keep his Commandments, is truly observed
by In Annot. in Ephesians. 6.2.
Erasmus and Grotius, not to have a peculiar respect to that precept alone, but
to have a general regard to them all; as the words in that precept do evidently
manifest. But to this fifth Commandment this excellent promise is adjoined,
that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the Earth,
which shows that our own interest is highly concerned in this case.

8. Wherefore the observing the duties of this precept, is the way which God
himself has directed men, for the obtaining his blessings, This is a
forfeiture of the right to Gods blessings in the world.
and the continuance of them in this world, and this the Apostle declares and
urges, with respect to the time of Christianity. And the neglect of the duties
of this command, so far as concerns the terms of Gods promise, is a forfeiture
of that right and title we might have to all the advantages of this life, and
the blessing of God for our comfort and well-being here upon Earth. And these
earthly blessings when the law was given, were so proposed in this fifth
Commandment of the Decalogue, as to have some typical respect also to the
blessings of the life to come. Now though God of his bounty and patience, does
many times bestow long life, and therewith many other enjoyments of this world,
upon them who have no right to them, by the terms of his Covenant and promise;
yet they want that assurance of these things, and especially that favorable
kindness and particular care of God to go along with them, which the pious man
enjoys, and which is far more valuable and excellent, than the possession of
any outward good is. Wherefore the careful and conscientious practice of
reverence and honor toward Superior relations, however some men may account
of it, is no light thing, it being that upon which our title to the blessings
of God so much depends.

9. Thirdly, All reproachful Calumnies especially against Superiors, are a
violation of the sixth Commandment, 3. This is a breach of the sixth
Commandment.
Thou shall not kill. For the performing the duty which relates to this
precept, according to the extent which the Doctrine of our Savior gives it,
requires an innocent, calm and meek temper and behavior, toward all men, so
as not to admit any causless anger, nor any passionate and contumelious
expressions, Mat. 5.21, 22. But to all this, this sin is directly opposite. And
besides this, we may further discover, how much this command is transgressed by
rash censures and calumnies, if we either consider the effects they produce, or
the cause from whence they proceed.

10. The effects of reproach, Calumny is cruel.
are frequently of different kinds. If we reflect upon the more immediate
result thereof; the Sword of the tongue often wounds deep, and keen words pierce
even to the inward part of man, and his very heart. The sense of which made
Naz. Ep. 191.
Nazianzen persuade them who reproach others, to lay down their arms; their
slings and spears, even their tongues, by which they do mischief to one another
and are applauded, and these are more ready at hand than other weapons. And
there is indeed so much of cruelty, and real hurt in calumny and reproach, that
our Savior accounts this a way of persecution, and observes, that thereby the
Prophets were persecuted for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12.

11. But when evil speaking is directed against Governors, Contumelious
expressions against Governors, often beget tumults and bloodshed.
it too often becomes the parent of violence, cruelty and inhumanity, by giving
birth to tumults and Seditions. They who reflect upon the last Age, may
discern, how by this method we became engaged, in such a bloody Civil War, as
cut off and destroyed many thousands of men. Thus as S. James observes, Chap.
3.6. The tongue defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature.
It puts men's heads and hearts upon contriving and acting fierce and furious
enterprises; it makes their hands forward, and their feet swift to shed blood;
and if not timely prevented, it kindles those heats, which bring all things
into a flame. And I heartily wish it were an hard and difficult task, to find
out instances to verify the complaints of Lipsius concerning calumny. He
declares Lipsius in Orat. de Calumnia. Doletis haerere in Reip. visceribus
discordiarum tela? calumnia injecit: ardere tot annos facem bellorum civilium?
calumnia accendit, etc.
that it divides intimate friends, and sets them at distance: Are any grieved
to see feuds and discords and weapons of death, stick fast in the bowels of the
Commonwealth? it is calumny darted them thither, and fixed them there. Do any
reflect with sadness, upon the flames of Civil Wars, continuing to burn for so
many years? it is calumny that kindled them. And, as he goes on, this is that
which sets Princes and people at distance from each other, and engages one man
against another. And indeed almost all the tumults, Seditions, and Rebellions
which have been so destructive and pernicious to the World, have had their
original from hence.

12. How he that hates his Brother, is a murderer.
And if we reflect on the cause from whence evil speaking and reproaching does
arise; this is a want of love, as I above noted, and a prevalency of ill will
and hatred. But S. John assures us, 1 John 3.15. he that hates his Brother is
a murderer. And in truth, though there may be several reasons which may
restrain him from any such acts of violence, as to commit murder, yet he
harbors much of the same inward temper with an open murderer. For he that
hates his Brother, so far as concerns his Brother himself, and unless he thinks
he may make use of him to serve some other ends, wishes him out of the way;
and would choose, and be pleased to have him out of the world. And this is that
very same wicked temper of mind which spirits a murderer. Wherefore this sin
which so defiles the heart, and stains the World with blood, is a sin of a
scarlet dye.

13. Fourthly, This sin offends against those precepts, which forbid bearing
false witness, slandering and speaking evil; all which enjoin the right
government of the tongue, in what it speaks of others. Phil. de Decal. p. 768.
Philo observes, that under the ninth Commandment is included (...), 4. It
ordinarily transgresses the bounds of truth.
not to calumniate or defame; which is to be extended not only to matters of
public justice, but even to rules of private conversation. But a reproachful
tongue both offends against charity, and is generally further guilty, of not
making conscience, to keep to the strict rules of truth. And as Tertullian
speaks, in refelling the slanders, spread abroad among the Pagans, against the
Christians, report and fame thus raised and divulged; is Tertul. Apol. c. 7.
plurimum mendax, quae ne tunc quidem quando aliquid very affert, sine mendacii
vitio est, detrahens, adjiciens, demutans de veritate: for the most part false,
and is not even then, when it contains somewhat of truth, free from the fault
of lying, taking something from, or adding to, or making some alteration
concerning the truth. And this sin of lying deserves to be accounted the more
hateful and evil, and to be abhorred as abominable, because it is part of the
character of the wicked one, that he is a liar from the beginning, and a
deceiver: whereas it is one of the excellent titles of our Savior, that he is
the faithful witness; and also he is the Amen, and the truth. And this sin has
much of the Diabolical nature and practice in it; the evil one doing much
mischief by false suggestions.

14. Fifthly, 5. It offends against justice.
Reproaching others is a great violation of Justice. He that speaks evil of
dignities, is ranked among the unjust by S. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. And calumny
in general is very injurious both to the person reproached, and to those also
to whom such reproaches are uttered. To wrong a man in his reputation and good
name, is an injury in several respects much worse, than the wronging him in his
goods and possessions, and has been so esteemed amongst men. Partly on this
account, it was, the Sa^^. c. ^^ n. 1.
general determination of the Jewish Rabbis, that though actions of trespass,
or violence against the estates of men, might be heard and punished by their
lesser consistory of three; yet matters of slander and defamation came not
under their cognizance, but were to be determined by a greater Consistory of
twenty three; being things of an higher nature, which required a more weighty
consideration, and sometimes a capital punishment.

15. For a man's reputation has a more immediate respect to his person, and the
true worth of the man, than his possessions have; and to have his good name
impaired deprives him of a great part of that satisfaction and comfort, which
he might enjoy, from society and converse in the world. This injury to the
person reproached, cannot easily be repaired;
And he who is injured in his Estate, may have his loss repaired, and his
damage recompensed, by having as much restored to him again, from the person
who wronged him. But the slanderer, and reproacher, is not capable of making
the like reparation, nor has he sufficiently wiped off the aspersion he cast
upon another, though he should recall it, and acknowledge his fault. For the
words of defamation which he uttered, may be so spread abroad, as to come to
the ears of many, who may never hear of his having retracted them: and many
others through their own uncharitableness, may give credit to the former,
rather than the latter. A reproach is herein like the running in of the Sea
water, where the bank is broken, it is apt to overflow every way, and is not
easily carried off again; and when it is so, it usually leaves a brinish
saltness behind it. It Bern. leviter volat, sed graviter vulnerat.
flies about quickly, and yet it wounds sharply: and though the sound of words
at the greater distance, grows less and less; the noise of fame and reproach
the farther it goes, the more it frequently increases, and becomes the louder,
according to the words of the Poet, Virgil.
Fama malum, quo non aliud velocius ullum, Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit
eundo. And this tends to make the life of the person who bears the reproach,
the more troublesome and uneasy in the world.

16. Indeed the Christian temper, and the grace of God, does wonderfully
support, and uphold the pious man, and enableth him to bear up above these
difficulties, and works in him a more than manly courage, whereby he is able
with S. Paul, to take pleasure in reproaches. But this does no more lessen the
sin of the reviler, than a Christian's knowing, how to rejoice in other
persecutions for Christ's sake, does lessen the sin of those persecutors, whose
actions have a direct tendency to work his trouble and calamity. He who
endeavors another man's mischief, by poisoning him, is not the less criminal
in foro Dei, if the other be sufficiently antidoted against it.

17. And this practice is injurious to them, and it greatly wrongs the souls of
those who hear it with delight.
to whom the reproach is uttered, especially if it be pleasing to them. For
then it many times envenomes their spirits, inflames their passions, brings
them into the snare of the Devil, and tends to engage them in all those sins,
which the person who is guilty of reproaching, is chargeable with. And hereby
they become deprived of that delightful sweetness, and pleasantness of mind,
and of the blessing of God, which accompanies the meek and charitable man. And
this is the doing them a far greater injury, than if their bodies should be
infected with noysom Diseases: both because the evil of sin, is of far worse
consequence, than sickness; and seizes on and defiles the nobler part of man:
and also because in such distempers of the body, he who undergoes them, is
ordinarily sensible of the evil, and danger of them, and complains of them, and
seeks for help and cure; while the mind tainted with this sinful temper, is not
for the most part so much as inclined to have it removed, but is too much
pleased, with the increase thereof. Bernard. sup. Cant. Sermon. 24.
S. Bernard observed, what a lamentable massacre may by this means be
perpetrated, upon the souls of men, even in a moment; Vnus qui loquitur, uno in
momento, multitudinis audientium dum aures inficit, animas interficit: One man
thus speaking, whilst he infects the ears of a multitude of auditors, does
forthwith destroy the souls, by extinguishing charity.

18. Sixthly, This sin of reproaching, 6. It opposes peace.
greatly opposes the practice, and duty of peace, which is so frequently and
earnestly enjoined, as one of the chief duties of our Religion. It has been a
frequent complaint, that the precepts for peace are not duly observed; and it
were happy if peace were as much entertained, as it is commended. In the early
days of Christianity, it was noted, that peace was such Naz. Orat. 14. (...).
a good, as was applauded by all men, but preserved by few. This all Christians
are to pursue as much as lies in them. This is expressed by S. Paul, to be one
of the chief things required, that we may so serve Christ as to be acceptable
to God, and approved of men, Romans 14.18. and from hence he makes this
Inference, Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, v.
19. Among the several expressions the Apostle uses, to declare the fruits of
the Spirit, the greater number of them tend to this purpose, Gal. 5.22, 23.
Love, peace, long-suffering, gentleness and meekness. But the unpeaceable and
passionate temper takes up a great part of the works of the flesh, mentioned
Gal. 5.20, 21. whereby we may discern, how much the true Spirit of Christianity
is concerned, in performing the duties of peace. But the reproaching and
defaming others, is a practicing strife and contention, and a quarrelling with
others though they be at a distance. I above observed, how the public peace of
Kingdoms has been undermined hereby. And it is a thing so obvious, that the
same method does disturb the quiet of private conversation; and also so
disorders men's minds, as to deprive them of that inward calmness of temper,
which becomes a Christian, that I need not undertake the proof thereof. And
reproaches and censures have in many ages and places, so sadly and scandalously
disturbed the peace of the Church of God, and fomented discords therein, that
the greatest Schisms and divisions have continually in a great measure, had
their birth, growth and continuance from this very cause. This, besides the
experience of latter ages, may appear from the instances of the Novatians,
Donatists, and some others, mentioned in the former Chapter.

19. And now let any serious person consider, whether there be not a very great
pollution, and filth, in that practice and behavior, which contains under it
so many several great sins. And if that man's body be in danger enough to be
poisoned, where a Viper or a Serpent singly fastens upon him; in what sadder
condition is he, on whom various venomous creatures fix, if there be not a
speedy and effectual care for his cure.

20. Another general Consideration, This sin of Calumny is severely punished
to manifest the great evil of defaming and reproaching others, especially
Superiors, is from the dreadful and severe punishment, which is threatened
against, and will be inflicted upon them, who practice this sin, and indulge
themselves in it. The common sense of mankind, even in time of Paganism, has
had such apprehensions of the hurt and mischief hereof, that great punishments
have been denounced against, by the laws of civil Societies,
and inflicted upon such offenders, in many civil Societies; this carrying so
great an opposition to the laws of nature, and the public quiet and good of
the World. Lipsius Lipsius in Orat. de Calumnia.
tells us, that the Athenians imposed a pecuniary penalty, upon such offenders,
and that the ancient Romans set a mark upon the forehead of him, who was guilty
of this crime, with the letter K. If this was so, I do not doubt, but this
letter K, was to signify Kalumnia or Kalumniator. Calumnia being one of the
three words, which are noted by Scalig. Animadv. in Eusebius. Chronol. p. 114.
Scaliger, to have been only written with K. and not with C. in the most
ancient use of the Latin tongue. And this was a public declaration, that the
Reproacher or Calumniator, deserved to be openly marked out, and branded, for
an infamous person.

21. But since a great part of mankind, have had as great an esteem for their
good name, as for their lives, in the ancient famous Laws of the Duodec. Tabul.
Fragment, Tit. 25, n. 3.
twelve tables, it is declared, that though very few crimes were by those laws
punished with death, yet the reproaching and defaming others, was thereby made
a capital offense. And in the ancient laws of the Empire, this is related to
have been sometimes punished with stripes, and sometimes by making the person
Intestabilis, or one who by the law, was not permitted to make any Testament,
to dispose of his goods at his death. But by the Constitution of Cod. l. 9.
Tit. 36. leg. unic.
Valentinian and Valens, both he who is the author of a Calumny, and he also
who casually finds a libel, and divulgeth it, seem guilty of death: to wit,
where the calumny is some great matter of defamation. And I above noted, that
this offense was sometimes capital, amongst the n. 14.
Jews. To this I shall add the consideration of S. Chrysostom, concerning the
dangers of reproaching Superiors, with respect to what God established, and
effected under the Mosaical Dispensation. He considers Hom. 2. in illud,
Salutate Priscillam and Aquilam.
that if he who reviled his Father or Mother must die the death, Exodus 21.17.
Lev. 20.9. how severe a punishment must he deserve, who does this to his
Spiritual Father? And when he had mentioned the dismal misery, which befell
Corah and his Company, for speaking against Moses and Aaron, he then considers
the case of Miriam. Miriam (with Aaron) had reproached Moses, because of the
Ethiopian Woman, by Gods judgment in this world,
which he had Married, Number. 12.1. with other expressions of contempt. And for
this cause Gods wrath was kindled against her, and by the hand of God she was
smitten with leprosy, and must be put out of the Camp of Israel, and bear her
shame. And as S. Chrysostom observes, this punishment for this offense could
not be avoided; though Moses prayed, and fell down before God on her behalf,
yea, though she was Moses his own Sister, and the person (as he goes on) who
preserved the life of Moses, calling his Mother to nurse him, and led the women
in their praises, Exodus 15. as Moses did the men.

22. But the inflicting the eternal judgment of God, and his severe wrath in
another world, is far more dreadful, than any temporal penalty. and in the
world to come.
And since the most High God is infinitely righteous, in all his laws,
threatenings and judgments; whatsoever he sets himself against, and wheresoever
he executes his fierce anger, it gives manifest evidence, that that which
provokes him so to do, must be greatly evil, as well as dangerous. And it is
necessary to abhor and avoid those things, which expose to the divine
vengeance, which is utterly intolerable. Now that the punishment of those, who
yield themselves to this sin of evil speaking, will be very sad, may appear by
two Considerations.

23. First, By taking a review of it, The several sins contained in it, are all
destructive.
and observing the danger of every one of the several sins above mentioned,
which are contained under this of reproaching; and therefore what the sad
consequence must be of all these meeting together. Does it oppose the great and
necessary duty of love? He that loves not his Brother, abides in death, 1 John 3.14. Does it include a breach of the fifth Commandment, and an opposition
against our Governors, when it has respect to them? they that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2. Is the violation of the sixth
Commandment included in it? When S. John had said, He that hates his Brother
is a murderer; he immediately adds, and ye know, that no murderer has eternal
life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15. Does the reproacher speaking against charity,
usually exceed the bounds of truth? all liars shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. And among the eight sorts of
lies reckoned up, and of all them condemned by de Mendac. ad Cons. c. 14, and
21.
S. Austin, this which is altogether pernicious or hurtful to another, is the
highest, except that one of lying concerning the Faith and Doctrine of
Religion. Is this sin a practice of unrighteousness? the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. Is it a yielding to passion, and an
opposing peace and meekness? they that do such things shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.21.

24. Now if the sum of all these particulars be cast up, and put together, it
will amount to thus much, even the treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath. And it will be hence manifest, that they who indulge themselves in this
sin, do put several bars to shut out themselves from the Kingdom of Heaven.
When our Savior had said to the young man, Mat. 19.17. If thou will enter into
life, keep the Commandments; and was again asked, which Commandments he must
keep; among six which our Lord expressed, as necessary for him to observe, that
he might have eternal life, these are four, Thou shall do no murder, Thou shall
not bear false witness, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, and Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self. And I have above showed, that in this sin of evil
speaking, especially when it is directed against Superiors, there is a
transgressing all these four precepts.

25. Secondly, By considering the severe punishment particularly denounced
against, or inflicted upon the practisers of this sin. I have above noted
diverse instances of Gods heavy Judgments, expressed in the Scripture: as the
sad calamity which came upon our first Parents, and all their Posterity, for
their hearkening to, and entertaining the reproach and evil suggestion of the
Serpent; the dismal punishment of Corah and his accomplices, for their speaking
against Moses and Aaron; and other such like. And the Author under ad fratres
in eremo, Sermon. 26.
S. Austin's name observes, that this sin has much of spiritual leprosy in it
(it is dangerous to the soul, and greatly defiles it; it is apt to infect
others, and renders the person unfit for common Society) and God was pleased to
punish it in Miriam, with leprosy in her body.

26. The Reproacher by public Censure shut out of the ancient Church.
When the strict rules of Christian discipline were exercised, he who defamed,
reproached or reviled others, was to be cast out of the Church by a public
censure; which is an evidence, that the Christian Church accounted this sin, to
forfeit the privileges of Christianity, and that the persons who commit it,
and live in the practice of it, deserve not to be esteemed members of the Body
of Christ. And that amongst other great sinners, the reviler, railer, or
reproacher, is worthy to be separated from the Christian Society, is declared
by the Apostle himself, 1 Cor 5.11. For the word (...), which the Apostle there
uses, is of that extent, as to include all who utter contentious, contumelious
and defaming words, (...), being often used by the Septuag. in Exodus 17.2, 7.
Number. 20.3, 13.
Septuagint, to answer the Hebrew word (...) which relates to strife and
contention, and takes in all contentious reproaching words. According to the
disciplinary rules, received in this Kingdom many hundred years since;
offenders of this nature, especially if they defamed, or spoke contumeliously
in 2. lib. Poenitent. Egbert. n. 21, etc 29. in Spelmar. Conc. Vol. 1.
against their Superiors, were to come under the rules of penance. In like
manner in the Eastern Church, in ancient times, in Regul. brev. Resp. 26.
S. Basil adjudgeth both him who slandereth his Neighbor, and him also who
should comply with him, or give ear unto him, to deserve (...), to be separated
and cut off, from Ecclesiastical communion. And it was more anciently decreed
in the Western Church, that those who should spread abroad reproaches, or
libels against others, should be under an Anathema, according to the Sentence
of the Council of Conc. Elib. c. 52.
Eliberis. All which shows, how odious this sin has been reputed, and how much
abhorred and condemned in the Christian Church.

27. And in the holy Scriptures, when the Psalmist declares the qualifications,
necessary for him who shall dwell in Gods Holy Hill, and threatened with
exclusion out of Gods Kingdom,
or who shall be owned a true member of his Church here, and have an entrance
into his glory hereafter, this is part of his description, Psalm. 15.1, 3. He
that backbiteth not with his tongue, nor does evil to his Neighbor, nor takes
up a reproach against his Neighbor. To this S. James his words are agreeable,
Chap. 1.26. If any man among you seem to be religious and bridleth not his
tongue, that man's Religion is vain. S. Paul also assures us, that revilers
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.10. and our Lord himself says,
concerning him who speaks contumeliously to his Brother, that he shall be in
danger of Hell fire, Mat. 5.22.

28. Now he who considers what God is, and what are the excellencies of his
Kingdom, and with eternal destruction.
cannot account it any light Sentence, to be eternal excluded from his glory
and presence, as the fallen Angels are. If this be not enough, the desperate
misery of all wicked doers, who shall be refused entrance thereinto, will make
the stoutest heart to tremble; and will change the most brisk and jolly temper
into doleful weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth. When they shall be under
the astonishing sense of the divine wrath; the infinite pains, expressed by the
fire which shall not be quenched; the perplexing torment of a terribly awakened
conscience, and the worm that never dies, this will be an unspeakably dismal
state. To which may be added, the amazing presence and Society of the Devil and
his Angels, and other damned persons, expressing their sad outcries and
terrors, and the overwhelming sense of an hopeless and unpitied condition, and
all this to abide in those black and frightful regions of darkness to all
eternity.

29. and with an heavy degree of future misery and vengeance.
And yet in the midst of this unspeakable and endless destruction and torment,
the Scripture which declares the rule, according to which God will denounce
his Sentence, tells us, that those who reproach, and speak evil of Superiors,
are of the number of those sinners, who must expect the highest degree of
judgment, and severity at the great day. 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. The Lord knows how
to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust unto the day
of judgment, to be punished. But chiefly them, that walk after the flesh, in
the lust of uncleanness, and despise government, presumptuous are they, self
willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. Where we see despising
dominion or Government, and speaking evil of dignities, is part of the
description of those, whom God will chiefly punish. And to such persons will
belong those other expressions, of being presumptuous and self-willed: for such
they must be, who will be so insolent, as to despise what God has set over
them, and forgetting their own station to reproach them, who are in Authority.
And though the former clause of this Verse, concerning them who walk after the
flesh in the (...).
lust of uncleanness, or defilement, may very well be understood concerning
them who practice adultery, fornication and lasciviousness; yet even this
clause also, may not improperly be applied to this sin, against which I am
particularly discoursing. For it is evident, from Romans 13.13, 14. Gal. 5.16,
17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 2.11, 12, 13. and other places of Scripture, that the
passions of men, and the expressions and unruliness of them (which are
contained in reproaching) are included under the phrase of the lusts of the
flesh; and that this sin I am treating of, is defiling, is manifest from the
former part of this Chapter. Now the direful vengeance of God, does infinitely
go beyond the severest executions, which can be contrived by men. And all men
ought to have a serious sense of this, and all holy and godly men have so. When
Martyr. Polycarpi.
Polycarp was threatened by the Proconsul, first to be torn in pieces by cruel
wild Beasts; and when this moved him not, he was told he should be burnt with
fire, unless he would depart from the Christian Religion: it was reasonably and
wisely, as well as piously replied by him, (...), etc. Thou threatenest that
fire which burns for an hour, and then goes out, but thou considerest not the
fire of the future Judgment, and the eternal punishment which is reserved for
the wicked. This is that we all ought to fear as most dreadful, and to avoid
all the paths that tend to it, and not to have such light thoughts thereof, as
rashly to gratify any disorder of mind or unruliness of temper, which will
bring us to this destruction.

30. Wherefore the care which all men ought to have, of preventing their own
misery, Carelessness in these concerns, is a daring presumption.
ought to have this influence upon them, that they resolvedly reject and abhor
this sin. Even human penalties have had a considerable force upon the minds of
men, to restrain them from evil practices. When good Josiah heard the law of
Moses read and the judgments denounced against such offenses, as that Kingdom
was then guilty of; his tender heart became affected therewith, and he humbled
himself, was greatly solicitous for Judah, and therefore he enquired of the
Lord, and forthwith undertook the establishing a great reformation. And shall
not men in our days be afraid of the most terrible threats, which the Divine
Majesty denounces, and the Almighty power of God inflicteth upon them who are
perverse and disobedient? We live in an Age wherein sin and doing evil is in
too many instances become bold and daring; and many who make a fair pretense to
Religion, stand not in awe of those heavy menaces of Divine vengeance, whereby
Almighty God has declared his wrath, against those sins, in which they indulge
themselves, and which they still resolve to espouse and prosecute, with a
presumptuous confidence, as far as they are pleasing to themselves, or serve
the interest of a party. Amongst other Arguments and Motives, to avoid all
manner of evil, the dreadful state of being under Gods displeasure, is a mighty
awakening one, and the thoughts of this has had a powerful operation on the
minds of men. Cont. Cells. l. 8. (...).
Origin tells us, that in his days, that he and others by the urging this great
truth, concerning the punishment of evildoers, had converted and turned many
from their sins. And God grant it may have the same effect in our Age.

31. It is far from speaking either the wisdom, or the goodness of any sort of
men, that in so weighty a case as this is, it is difficult to bring them to any
serious consideration and reflection upon themselves. But they are never the
more safe in any evil, for their rash confidence and carelessness, which is no
other than an aggravation of their sin, and an higher provocation of God. I
have had so frequent experience, how hard it is, by any sorts of Arguments, to
prevail with many persons, who seem to have some sense of piety, to make
conscience of performing several particular plain duties of Religion, (as the
attendance on the holy Communion, and the Governing their passions) that I
could not observe it without admiration and some kind of amazement. And I fear
that all that man can say, and all that God has said, which is terrible
enough, will not be effectual to bring many persons guilty of this sin of
speaking evil of others, into a serious sense of it, and an hearty repentance.
However such persons esteem of themselves, this behavior shows a great
prevalency of obstinacy and hardness: and the time will come, when they who
refuse instruction, will wish they had attended to it. And as I heartily beg of
God that all who offend herein, may take warning, and amend, while they have
opportunity; so for them who will not, I shall be heartily grieved, and account
it both with respect to themselves, and the hurtful influence they may have
upon others, a matter of sad lamentation.

32. They who will practice this sin, may for a time please their own passions,
and may gratify the unruly tempers of disordered minds, with whom they
converse. And by uncharitable reflections or insinuations against Superiors,
they will occasion delight, rejoicing and satisfaction to them, who are enemies
to goodness, truth and peace, and a well-established Order in Church or State;
and they may hereby give these men encouragement, and hopes of success, in
their ill designs. But in all this, they act against the interest of Religion,
and their duty to God; and therefore they do so much the more expose themselves
to his wrath and indignation, except they repent. And when they shall either
repent, or bear the effects of Gods anger, none will then be more displeased
with the folly of these their practices, than themselves.

CHAP. IV.
Contumelious evil-speaking in general; and all irreverent and disrespectful
behavior, toward Rulers and Governors, is contrary to the life of Christ; in
those things, wherein we are particularly commanded to imitate his Example: and
S. Paul's carriage, Acts 23.3, 4, 5. considered.
1. HAving discoursed of the mischievous unreasonableness and extravagancy, and
of the great sinfulness and heavy punishment, which attends an unruly tongue,
and uncharitable speaking: I shall now consider the gentleness, meekness and
innocence; yea the charity and due reverent respect, The precepts and example
of Christ ought to guide our practice.
which Christianity teaches us to show, in our words, to others; as this is
especially proposed unto us, in the example of Christ, and what is therein
tendered to our imitation. The precepts of the Gospel to be kind and gentle,
courteous and charitable, and to speak evil of no man, are so obvious, that I
presume every Christian to be acquainted with them. And these things, together
with a respectful demeanor to all Superiors, as they were conspicuous in the
life and practice of our Lord himself, will now fall under my consideration.
But concerning his example, some may possibly think with themselves, that he
was an extraordinary instance of suffering evil, and came into the World to
bear the punishment of our sins, and yielded up himself as the Lamb of God, to
be a Sacrifice; but all Christians are not to bear like sufferings with him.
But such ought to consider, that all his followers are to take up his Cross,
and to perform such duties, and exercise such graces, as are enjoined by his
Laws, and in which we have himself also for our pattern, and are required to
follow him. Now to manifest, how far the practice of our Savior was intended,
to guide and direct us to reject all reviling, and to show reverent respect to
Superiors, I shall lay down these following Considerations.

2. Cons. 1. 1. His meekness, and not reviling, particularly proposed to be our
pattern.
What our Savior did in practicing meekness, and in not reproaching any, or
speaking evil, is proposed to us, as a pattern for us to imitate. This is
clearly asserted by S. Peter, telling us, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23. that Christ
suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps: Who
did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled, he
reviled not again. So that in these things, it is not only an historical truth,
when we are told what Christ himself did; but this is also a rule, to acquaint
us what we ought to do. Contr. Apion l. 2.
Josephus accounted it a great advantage, which the Jews had, for guiding them
to goodness and virtue, that when the Lacedaemonians and Cretians instructed
others in their duty by examples only; and the Athenians, and many others, did
this only by precepts, the Jews made use of both these methods jointly. But in
the Christian Dispensation, we have both more excellent precepts, and an higher
inforcement of them; and also a more exact pattern and example, than ever the
Jews had. The life of Christ recommends those practices, in which we are to
follow him, to be the most honorable, and the wisest undertakings; in that
herein our lives are made conformable to the most glorious person, that ever
appeared in our nature; and we herein do what he who is infinitely wise chose
to do. And his life also shows, that as he in our nature was a perfect pattern
of meekness; so he can and will by his grace enable us, (if we resolve piously
and diligently to follow him, and serve him) to perform these duties also,
though we attain not to the same perfection. It is in all cases very useful,
Ign. Epist. ad Ephesians. (...).
that he who instructs another in what is good, should himself do the same:
for this has a considerable influence upon the practice of others; but no
example of any other teacher, can be so highly profitable, as that of Christ
is, the perfection of which makes it a complete rule and guide. And his
example, especially in the acts of his humility and lowliness, we in duty ought
always to follow, and safely may.

3. Some things are observed by Nazian. Orat. 40.
Nazianzen in the practice of our Savior, which are not to be proposed for our
imitation; to wit, such as he did, according as occasions and circumstances
offered themselves, as his celebrating the holy Communion in an upper chamber,
His temper of mind is in all things to be our examp e.
and after supper, and in the night, and even that very night in which he was
betrayed; and such also as spoke the Dignity and Divinity of his person. And
what he did in the discharge of his Mediatory Office, though all Christians are
highly concerned therein, being interested in the benefits thereof, yet the
performance of these actions, were so peculiar to himself, that none other are
to do the like. Of this nature was his giving up himself to death, for the
working our redemption, and to be a Propitiation for the sins of the World. But
yet it is observable, that in this singular act of his Mediatory Office, (and
the like may be said of others) that excellent temper of mind, in which he
performed this work, is that wherein we stand obliged to follow him; and this
will recommend to us patience and meekness.

4. Thus with respect to God, whilst he gave up himself to be a Sacrifice for
sin, this was a rare instance of obedience, to the will of his Father, even in
the most difficult performance; and of submission to the pleasure of his
Father, in drinking that Cup which he gave him to drink without any murmuring
or repining. And in these things it is our duty to follow him, and that the
same mind be in us which was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5.-8. And with respect to
man, this his Priestly action of making atonement, was performed out of the
greatest love to us: and it contained the highest expressions, and evidences of
this love, in that he was willing to do so much, and to bear so much for men,
who were sinners and enemies; and also in that he did thereby effectually
procure for them the greatest good. And here we are commanded to imitate him,
and to walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for
us, an offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.
And toward them who were his cruel and inhumane enemies, who both crucified
and reviled him; in his great sufferings, when in his own body he did bear our
sins, he expressed a temper of eminent meekness, patience and kindness, and
herein we are commanded to follow his steps, who when he was reviled, he
reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.21, 23. And besides this instance, in what other
things we are not to imitate the particular actions of our Lord, there are yet
some general considerations, with respect to the Spirit and temper of mind, in
which they were done, that are of great use for our imitation. And on this
account it may be affirmed, Aug. de vera Relig. c. 16. Tota itaque vita ejus in
terris disciplina morum fuit.
that the whole life of Christ, was a most excellent instruction for our duty;
which was S. Austins inference, after he had considered many things, which our
Savior did, and especially his patience, meekness and self denial.

5. And the precepts of meekness, and patience, and of governing our tongues,
are as plainly and fully enjoined in the Gospel, as any other commands
whatsoever. If some men will causelessly be our enemies, and will hate, Meekness
and patience are great duties of Christianity.
curse and persecute us; however men had been taught or allowed before to love
their Neighbor, and hate their enemy, the will of our Lord is, that we love
our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate us, and pray
for them that despitefully use us, and persecute us, Mat. 5.44. And if we meet
with them who work us evil, and rail against us, the rule of Christian practice
is, 1 Pet. 3.9. not rendering evil, for evil, or railing for railing, but
contrariwise blessing. And these and other such like precepts, are so excellent
and amiable, that if the meekness, and innocence and charity which Christianity
requires, did universally prevail, and obtain in the World, it would make the
Society of mankind wonderfully more sweet, delightful and comfortable than it
is, and their converse would be free from the poison, and venom of the old
Serpent. And surely the laws which are established for our guidance, especially
where God is the lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, ought to be
accounted of sufficient authority and influence, to command subjection and
obedience. But the example of our Lord, does here add a mighty persuasive
virtue to his precepts, besides what I above mentioned, in that he was far
better than any of us, who deserved most from men, and yet was worst treated by
them, has left such an exact pattern of meekness and patience. And then much
more ought we to practice these duties, since we deceive our selves, if we
think the evil we undergo, whether of this kind or of any other, is not
deservedly ordered to us, with respect to the general disposing of all things,
by Divine Providence. Upon which consideration David exercised himself in
patience toward Shimei. And it may justly seem incongruous, that if a mean
Peasant, who is an offender, shall have the same treatment from men, with an
excellent and gracious Prince, or shall be in the same storm abroad, in his
voyage or journey; that he should be in a fury, as thinking himself too good to
be thus dealt with, while his good Prince goes through all this, with a quiet
and calm demeanor.

6. To imitate Christ in these duties is the way to happiness.
But there is yet a farther very weighty consideration, upon which all
Christians stand bound to follow this example of our Savior; and that is, that
the imitating him in this very thing, is directed and enjoined, as the course
we are to take, for the obtaining happiness, Mat. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you,
and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest unto
your souls. So that the following him in humility and meekness, is the walking
in the path of rest; for this (as all acts of goodness and duty) brings here
serenity and peace, to the mind of him who practices it, and is one of the
great duties to be performed in order to perfect peace and rest hereafter. And
those his Servants who thus serve and follow him, shall be with him where he
is. Thus S. Austin De Temp. Sermon. 61. and Enarrat. in Ps. 90.
, having considered those words of S. Matthew, Chap. 11.29. and of S. Peter, 1
Pet. 2.22, 23. observes, that that example of our Lord, which it is necessary
for us to imitate, is not that which is too high and great for us, in our
capacities, to perform, as to restore the dead to life, or to walk upon the
Sea; but it is to be meek and humble in spirit, and that we should love not
only our friends, but even our enemies with all our hearts.

7. And as this duty is particularly recommended to us, There is no true piety
in them who do not walk as he walked.
as one especial and main thing, in which we are to imitate our Lord, and shall
be highly rewarded by so doing; so it will be useful to take notice in general,
that it is a very vain thing for any to talk of Christ and Christianity, and of
their hope and interest in him, if they do not follow his example, and live
according to his life. And of this we are assured by S. John, 1 John 2.6. He
that says he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked.
And these words are the more necessary to be minded and seriously regarded,
because S. John in the former part of that Chapter, does particularly undertake
to declare and reckon up, in large and comprehensive expressions, diverse of
those things which are of absolute necessity for every man to observe, who
would be owned as truly Religious, and in a comfortable relation to God. To
this purpose he says, v. 4. He that says, I know him and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. And v. 5. But whosoever
keeps his word; in him verily is the love of God perfected, hereby know we
that we are in him. And after he had inserted some emphatical expressions, to
manifest the weight and excellency of these things, which he was now
discoursing, he proceeds to assert v. 9. He that says he is in the light, and
hates his Brother, is in darkness, even until now: and v. 15. If any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And amongst these he
expresses what I now mentioned, v. 6. concerning walking as he walked. Which
Verse also is intended to express, what is so necessary to true Christianity,
and communion with Christ, that they cannot consist without it. How far then do
they go astray, who are so negligent of Christian meekness and gentleness; as
if fierceness and passion, were rather to be accounted the practices of our
Religion.

8. 2. Our Lord's example peculiarly requires reverence to Superiors.
Cons. 2. Our Savior's example is particularly set before us, to silence and
suppress all evil speaking against Superiors, and reproaching them who are in
Authority; and to engage us to behave our selves toward them, with reverence
and due respect. And for the manifesting this, I shall show three things.

9. First, That this is the scope and intention of S. Peter, in proposing to us
the example of Christ. 1 Pet. 2.21, 23. for the proof of which, I need only
make a brief reflection on the foregoing Verses. To this purpose, it is urged by
S. Peter.
That Apostle had spoken of the duty of Subjects, to their King and Governors,
v. 13. commanding them, to submit themselves to every ordinance of man, for the
Lords sake, whether to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them
that are sent by him. And he continues his discourse with particular respect
to them, unto the end of v. 17. concluding it with these precepts, Fear God,
and Honor the King. And v. 18. he comes to speak of that duty and respect,
which is due to those Superiors, who are in a more inferior domestic
relation, and are not furnished with that Dignity and Honor, which belongs to
them who govern in an higher rank and capacity. And here he commands Servants
to be subject to their Masters with all fear, etc. and then he proceeds to
declare, what patience, meekness and reverence, is to be expressed toward such
Superiors, by those who are subject to them, though they should meet with hard
measure from them, and suffer undeservedly by them. And for the guiding
Christians in this case, he brings in the example of Christ, and this part of
it particularly, that he who did no sin, when he was reviled, he reviled not
again, and when he suffered he threatened not, v. 22, 23.

10. Secondly, That our Savior did behave himself, Our Saviors practice
expressed great respect to Superior Relations, particularly to his Parents:
with that respect to superior Relations, both in words and actions, which is
fit to teach us to do the like. In his Divine nature, he was Lord of all, even
in the depth of his humiliation; and in his humane nature, he was advanced to
an high dignity, in Union to the Divine, and as our Mediator. But yet
considering him as made under the law, and in the form of a servant, and he
therein carefully performed the duties of the fifth Commandment, as well as any
other precepts of the law of God, both to his Parents, and to all that were in
Authority, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical. When he took on him the nature of
man, he became subject to those duties, which belong to that nature, and tend
to the public good and order of the World. In his younger years he began his
life, with subjection to his Parents, Luke 2.51. And this thing deserves to be
the more especially taken notice of, because as some Ludolph. de Vit. Chr. P.
1. cap 16. Barrad in Concord. Evang. Tom. 1. l. 10. c. 14.
have truly observed, this is a main and chief thing, which the Holy Ghost
thought fit to record, concerning the actions of that former part of our
Saviors life; from the twelfth, to the thirtieth year of his age. And in one
of the last actions of his life, when he was upon the Cross, he expressed that
honor to his Mother, as to recommend her to the care of his beloved Disciple,
Joh. 19.26, 27.

11. He gave that respect to the Temple-service, To the Office of the Priests,
and the Temple-service,
and to the Office of the Priests, who ministered therein, that though he came
to put an end to this typical worship, by the Sacrifice of himself, yet so long
as it continued in force, he himself attended thereon. In his infancy he was
there presented to the Lord; he observed the Passover, and other public
solemnities there; and the night before his Passion, he not only kept the
Passover with his Disciples, but declared the great desire he had, to eat that
Passover with them, Luke 22.15. And when he had cleansed a leper, he enjoined
him to show himself to the Priest, and offer for his cleansing as Moses had
commanded, Luke 5.14. And I doubt not but that it was truly observed, by
Ludolphus de Vita Christi, that when the Scripture speaks of his going into the
Temple, it is not to be understood of the Temple strictly so called, nor yet of
the Court of the Priests: Lud. P. 2. cap. 29. n. 2.
Ista duo loca non intravit Christus, quia non erat sacerdos (sc. Aaronicus.)
He being no Aaronical Priest, and observing the law of God, did not take upon
him what peculiarly did belong to them by virtue of their Office.

12. and even to the Constitutions of their Synagogues; and to the Baptist, and
the Scribes and Pharisees:
And he had that honor for the order and authority of their public
Synagogue-worship and solemnities, that it was his custom to attend thereon,
Luke 4.16. He showed also that respect to the Ministry of John the Baptist,
though he was both in Office, and Person, far inferior to himself, that he
would be Baptized of him; and hereby he gave testimony that he would have all
persons, whom God had called to any public ministration, to be reverenced, and
received with honorable respect in that service. And though the Scribes and
Bharisees reviled and opposed him, such was his signal meekness and integrity,
that so far as they sat in Moses seat, or were invested with authority, and
kept themselves to the Rules of the Law of Moses, and to the due limits of
their Power, our Lord commanded the people to observe and do what they said,
Mat. 23.3. But where they departed from this rule, it was necessary to declare
the falsehood of their Doctrine, and the corruption of their practices, and this
also was faithfully done by our Lord.

13. And when the Highpriests and Elders, Jos. Ant. Jud. l. 14. c. 17.
who had some continuance of Secular Authority, under the Roman Power, sent
Officers and Soldiers to take him; he was so far from giving the least
countenance to any tumult or Sedition, that he gave a sharp reproof to S.
Peter's drawing the Sword, and undertook to heal Malchus, whose ear he had cut
off. to the Synedrial Authority of the Jews,
And when before the judgment seat, he was smitten by an angry Officer that
stood by, he returned not a passionate word, but in these mild expressions
replied, if I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, but if well, why
smitest thou me? Joh. 18.23. And that answer which he gave the High Priest,
which occasioned this Officer to be so furious, contained not the least
intimation Cyp. Ep. 65. Dominus noster -- usque ad passionis diem servavit
honorem Pontificibus and Sacerdotibus, etc.
of disrespect unto him. But being asked concerning his Disciples and his
Doctrine, he appealed to the Jews themselves, to testify what they knew, who
were able to give an account of this, since he ever taught openly in the
Synagogues, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resorted. And yet this
innocent and reasonable answer, was, it seems, the greatest occasion this
fierce Officer could take, to strike him. He commanded also to pay tribute, and
to render what was due to Caesar, and to Caesar.
but he neither spoke nor did any thing, that testified want of due respect to
any person, invested with Authority. Nor did his Doctrine give any liberty to
his Disciples, to neglect this reverence and respect; as appears from what was
delivered as the Christian rule of practice, by himself, and by S. Peter, and
S. Paul. For herein resistance, and evil-speaking of a Ruler, is condemned and
forbidden; and honor, submission and obedience to all Governors, and that
even for conscience sake, and for the Lords sake, is enjoined upon every soul,
under the most heavy penalties even of damnation it self. Wherefore let us
herein be followers of him, who himself long practiced Stella in Luc. 2.
Ludolph. de V. C. Part. 1. c. 15, 16.
subjection before he preached it to others; and from him Subjects may learn to
obey those that are over them, when they see the Redeemer and Lord of the whole
World, subject to Joseph and Mary.

14. Thirdly, We are the more obliged, to follow the example of our Lord, in
behaving our selves meekly, and reverently to our Superiors; because this is
that, which the Holy Scriptures particularly recommend, Christians practicing
reverence to Superiors, does greatly recommend Religion.
in order to the growth of the Christian Religion, and the advancement of its
interest in the World. And if this be so, they who are the true friends to
Christianity, and therein to the honor of Christ, and the happiness of men,
must manifest this, by their awful and respectful carriage to their Governors,
as well as by any other duty of Christianity. And they who transgress herein,
are guilty of such a crime, as has a tendency to hinder the prevalency of our
holy Religion, and to put a stop to its progress among men. And indeed where
duties of submission are practiced, out of principles of Conscience, and a
sense of God and Religion; they are there regular, uniform and constant, and
they speak this excellency in Religion, that it is that which calms and subdues
men's passions, and brings them into a subjection to the rules of their duty.
And it also manifests that Christianity, where it is rightly and sincerely
entertained, by suppressing the fierce boisterousness, and tumultuousness of
unruly minds, does very much help forward the establishment, and continuance of
an excellent and beautiful order, in human Societies, and promoteth quiet and
peaceableness among men. And where the true Spirit of Religion does prevail, it
effectually will do all this good; and when vicious and evil men are apt to be
proud and self-willed, and fierce and unruly, it makes those who are guided by
it, meek and humble, gentle and obedient; which is so amiable a temper, and so
useful and beneficial to the World, that the generality of mankind, unless they
offer violence to their reason and conscience, cannot but think well of it. And
it would be of mighty advantage to the reforming the World, if all who profess
Christianity, were so far Christians indeed, that they would in these things,
manifest the life, and power and excellency of their Religion.

15. To this end it is directed in the Holy Scripture
Now that the Holy Scriptures do direct, and enjoin this submissive and awful
carriage of inferiors, toward all who are in Authority, as a means for the
bringing honor to our Religion, and for the propagating it, and making it more
effectually prevalent amongst men, is sufficiently evident both from S. Peter
and S. Paul. S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.12. gives the command to Christians, who lived
among Pagans, by S. Peter,
having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
against you as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation. Where he exhorts them so to
live, that they might win them who were yet strangers to the Christian
Religion, into an affection to it, and esteem of it. And as a particular means
to effect this, he adds in the next words, Submit your selves, therefore, to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
Supreme, etc. So that this is here laid down, as a first, and principal
direction and rule, for the bringing credit, and esteem to Christianity, among
the Gentiles. And Estius Estius in 1 Pet. 2.13.
thinks, not improbably, that the Apostle the rather gives this precept to
them, for this end and purpose; because the Jews from amongst whom most of the
Christians to whom he wrote, were Converted, were ordinarily reputed perverse,
unruly, and enemies to civil Government, and thereupon both themselves, and
there Religion were the more disliked by the Gentiles.

16. Indeed that particle, Therefore, which is of great weight in this Text, is
omitted and left out, both in the various impressions of our last English
Translation, and in some other The Geneva, and Wicklef 's.
more ancient English Versions; which yet is fully expressed in the Original,
by the general, and almost universal consent of all ancient Copies, agreeably
to the scope of the Apostles discourse; and therefore it ought to be restored
in our Translation. And after S. Peter, v. 13, and 14. had commanded
submission, and dutiful respect to the King, and other Governors, he adds this
argument, to enforce the practice of this duty, v. 15. For so is the will of
God, that with well-doing, you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.
In which words it is declared, both that this respectful behavior to
Governors, is of great use, to take of those oppositions which the enemies of
Christianity make against it; and also that it is the will of God, that
Christians should carefully practice this duty (which is a great branch of
well-doing) in order to the obtaining this end.

17. To the same purpose S. Peter proceeds, to require an humble subjection and
obedience of Servants, to their Masters, v. 18. declaring v. 19. this is
thank-worthy, (...), or that which obtains, both in the sight of God and man, a
favorable acceptance, and good esteem (so (...) often sigifies as Luke 1.30.
Chap. 2.52. Chap. 6.32, 33, 34. Act. 2.47. and this is the most proper sense of
that word in this place) and this brings (...) glory and renown, and deserves
honor, v. 20. And in this case as I n. 9.
above noted, he sets before us the Example of Christ, in a matter of so great
usefulness to our Religion. To the same end still this Apostle Chap. 3. v. 1,
2. requires the submission of Wives to their Husbands, as a means to bring over
those Husbands to Christian piety, who were not prevailed upon, by the
instruction of the word. And here he requires, that they show a reverent
behavior, v. 2. a quiet temper, v. 4. and such a submission as includes the
use of words and expressions of honor and respect, and this is mentioned as
well-doing, v. 5, 6. And indeed the power and force of Religion does eminently
appear in the pious performing the duties of Subjection: for whilst pride, and
passion and inordinate affection, puts men upon striving to be greatest, and
makes it an uneasy thing to them to be led and governed by others, in a mean
station; conscience to God will make persons faithful, and submissive in the
most inferior relations, and willing to serve him with humility, and meekness
in the lowest condition, in which God places them. And this is in truth both a
great and a good; a generous and noble, and even a divine temper of mind.

18. and also by S. Paul.
From S. Peter, I now proceed to S. Paul, who discoursing Tit. 2.9, 10. of the
duty of Servants to their Masters, though the relation of a Master, does not
require so high a degree of honor and reverence, as that of a Prince and
Governor, in great Authority, does; yet the Apostle commands that Servants be
exhorted to please them well in all things, not answering again, not
purloyning, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things. Where he requires from Servants, faithfulness
and fidelity, a submissive temper, to please in all things; and a meek
Government of themselves as to their words and expressions, not answering
again, and consequently not giving any passionate, murmuring, contumelious or
other ill words; and these duties are particularly required for the adorning
the Doctrine of Christianity. And it is somewhat to the same purpose, that in
the following Chapter, the Apostle commands, that men be put in mind to
practice subjection to Magistrates, and meekness toward all men, Tit. 3.1, 2.
as manifesting thereby, what an excellent effect, the Christian Doctrine and
Spirit rightly entertained, has on the lives of men. For before that took
place and was entertained, the Apostle says, v. 3. We our selves were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice, etc. But v. 4, 5, 6. after the kindness and love of God our
Savior toward man appeared, the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost, wrought a mighty change in this temper and conversation, in order
to the eternal happiness of men. See also 1 Timothy 6.1.

19 Cons. 3. The example of Christ is intended, to press upon all Christians
this duty of meekness, and the forbearing to reproach any others whomsoever;
and especially a reverent behavior toward all who are over us, though from
them we might sustain real injuries. And evil-speaking to reproach or revile
others, though it be upon provocation and receiving wrong is too common among
men, but is contrary both to the example, and Doctrine of our Savior. Christ's
example requires kindness to all, and reverence to superiors, though we
sustain injuries.
He was every way injuriously treated by word and deed; his enemies who set
themselves against him, were evil men, and guilty of those faults, which they
falsely and undeservedly charged on him; and yet in his sufferings, he made no
return of rash and reviling expressions toward them, nor yet of passionate
complaints against them, but was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a
sheep before his shearers is dumb so he opened not his mouth. Is. 53.7. Such
was the admirable practice of his meekness, and patience, and in these graces
we must follow him, even under difficulties.

20. Indeed reason as well as the Christian Religion, will condemn the return
of passion, violence or evil-speaking to them from whom we have received the
like. For as Bas. Hom. de Ira.
S. Basil argues, what excuse can there be for him, who returns the like to him
who provokes him? will he plead that another began? It is suitable to reason not
to return injury in word or deed to any men,
would this defend the person who by compliance, yields to the commission of
adultery? there is no Crown of Victory but to him who withstands, and fights
against his adversary; and as that Father adds, art thou angry at another
reproaching as being bad, and yet thou imitatest it, as if it were good, (...).
And what man can stand more self-condemned, than he who complains of others who
speak or act injuriously against him, and at the same time follows their
example, and does the same thing to them? For if this be not evil, he has no
occasion to complain, or be offended; if it be evil in another, it will also be
so in him, and ought to be avoided.

21. It is an unmanly thing, to imitate the croaking of a Frogg before you, or
the snarling of a Dog against you. But though these be weak and silly things,
the acting by evil examples of bad men, is far worse, because there is a moral
turpitude, or sinful defilement in such actions. The rules of our holy Religion
require us, to behave our selves otherwise, 1 These. 5.15. See that none render
evil for evil. and commanded in the Scripture.
And though a bad man deeply infected with the poison of the Serpent, may have
a pestilential breath, and his words may be envenomed; the pious man, who is of
a sound temper of mind and heart, must have no evil communication proceed out
of his mouth. It becomes him, and is his duty, to follow his Lord, who in this
case did not only forbear to speak, or so much as to think or desire any evil,
but to his patience and gentleness, he added his tender kindness and
compassiate love, in dying for his enemies, Romans 5.8, 10. and praying for his
persecutors, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, Luke 23.34.

22. This example and doctrine of our Lord, outwent the rules of virtue,
delivered by the wisest Philosophers. de Virt. and vitiis. (...).
Aristotle describes the virtue of meekness, to be that by which a man can bear
with moderation, both calumny and disrespect and contempt, and is not easily
moved to anger, but is of a calm and steady temper. And the Stoics went
somewhat further, by directing the wise man to esteem nothing to be injurious
to him. But our Lord and his Religion, not only undertake the moderating, and
suppressing of irregular passion, but the overcoming evil with good; and herein
his example and Laws are beyond all other patterns or institutions.

23. Those Pagan examples were considerable, which being mentioned by Plutarch,
are related also by Cont. Cells. l. 8. p. 401.
Origin, of returning kindness for unkindness, both in words and actions. That
Lycurgus not only forbear all revenge, against him who had struck out his eye,
The greatest Pagan examples are short of Christianity.
but would not give over instructing him, till he had prevailed upon him, to
study Philosophy and virtue. And Zeno when he heard that one who was his enemy,
had vowed to do him a mischief; answered, and let me perish, if I do not my
utmost, to overcome him to be my friend. To which I add that of Sueton. in Tit.
n. 9.
Titus the Roman Emperor, who when Domitian, whom he had declared his
Successor, would not desist from designing evil against him; he still not only
continued his former kindness to Domitian, but with entreating and tears
besought him, that they might have a mutual friendship toward each other.

24. But such actions as these, were mostly singular instances, practiced only
toward some particular persons, and remarked as things extraordinary, nor did
their precepts oblige others to do the like. But David's tenderness was more
extended and general, who behaved himself toward his enemies, with that
kindness, as if his friend or Brother had been concerned, Ps. 35.11, -- 14, 15.
And our Saviors love and affection, unto them who were his enemies, was
universal, and his precepts so fully require the same, and so much beyond any
other rules of practice, received in the world, that Tertullian might well say,
that the Christian kindness toward enemies, and revilers, is Ad Scap. c. 1.
perfecta and propria bonitas nostra, non communis, a rule of complete
goodness, peculiar to Christians, and not common to others. And though the
Christian temper of meekness and love, be at all times desirable, that mildness
which was practiced by some of the Pagans, that offenders should be set free
from punishment, is not always fit to take place in the world. That Oath of
Titus (who would not punish those two of the Patricii, who would have seized
themselves of the Empire) was unadvised and indiscreet Sueton. ubi sup.
periturum se potius, quam perditurum, that he though an Emperor on whom the
public welfare depended, had rather be killed himself, than put any other
person to death. But the rules of Christian meekness, observe those right and
regular bounds and limits, which run into no hurtful extremes, but promote and
secure true goodness, together with the common welfare of mankind.

25. This returning kindness to the most ill-tempered persons was a thing very
familiar to the ancient Christians, even under their most heavy trials. But as
good men may sometimes misapprehend the due measures, and rules of their duty;
so affectionateness and tenderness, may in this case carry them sometimes, into
the other extreme; to show too great respect, to those their enemies, who are
also adversaries to the truth. It was an excellent sweet temper of Gr.
Nazianzen, that Gr. in vit. Gr. Naz.
when the Church met with many oppositions, and himself was particularly aimed
at, he much endeavored to allay the heat of the Orthodox Christians, whenever
he discerned them to exceed. And when such Emperors reigned, as were friends to
the truth, he declared, that this was the revenge he would take of his enemies,
to endeavor they might be saved, and own those good things which before they
rejected. And yet he had been loaded by them with injuries. The Apolinarians by
their calumnies and clamor, had rendered him distastful to the people, and when
he was under the disrespect of the multitude, the Arians stoned him; and this
meek man was accused before the Secular Tribunal, to be the author of tumult
and sedition. And after all his expressions of kindness, he was so ill requited
by these his enemies, that they set a young man to assassinate and murder him:
who was so far moved with the converse, and presence of this holy man, that
relenting with tears and lamentations, he implored, and easily obtained his
pardon. I confess, Naz Orat. ad 150 Episc.
he was by some blamed for showing too much kindness to the enemies of the
truth; and it is true, that good men, and especially Bishops and Governors,
ought not to express an equal favor to them, who oppose truth, peace and
goodness, and to those who embrace them. But that kindness which may tend to
their good, and the good of others, is such an excellent temper, as ought not
to be laid aside for any personal injuries.

26. But the example of Christ, The Example of Christ considered with respect
to Rulers, from whom we receive hard measure.
particularly recommends reverence, and respect to Superiors, though we should
receive hard measure at their hands. From hence S. Peter commands, 1 Pet. 2.18,
-- 21. the reverent subjection of Servants to their Masters, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward. And if such a behavior be necessary,
toward them who possess a lesser degree of authority, in a family; much more
to them in higher capacity: for the neglect of duty to them is an offense of a
more public nature, and tends to a more general scandal and prejudice. And
hence we may further infer, that neglect of dutiful carriage, is much more
inexcusable toward those Governors, who are good and kind, and from whom we
receive no wrong or injury. But how we ought to behave our selves, even to
froward Rulers, we are to learn by the example of Christ, which is to this
purpose set before us 1 Pet. 2.21. He was without any crime, and though he was
condemned, he did no sin, v. 22. He suffered, but without threatening, or
returning any evil word, or reviling again, but committed himself to him that
judges righteously, v. 23. And such is the Order that God has established in
the World, that he who is wronged by his equal, or fellow Subject, ought not to
avenge himself; but if the case require it, may apply himself to his Ruler, for
help and redress. But if he be hardly and severely dealt with, by them who have
the Government of the world, he must not then avenge himself, no not so much as
by reproach, or evil expressions, but commit himself to God as a righteous
judge: and this the example of Christ will direct him to do.

27. Yea, our Saviors prayer, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do, did manifest his great and tender affectionateness, not only to the common
people, but also to their Rulers, who contrived and conspired his death. For
even they also knew not what they did, as S. Peter declares, Act. 3.17. And
thus the ancient Christians, though ill treated under Pagan or Heretical
Governors, did not only forbear evil speaking, and irreverent and indecent
carriage, but thought themselves obliged, to maintain an high respect to these
Rulers, and to desire their happiness and welfare. This Apol. and ad Scap.
Tertullian declared, under an Ethnic Emperor, and that Council of in
Athanas. de Syn. Arim. and S^l.
Ariminum, which established the Faith of Nice, under Constantius the Arian
Emperor, in their Epistle which they sent unto him.

28. Performing this duty is acceptable to God, and conscience toward him will
require it;
And such a continued respect, and practice of duty to Governors, even under
harsh usage, is that which conscience to God will oblige every Christian to
perform. S. Peter therefore commends that temper, where a man for conscience
toward God, endures grief, suffering wrongfully, 1 Pet. 2.19. that is, endures
it patiently, and without reviling, as the following Verses will explain it.
And the reason for this is, because this duty of respectful submission, is not
founded chiefly upon the good temper of our Superiors, but upon the authority
they receive from God, and the precepts which God has thereupon given to us.
So that here the debate lies between conscience and self-will; whether the
precepts and rules of Religion are to be followed, which conscience will oblige
unto; or the passions of men, which the unruly temper of sinful inclinations
are prone to comply with. Now where this Christian duty is carefully observed,
we are assured by S. Peter, that this is acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 2.20. And
every good man will please himself best, in doing those things which are
pleasing to God. And this he may do, and bring honor to himself also, by this
Christian temper toward Governors. For the Apostle in that place tells us,
What glory is it, if when you be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it
patiently? but if when you do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently,
this is acceptable with God. But if patience in suffering for faults, has not
so much of virtue in it, as to bring any honor and renown to him who
practices it, how blameable must they needs be, who are faulty, and yet though
they be free from suffering, are impatient and murmuring.

29. To all these weighty Considerations, I might add, that this temper is a
thing so necessary, that in the neglect of it, we cannot behave our selves as
Christians, or sutably to our Christian calling. And therefore S. Peter v. 21.
and this becomes our calling.
adds, For hereunto were ye called: our Christian Religion greatly requires
us, herein to follow our Saviors steps. And when S. Paul did beseech the
Ephesians, to walk worthy of the vocation, wherewith they were called, the
first things he requires from them to this end are, all lowliness and meekness,
and long suffering, Ephesians. 4.1, 2.

30. Obj. 1. But possibly some men, This Discourse is against the true interest
of man.
who are not willing to put these great Christian duties in practice, may be
forward to raise prejudices, against such a Discourse as this, and may pretend,
that these things are not suitable to the true interests of men, but there is
rather some ill design carried on by them.

To which I Answer, It wholly designs to bring men from passion and sin to
goodness.
First, That this really tends to no other end, but to preserve or recover men
from the snares of sin, and to guide them into a true obedience to the will of
God, and the doing those things which are to the honor of Christianity, by
calming the unruly disorders of men's minds. Where persons are engaged in any
unaccountable practice, with passion and fierceness, there is no case wherein
sin has a greater dominion, and government over man, than in this. For whilst
any are carried on with rash heats, these blind their minds, and hinder them
from a sober consideration, of what they ought to do. And there is no sinful
indisposition, wherein men are more averse from good counsel, and more forward
to be displeased with, and oppose them who would direct them better. And Arist.
Ethic l 1. c.
Aristotle observed from Hesiod, that he who will neither consider things
rightly of himself, nor be advised by others, is (...) a man of whose good
there is little hope. Wherefore he who will endeavor the recovering of men
from such sins, must be prepared to bear the hard words of such offenders;
which was the lot of Christ himself, of his Apostles, and many of the ancient
Fathers in the like case. Even as he that would be most instrumental, to
extinguish a prevailing fire, may be scorcht, and must be touched, with some
sense of the heat and flame.

31. 2. It is impious to think the breaking the laws of God to be our interest.
Secondly, Consider how much it savoureth of impiety, that the urging the plain
duties of meekness, patience, humility, and reverence to Superiors, should be
thought things of ill and hurtful consequence; and that passionate fierceness
and disobedience, should be esteemed things good and useful for mankind. As if
those things which God commands, were for the prejudice of man, of whose
welfare he has so great a care. This would represent the Kingdom of Christ to
be divided against it self, and persuade men, that if they will take care of
their own true interest, and do what is best for themselves, they must cast off
the yoke of Christ, and comply with the temptations of the Devil. But whoever
will talk, or judge at this rate, if he do not stop his course, and return from
the error of his way, is in a fair progress toward the renouncing his
Christianity, and the denying the wisdom and goodness of God in governing the
world. But then, he must withal contradict the sentiments, of his own reason
and conscience, since no man can think it just and fit, that himself should be
thus treated, either with uncharitable censures, and unjust reproaches, and
calumnies by others; or with an untractable disrespect, and an irreverent and
undutiful behavior, from his own Children and Servants. It would be folly
enough for Subjects to think, that those prudent Laws, which are the
contrivance of the wisest men, are their burden and damage, and that it would
be far better, for every man to be wholly left to his own will: when as the
Cic. pro Cluent.
Roman Orator truly observed, Laws are the bond, and the soul and life of civil
society, and the foundation of liberty; and we are therefore subject to Laws,
that we may enjoy freedom, legum idcirco servi sumus, ut liberi esse possimus.
But it would be far more unaccountable to have such disparaging thoughts of the
directions and commands, of the infinitely wise God. And it has been a great
part of Satan's business in the world, to persuade men to reject useful truth,
and rules of practice, by raising prejudices against them, and those that teach
them. This he often does by pretending that they are against the interest of men,
and that some ill design is laid by them who propose them. In this manner he
began with our first Parents in Paradise, and so he proceeded against the
Christian Religion, as I have showed.

32. Obj. 2. But it may be further objected, If Religion be concerned, ought
not men to be zealous?
If Religion be concerned and in danger, does it not become every good man to
be moved and zealous in this case, and both to speak and act, what may tend to
its preservation. To which I shall return four things, by way of Answer, with
desire that they may all of them be seriously considered.

33. Yes, in Christian and prudent actions, not in sinful passions.
Ans. 1. It is very requisite, he should in such a case be zealous, and active
as a Christian, in the diligent exercises of an holy life, and in frequent and
devout prayer, and supplication to Almighty God, to procure his protection and
defense against all the enemies of his Church, and their ill designs. And it is
proper also for him, to be active as a wise man, in the use of all lawful and
prudent means, which agree to his place and station. But he must not be active
as an evil doer, in giving himself the liberty, to vent passionate slanders,
and uncharitable reproaches against others, or to behave himself undutifully
toward his Superiors. If a Ship be in a storm, it is desirable that its
passengers should both pray to God, and in their places put to their helping
hand for its security; but it very ill becomes them at that time, to fall into
quarrels with them who take the best care for its safety. And it must be
considered that Just. Mart. Paraen. p. 33. (...).
Religion is not so much a name, as a business of life and practice. And
therefore they who speak of showing a great respect to Religion, by disobeying
its precepts, do really lose Religion, under a pretense of preserving it: for
though men may deceive themselves, it is a truth of undoubted certainty, that
whosoever seems to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, that man's
Religion is vain: it is an empty appearance, and not profitable to himself.

34. 2. Gods Kingdom needs not the help of Satan and sin.
Ans. 2. Religion can never be so in danger, that God should need any sinful
practices of men, to uphold his interest. His Kingdom is not so weak, that it
cannot stand, without the assistance of the works of the Devil. Such methods
may help forward the ruin of a Church, but will never be found the true way to
its settlement and establishing. Christ who founded his Church, did support it,
when it was in the midst of persecutions, even in its weak beginnings. And the
exercises of piety and all good conscience, accompanied with innocent prudence,
are the way to put us under his care, and entitle us to his protection, but he
will have no concord with Belial. When the pressures of the Israelites were
heavy in Egypt, God delivered them from their Bondage. And when their
transgressions had at other times exposed them to great calamities and
sufferings, upon their returning to him, he raised up Judges, and gave them
redress. And he knows how to defend those who fear him, by various methods, and
sometimes in a more strange and extraordinary manner. Thus the wrath of Jos.
Ant. Jud. l. 11. c. 8.
Alexander, who went against Jerusalem with the Spirit of an enraged enemy, was
fully appeased, to the admiration of those who accompanied him, when he met
Jaddus the High Priest, in his Priestly Garments, and remembered that before he
came out of Macedonia, such a person, in that habit, appeared to him, and
encouraged him in his enterprise. And when a Diploma was signed to create
trouble to the Bohemian Church, when Maximilian the second was Emperor, 1565,
Comen. Historiolae. 109.
Comenius acquaints us, that he who carried it, going over the Bridge of
Danubius without the Gates of Vienna, the Bridge at that instant broke, and
though this person was taken up dead, by some Fishers, the Diploma was never
seen after, and thereby that Church enjoyed rest and peace. And for the
preservation and security of his Church, in the time of its greatest
oppositions, he raised up a Constantine, and in the same age soon removed a
Julian. And we have had instances of Gods care toward the Reformation of our
Church, in defeating many oppositions contrived against it and our Religious
Princes, and in restoring it again to its former establishment, after our late
troubles; and also in ordering the Reign of Queen Mary to be short, and that
she should have no issue, and that after her, there should be a succession of
many excellent Princes.

35. Ans. 3. 3. Religion was never more opposed, than when Christ was Crucified.
Religion can never be opposed with greater enmity, and malicious designs, than
it was when our Savior suffered: Yet then he reviled not, nor allowed S.
Peter's rashness, but left us his example for our imitation. The Church of God
upon earth, was never without the enmity of the evil one, and those whom he
could engage against it: but at sometimes their opposition is more vehement
than at others. When our Lord was crucified, the Devil entered into Judas to
effect it, the Jews aimed utterly to root out the Christian name. The power of
the Jewish Church and Sanhedrin, was then engaged against it, and gained both
Herod and Pilate, into a compliance with them. And there were great oppositions
against Religion, even fiery trials, 1 Pet. 4.12. When yet S. Peter requires
Christians, to follow the example of our Lords patience and meekness, and to
reverence Superiors. But with us, blessed be God, our Laws establish the true
Religion, our Clergy defend it, and press the practice of it, and our Prince
(whom God preserve) upholds the profession of it. But the Primitive Christians,
who lived under Pagan Rulers, who persecuted the Church; behaved themselves
with more honorable respect toward them, than many now do toward those
Christian Governors, and Spiritual Guides, who encourage and promote
Christianity.

36. 4. True zeal has respect to all duty.
Ans. 4. True zeal for Religion is of excellent use, and very desirable, but it
consists in pious and holy living, not in passionate and sinful speaking. And
it must be uniform in minding all the parts of duty, which are incumbent on us.
But they who are careless and negligent, in great and plain duties, can have no
true love, and conscientious regard to Religion, and therefore no zeal for it,
but it is something else, which they miscall by that name. True zeal will put
men on diligent, constant and devout attendance, on Gods public worship, and
the holy Sacraments; upon solicitous thoughts and care for the Churches peace
and Union; upon all the exercises of piety to God, and of righteousness,
charity, meekness and due obedience to man. And particularly, both with respect
to the happiness of another world, and a comfortable estate in this, it will
oblige men to curb the rashness and sin of their words and expressions,
according to that advice of the Psalmist, and the Apostle S. Peter, 1 Pet.
3.10, 11. He that will love life and see good days, let him refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile: Let him eschew evil and do
good, let him seek peace and ensue it.

37. Wherefore let every person, uncharitable reproaches against all men to be
avoided,
as he values his own happiness, and as he would approve himself a true
Disciple of Christ, beware of this sinful behavior, of slandering or
reproaching others. And not the speaker only, but he that hears such things
with delight, is guilty of the same uncharitableness, and in like manner serves
his own sinful passions, and gives encouragement to the practice and spreading
of this vice. S. Bern. de modo been vivendi.
Bernard, therefore well advises all men, to avoid a detractor as a Serpent,
who casts forth his poison, because besides his own sin, he who willingly
gives ear to him, becomes guilty also. To the same purpose S. Austin, S.
Hierome, and others who sometimes speak of the contumelious ear; or that men's
ears, as well as their tongues, may render them justly chargeable with the sin
of reproaching. He that in this case speaks rashly or uncharitably, or that
entertains such expressions with pleasure, must ordinarily intend a prejudice
to another, and a blemish to his reputation: and this very intention speaks
some degree of malice or ill will, contained in this sin, and sometimes a very
high degree thereof. But the main hurt and mischief fal's upon the offender
himself, being contained in his sin, and consequent upon it. He like the man
whose Spirit is so far envenomed, as to take poison in his mouth to spit it at
another, is in a direct way to ruin himself, whatsoever prejudice the other
may sustain by him. So S. Hier. in Ps. 119.
Hierome declared, detrahimus illi, illi non nocemus, sed nostras interficimus
animas, we speak unworthily of another, but the main damage does not fall upon
him, but we destroy our own souls.

38. and repented of.
Let all those therefore who have been guilty of this transgression, heartily
repent thereof, that they may find mercy with God. But it must be considered,
that repentance in matters of injury to men, by word or deed, does not only
require a desisting from the further practice of the sin, with due sorrow for
the former miscarriage; but also a careful undertaking to make satisfaction for
the injury done. It is therefore here requisite, that the offender do readily,
freely and ingenuously retract, what has been spoken amiss, and vindicate him
who has been injuriously aspersed; and also endeavor that his future kindness
toward him may be equivalent to his past unkindness. And the man who refuses
this, is as far from integrity, as he who wrongs his Neighbor in his
Possession or Estate, is from honesty; if he only forbear the repeating new
acts of theft, fraud, or violence; but still detains without restitution, what
he injuriously possessed himself of, which of right belongs to another man.

39. A candid construction needful in private and public cases:
And as a preservative against this sin, it is needful that we regulate our
passions, and maintain a due government over them; and set a watch over our
lips, humbly begging the aid of divine assistance. And we must also take care
that we allow a favorable construction, and a candid interpretation, to the
words and actions of others, especially of our Superiors. And to this both
ingenuity, and Christian charity will direct and oblige us. Wise men have
justly condemned those persons, who are guilty of calumny against a Law, in
wresting the words thereof, to a sense never intended to the prejudice of
Authority. This is done in some degree, when by subtle quirks, the letter of a
Law is in a forced interpretation observed, but the true sense, and meaning
neglected. This fault has been taxed, by the Nimis callida and malitiosa juris
Interpretatione. Cic. de Offic. l. 1. Arist. Eth. l. 5. c. 10.
gravest Authors, as a calumny, and the Cod. l. 1. Tit. 14. kg. 5.
Civil Law has particularly provided against it: and this includes a false
suggestion, against the prudence and good design of Authority. But besides
this, there is an higher degree of calumny, when a Law (or the words or actions
of Rulers) is odiously represented, to intend some ill thing, which is contrary
to the mind of the Lawgiver: and this is a reproach against the goodness, care
and integrity of the Governor. And the practice of this, which is too
frequent, gave occasion to Queen Elizabeth's admonition, to simple people
deceived by malicious.

40. And toward all men, Yet it is prudent to have a cautious jealousy of ill
men.
a favorable interpretation is usually suitable to charity. Yet it must not be
denied, that there are so many men of dangerous and pernicious principles and
practices; that toward them, cautiousness and suspicion, in policy and
prudence, is necessary, for preventing the mischiefs, which may otherwise
ensue. The History of all Ages will give us instances, of ill designs against
public peace and settlement, carried on by fair words, and plausible
pretenses: and it is great wisdom to discover, and lay open the ill designs of
these men, and not to be beguiled by them. And with respect to the Church, even
in the Apostolical times, there were some who with good words, deceived the
hearts of the simple, Romans 16.18. And afterward many Heretics would use
Orthodox words, in an heretical sense; as the Pelagians would speak much of
Aug. de Great. Chr. cont. Pelag. and Celest. l. 1. c. 1, 2.
grace, in a wrested meaning; and in some Councils, the subtle Arians gained
advantage, by the overgreat unwariness and charity, of other well-meaning
Bishops. But the considering these cases, will not allow any, unwarrantably, to
defame others: but will direct them wisely, honestly and cautelously to provide
in their places, for the securing themselves, and the public good and welfare
of Church and State. And these are things, which principally concern Governors
and Rulers, whom God has placed over others, in the Church or Commonwealth;
but it is of universal obligation to all Christians, that true kindness and
general love, and due respect to all men, especially to Superiors, should
prevail in them.

41. And let those Christians, Charity toward revilers required.
who are opprobriously and injuriously aspersed, together with pious
stedfastness and resolution, embrace the temper of Christian Charity. And let
nothing of ill will take place in their hearts, toward those who revile or
slander them, but let them heartily pity their folly, and their sin. A person
of common prudence, if he discern a distracted man raving, and complaining
highly against those who deserve well from him, will commiserate the man's sad
condition, who would never have done so, if he had not been bereaved of his
judgment and understanding. And the want of a Christian temper of mind, is as
sad a thing, and on that account deserves as much pity, as the loss of the
capacities of reason and knowledge. Let us therefore pray for them who thus
behave themselves toward us. Thus as Basil. Hom. de Ira.
S. Basil urges, did Moses in this case, make intercession for Miriam; and
David humbled his soul with fasting, for those who slandered him; and our
Savior prayed for his enemies. He commands us to do the like for them who
despitefully use us; and our Church directs us, to beseech God, to forgive our
enemies, persecutors, and slanderers, and to turn their hearts. Wherefore let
none render evil for evil, but overcome evil with good. And the right
management of this duty, is a considerable action in our Christian warfare. It
was the consideration of S. Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 11, 12.
Austin, when he was reproached by the tongue and writings of Petilian, that we
are assaulted by good report, as a trial whether we can withstand the
temptations to pride; and by evil report to prove us, whether we love our
enemies: and it is our work to overcome the Devil, by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand, and on the left. And upon a due behavior in
our conflict, we may expect a reward and crown.

42. It Is necessary for them who have reproached their Rulers, to acknowledge
their fault and repent.
To all this I shall now add, what I desire may be well considered, and
therefore I choose to close this first part therewith; and that is, That
Christianity will engage them who truly practice it, that if they have
offended, in uttering any thing reproachfully, or disrespectfully against their
Superiors, they freely acknowledge their fault, and by no means continue in
it. This may be sufficiently inferred, from the general necessity of
repentance, from all sins and offenses, against any part of our duty: and
therefore if this be so heinous a sin, as I have manifested, it calls aloud for
serious repentance. But besides this, I shall more particularly to this purpose
observe, that in this special case thus much is taught us, by the behavior of
S. Paul, in that place which I have before mentioned, and shall now more
largely explain, and insist on, Acts 23.2, 3, 4, 5. Where when Ananias the High
Priest, The example of S. Paul, with respect to Ananias, proposed:
(or a Chief Priest) had commanded him, v. 2. to be smitten on the mouth, Then
said Paul unto him, v. 3. God shall smite thee thou Whited Wall; for sit
thou to judge me after the Law, and command me to be smitten, contrary to
the Law? And v. 4. when they that stood by, said, Revilest thou Gods High
Priest? Then v. 5. said Paul, I wist not, brethren, that he was the High Priest
(or a Chief Priest) for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler
of thy people.

43. These words are acknowledged to have some difficulty in them, and have
been very variously interpreted: but according to that sense, which I apprehend
to be most natural, the Apostle in those latter words, v. 5. (which are the key
to the former) owneth and confesses, some sudden unadvisedness, in what he had
expressed, v. 3. When in the beginning of v. 3. he said, God shall smite thee,
(...), I conceive S. Paul by the Spirit of Prophecy, did know, that Ananias
would come to an untimely end, and in these words expressed so much. For he
would not have made use of this form of speech in the name of God, merely in a
passion. And though Ananias lived after this, several years in honor; yet
afterward Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. (...).
hiding himself for fear of the Bands of Robbers, who were very mischievous in
Judea, he with his Brother was taken, and murdered by them. That phrase of a
whited wall, with other such like, might in some cases, admit of a favorable
interpretation, to denote painted innocence and not real, according to the
usage of the Jewish way of expression Part ^2. chapter 1.11.
hereafter noted. Yet this and the words following, being spoken in some
passion, as appears from the connection of these clauses, Thou whited wall, for
sit thou to judge, etc. the Apostle being admonished thereof, readily owns
that there was something unawares uttered in those sudden expressions. His
form^r sudden words not free from all fault,
There are indeed by many, great pains taken, to acquit S. Paul, from being
chargeable with any, even the least fault, in what he had here spoken,
notwithstanding his own free acknowledgement; as the like is done by many also,
to free S. Peter from all blame, Gal. 2. notwithstanding S. Paul's own reproof
of him, and his plain declaration, that he was to be blamed, v. 11. And
therefore I think it may be worth my pains, in a weighty matter of practice, to
endeavor the clearing this place from difficulty: and I hope there will appear
so much usefulness therein, as may excuse the largeness of my discourse,
concerning the explication of these words.

44. Some with Chrysostom. in Act. 23.
S. Chrysostom think, that what the Apostle said to Ananias, contained no
expressions of any undue disrepect, but that he used a just freedom, in
speaking thus to a Ruler; and that when he unjustly received hard measure from
him; notwithstanding S. Chrysostom endeavors to excuse them,
it was requisite he should so speak to him with this openness and sharpness.
But this is opposite to the genuine sense of v. 4. and 5. And therefore to
reconcile those words to this sense, they think that the Apostle spoke these
words, I wist not that he was the High Priest, for it is written, Thou shall
not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, in such a way of compliance with his
auditory, that his hearers might think him to have blamed the use of such
expressions toward Rulers, when in truth he did not do so, nor intended any
such thing. And by this method, that there might not appear any, even the least
fault, in the Apostles practice, they admit a want of sincerity, in what he
declared as a duty and doctrine, that thereby he intended to guide men into a
mistake and deceit, (and that includes a very great fault in practice also.)
And this is much the same thing with that which S. Austin justly blames, Aug.
Ep. 15.
in S. Hierom's defense of the fact of S. Peter abovementioned; and the
admitting this, would cast a mighty aspersion on the Apostolical Doctrine. And
that S. Paul himself did not think sharp words needful to be returned to a
Ruler, in such a case of injury; is manifest enough, in that when Festus told
him, he was besides himself, and was mad, Acts 26.24, 25. he presently treated
him with honorable respect, I am not mad, most noble Festus; nor did the Holy
Jesus give such a return, though but to an inferior Officer of the Court, who
stroke him with the palm of his hand, John 18.22, 23.

45. Many others are of opinion, that when S. Paul said, and several methods
used by others.
he wist not that he was the High Priest, he thereby justified his former
words, by denying him to be an High Priest, to whom if he had been so indeed,
he ought not to have thus spoken. To this sense Aug. Ep. 5. ad Marcel. and l.
1. de Sermon. Dom. in Monte.
S. Austin inclines, upon thoughts, that S. Paul would now own none other,
under the title of High Priest, but only our blessed Savior. And yet it is
plain, that S. Paul did give this very title of High Priest, to him who was so
called amongst the Jews, Acts 22.5. and when all the Christians in Judea were
still zealous for the Law, even the Apostle also still expressed so much
honor, to the Priestly Service at the Temple, that he there purified himself,
and designed to offer his Offering, Acts 21.26. Others think, that he denied
Ananias to have any just authority, Erasm. in Act. 23.3.
because he tyrannically commanded him to be smitten; as if Christians were not
to reverence them that are over them, not only the good and gentle, but also
the froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. and our Religion teaches, that if we do well and
suffer for it, and take it patiently, this is acceptable with God, v. 20. And
Annot. in Act. 23.5.
Grotius supposes the Apostle might reject the authority of Ananias, because
(says he) he came into his Office by purchasing it with money. But I can see
no particular proof of his accusation; and Josephus speaks often of him, as a
person of great reputation and honor; and however such a crime in an inferior
Officer, will not make invalid the authority of a superior by which he acts,
until the superior shall think fit to recall it: even as David's sentence
concerning the possessions of Mephibosheth, was not void of it self, though
procured by Ziba's lie, until David had otherwise determined. And it is
abundantly sufficient against alll these pretenses in this Paragraph, to
observe, that the Holy Scriptures, and the Spirit of God in them, do frequently
own Ananias, to be at that time an High (or Chief) Priest, Acts 23.2. chapter 24.1.
chapter 25.2. and it is a bad way of solving a difficulty, by presuming that to be
false, which the Holy Scriptures declare to be true. Nor would it be any thing
considerable in this case, if it be granted that Ananias was not properly the
High Priest, as will appear from what I shall now add.

46. Whether Ananias was High Priest or not?
He was manifestly (...), an High, or Chief Priest, but very probably he was
not eminently the High Priest, who entered into the Holy of Holies. In the Old
Testament sometimes, and often in the New, there are more persons than one, who
are called Chief Priests, and so there were in this very Council, before which
S. Paul now appeared, Acts 22.30. And Josephus speaking of Ananias, says, that
Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. (...).
Jonathan and Ananias the (...), or Chief Priests, were sent to Rome: where he
places Jonathan before Ananias. And after Jonathan was murdered, by the
procurement of Jos. Ant. l. 20. c. 6.
Felix, by some Ruffians, who pretended to come to the Temple to worship; and
two or three others had succeeded Jonathan, in his High Priesthood, one of
which continued in that Office not above three Months; Josephus says, that
Ant. l. 20. c. 8.
(...), the Chief Priest Ananias, did reverence the High Priest, by making
frequent Presents to him, (...), which makes it very probable, that he was not
the High Priest, strictly so called. Yet it appears by many expressions in
Josephus, that he was in some eminent Office in the Temple Service: and
therefore probably was the v. Hor. Hebr. in Luc. 3. v. 2.
Sagan, who was one of the Priests, which had a singular authority, next to the
High Priest strictly so called, in what concerned the things relating to the
Temple, and was called (...), a Chief Priest: And it is evident from the
History of the Acts of the Apostles, that this Ananias was a chief Officer of
Judicature, and a special manager of affairs relating to the Jewish Consistory,
Act. 22.5. chap. 23.2, 3, 5. chap. 24.1. And our learned and worthy Dr. Ham.
Annot. on Luke 3. c.
Annotator has observed, that such a Priest, who had the chief governing
Authority, might on that account being (...), and (...), a Ruler and a Priest,
be called (...), a Chief Priest. Indeed a greater number than these singular
persons, went under the name of Chief Priests: but it is not to be doubted, but
Ananias was either the Nasi, or chief President of the Sanhedrin, or at least
an eminent person in that Consistory, and on that account now sat as Judge,
when S. Paul appeared before him.

47. Now besides that the honorable dignity, which Ananias possessed in the
Temple-service, was conferred upon him by Jos. Ant. l. 20. c. 1, 3. He was a
chief Officer in the Sanhedrin.
the Roman Authority; the whole exercise of the Jewish consistorial power, and
the Authority thereof as to judicial proceedings, was now in dependence upon
the Roman Government; which the Apostle declared both himself and others bound
to submit unto: and it had also a considerable foundation in the Laws of
nature, and the general rules of civil polity. For the Political Government of
the Jewish Nation, and their Consistorial Power which was a branch thereof, was
valid and of force, before they were subdued by the Romans, from the common
principles of natural justice, righteousness and prudence, according to which
all other Governments in other Kingdoms were established, (besides what was
superadded hereto by the Law of Moses) and by these prudential principles, very
many things relating to their Synedrial Courts, were established. And after the
Jews were under the Roman power, they had diverse privileges indulged them, by
many Rescripts of the Roman Emperors and Governors: some by Julius Joseph.
Ant. l. 14. c. 17.
Caesar, Dolobella and others, who treated them as friends and confederates,
and yielded them a liberty, to enjoy their own Laws and Customs. And the like
freedom was granted to them by Ant. Jud. l. 16. c. 10.
Augustus: and these Privileges were now lately confirmed and amplified by
Claudius. In the Rescript of Claudius, he recites some contents of a former
Imperial grant, whereby the Alexandrian Jews had a right given them, to enjoy
the privileges and freedoms of the City of Alexandria; and also that they had
allowed them an Ethnarch or chief Governor among themselves, (who yet must be
in subjection to the principal Roman Officers) with a permission, that upon the
death of such a person, aanother might succeed. And after this, Joseph. Ant. l.
19. c. 4.
Claudius grants to all the Jews, every where throughout the Empire, the like
liberties, with those of Alexandria, and that they may observe their own
customs, and keep to their own Laws. And therefore especially the Jews in
Judea, must enjoy the same power, of having Jewish Governors established among
them, when this was done in several places of their dispersion.

48. The Jewish Magistracy upheld by the Romans.
And how much the Imperial Law designed to uphold the power of the Jewish
Magistracy among themselves, may appear from the Constitution of Cod. Theodos.
de Jud. and coelie.
Arcadius and Honorius, which declares, that privileges have been granted to
the Patriarchs of the Jews, (who were much of the same nature with the
Ethnarchs) and to the Officers appointed by them, in times past by former
Princes and Emperors, and it also takes care, that these privileges, shall
still retain their force and power; and of the continuance of this power,
Petit. Var. Lect. l. 2. c. 10.
S. Petitus discourses at large. And even in the Justinian Code, is owned and
asserted the Authority of the Cod. Just. l. 1. Tit. 9. leg. 17.
Jewish Primates, as they are there called, who are there said to preside and
govern, in the Synedria, or Sanhedrin, in both the Palestines, and in other
places. Wherefore the Jewish Synedrial authority, being allowed to be exercised
under the Romans, might proceed upon the same foundation of secular and
temporal power, with the Governments of other Principalities and Kingdoms. For
this allowance does so far continue their former freedom and authority, and
permit the exercise thereof. And the public declaring of such an allowance
(which was here done) is in some sort an act of establishment, because it
forbids an opposition against, or restraint of such an authority, and
consequently excludes the owning and approving thereof, and the giving force
and virtue thereto: but this is much more plainly done, in the granting and
continuing privileges for the exercise of such Authority.

49. And in that Jewish Governors did preside, even over the Alexandrian Jews
above mentioned, it is manifest that the privileges of the Roman freedoms did
not exempt the Jews, from subjection to such Governors; only such freemen were
by the Digest. l. 48. Tit. 6. leg. 7, 8.
Roman Laws allowed an appeal to the Emperor, from any subordinate Governors
whomsoever. For Alexandria was a City chiefly privileged, which from the
beginning of the Imperial dignity in Rome, all the Emperors had greatly
honored, as Phil. in Flacc. p. 968.
Philo who was himself an Alexandrian Jew declares. And there was great reason
for this honor, because that City was of mighty advantage to Rome, paying more
every month, than all Judea did in a whole year, to the Roman Power, besides
other vast provisions thence received, as Jos. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. (...).
Agrippa declared in his Oration to the Jews. And from the time of Julius
Caesar, the Alexandrian Jos. Ant. l. 14. c. 17.
Jews enjoyed the freedoms of that City. Now from hence it appears, that the
Jewish Consistories under the Romans, retained a sufficient right of Judicial
authority; and therefore Ananias in this chief Council was to be considered, as
an Officer in a Court of Judicature, acting by a just and competent power and
authority.

50. The sense of these words [I wist not that he was the High Priest] enquired
into.
Having spoken thus much concerning the words of the Apostle to Ananias, and
also concerning Ananias himself, and the state of the Jewish Consistories at
that time, I shall now more particularly consider the sense of that expression,
v. 4. I wist not, (...), or I knew not, brethren, that he was the High Priest.
Some think that the Apostle did not know the person of the High Priest, and
professed so much, as an excuse for himself, in his having uttered such words,
which he would not have done, if he had known him to be the High Priest, since
the Law commands, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. But
they seem not to consider, that whether the word High Priest, be taken in a
more strict or more large sense, that Law has no singular and peculiar respect
to the High Priest alone: and S. Paul did know Ananias to be a Ruler, and to
sit as Judge, and expressed so much v. 3. declaring that he sat to judge him
according to the Law. And therefore some other sense of these words, must be
enquired after. And that which seems to me most agreeable to the whole
Context, and free from all just exceptions, is this, that as the word to know,
often signifies to approve, regard, affect, or own; so it oft-times signifies to
consider duly, and to attend to, and think on, and may be so best taken in this
place. So (...) in the Hebrew, (from whence probably (...) and (...) had their
original) is sometimes rendered in our English Translation to consider, as Deuteronomy.
8.5. Jud. 18.14. 2 King. 5.7. and this sense is most agreeable to many other
places, as Genesis 12.11. Ex. 2.25. Deuteronomy. 4.39. chap. 9.6. Judge. 15.11. Ruth 3.4.
2 Samuel 24.13. 2 Chr. 12.8. chap. 13.5. with many others. And among the Rabbis
(...) and observa istud, is an usual expression when they require a special
attention or observation, or a particular notice and consideration to be taken
of any thing, as is noted by Buxt. Lex. Rab. in (...) p. 935.
Buxtorf. And in that sense is (...) most properly to be understood, in many
places of the New Testament, to denote, to consider. It appears so used by S.
Luke, Luke 2.49. chap. 9.55. chap. 19.22. and also Joh. 6.61. chap. 11.49.
chap. 19.10. Ephesians. 6.8, 9. Col. 3.24. chap. 4.1. And if we thus expound these
words of the Apostle, the sense of these words will be this, that he owneth
somewhat in his former expression to have been words of sudden surprise, and
some degree of inadvertency; and that being moved with the injury offered to
him, they fell from him over hastily, and he did not on the sudden duly think
of, attend to, and consider the Office and Dignity of the person to whom he
spoke, otherwise he would not have used the least expression, which might
intimate any degree of unbecoming reflection, or disrespect, toward a person
in Authority, since he acknowledges this to be his duty, not to speak evil of
the Ruler of the people: while the Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l 4. c. 19. gr.
Jewish Zealots spoke and acted insolently against them without any remorse.

51. And that there was somewhat in some measure blameable, in the foregoing
expressions of S. Paul, is plainly acknowledged and declared by Adv. Pelag. l.
3. c. 1.
S. Hierome, and by In Willet on Exodus 22. qu. 52.
Procopius, as I find him cited agreeably to my sense, and by Paraph. on Act.
23.5.
Dr. Hammond, and other worthy men. And they who would by no means admit any
thing to have been said, or done am^ss, by any of the Apostles, might consider,
that even they were to pray, for the forgiveness of their trespasses; and that
such things as S. Peter's rebuking, and denying his Master, and drawing his
sword; the Apostles arguing who should be the greatest, and their forsaking
their Lord, when he was laid hold on; the desire of the Sons of Zebedee, for
the chief advancement in Christ's Kingdom, and their forwardness to call for
fire from Heaven; S. Peter and Barnabas their withdrawing at Antioch; the sharp
contention betwixt Paul and Barnabas; and some other things, ought not to be
justified and defended. And Orig. cont. Cells. l. 2. p. 69, 70.
some of the ancient Christian Writers urged it, as an evidence of the
integrity of the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures, and that they wholly designed
to keep to truth, and not to pursue any interest, in that they did not
endeavor to conceal, and silence the failings of the Apostles, and of their
chiefest friends, which had never been known to the world in after ages, but
from their writings. Even S. Mark, who was S. Peter's follower, did not omit to
express his denying our Lord; and S. Luke, who was S. Paul's companion, recorded
this expression of his, and his acknowledgement thereupon. And a sudden hasty
expression, which was upon a great provocation, and was soon recalled, was no
fault of any high degree, especially considering the right the Apostle had,
being a Roman, to claim satisfaction, even from a Governor, who should offer
him an injury, in proceeding against Law, as was done Acts 16.37, 38, 39. and
in part, Acts 22.25, 26, 29.

52. Nor is this interpretation, which admits some degree of blame, in the
expression of the Apostle, inconsistent, as I conceive, with the promises of
our Savior to his Apostles, The great assistances of the Apostles considered.
when they should be brought into the Synagogues, and before Governors and
Kings, for his names sake; that the Holy Ghost should teach them in the same
hour, what they ought to say, Luke 12.12. and that he will give them a mouth
and wisdom, which all their adversaries shall not be able to gainsay or resist,
Luke 21.15. For 1. It may be considered, that due dispositions are requisite,
for obtaining the benefit of any of Gods promises, and his special guidance,
and therefore a sudden compliance with some hastiness of temper, might for the
present, hinder the fullest obtaining the benefit of that promise. As S. Peter
after he had asked our Lord, whether he should smite with the Sword,
overhastily undertaking the action, before he had received his answer, deprived
himself at that present, of the advantage of that good advice and guidance, for
his present action, which he might otherwise have had. 2. The thing mainly
intended in these promises, is, that the Spirit of God should so guide and
assist the Apostles, (and others, as S. Stephen) in their bearing witness to
Christianity, before Rulers and Governors, that they should not be ashamed to
own the truth, and that they should be enabled to make it manifest, with such
evidence, as should baffle and confound their adversaries, who could not deny
or disprove the truth, of what they alleged in their testimony. And S. Paul
did thus confound them, who opposed his Doctrine in Jerusalem, Act. 22.1-22.
chap. 23.1, 6-9, 11.3. Whereas the only thing in any wise amiss, in what the
Apostle said, was, that there fell from him a sudden expression too much
reflective upon a Governor; it may be here noted, First, That these his words
appear all of them to be truth, and the fault in them was, they were uttered
with some passionateness of temper, and without sufficient reverence in the
manner of expression. Secondly, By his recalling such words as these, and
owning his surprise therein; the tenderness of his conscience, and the
strictness of his doctrine, concerning the honoring of Rulers, and against the
least word of undue disrespect toward them, is in a more eminent manner set
down, for the instruction and guidance of all Ages, than if there had been no
appearance at all, of any thing blameable in his former expression. Thirdly,
This is the more remarkable, because this his reflection upon, and retracting
what he had thus spoken, as also the Doctrine he urges thereupon, was no doubt
under the guidance of that Spirit, which our Savior had promised in this case,
and so makes his Example in this particular, to be a necessary pattern for
every Christian, that if he should offend in the like manner, he ought to
retract and own his fault, in the least miscarriage of his expression.

53. From this Practice and Doctrine of the Apostle, I shall further observe,

First, that though these words were but once spoken, S. Paul's reflective
words though but once spoken, and upon a sudden provocation,
and then also in a sudden surprise, and upon a great provocation of injurious
dealing; though the Apostle had never gone so far as frequently to blaze
abroad, by open contumelious expressions, or secret whisperings, what might ill
affect the people against their Governor; Yet in this case he acknowledged the
fault, and would by no means persist in it, or do so any more. And if one
single reflective expression was not allowable in him, who was commanded to be
smitten against law, and had no intention of defaming Authority, the same (and
much more the frequently repeated uttering designed reproaches) is far more
blameable in them, who receive no such injury, but are rather favored, beyond
what the Law establishes. Nor did the Apostle allow of such expressions,
toward Ananias being a Ruler, though he was on this account a bad man, as
being a zealous opposer of the true Christian Doctrine. And he would in no wise
justify, but retract such reflective words though true, as those which in some
passion unwarily fell from him.

54. Secondly, Ananias was far from being a Supreme Governor. Caesar had now
the chief Authority in Judea, and Felix was a Deputy Governor under him: and
both the President of Judea, and the High Priest, were under the power of the
Joseph. Ant. l. 20. c. 5. and de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. (...). and to a
subordinate Ruler,
Governor of Syria. And Ananias was so far inferior to Felix in his
Authority, that he with the other Synedrial Elders, appeared upon summons,
before the tribunal of Felix, as an Higher Court, to desire judgment against
Saint Paul, Acts 24.1. And this, and other things also he did, at the command
of Lysias, the Chief Captain, Act. 22.30. chap. 23.30. chap. 24.8. which shows
his Authority also, to be superior to that of Ananias. And both Felix and
Lysias, disposed of the Apostle Paul, otherwise than was desired by Ananias,
and the Elders. And the Jewish Consistory, in which Ananias sat, was now in a
declining state, all power of capital punishments having for about thirty years
been taken from them, by the Roman Authority. Now expressions aspersing a
Superior, or supreme Governor, are the greater fault, because they affront an
higher Authority, to which a more eminent degree of honor and reverence is
due: yet S. Paul would not defend, but condemn such a behavior, toward one
who was in such an inferior, subordinate and declining Authority as that of
Ananias and the Sanhedrin then was.

55. Thirdly, The Apostle declared thus much, are presently and openly recalled
in the face of a Civil Court.
presently after he had spoken the former words, and as soon as he had
considered them, and was enquired of, concerning them, he made no demurr or
delay; but forthwith he forwardly and readily, owned the indecency and
unlawfulness of such expressions. And this he also did very plainly and openly,
before the whole Assembly of the Jews, that no person might either defend his
practice, or follow his example, where he had spoken amiss. This also he did in
a Civil Consistory or Court, though he was an Apostle, and being there charged
with a fault, in his behavior toward a Ruler, he does not so decline the
thing, as if it was fit for him to give his answer in a Civil Consistory; But
he there owns his duty and his fault also, and treated Civil Governors at
another rate, than either the Conclave or the Kirk would do. For though a
Priest was sometimes, not always, President of the Jewish Sanhedrin, that was
chiefly a Civil Court, Seld de Syned. l. 3. c. 1, 2, etc.
inflicted Civil punishments: and took cognizance of criminal causes, and
appeals from other inferior Judicatures: and in the progress of this case for
which S. Paul was brought before them, after he had been heard by Felix and
Festus he appealed unto Caesar.

56. Now I think that what I have said, is not inconsiderable, for my
Exposition of these words, which represents them to be a signal example, of
acknowledging the fault, of any indecent expression toward a Superior. And I
thought the influence which this ought to have upon the lives of men, to be of
so great use, that it may be a sufficient excuse for my long discourse upon
these words. Yet I must acknowledge, that the greater number of Writers which I
have seen, who discourse of these words, and some very worthy and learned men,
do excuse the Apostle's words to Ananias from all blame, according to some of
the methods above mentioned; especially by supposing that he did not know
Ananias to be an High Priest, or Ruler, or that he did not own his Authority.
But since the Apostle was designedly brought to appear before the Jewish
Council, Act. 22.30. and when he began to speak, did earnestly behold the
Council, or the (...), or persons of the Sanhedrin, Act. 23.1. and the Judges
of the Sanhedrin had their Bench fixed Seld. de Syned. l 2 c. 6. n. 1.
, on which every one of them sat in their order, in the form of a semicircle;
and the Apostle having been long before acquainted, with the order and business
of that Court, Act. 22.5. and now mentioning Ananias, to be one that sat to
judge him, there seems no color left for this opinion. And from what I have
said above, n. 45- 49. I account it manifest, that the authority of Ananias
could not be disowned by the Apostle. However I shall here observe, that they
who shall not be satisfied with my interpretation of these words, M^^^^ h^^e
duty urged, must be granted upon other Expositions.
cannot well frame any other tolerable sense of them, than such, according to
which they must condemn and blame all indecency of expression (and much more,
insolency of deportment) toward Superiors; and also show the Apostles
forwardness, to wipe off all appearance of suspicion, of his allowing any such
thing in himself or others. And that he did with great readiness, and openness,
declare that the admitting any such thing (though in his circumstances above
observed, n. 53.54, 55. and in the managing so good a cause as that of
Christianity was and is) is contrary to the Laws of God and Religion. And that
those who shall wittingly thus misbehave themselves, must be inexcusable: and
that they who are suspected to have erred in this kind (and therefore much more
they who have really done so) ought thus to behave and clear themselves, by a
free declaration, of their honorable respect, to them who are in Authority, as
S. Paul here practiced himself, and taught others.

57. But this duty, of being ready freely to confess their fault, in what they
have openly said or done amiss, with a care to repent thereof, and to do so no
more; is, I fear, by some rejected out of this gross mistake, that it is a
shameful thing to acknowledge a fault. Whereas in truth it is a very shameful
thing to continue in sin: but there is no more shame in an offenders repenting,
and acknowledging he has done amiss, than there is in becoming wise and good,
and doing his duty, and pleasing God. And God grant that all who have neglected
their duty, in this or any other branch, thereof, may so consider their ways
as to amend and reform them.

The Second Part,
Concerning the usefulness of a sober Censure of such Parties or persons, who
practice evil, or propagate falsehood; with an enquiry into some different
parties, who make profession of Christianity.
CHAP. I.
To speak against evil persons and practices duly and discreetly, and to the
just discrediting and disparaging bad Principles and Doctrines, is reasonable
and good; with an account of what Rules are here to be observed.
1. HAving declared in the former Part, how unreasonable and evil, uncharitable
and passionate reproaches are, especially against Superiors: Ishall now show
that Christianity does not only allow, but require a rational and just dislike,
and sober censure of those, who entertain or countenance evil practices,
Christianity allows what is manifestly evil, to be condemned and blamed.
to debauch or corrupt the lives of men, and who spread, promote or receive,
false, and unsound principles, whereby deluded and misguided minds forsake and
depart from the truth. The meekness and innocence of Christianity does not
engage its followers to such a temper, that they may not look on any men, or
party of men to be offenders, or to deserve blame: if this were so, virtue and
vice, and the practicers of them both, must have an equal esteem and respect;
and judging righteously, and executing judgment amongst Christians, must be
banished out of the Earth. If Religion should be supposed to make it an
universal duty, to preserve and maintain the good reputation of all even bad
men; then must Christian charity, in a great measure suppress the use of our
reason and conscience, and the reproacher himself must not lie under any blame
or disesteem; and men who pervert the truth, and corrupt the minds of others,
must still be had in honor. But this would be, to abuse and pervert the
charity and meekness of Christianity, and to make the pretense thereof hurtful
and destructive to the good of mankind. Yea, this would set up the duties of
Religion to become a cloak for wickedness; and a method to keep Christians from
the watchful observing, and discerning the evil, and careful rejecting the
snares of those who cunningly contrive deceit, or of them who through
indiscretion and mistake, are misguided themselves, and would mislead others,
and are as eager as the Scribes and Pharisees were to proselyte men into their
errors. But the true Christian temper is far from obliging any to such unwary
compliances with corruptions and sin.

2. I heartily wish, The Christian Rule, and the Practice guided by it, are
excellent.
that the behavior of all, who call themselves by the name of Christians, were
such, that nothing could truly be spoken of them, but what is excellent and
honorable. And thus it would be, if the doctrine and rules of the Christian
Religion, were diligently observed and practiced by all who profess it. For
such is its efficacy in renewing the minds of men, where it is heartily and
sincerely embraced, that on this account, the Christian institution was
anciently much admired, even by many who would not receive it, but opposed and
rejected it. And as Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 13. gr.
Eusebius testifies, the mighty influence it had on the purity of men's lives,
was the great cause of its being (...), amongst all much spoken of and famed.
Insomuch that as the ibid.
same Author tells us, the Gnostick brood of Simon Magus, would make
pretensions to the Christian name. And from the same consideration of its
visible effects, in purifying the lives of them who were guided thereby, it was
mightily honored, and extolled by those who did entertain it: Thus Strom. l.
7. in init.
Clemens Alexandrinus observed, how it greatly perfected him that is the (...),
the truly wise and good man, and that it was also of great power to correct and
change, even those who were perverse, and whose hearts were hardened. And his
Scholar Origin noted Cont. Cells. l. 1. prope fin. and passim.
what a mighty alteration, did manifestly appear among men, by the power of the
Christian Doctrine, which furnished them who embraced it, not feignedly but
sincerely, with meekness, goodness, and such an excellent and well composed
temper, as far exceeded what the practice or Philosophy of the Gentiles could
pretend unto. And the like might be observed from Justin Martyr, Lactantius,
and many others.

3. But the great miscarriages of too many professed Christians, both in
Doctrine and Practice, are things plainly obvious and manifest. And in this
case, it is nothing of uncharitable and passionate reproaching, which is
contrary to the example of Christ; but an exercise of sobriety and charity, and
a following his example, to war against those hurtful evils, which spread
themselves in the world; and to speak of those principles which are
mischievous, with dislike and detestation. For though our Lord had a great
kindness for the Jewish Nation; yet their ill temper, and their forsaking the
true guidance of the Law, made him rebuke them with sharpness, and declare
against them as an evil and crooked generation. To discover the evil of ill
designing men and false Doctrines, is useful and good.
And if the manifest and prevailing errors of men, which are dangerous to
others, might not be prudently exposed, and solidly declared against; many
excellent and famous writings of the most eminent Fathers, against the
Gentiles, the Jews, and diverse Heresies and Schisms, which have hitherto been
honored and accounted useful in the Church of God, must now be thought fit for
nothing more, than to be censured by an Index expurgatorius, or to be ranked
among prohibited Books. Indeed persons who are concerned in the guilt, are
sometimes apt to be so far provoked, at the just reproof and censure of their
opinions or practices, as to cry out upon it, as if it were reviling or
railing, or to speak as the Lawyer did to our Savior, Luke 11.45. thus saying,
Thou reproachest us also. But our Lord did not think fit to desist, from a free
and needful declaration against evil; how unacceptable soever it was to the
offending persons, as appears sufficiently from the Answer he returned to those
words, v. 46. And for others to do the like, is both a faithful discharge of
conscience toward God, and the performing a work, which is very useful, and
charitable unto men. Thus he that gives a plain and true discourse, in a time
of mortality, of the nature and danger, and of the right and sure methods of
prevention and cure, for the diseases that then reign, performs a work, which
if it be made good use of, may preserve some, and recover others from those
distempers which may otherwise be fatal to them. But as no diseases are so bad,
as those which defile and infect the minds and souls of men; so here as Basil.
Regul. fus. disp. Resp. 46.
S. Basil truly affirmed, (...), he that makes a covering for sin, and that
which is evil, makes preparation for the death of the diseased person.

4. It is evident, that in the Holy Scriptures, the Prophets in the Old
Testament, and the Apostles and other Officers in the Ministry of the New,
were to reprove and declare against prevailing evils. In this case Isaiah was
commanded to cry aloud, and lift up his voice like a trumpet, and show the
people their transgressions, Isai. 58.1. and Titus was required to rebuke the
Cretians sharply. Sinful practices and corrupt Principles are such real
blemishes to those that cherish them, that they cannot be laid open, without
reflecting some degree of disparagement upon them; even as light it self brings
a discredit to things uncomely, and represents the loathsomness of what is
noisome and deformed. But there are some rules necessary to be observed, Rules
to be observed in speaking against those who deserve censure.
which ought to guide and govern our discourse, concerning what is amiss among
men in the world. And it may be noted, that in most cases, there is greater
caution to be used, in speaking of the principles or actions of particular men,
as charging them therewith, than of the openly avowed evil practices, or
opinions of any party or sort of men, in a general consideration of them.
Because the former does more especially refer to the persons, toward whom we
are bound to exercise charity; but the latter does most directly respect
things, and there is no charity due to falsehood, transgression and sin; and
personal actions may be more easily misapprehended and misrepresented, than
what is publicly owned by any party. But in both these cases, the difference
between sinful reproaching, and rash and uncharitable evil speaking on the one
hand; and an useful and sober reproof and censure, and declaring against evil
on the other hand, lies in three things; viz. in the respect they bear, 1. To
certain truth. 2. To sobriety. 3. To charity.

5. First, The first Rule is certain truth.
A just Censure is ever founded on certain and evident truth; but the
reproacher often declares that evil for truth, which is either in it self false,
or to him doubtful and only suspected. But whosoever lays that to the charge of
others, of which he has no certain evidence, becomes a false witness. And
false reporting, or asserting that against another as true, which is not
certainly known to be so, is in matters of ordinary conversation among men, a
crime much of the same nature, with the same miscarriage of a witness, in a
Court of Judicature, concerning matters of justice and right. For in both of
these is contained, what Phil. de Decal. p. 763, 764.
Philo more particularly expresses of the latter; that truth which ought to be
sacred, and is as the light of the Sun, which gives a right and clear prospect
of things, is hereby violated; and things are disguised in the dark; whereby
others are misguided into a wrong judgment, and are thence involved in a
miscarriage; and wrong and injury is done to the person concerned. And whereas
it is requisite for him who attempts any thing, both to have sufficient
knowledge thereof, and to be a person of integrity, whose testimony deserves
credit; he who will venture to declare things as true, upon jealous suspicions,
does miscarry in both these, and is therefore wanting in the latter, because he
fails in the former. And such a person does offend both against charity and
truth.

6. It was part of the description of those evil men, 2 Pet. 2.12. that they
spoke evil of the things they understood not. The venting uncertain jealousies
and suspicions are oft-times of mischievous consequence. For they frequently
spread like wildfire, Suspicions on plausible pretenses not sufficient.
and are entertained as things certain, upon slender appearances of proof; and
in public affairs, they sometimes become dangerous, if not fatal, to Church
and State. Nor is it sufficient to excuse such persons from sin, if they
proceed upon some seeming plausible probabilities, which are mistaken and
misapprehended by them. Those Jews might seem to have some color, for what
they laid to our Saviors charge, who declared him to have said, I am able to
destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days, Mat. 26.61. Yet
these persons misunderstanding or misapplying, what he said concerning the
Temple of his Body, are called false witnesses, v. 60. And therefore it
becomes rash men, who let loose their tongues many times, upon no greater
evidence or probability, than these false witnesses had, to consider seriously
what guilt they contract upon themselves. But the upright man is no false
accuser, but has a conscientious respect both to truth and charity, so that he
transgresses against neither. Our Lord blamed the Jews in many things, but
charged them with nothing but what was certainly true. He called them
hypocrites, but he fully knew their temper, and understood what was in man.
Indeed the censure of hypocrisy is not fit for other men to make use of in
ordinary cases; except it be where persons certainly manifest a vicious
looseness of life, and yet will sometimes seem very earnest and forward about
purity and Religion; or where themselves shall more privately declare their
disesteem of what they publicly appear exceeding zealous for. And partly by
this Rule, Eus. Eccl. Hist. l. 2 c. 1.
Simon Magus was charged with hypocritical dissembling a respect to
Christianity.

7. Secondly, The second Rule is sobriety and a well composed temper of mind.
A just censure of the practices or Principles of others, must be soberly
managed: when oft-times the opprobrious tongue is rash and heady, and puts men
upon running out of their places and stations, and out of themselves also.
Hence some are forward to be inquisitive into the lives and behavior of
others, and to pry into them with a narrow and curious search, to see what they
can discover to speak ill of; while in the mean time, they do not duly reflect
upon themselves, and examine and consider their own ways. These act against
that sobriety, which Religion requires, and fall under that sharp censure of
our Lord, against them who behold the mote in their brothers eye, but not the
beam in their own, Mat, 7.2, 3, 4, 5. And there are some who censure others by
sinister judging, and odiously representing the intentions and designs of their
words and actions, beyond what is evident. These without due reverence to God,
or charity to their Neighbor; so far usurp the place of God, as to pass
sentence on the inward thoughts, and dispositions of the minds of men, but they
proceed herein, neither according to the rules of goodness, nor of
righteousness. And they also offend against this Rule, who in speaking or
writing against others, let loose their expressions, to gratify their
passions, and fierce heats, beyond what is sober and comely. I acknowledge that
sharp reproofs, are in some cases very seasonable and proper; and some
practices and Doctrines are so greatly evil, that it well becomes them who are
lovers of goodness, An angry temper to be avoided.
to express a pious indignation and abhorrence toward them; nor is it always
blameable to expose some wild extravagant fancies, to the just contempt of
others. But in an undue manner to vent expressions of wrath or reproach; or of
scornfulness or scurrility; and to treat others with an angry and waspish
temper, and instead of calmness to raise a storm of rage and fury; these things
are evil in themselves, being contrary to the meekness and gentleness of
Christianity, and savouring of the fruits of the flesh, and the root of
bitterness; and they are also very unsuitable to all sorts of men. Such a
temper is in several respects the worse, in them who defend evil, error, and
falsehood; because they have no just reason, to express their displeasure,
against the things they reject, or against the persons with respect to the ill
influence of their assertions; and what aspersions they cast upon the defenders
of the truth, have some reflection on the truth it self; and this their
behavior speaks their greater averseness from it, and often makes them more
steadfastly perverse in their error. And this method is also very unbecoming the
defenders, of such excellent things as truth and goodness; because they neither
need nor approve such unworthy Artifices, in the managing their cause; and the
use of such things brings a disparagement, and disadvantage to the best cause;
and it is most suitable to truth and goodness to appear like themselves, every
way blameless and unexceptionable.

8. They also act against sobriety, and irreverence to Superiors.
and a due government of themselves, who take upon them frowardly and
irreverently to censure their Superiors, and to defame them; and thereby to
lessen and vilify their reputation and Authority. Such persons act against the
duty of their places as inferiors, in which state they ought out of reverence
to God and his Ordinance, and out of respect to men also, to honor them who
are over them. Yea though there may be some real fault, they may not make it
their business to expose them. This was the miscarriage of Ham, in his
behavior toward his Father Noah. And it is noted both by Ambr. de Noe and
Arca, c. 30.
S. Ambrose, and by Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 9.
S. Chrysostom, that Ham in doing this undutiful action, is particularly
expressed to be the Father of Canaan; not only as S. Ambrose speaks, ut vitio
authoris deformaretur haereditas, that this might be a blemish, and
disparagement to his posterity, who descended from him; but because on this
occasion of Ham's irreverent disrespect to his Father; Canaan his Son, and his
Posterity, were under a curse, and doomed to a state of subjection, Genesis 9.25.
And therefore if any men should neither have any fear of God, nor regard to
themselves; if they have any respect to the good of their posterity, they are
thereupon concerned to honor those, who are in superior relations to them.

9. The ancient Councils Conc. Constant. c. 6.
of the Christian Church, very justly expressed great displeasure against
those, who out of an ill temper, would even, undeservedly, lay things to the
charge of the Bishops and Clergy, that they might lessen their reputation and
esteem, and hinder the Churches peace and settlement, and promote disturbances
therein. And such disorderly practices, though they have too much prevailed in
the World, do greatly offend against very many precepts of Religion; both
toward God, toward our selves, and toward others. But while the Christian
Church, for peace and order sake, and for the sake of piety too, required a
just honor to be preserved to its Officers; it still maintained such a care of
true goodness, that where any of the Clergy were really faulty, it not only
ibid.
allowed regular accusations to be orderly prosecuted against any of its
Officers, but also appointed Can. Ap. 74. Antioch. 14, 15.
its Censures to be inflicted upon them, after sufficient evidence of their
offenses.

10. Now our blessed Lord, Thus our Savior practiced.
in his sharp censures of wicked men, acted nothing but what was every way
suitable for him to do. When he came into the world, Religion was strangely
defaced amongst the Jews, and they who should have taken the care of it, set up
very many false doctrines, and ill rules of practice. But our Savior was sent,
as a great Prophet and Teacher from God, to reform what was amiss, and to bring
the world to embrace what was true and good. And therefore it was necessary for
him, in the discharge of his Office, freely to declare against the evil
practices of all men whomsoever, and to discover the dangerous and hurtful
errors of them, who really were blind guides; and to show the insufficiency of
such rules o practice, as made Religion a mere outward formal thing, and
gratified the hypocrisy of evil men: and in a like case it is well becoming
any good man to do the like. And be cause the unbelieving Jews, with their
Scribes and Pharisees, opposed the truth which he convincingly declared and
maliciously set themselves against him, and against the evidence of the mighty
Miracles wrought by him; it was necessary that he should use such expressions,
as should declare the great evil of their wicked, obstinate and perverse
temper; and the mischief they would bring upon them who followed them. And this
he did, sometimes, in metaphorical and representative expressions, as of
Wolves, Serpents, Vipers, which was a way of speaking often used by the Prophets,
and amongst the Jews very frequently in their Writings. And that such words
were not accounted by them as phrases of reviling, so much as of expressive
significancy, may appear from the language of the Scripture, in many places,
and particularly from the blessings of Jacob, Genesis 49. Where the phrases of
Woolf, Serpent, Ass, and Lion's whelp, are manifestly so used.

11. To this purpose, our Lord might well send a message to Herod, under the
name of that Fox, as an expression of just reproof (according to the customary
way of speaking among the Jews) to him, a subtle and cunning man, who had the
guilt of blood to answer for. Besides other actions of cruelty, he had beheaded
John the Baptist, which act, as it was greatly condemned by the Jews, toward
so good a man, as Ant. Jud. l. 18. c. 7.
Josephus relates; so himself was sometimes stricken with terrible and
astonishing thoughts thereof, Luke 9.7. And that same Herod who ibid.
had Herodias his Brothers Wife, and ibid.
slew the Baptist, continued Tetrarch of Galilee, several years after our
Saviors death, even till the first year of Caligula, as is declared by ibid.
l. 18. c. 8, 9.
Josephus, and then was banished. To him our Lord directed this message, who
also by reason of his compliance in the death of our Savior, might in a
Prophetic manner be styled a bloody man.

12. Thirdly, A just declaring against the faults of others, The third Rule is
Charity, of which there is neglect,
must be tempered with charity. If this arise from malice, or be managed for
the doing an unkindness, or the venting hatred or ill will, or in way of
Revenge, or retaliation, it then serves the lusts of men, and is mischievous,
and therefore can be no good and lawful action: but the speaking truth from
such a disposition, or to such ends, is an evil action. In such a case, what
Chrysostom. Hom. 2. de Prophet. obscuritate.
S. Chrysostom resolved must be admitted for truth, that he who speaks evil of
his Neighbor, is in the way of ruin, (...), whether what he speaks be false,
or whether it be true. There was truth, as it might be understood, in what
Shimei said, when cursing David, he called him a bloody man, 2 Samuel 16.7, 8.
but the expression was evil, because of the malice, which accompanied it. Now
uncharitableness appears in the speaking evil of others, in any of these four
Cases.

13. First, 1. when what is amiss, is spoken of with delight:
Where the speaker mentions the miscarriage of others, with a inward delight,
or pleasure in the relating it. But of this act of uncharitableness, in being
pleased with that which is hurtful to men, pleasing to Satan, and offensive to
God, I spoke something in the Chap. 3.
former Part, and therefore shall only mention it here.

14. Secondly, 2. when praying for offenders is neglected:
When he who is ready to speak against another who does amiss, is neglectful of
praying unto God for him. When Samuel declared to Israel, that their wickedness
was great, yet he said, God forbid, that I should sin against the Lord, in
ceasing to pray for you, 1 Samuel 12.17.23. And Moses prayed for Israel to turn
away Gods wrath. And it is to be a rule of Christian practice, 1 Jo. 5.16. If
any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he
shall give him life for them that sin not unto death.

15. Thirdly, 3. when there is an uncharitable interpretation:
When the worst constructions are put upon the words or actions of others. This
I mentioned in the former Part, and therefore shall say little to it here.
Where this temper prevails, the most innocent persons may thereby be charged
with guilt. Even our Lord himself, from a sinister interpretation of his free
converse, was proclaimed a glutton, and a drunkard. And though there was truth
in the information of Doeg, which he gave to Saul concerning Ahimelech, or at
least in a great part thereof, That he enquired of the Lord for David, and gave
him victuals, and gave him the sword of Goliath, 1 Samuel 22.10. Yet this being
expressed in compliance with the suspicions of Saul, and (though David
pretended to be employed by Saul) as an intimation that the Priests had
conspired with David against him, on which account Doeg was ready to slay them:
in this sense it was both mischievous and false, Psalm. 52.

16. Fourthly, 4. when any ill intention.
When any thing is spoken against others, with a pure intention to prejudice,
or procure hurt to the persons of whom they speak. A bad design merely to do
hurt, as to blast another credit, and expose him to scorn or hatred, and to
render him contemptible, do very ill become him who pretends to goodness. The
end has here a considerable influence upon the action. He that censureth the
miscarriages of others, in a prudent reproof to the person himself for his
amendment; acts the part of a faithful friend, while flattery in this case, is
a kind of hatred, Lev. 19.17. Or if this be done to another person, as a
warning to him, who is in danger to be ensnared by, or suffer mischief from
him; this is also an act of kindness, to prevent the doing or suffering evil:
and of this nature is the exposing the mistakes of men, to put a stop to the
progress of their errors. And these are the two cases mentioned by Basil Regul.
Brev. Resp. 25.
S. Basil, in which he allows of the speaking evil of others, when it is done
for reclaiming the offender, or preserving others. And it is also lawful and
good, to declare against the evil and wicked actions of men, out of just
indignation, and in order to the due punishment of them; as the Levite did
concerning the lewdness of the Gibeathites toward his Concubine. For this
tends to the restoring good order unto, and the discountenancing Vice in humane
society, and is also for the preservation of others. Such proceedings are as
the useful opening a wound, either in order to its present healing, or to
prevent a spreading Gangrene, or further mischief: whereas the speaking against
any, merely to make them censured and reproached, is like the opening a wound,
only to expose it to the Air and venomous Insects, which is a way to make it
the worse, but to do no good.

17. Our Saviors sharp reproofs give no countenance, Our Saviors just
reproofs give no encouragement to disorderly expressions.
nor allowance to any other censures, than those which observe all the rules of
Christian Charity. For they were every way mixed with love and kindness, and
wholly contrary to all these appearances of uncharitableness. He was, 1. so far
from being pleased with any evil actions, which might expose his enemies to the
censures of men, or the Judgments of God; that it was his great endeavor to
persuade them to goodness, and when they would not hearken, he was grieved for
the hardness of their hearts, Mar. 3.5. and he wept over Jerusalem. 2. He
prayed for them, even with respect to that their sin against him, in putting
him to death; wherein the greatness of their cruelty and malice, could scarce
be equalled by any thing else, but the greatness of his sufferings thereby. And
though they were perverse, he was still desirous to bless them in turning every
one of them from their iniquities, Act. 3.26. 3. He was so far from taking
things in the worst sense, that he was not pleased with his Disciples, who
forbad them who cast out Devils in his name, because they followed not them;
and thereby he expressed a kind approbation of them, toward whom his Disciples
were harsh and severe. 4. He did not intend any prejudice to the worst of men,
but their greatest good. He came not to condemn the world, but that it might be
saved. And amidst his kind reproofs and rebukes, how often would he have gathered
Jerusalem, and how much did he desire, that they might have known the things,
which belonged unto their peace? And such prudently managed Cl. Alex. Paedag.
l. 1. c. 8.
reproof, and even the (...), or discreet upbraiding with the shamefulness of a
miscarriage, is medicinal to heal the distempers and disorders of the soul, and
tends (...), to its everlasting health.

18. But whosoever offend against the forementioned Rules, In Reproaches and
uncharitable Censures, 1. He that spreads them is guilty, as well as the first
Author,
their speaking against others, thereby becomes chargeable with sin; nor can it
be palliated by such vain methods, as men sometimes make use of; as, First,
Though he be not the first author of a calumny. For he that rashly spreads
abroad a slander, which he receives from another, is as well guilty, and
sometimes to as high a degree, as the first author of it; since his act may in
many cases, be as much injurious to the person slandered; and his uncharitable
intentions may be as bad, and sometimes worse, and he is as much obliged to
know the truth of what he utters. In a public flame, kindled and fomented by
wicked designs, he that brings fire from one house to burn another, is as
really mischievous, as he that set the first house on fire. The Psalmist
requires of the pious man, or of him who would obtain the favor of God, that
he take not up a reproach against his Neighbor, Psalm. 15.3. And it was one of
the wicked practices of Sanballat, to abuse and discourage Nehemiah, by
publishing, upon the credit and report of one of his Companions, that Nehemiah
purposed to rebel; nor did it excuse him that he alleged his Author, that
Gashmu said it, Neh. 6.6.

19. Secondly, 2. and hei who only sl^ely insinuates them,
Though he does not positively averr the fault, or crime of which he
discourses; but only insinuate it by reflective intimations, or represent it
as a thing probable, or what some believe. For if it be considered, how prone
men are to entertain bad thoughts of others, especially if upon account of
parties or opinions, they have any prejudice against them, it may be thence
discerned, that this way, amongst such biassed and credulous men, is sufficient
to propagate and spread such things, as are hurtful and uncharitable. But the
prudent and good man is one, whose angry countenance (as the wise man speaks)
drives away a backbiting tongue, Prove. 25.23. Thirdly, 3. and he who carries
fair appearances of friendliness.
though his words be not fierce and furious, but gentle and smooth, and such as
express a kindness and respect to the person of whom he speaks: and possibly
when he intimates any ill of another, it is with expressions of his being sorry
for it, and that he wishes it were otherwise. For if the things in this manner
related, do offend against the Rules above mentioned, such soft and oily words,
make the slander to be swallowed down more glibly, and there is the less
suspicion, either of ill intention, or of falsehood in him who speaks with so
much appearance of kindness. But this may on these accounts, become the more
dangerous way of doing mischief: even as Poison may be most readily received,
in a pleasant vehicle, and from the hand of a supposed Friend, and may then as
effectually do its work, as if it had been taken in any other way.

20. But where the Rules which I above laid down, There is in too many, just
reason of Censure and blame,
are carefully regarded, they who espouse evil actions, or who patronize
corrupt Doctrines or Practices, may be lawfully and usefully declared against,
and blamed, by good men, with prudence and sobriety. And their undertakings may
be justly discredited, and their reputation may in a due and right manner be
lessened, for the preventing the growth of that evil they are carrying on; and
if it may be, for the reducing themselves, and working them to repentance. But
I am very sensible, that it is a truth of sad consideration, that it is more
difficult and more unusual for men, though they seem zealous for God and
Religion, when they have entertained such false notions and opinions, as are
very pernicious to the Church of God, to be reclaimed from them, or from doing
mischief by them, than it is for lewd and debauched persons to be convinced,
and become converts. Hence the Doctrine of our Savior found less success,
among the Scribes and Pharisees, than amongst the Publicans and Sinners, or in
the Gentile World. But a good undertaking is not to be laid aside, because of
the difficulty of effecting it, but it becomes us to do our best to promote it,
whatsoever the issue shall be. Nor will such endeavors, though frustrated by
men, lose their acceptance with God, and their reward from him, if they be
faithfully and piously managed; as the Prophet Esaias declared even with respect
to our blessed Savior himself, Isai. 49.4, 5. though Israel was not gathered.

21. That vicious actions and a wicked life, from vicious actions and practices.
bring shame and disgrace to the practisers, or in Solomon's phrase, that sin
is a reproach to any people, Prove. 14.34. is very obvious to common Principles
of Reason and Conscience; since the generality of mankind are sensible, that
Arist. de Virtut. and vitiis.
(...), good and virtuous things are to be commended, but filthy and vicious
things to be dispraised. And though goodness is too often in practice reproached,
and disparaged in the world, there is a vast difference, between the censure,
an upright and truly pious man undergoes in well doing, and the ill report and
infamy which is consequent upon evil doing. For the truly good man knows, that
what censure he lies under, for his piety and integrity, is sometimes from men's
speaking against their own consciences, or at best from their mistakes, and
misapprehensions; and his conscience speaks peace to him, and he knows that God
both approves his sincerity, and howsoever he is misunderstood by men, will
reward him. But if the evil man be spoken against, his conscience does or may
testify, that this is no more than he justly deserves; and that he must expect
(without timely repentance) more hurt from his sin, than from the infamy that
follows it; and that if his evil ways make him justly disapproved and
condemned of men, it will make him more odious in the sight of God, and the
Holy Angels, and will expose him to a more severe sentence and condemnation,
from the righteous Judge of the World.

22. And that the patrons of error, and from corrupt Principles and Doctrines.
whose evil Principles tend to corrupt Religion, and debauch the world, should
be declared against, and the danger and detestableness of their undertakings be
manifested, is a thing as useful and needful, as it would be to detect and
discover him, who is contriving felony, murder or any public mischief. On this
account did our Savior censure and condemn the Doctrines of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and spoke to the disparagement of their reputation; and commanded,
Matt. 7.15. to beware of false Prophets, who come in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravening Wolves. And the true Apostles made a plain discovery of
the false Apostles, and corrupt workers, though this laid them open to
reproach. And S. Paul withstood even S. Peter, and spoke against him openly, in
that wherein he was to be blamed, Gal. 2.14. when his own behavior, and what
he encouraged others unto, was of ill consequence, and contrary to the true
spirit of the Gospel, though himself was so excellent a man, that he was far
from advisedly managing any ill design. Indeed all dangerous errors are not of
equal degree of guilt, but some are more heinous than others: but the meekness
of Christianity obliges no pious man, to a compliance with any of them, though
the worst are more earnestly to be rejected.

23. S. John who so vehemently and abundantly, Primitive zeal in this case
noted.
pressed the duty of Christian love in his Epistle; and so fully declared the
same, to be the necessary Doctrine of Christ, in his Gospel, and who in his
extreme age, when he was not able to make any long discourses, is Hieron.
Comment in Gal. l. 3.
related, to have come into the Christian Assemblies, and often to have spoken
these words, Little children, love one another; yet as adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus tells us, he declared himself with that earnestness against
Cerinthus, a Master of Heresy, that when he came to the Bath where S. John
was, he leaped out of it, and declared his fear of the place falling upon them,
when that enemy of the truth was there. And from the like Spirit of Primitive
zealous earnestness, Iren. ibid.
when Marcion meeting with Polycarp, an Apostolical man, a Disciple of S. John,
and one who was, ab Apostolis constitutus Episcopus, Ordained a Bishop by the
Apostles, and Marcion desired him to take knowledge of him, Polycarp answers
him, cognosco te primogenitum Satanae, I know and own thee to be the firstborn
of Satan. And all the first and purest Churches expressed vehement dislike,
against all Heretics, and dividers of the Church. And Cyp. Ep. 76.
S. Cyprian when he spoke of Novatianus, with respect to the Novatian Schism,
says, that inter adversarios and antichristos computetur, he was to be
reckoned among the adversaries to Christianity, and the Antichrists. And this
is sufficient to show (which may be more largely and amply proved, beyond all
contradiction) that earnest oppositions, against them who forsake the Catholic
truth, or who divide the Church, was not, as some very falsely pretend, first
brought into the Christian Church, by the unadvised and indiscreet rashness, of
some Canons and Councils, after the first Centuries, who are said herein to
have swerved from the true Spirit of Catholic Charity.

24. And it is a thing too plain to be denied, Hartful errors are too much
prevailing.
that in this age, diverse persons and parties entertain those errors and
corruptions in matters of Religion, which deserve to be sharply censured and
spoken against. It Is generally known, that the several parties, and different
professions, do condemn one another; and it may well become them to consider,
whether they have sufficient ground, for the Censures they pass on others, and
whether they proceed therein in a due Christian temper of Spirit, and also
whether there be not any just foundation, for the blame themselves meet with
from others. Wherefore I shall make some impartial enquiry into some of the
several parties of men, who divide the profession of Christian Religion. And
since they who strictly adhere to the Church of Rome, lie under an infamous
character from others, I shall first enquire, An account of the things
discoursed of in the following Chapters.
whether they may not be justly accused, of such things as deserve great
condemnation and censure. And since the dissenting parties are spoken ill of by
others, I shall 2. Enquire, whether they be not guilty of that, which is
sufficient cause of blame. And if any of these several parties be no further
spoken against, than they deserve blame, and this be also ordered according to
the Christian Rules, I delivered above, this is not a sinful reproaching, but a
judging righteously and according to truth.

25. And I here seriously profess, that there is no duty I esteem my self more
obliged to practice, than to have an universal kindness to all men. And
therefore I shall be so far, from willingly charging any sort of men, with what
they are not guilty of, that while I write some account of things blameable,
among several parties of men, it is with a mixture of hearty sorrow, that so
much evil should prevail in the world, and that so many persons (diverse of whom
intend well) should be led away thereby. And I humbly beseech Almighty God, of
his mercy and goodness, to bless and give good success to all those labors,
which are undertaken to guide men, into the right ways of truth and peace.

26. I know that many men account him to be wanting in kindness, The nature of
true kindness, and love to men under mistakes and error.
and love to others, who undertakes to lay open their mistakes and
miscarriages, how sincere and beneficial soever his intentions be, yea though
this be managed with the greatest tenderness and prudence: (even as indiscreet
Children have hard and unkind apprehensions of him, who opens their sores,
though it be for their cure) and such a person with many men, shall rather be
ranked amongst revilers and reproachers, than amongst the number of Friends.
And they account that to be kindness and love, when any one is ready to speak
in favor of them and their actions, and will take care to hide their faults
and errors, whenever he discerns them. And this kind of behavior is indeed
in a due measure an Office of charity in the case of private failings, where
the offender is sufficiently sensible of his miscarriage, and affected with it.
But it is much otherwise, where things that deserve blame are publicly
declared and professed, and are justified and vindicated; or indeed where they
are kept more private, but without any penitent resentment of them. Yet these
cases fall under different Rules and considerations. If this were true kindness
(as it cannot be) toward men who themselves do amiss, and by their examples
and persuasions, would engage others to do the like, to flatter and complement
them, and to encourage them, that they do well to continue in those practices,
which are their errors and miscarriages; then must our grand adversary the
Devil, be looked on as our kind friend, who is very forward to sooth men in
their faults, and to persuade and entice them, into a resolved continuance in
them; and to shut their ears, and open their mouths, against those who would
advise them better. But this is true Christian kindness, love and goodness, to
follow the example of our Lord, and to set our selves to do good, and to
preserve or reduce others from evil, though in so doing, we expose our selves
to the censure and displeasure of bad men, or of them who are misguided.

CHAP. II.
The Principles and Practices, maintained in the Church of Rome, are such as
deserve severe Censure and a note of infamy.
SECT. I.
The Romish Church and its Doctrines, and the putting them in practice, is
chargeable with great disturbances, mischievous to the peace and order of the
World.
The bad Principles and practices owned in the Church of Rome.
whether the Church of Rome and the Members thereof, who practice upon the
Principles they are there taught, be not chargeable with things really very
evil, and infamous, and which deserve to be greatly condemned. In this
discourse I shall not intend to take notice of all the considerable errors in
doctrine and practice, which are owned and espoused in that Church. But I shall
instance in so many, as may be sufficient to satisfy any unprejudiced and
impartial Reader, of the great corruption of that Church, and how hurtful and
dangerous it is to be guided by it. I acknowledge there has been so much said
already, and so largely and plainly proved, by diverse Protestant Writers, and
by many of our own Church, and particularly by many learned and worthy
Discourses of Dr. Stillingfleet, in this Controversy of late years, that I do
not pretend (nor need I) to add much that is material and considerable, to what
they have written, nor indeed to say so much as they have done, upon those
Arguments of which I shall discourse. But yet I think, such Remarks as I shall
make, may be of so much use to some persons, as to give them a satisfactory
account, how necessary it is to avoid the Romish gross Errors.

2. Several Heads of these proposed.
And what I shall here consider I shall reduce unto five-Heads. First, to give
some instances of the principles and allowed practices of sedition, and
disturbance, against the peace and good order of the Church, and of the world;
and the violation of the rights both of secular Rulers, and of other Churches
and Bishops. Secondly, Of such things as are plain obstacles, and hindrances to
an holy life. Thirdly, Of those practices and opinions, which derogate from the
dignity, and authority of our Savior. Fourthly, of some things which debase
the Majesty of God, and deprive him of that glory and worship, which is due
unto him. Fifthly, Of such things as represent Religion, and the Doctrines
thereof, as a thing contrived or ordered, to serve the interests of worldly
designs or human Policy. And in treating of the several instances I shall give,
I desire my Reader to observe, that since I use these Heads in part for Method
and Order sake, that which is to be considered in them, is not only, how aptly
they are digested, under these several heads (though I think that is
sufficiently clear) but especially, whether they do not manifestly contain,
what is false, evil and opposite to Christianity. And therefore it may be
further noted, that several things which I shall treat of, are upon other
accounts also evil and blameable, besides the respect they bear to those
particular Heads under which I do digest them.

3. Observe. 1. Popish Principles opposite to peace and due order.
First, I shall enquire into the principles, and allowed practices of sedition
and disturbance, against peace and good order of the Church and the world. Here
I shall not need to prove, that true Religion and the Christian temper, greatly
promotes peaceableness, and establishes justice and righteousness in the
earth. And that the doing wrong and injury, the prosecuting unjust claims, and
invading the rights and properties of others; as also the embroiling any part
of the World in discord and confusion, in wars and tumults, and in Sedition and
Rebellion, is exceeding contrary to our holy Religion. For the true principles
of Morality, and the light of nature, will direct men who are not influenced by
interest and passion, to condemn and detest such things as these. Wherefore
taking this for granted, I shall in the first place reflect on the injurious
demeanor of them at Rome toward secular Princes, in claiming to the Romish
Bishop, an universal Sovereignty over Kings and Princes, with a Power to depose
them, and dispose of their Kingdoms. That the Pope makes, (and has often acted
upon) this claim of Sovereign Supremacy, I have showed Christ. Loyalty. B. 1.
chapter 6. Sec. 2.
in another Treatise. And that the power of deposing Kings, is owned as a
Doctrine of the Romish Church, I have given also B. 2. chapter 1. Sec. 1. n. 4, etc.
sufficient evidence; and the same has been done at large by others. The
Romish claim is like that of the Tempter, who, concerning the Kingdoms of the
World, and the glory of them, said, Luke 4.5, 6. All this is delivered unto me,
and to whomsoever I will, I give it; and it has also a parallel title, which
bears it self up, upon confident usurpation, vain boasting, and false
pretenses: Yet they who are thorough Papists must acknowledge this.

4. Some Writers indeed of that Communion, deny the Pope any power over Princes
in things temporal: but besides the Censure they generally undergo, from their
own party, they are put to hard shifts, when they undertake to reconcile their
Assertions, with the publicly received Constitutions of that Church. For
instance sake, I shall take notice of the Council of Council Lateran. c. de
haeset.
Laterane (concerning which they have as fair and plausible a plea, as for any
other thing) which declares, that the Pope may give the Country of a temporal
Lord to Catholics, if he neglect to purge his Country of Heretics. Here it is
first pretended, Of the C^uncil at the Lateran.
that this was not declared by that General Council, but only by Pope Innocent
III. after it was broken up, and that there were no Constitutions or Canons,
made in that Council. And yet in the Decretalia of Gregory the Ninth, who was
Pope about twelve years after that Council, this very Constitution is inserted
into the Decret. l. 5. Tit. 7. c. 13. Excommunicamus.
Canon Law as being established by Innocentius in a General Council. And from
the Authority of that Council, Transubstantiation has been ever since
acknowledged, to be a declared Doctrine of the Roman Church. And what goes
under the name of this Council, is acknowledged to have the Authority of a
General Council, both by the Council of Constance and by that of Trent, as has
been observed by the Of Popery p. 48-51.
Bishop of Lincoln.

5. But it is further said by them, that the Canon of Lateran, concerns Shel.
l dons Reasons for Allegiance, p. 41.
not Sovereign Princes, but only some feudatory Lords, in Italy, and some parts
of the Empire. And whereas this sense seems plainly contradicted, by the last
clause of that Constitution, eadem servata lege circa eos qui non habent
dominos principales, that the same Law should be observed concerning them who
have no Chief Lords over them; they note, that there is an Constit. Frederic^,
n. 7
Imperial Law, established by Frederick the Second, much to the same purpose
with this Canon, to make void the rights of such Lords, as purge not their
Lands from Heretics, and that therein this clause is annexed, that this same
Law shall be observed against them who have-no Chief Lords. But say they, it
cannot be supposed, that the Emperor would enact a Law, which might make void
his own Imperial Dignity, and forfeit his Empire. Now in this Constitution of
Frederick, there is no express mention, of any right of disposing Dominions,
devolving it self upon the Bishop of Rome; but it may be considered, how much
this Emperors interest, and that of the Church and See of Rome, were at this
time linked together. For his possession of the Empire, much depended on the
Popes authority; for Mar. Polon in Oath. p. 394, 395. Ursperg. p. 326, 327. Ave.
t^^. Ann. Boio. (...), p. 519.
Innocent the Third, having excommunicated and deposed Otho the Emperor, some
of the Princes fix their thoughts upon Frederick, to advance him to the Empire;
and the Pope closes with this design, and encourages both him and them. And
therefore this clause, concerning the advancing the interest of the Church, and
the forfeiture of Sovereign Dominion (of what force or validity soever it be)
both tended to assert Fredericks own right, and jointly to gratify the Romish
See. And this Law was confirmed by him, in compliance with the Pope Constit.
Fred. in Praef.
on that very day, in which he received his Imperial Diadem, from Honorius the
Third, who succeeded Innocentius. And this Law was highly applauded by
Honorius, and ratified ibid. in fin.
by him with a severe Curse, against them who should act any thing against it,
and was again confirmed by Boniface the Eighth, and seems to be framed by the
Popes order, from this clause in the Preface, Cum nihil velit Ecclesia quod
nobis eadem non placeat voluntate.

6. And yet if this were true, that the Doctrine of their Church gives the Pope
power of disposing, only, Emperors and Kings must be submissive to the Pope.
of such Principalities which belong to inferior and dependent Lords; this
would afford but little security to the greatest Princes, if the Romish Bishop
be still allowed to judge in this case. For the most imperious Popes have often
very plainly declared the Secular authority of the highest Princes, to be
derived from them, and to depend upon them. And the collection of Sacred
Ceremonies, contains such things concerning Emperors and Kings, as when
occasion serves, may be made use of to infer subjection and dependence. Thus we
are told Sacr. Cerem. l. 1. Sect. 5. c. 1.
that the elected Emperor must implore the favor of the Apostolical See, and
offer himself, ad quaecunque fidelitatis juramenta Romanae Ecclesiae
praestanda, to take any Oaths of Fealty to the Church of Rome: and must humbly
desire Unction, Consecration, and the Imperial Diadem. And the Pope after
examination of the Election, and considering the fitness of the Person, does
grant him his grace and favor, and does eum nominare, denunciare, assumere and
declarare Regem Romanorum, Nominate, authoritatively pronounce, receive and
declare him to be King of the Romans, and to be fit and sufficient to receive
the Imperial Dignity. And in this manner it is there said, that diverse
Emperors have addressed themselves to the Pope, some of which are there
particularly named. And if any King shall come to Rome, l. 1. Sect. ^3. c. 2.
f. 132.
after the first day of his being there, he is to carry the Popes train, and to
pour out water for his hands, and to carry up the first Dish to his Table, and
serve the first Cup in other Collations: which things, with others mentioned in
the same Book, carry in them fair appearances of doing homage. And some of the
Romish Bishops, which have somewhat more than others, complemented Secular
Authority, in some of their notions, have yet in their practice acted as much
against them, as any others. So did Innocent the Third, who acknowledged,
Decretal. l. 4. Tit. 17. c. 13 Pervenegabil^m.
Rex superiorem in temporalibus minime recognoscit, that a King is to own no
Superior in temporals; and therefore speaking of his own Authority, besides
what he had within the Patrimony of the Church, he says, In other Regions,
upon the inspection into some certain causes, temporalem jurisdictionem
casualiter exercemus, we casually exercise temporal jurisdiction. And yet this
is he, who declared that Canon above mentioned, in the Council of Lateran; and
practiced the power of deposing, in Germany, and in other places, even in
England against King John.

7. Papal claims have been mischievous:
Concerning this claim of Papal Sovereignty, and the deposing power, I shall
observe three things. First, That it has been very mischievous to the
Christian World, and has been the cause of many Wars and intestine broils,
especially in Germany and Italy: and hence has proceeded very much bloodshed,
and very many rebellions. When Mar. Pol. in Hen. p. 358.
Gregory the Seventh, and then Ursperg. ad an. 1102.
Vrbane the Second, and Paschalis the Second, had undertaken to excommunicate
Henry the Fourth the Emperor, and to depose him, and declare against his
Subjects paying him any allegiance, first Rodolphus of Saxony was set up
against him, who perished in his undertaking: after which Henry the Fifth his
own Son, engages in that U^sp. p. 257, 261.
Parricidale bellum, as Vrspergensis calls it, to fight against his own Father
and Sovereign. And in the time of diverse succeeding Emperors, there were
frequent deposings, and thereupon Civil Wars, and almost continual broils;
hence arose the long remaining high animosities, and fierce contests, in Italy,
and some adjacent parts of the Empire, between the faction of the Guelphs, who
adhered to the Pope; and the Gibelines, who closed with the Emperor. In this
period of time, for many ages, sometimes the Emperor, and sometimes the Pope,
were taken Prisoners, or forced to escape by flight, and reduced to great
extremities; and the Countries in the mean time were miserably harrassed, which
were the Seat of these Wars. And in these, foreign Princes were frequently
engaged, some on the one side, and some on the other, even so far, as sometimes
to take in, both the English and French. The particulars of these things, or
the effects of the like proceedings in some other Kingdoms, would be too large
to be here inserted. And besides these things, diverse secret Conspiracies, of
Subjects, against the lives of their Princes, have been the effect of these
Romish Principles, in contradiction to that honor and reverence, which
Christianity requires to be given to them. Nor have such evil attempts been
made, only, upon the lives of Protestant Princes, but of such also, who have
adhered to the Romish profession, both before and since the Reformation.

8. But I shall here take notice, that even those persons who were set up, in
prosecuting this deposing power, the promoters of them have smarted by them.
where it did take effect (as very often even before the Reformation it was of
no force) besides other troubles, they were engaged in, they often fell
themselves, under the like Sentence of the Bishop of Rome, and sometimes into
great calamities thereby. Here I might instance, in those two I lately
mentioned. The Emperor Henry the Fifth, who rose up against his Father
(against whom the Bishop of Rome had declared his Sentence of deposition did
prevail against him, and took him Prisoner; but behaved himself very unworthily
toward him, and kept him in Prison till he died, and Reigned after him. But he
himself fell under the sentence of Paschalis the Second, and was involved in
War thereby, but he overcame the Pope, and took him prisoner: But he died
Childless, having no Issue to succeed him in the Empire, which was then
Hereditary; M. Pol. p. 367, 368.
and this was by many in that age, accounted Gods just judgment upon him, who
had acted so unchristianly and undutifully against his Father. And after his
death the Empire came to the Saxon line.

9. But I shall particularly take notice of Frederick the Second, who was
substituted Emperor, in the place of Otho, who was deposed. He made many Laws
in favor of the Church, and increased its wealth and revenue, and was, Avent.
l. 7. p. 525, 535. Nic. de Cusa.
as Historians relate concerning him, an excellent, most wise and flourishing
Prince. Yet he was both excommunicated and M. Pol. in Honor. and in Fred.
deposed, by Honorius who had Crowned him. And this Sentence was again renewed
by Gregory the Ninth, who succeeded Honorius, in three several Bulls of
deposition: Avent. P. 537, 538.
In the first of these, in the courtship of Rome, he declared the Emperor to
be a Beast, and in the last of them to be an Heretic: but whatever great words
were used, Chron. Ursperg. p. 337.
Vrspergensis, who was an Abbot at that very time, declared that it was, pro
frivolis causis and falsis, upon trifling and untrue grounds and occasions. And
against this Frederick did Innocent the Fourth erect the Banner of the Cross as
against the Turk, and denounce the Sentence of deposition in the Council of
Lions, to the astonishing terror of them who heard it. Amidst these
Circumstances, his own Son Henry, whom he had designed his Successor, and had
declared him so, rose up in rebellion against his Father, and being condemned
of parricide, by Avent. p. 533.
the Sentence of seventy Princes, was imprisoned, and not long after died in
Sicily. And when Frederick had encountered with various difficulties, after his
flight into M. Pol. p. 399. in Fred.
Apulia, he there died in distress and misery. And this was the kind requital
he met with, for his affection to the Pope, and interesting himself in his
quarrel, against the preceding Emperor.

10. Secondly, I observe that the pretended pleas for this Papal power, are
very vain. Many of these, and the most considerable I have examined Christ.
Loyalty, B. 1. chapter 6. and B. 2. chapter 1. Sect. 1. Observe. 2. The vain pleas for
Papal power.
otherwhere. But here I shall take notice of some things, urged by Innocent the
Third, in a decretal Epistle, which has been confirmed by Gregory the Ninth,
and other Romish Bishops since. And it is strange to see, how extravagantly
impertinent these proofs are. For an evidence of the Popes chief decisive
power, in the highest matters of right, he reserreth to Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11,
12. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, -- thou shall get
thee to the place, which the Lord thy God shall choose. And thou shall come unto
the Priests the Levites, and unto the Judge, -- And thou shall do according to
the Sentence, which they of that place shall show thee. And then he tells us,
3. Decretal. l. 4. Tit. 17. c. 13.
quia Deuteronomium lex secunda interpretetur, that because the word
Deuteronomy, signifies a Second Law, it is thence proved, that what is there
determined, must be observed in the time of the New Testament; and the
Apostolical See, is the place which God chooses. Now the proof is much alike,
that Rome is the place which God chooses under the New Testament; What is urged
by Innocentius the Third, has no infallible evidence.
as he chose Jerusalem under a great part of the Old Testament; and that all
that is in the Book of Deuteronomy, continues established under the Gospel. And
it may be wondered, that such a thing should be affirmed, if it were not to
impose on others; when the Book of Deuteronomy contains many things, concerning
the Aaronical Sacrifices, and other Jewish Feasts: and in that, is that
particular permission of divorce, which our Savior will not allow of under the
Gospel. Deuteronomy. 24.1. Mat. 19.8, 9. and a repetition of many Mosaical Laws,
whence it was called by the Greek Translators Deuteronomy.

11. In the same Epistle, as a proof of this plenary and supreme power seated
in the Pope, he produces what S. Paul writes to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.3.
and tells us that Paul, that he might expound the plenitude of power, writing
to the Corinthians, says, Nescitis quoniam Angelos judicabitis, quanto magis
secularia? Know ye not that ye shall judge Angels, how much more the things of
this life, or things secular? But what the Apostle wrote in that Epistle to the
Corinthians, bid directly concern the Church of Corinth. And therefore if he
had discoursed of a plenitude of power, (or the highest universal Authority
over all the parts of the World, or the Church) as he did not, it would appear
from this place, to be as much, if not more fixed in S. Paul, and the Church of
Corinth, as any where else; and it must needs be hard to prove, that S. Paul in
these words, declared a plenitude of power in the Bishop of Rome, both over
Corinth and all the World, when he said, Know ye not that we shall judge, etc.

12. What light the two great Luminaries give to the Popes power.
But that proof which passes all the rest, which is urged in the same decretal
Epistle, is, from Gods making two great Luminaries, the greater to rule the
day, and the lesser to rule the night; from whence it is there inferred, that
the power of the Bishop of Rome, is as much above all Secular power, as the Sun
is above the Moon. And it may be also hence collected, that the Imperial power
is derived from the Papal, as was declared hence by v. Addit. ad P^de Marc. de
Couc. S. and s^^p. l. 2. c. 3.
Boniface the Eighth. Now from hence it may appear, that a pretended testimony
from the first Chapter of Genesis, may be as effectual (though it be nothing to
the purpose) as if it had been taken out of the Book of Deuteronomy. And this
is such a wonderful Argument, that so far as the strength of it will reach, it
will not only prove the highest power of the Bishop of Rome, to be ordained of
God, before the coming uf Christ, and even before any promise made concerning
the Messiah, and before the fall of man, but that this was established before
Adam was created, and was one of the principal things done in the framing and
making of the World. And therefore if this authority be rightly applied, it is
indeed an early testimony of the greatest antiquity of this power in the Church
of Rome, and deriveth its original much higher, than most men have been aware
of, and it confutes the great mistake of those Novelists, who pretend it to be
founded in any eminency of authority, conveyed unto S. Peter, when it was so
clearly ingraved upon the brightness of the Sun beams (but not to be seen by
men's eyes) in the first springing forth of their light.

13. Such things as these are so trifling and frivolous, that they deserve not
any serious consideration or answer. And it can scarce be imagined, that they
who laid down these testimonies, as a foundation to support the Papal power,
could have any other design, than to delude, and impose upon the great
ignorance of the World. And if it be a wicked and abominable thing, for any
private man to forge an evidence for an Estate, or to counterfeit the Kings
broad Seal, to serve his interest; it is far worse to design to deal falsely in
that which has respect to the authority of the sacred Majesty of God, and to
the greatest rights of men, and the public interest and peace of the World.
And I think no men ever spoke more wildly about these things, than the Popes
themselves have done, the extravagancy of their pleas, bearing an equal
proportion to that of their claims.

14. Thirdly, I observe, Observe. 3. The high Papal power was unknown to the
ancient Roman Bishops;
that the pretense of this high Papal power, which for some hundred years has
been of ill consequence to Christian Kingdoms, has this manifest mark of an
encroachment, usurpation and innovation, in that the more ancient Bishops of
Rome, never knew any thing thereof, but did profess, and own their subjection
to Emperors, and their Authority. The testimonies of diverse of them have been
to this purpose produced by Protestant Writers: And it may be sufficient here
to note, that I have Christ. loyalty, B. 1. chapter 5. Sect. 3. To Leo the Great,
in another place showed, that Leo the Great submissively owned his subjection
to the Imperial Authority, and that with respect to the external administration
of matters Ecclesiastical. And it is manifest, from the Writings of Gregory the
Great, that he both submissively behaved himself toward Mauritius the
Emperor, as a subject toward his Sovereign Lord, and that he thought he ought
so to do. When Mauritius declared his desire, that there might be a good accord
between S. Gregory, and John Patriarch of Constantinople, Gr. Ep. l. 4. Ep. 76.
Gregory writes to Mauritius giving him the title of Dominus noster a Deo
constitutus, his Lord whom God had constituted, and owns himself to be his
Servant, (and such language is very frequent in his Epistles) and lets the
Emperor know, that in that matter, in which the cause of God was also
concerned, he would do what on his part could be done, To Gregory the Great,
Dominorum jussionibus obedientiam praebens, yielding obedience to the commands
of his Lord; and in this case he says, Serenissimis jussionibus obedientiam
praebeo. Which words show sufficiently, that he claimed not any Sovereignty
over the Emperor, but acknowledged his owing subjection to him. And when
Mauritius had made a Law, that no person in any public Secular Office, should
be received into Ecclesiastical Orders, and that no Soldiers might be admitted
into Monasteries, Gregory writes a Letter to the Emperor concerning this Law,
expressing his good liking and approbation of the former part, but with much
Gr. Ep. l. a. Ep. 100.
earnestness declaring his dislike of the latter part, as being contrary to God
and Religion. And in the close of that Epistle, he acquaints the Emperor, that
in subjection to his commands, he had caused that Law to be transmitted to
several parts of the Empire, but yet had plainly written to him how much it was
against God. And then adds, utrobique ergo quod debui exolvi, qui and
Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro Deo quod sensi minime tacui; On both
hands therefore I have performed what I ought, I have yielded obedience to the
Emperor, and I have not forborne to speak what was my judgment on the behalf
of God. And in this Epistle also (and in others frequently) he owns Mauritius
to be his Lord, and himself to be his Servant. And the usual subterfuge of
Romish Writers, that what the Popes have spoken in such a respect to Emperors,
was from humility, and gracious condescension only, can have no place here. For
he went as far as any Subject in his capacity might do, in what he was
persuaded was unlawful; and further than he might do, who was no Subject. In
humility he might dispense with his own right, but not with what concerns God
and Religion.

15. These things do so plainly show, that those ancient Bishops acknowledged
the Emperor to be their Superior, even in constituting Laws, and doing other
acts, which had respect to the state of Religion, that I think it unnecessary
to add other instances, which might be given for many Centuries. The known
expression of Otho Frisingensis declares Gregory the Seventh, to be the first
of the Roman Bishops who usurped the deposing power. But Conradus Ursp. p. 336.
Vrspergensis differing herein from Otho, whom he mentions, seems to fix the
first Original of these Papal proceedings upon Gregory the Third, who above
seven hundred years after Christ, in the contest concerning Images (where it
might have been expected that he who was so earnest for the adoration of
Images, should have highly honored the Emperor, who bare the impress of
Divine authority) did ibid. p. 286.
forbid Italy to pay any tribute to Leo Isaurus the Emperor, and deprived him
of his rights there. But it is manifest that all the Roman Bishops who
succeeded him, were not of the like spirit and temper. Above an hundred years
after him, Leo the Fourth Gratian. Did. 10. de capitulis. and to Leo the
Fourth.
assures Lotharius the Emperor, that he would as much as he was able,
irrefragably keep and observe his imperial precepts, and that they were liars
who should suggest the contrary concerning him; and c. 2. qu. 7. Nos si
incompetenter.
he likewise submits his actions, to be examined by the Emperor, or such as he
should commissionate, and to be corrected or amended, if he had done amiss, and
not kept to the right rule of the Law.

16. But the main hurt of this pretended Papal power, so much contended for at
Rome, is not only the disturbing peace, Such Principles of Rebellion lead men
to damnation.
fomenting Wars, and unjust invading the right of Princes: but besides the
ambition therein contained; by stirring up Subjects in rebellion against their
Sovereigns, it puts them according to S. Paul's Doctrine into a state of
damnation, Romans 13.2. And such rebellious practices are the more promoted, by
those frantic principles, of many of the Church of Rome, which have spread
themselves also amongst other Sects, which give liberty to Subjects (without
respect to the Popes Sentence) to take away the lives of Princes. It is too
clear to be denied, that such Positions are maintained by diverse of the
Jesuits, and it must be granted also, that there is truth in what some of the
Jesuits have observed, that the like was asserted by other Writers in the
Church of Rome, before the first institution of that Order.

17. The Pope's usurped claim over other Churches and Bishops
There is also great disorder and evil, unduly occasioned in the Church, by the
claim the Roman See pretends to, over all other Bishops and Churches. To this
authority she has no just title; but the exercise of this power did obtain and
prevail in many Churches, by various methods and degrees of encroachment. And
by this means both rights and also purity and due order are jointly violated.
Hence this Church obtrudes on others, her pernicious Doctrines and practices,
under a pretense of authority. And by the same means, it hinders the necessary
reformation of great and spreading corruptions, and thunders out Censures
against such Churches as reform themselves according to Primitive and
Apostolical rules.

18. Now such an Authority over all other Bishops and Churches, could never be
founded in any actual possession, or in any human or Ecclesiastical
constitution, of what nature soever. For an incroaching authority is void, by
the ancient Canons, especially that of Ephesus, and being an unjust possession,
ought to return to him, who has the true right. And where there has been any
consent given to an unjust claim, by misunderstanding, or upon any other
account; or where any other act whatsoever has been done by Princes, falsty
pretended to be of Divine Authority:
or by Bishops in any part of the Church, to yield or convey any Superior
Authority to the Roman Bishop, they cannot by any act of their own exclude
themselves and their Successors from the obligation, to perform their duty, in
duly guiding, governing and reforming their people. And therefore so far as the
authority, which Princes and Bishops have received from God and Christ, does
oblige them to the performance of this work, no pretended power of the Bishop
of Rome, nor any act done by any others, or even by themselves, can set them
free from it. But this universal Superiority is claimed by the Pope, as not
derived from any human Constitution, but from the authority of Christ. To which
purpose the Catechism according to the Decree of the Council of Trent declares,
That the Catholic Church Catech. ad Paroch. c. de Ordinis Sacramento.
Summum in eo dignitatis gradum, and jurisdictionis amplitudinem; non quidem
ullis Synodicis aut aliis humanis constitutionibus, sed divinitus datam
agnoscit: quamobrem omnium fidelium, and episcoporum, caeterorumque antistitum,
quocunque illi munere, and potestate praediti sint, pater, ac moderator,
universali Ecclesiae, ut Petri Successor, Christique Domini verus and legitimus
vicarius praesidet; does acknowledge in him (the Pope) the highest degree of
dignity and amplitude of Jurisdiction, not given him by any Synodical, or other
human Constitutions, but by Divine Authority: wherefore he the Father and
Governor of all the Faithful, and of the Bishops, and the rest who are in
chief Authority, whatsoever Office or Power they are endued with; does preside
over the the Universal Church, as the Successor of Peter, and the true and
lawful Vicar of Christ the Lord.

19. But notwithstanding this great noise, it was unknown to the ancient Church;
no such Divine institution has been or can be produced; and pasce oves, and
tu es Petrus have been often scanned, and no such thing can be found in them. And
it is considerable, that the ancient Bishops of Rome owned not, nor claimed any
such Authority, nor was any such given to them, by the Primitive Church. To
this purpose it may be observed from Epiph. Her. 42.
Epiphanius, that when Marcion being excommunicated by his own Father a pious
Bishop, for his debauchery, went to Rome, and desired there to be received into
Communion, he was told there, by those Elders yet alive who were the Disciples
of the Apostles, that they could not receive him without the permission of his
Reverend Father: there being one Faith, and one Concord, they could not act
contrary to their Fellow Ministers. And this was agreeable to the Rules and
Canons of the ancient Church, whereby it was ordained. Can. Ap. 12.
that if any excommunicate person should be received in another City, whither
he should come, not having commendatory Letters, he who received him, should be
himself also under excommunication. And the novel Romish Notion, of all other
Bishops so depending on the Roman, as to derive their power and authority from
him, is so contrary to the sense of the ancient Church, that Hieron. Ep. ad
Evagrium.
S. Hierome declares ubicunque fuerit Episcopus, five Romae, five Eugubii --
ejusdem meriti, ejusdem est and sacerdotii -- omnes Apostolorum successores
sunt; wheresoever there was a Bishop; whether at Rome or at Gubio -- he is of
the same worth, and the same Priesthood, -- they are all Successors of the
Apostles.

20. and prejudicial to other Churches, and to Religion it self.
However the Romish Church upon this encroachment and false pretense, claims a
power to receive appeals from any other Churches. And this often proves a great
obstacle to the Government, and discipline of those Churches; and an heavy and
burdensome molestation to particular persons, by chargeable tedious and
dilatory prosecutions: and is a method also of exhausting the treasures of
other Churches and Kingdoms, to gratify ambitious avarice. But even the c. 6.
qu. 3. scitote.
Canon Law declares the great reasonableness, that every Province, where there
is ten or eleven Cities, and a King, should have a Metropolitan and other
Bishops, and that all causes should be judged and determined by them among
themselves; and that no Province ought to be so much debased and degraded, as
to be deprived of such a Judicature. Indeed the Canon Law does here for the
sake of the Roman See, exempt such cases from this judgment, where those who
are to be judged enter an appeal, which is much different from the appeal the
ancient Church allowed Conc. Constant. c. 6.
to a more General Council after the insufficient hearing of a Provincial one.
But in truth this right of ordering and judging what is fit in every Province,
is not only the right of that particular Church, or Country or Kingdom; but
where they proceed according to truth and goodness, it is the right of God, and
the Christian Religion, which is above all contrary authority of any other, and
ought not to be violated thereby. And appeals from hence Cod. ean. Eccl. Afr.
c. 28. The Romanists Schismatical.
even to Rome were anciently prohibited in Africa.

21. And the Schismatical uncharitableness of them at Rome, toward other
Churches, deserves here to be mentioned. This widens divisions and discords,
and perpetuates them by declaring an irreconcilable opposition to peace and
truth. They excommunicate them as Heretics, who discerning their right, and
their duty, will not submit themselves to their usurpations, and embrace their
errors, and to them they hereupon deny the hopes of Salvation. Thus they deal
with them, who steadfastly hold to the Catholic faith, and to all the holy
rules of the Christian life and practice, delivered by the Apostles, and
received by the Primitive Church; and who also embrace that Catholic charity
and Unity, that they own Communion with all the true and regular members of the
Christian Church; and would with as much joy, communicate with the Roman Church
her self, if she would make her Worship and Communion, and the terms of it free
from sin, as the Father in the Gospel embraced his returning Son. But this is
the crime of such Churches, that while they hold fast the Apostolical Faith and
Order, they reject the novel additional doctrines, introduced by the Church of
Rome, and they submit not to her usurped authority, in not doing what in duty
to God they ought to do, in embracing the right ways of truth.

22. Their unjust excommunications hurt not others,
But the excommunicating such persons and Churches, does no hurt to them, who
undeservedly lie under this unjust censure, but the effect of the censure may
fall on them who thus excommunicate. For they who reject the Communion of them,
who are true and orderly Members of the Church Catholic, do divide themselves
from that Communion. To this sense is that received rule, c. 24. qu. 3. c. si
habes; etc. certum.
illicita excommunicatio non laedit eum qui notatur, sed eum a quo notatur: and
this was declared by in Balsamon. p. 1096.
Nicon, to be agreeable to the Canons. And the excellency and power of the true
Catholic Doctrine, and the purity thereof, is so much to be preferred, before
the authority of any persons whomsoever who oppose it, that that which the
ancient Canons Conc. Sardic. c. 17.
established was very fit and just, that if any Bishops (and consequently any
other persons) were ejected from their own Churches, or suffered any censures
unjustly, for their adhering to the Catholic Faith and profession, they ought
still to be received in other Churches and Cities, with kindness and love. And
whereas there were Canons of the Church, which allowed not Bishops to reside in
other Churches and Dioceses; these Fathers at Sardica dispense with that Rule,
in such a case as this, and thereby declare their fense to be, That the
observation of Canonical establishments, must give place, where the higher
duties of respect to the Christian Faith and Charity were concerned.

23. but only themselves.
When the Scribes and Pharisees condemned the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles for Heresy, and cast them, who received it, out of the Church; the
Christians were nevertheless the true members of the Church, but they who
rejected them were not so. And when the Donatists would allow none but their
own party to belong to the Church, they thereby cast themselves out of the
Catholic Communion, as Schismatics. And when they at Rome so far follow their
steps, as to confine the Christian Communion to themselves; or to a particular
Church, especially such an one, as so greatly swerves from the truth and purity
of the Christian Religion; Sect. II.
this is in effect to deny that Article of our Creed, concerning the Holy
Catholic Church. And since Charity and Unity are of so great concernment in
Christianity, on that account also they are none of the best members of the
Church, who are so far from them, as all of the Romish Communion are obliged to
be; and are thereby guilty of heinous sin, and of that which is greatly
scandalous to Christianity.

SECT. II.
The Doctrines maintained in the Church of Rome, and the Constitutions therein
established, are great hindrances to holiness of life, and true devotion in
Religion, and comply very far with Wickedness and Debauchery.
1. I Shall now come to consider, that there are such doctrines asserted by the
Church of Rome, and such practices established therein, as are plain obstacles
and hindrances to a holy life. Holiness and purity are suitable to the nature
of God, and agreeable to the end of Christ's coming into the World, to redeem
us from all iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of
good works, Obstacles in the Roman Church to an holy life,
Tit. 2.14. This is a compliance with his Gospel, which is a doctrine according
to Godliness, and his Church which he founded, is an holy Catholic Church. And
therefore nothing can be of God and Christ, which is not agreeable to true
goodness and piety, but that must be contrary to God and Christianity, which is
opposite to holiness and a godly life. But that the Church of Rome does declare
such Doctrines, as undermine piety and holiness, and establishes such
constitutions and practices, as are highly prejudicial thereunto, I shall
manifest by some particular instances.

And here I shall consider,

2. 1. In their Doctrine of Attrition and Absolution:
First, Their Doctrine of Absolution. This is such that it sooths men in their
sins, and thereby takes away the weighty Motive and Argument to holiness of
life, which is from the necessity thereof, to avoid the wrath of God, and
endless perdition, and to obtain the favor of God and everlasting salvation.
For this Church and the Writers thereof, do generally teach that attrition
though without contrition, is a sufficient disposition or qualification for the
receiving Priestly absolution, and that persons so qualified, and thereupon
absolved, are in a safe state, as to the avoiding eternal damnation, and the
future entrance into everlasting happiness. Now contrition includes a grief
for, and hatred of sin, as it is an offense of God, with a purpose and
resolution not to go on in the practice of evil, and this is conjoined with a
chief love to God. But attrition is a grief for sin, in such a manner that it
is not produced from, nor contains in it the chief love of God and goodness.
And when diverse ways are either asserted, or disputed of by many Casuists,
concerning the difference between Attrition and Contrition, Mart. Becanus
speaks with much plainness, and I think with truth, when he tells us Part. 3.
Tr. 2. c. 35. Qu. 1.
that contrition includes aversion from sin, and conversion to God, which is in
loving him above all; and that this principle of the love of God (which
includes consequently hatred of sin, and turning from it) is that thing in
which contrition essentially differs from attrition, and that all other
differences or ways of distinguishing them are either to be rejected as false,
or may be spared as being of little or no use.

3. Now some Writers of the Romish Communion, especially in former Ages, have
been of opinion, that contrition is necessary to justification. But this
assertion is declared by Tom. 4. Disp. 3. Qu. 8. Punct. 3.
Gr. de Valentia, to be sententia his presertim temporibus vix tolerabilis,
such an one as especially in these times is scarce fit to be tolerated And he
calls the other the common opinion. This Bell. de poenit. l. 2. c. 18.
Bellarmine takes for granted and Becanus declares ubi sup. Qu. 6.
omnes fatentur contritionem non esse necessariam in Sacramento Poenitentiae,
that all acknowledge that Contrition is not necessary in the Sacrament of
Penance. And these Writers, and many others, affirm the Council of Trent to
have declared thus much. And that Council plainly enough determines, that
Contrition Sess. 13 de poenitentia cap. 4.
is a grief of mind for sin already committed, with a purpose to do so no more;
and that this which encludes a hatred of the past evil life, and the beginning
of a new life, when it has Charity joined with it, does reconcile man to God
before the actual receiving the Sacrament of Penance, if there be a desire to
partake thereof. But then it adds, concerning another sort of sorrow, from the
foulness of the sin or the fear of punishment, ex peccati turpitudine, vel ex
supplicii metu, and of this that Council determines, that it cannot bring a
sinner to justification, without the Sacrament of Penance, but it does dispose
him to obtain the favor of God in the Sacrament of Penance. A bad life
encouraged hereby.
Now the result of all this according to the plainest sense their own Authors
give, is, that if a wicked man ready to go out of the world, shall be troubled
when he apprehends the foulness of his sins, lest he should go to Hell, which
is attrition, and shall then send to the Priest and receive Absolution; this
man though his beart be not turned from sin to God, and to a love of him, and
of goodness, will according to this loose Doctrine, go out of the world in the
favor of God and in a justified state. And thus much is pretended to be
effected, by virtue of the Sacrament of Penance and Priestly Absolution.

4. Now it is to be acknowledged, that the true Ministerial Absolution is very
profitable (being in an eminent manner contained in dispensing the holy
Sacraments) and is of much greater weight than many men account it to be, to
them that believe and truly repent, or to them who sincerely perform the
conditions of the Gospel Covenant: but no pretense of Absolution must be
admitted, to make void these conditions. And it may be granted, that in the
Roman Church, in some Societies, there are rules of severity directed to them
who are disposed to seriousness: but this their Doctrine of Absolution takes
off all necessity of observing any such rules, (or any vows whereby they
obliged themselves to any duties or exercises of perfection) so far as concerns
the fear of God, as to the interest of an eternal state. And this Doctrine
opens a gap, to all licentiousness of life, contrary to the rules of
Christianity, and all good conscience; by the security it pretends to give of
eternal happiness to wicked and debauched men, who amend not their lives, nor
forsake their sins. If this be truth, then are all the promises and threatenings
of the Gospel made void; as they are Motives to the necessary duties of
holiness and piety.

5. Holiness of Christianity undermined hereby.
By such arts as this, all the great precepts of Religion are made of none
effect, in order to salvation. For if against this impure Doctrine, all those
Texts of Scripture be urged, which require the wicked man to repent, and turn
from all his iniquities that he may live, and other such like; we are told by
Gr. de Valent. ubi sup.
Gr. de Valentia, that this is the general rule, extra sacramentum neminem
posse justificari sine contritione, that excepting the use of the Sacrament;
none can be justified without contrition. But then he tells us, casus quo
Sacramentum poenitentiae usurpaetur, plane ab illa lege universali exceptus
est, that case in which the Sacrament of Penance is used, is clearly excepted
from that universal Law. And this exception, he says, is made in Christ's
instituting the power of the Keys, and of remitting and retaining sins. As if
the power of the keys, and the ministerial Authority, (which rightly understood
is great and excellent, though it be grossly perverted and abused by the
Romanists, and slighted and undervalued by others) was an underhand
contrivance, to frustrate and defeat all the great precepts of God, and the
Laws of Christianity. And these precepts are so far made void thereby, that
Melch. Can. Relect. 4. de Poenit.
Canus confidently affirms, that he who with attrition receives the Sacrament
of Penance, is not only in a safe state, but does as much as the precepts of
God require from him. Whereas (says he) Baptism and the Sacrament of
Absolution, confer grace to him that is attrite, and these two Sacraments were
directly instituted for the remission of all sins; qui suscipit alterum ex his
sive contritus sive attritus, vere implet praeceptum de poenitentia, quoniam
Deus nihil amplius exigit in compensationem delicti commissi, quam vel
contritionem sine sacramento, vel attritionem cum sacramento; He who receives
either of these, either with Contrition or with Attrition, does really fulfill
the precept of Repentance; because God does require nothing further, in
compensation for the fault committed, than either Contrition without the
Sacrament, or Attrition with the Sacrament. And thus the illustrious and
substantial precepts of purity, and newness of life, are by these men made to
dwindle into the shades of darkness.

6 And as this Doctrine of Attrition is improved by them, it tends to eat out
all true devotion: This renders pious devotion unnecessary.
since we are told by the Romish Casuists, and Controversial Writers, that this
disposition is sufficient for performing the highest acts of Religion, even the
receiving the holy Eucharist. Indeed they ordinarily grant, that the precept of
Contrition being an affirmative precept, does oblige at some special times;
though they are very sparing in fixing these times: but many particularly
mention the case of being in danger of death, and some add the receiving or
dispensing a Sacrament, which ought to be handled reverently, and some may
assign some other special cases. But others can tell us, how that which is thus
granted in words, shall contain nothing of reality under it. For if the
Question be proposed, whether when the precept of Contrition does bind,
Attrition with the Sacrament of Penance be not still in that case sufficient;
(h) Becanus declares, M. Bec. ubi sup. Qu. 7.
that though some be of the other opinion, they are most in the right who
affirm this: because the precept of Contrition is obligatory, only on them who
have mortal sin, and therefore if a man may be freed from mortal sin by
Attrition, non amplius obligatur praecepto contritionis, he is no further bound
by the precept of Contrition. Such strange methods are made use of to evacuate
the Divine precepts. And they tell us that Attrition with Absolution makes up
Contrition.

7. Hereby sinners are deluded by false hopes.
By these artifices repentance is misrepresented, as if it could be
sufficiently performed without amendment of life; and the way to Heaven is so
described, as to be so far from requiring a patient continuance in well doing,
that there is no necessity of well doing at all. This is to encourage men in
such a wicked and evil life, against which Christ the righteous judge, will
pronounce an heavy Sentence. And thus they deal with the souls of men, as a
flattering Mountebank may do with the Body, if he should pretend, that he can
cure the most dangerous diseases, without carrying off the matter and cause of
the distemper, and without his Patient's taking so much care, as to observe the
rules of temperance and sobriety: but that man who is wise will not give heed
to such deceitful boastings, nor venture his life upon confidence of the truth
of them, when there are other rules and directions to be observed for his cure,
from whence he may rationally and upon sure grounds expect a good effect. These
Pontifician devices carry in them a perfect estrangement from the true
Christian rules; and since Christianity consists in life and practice, more
than in words and profession; that man who practices on this Doctrine, may be
a Papist, and do all that the Church of Rome requires; but he cannot be a true
Christian, to do all that the Gospel of our Savior makes necessary to
salvation.

8. I confess a bad man according to the Romish Doctrine will fail of
salvation; if he miss the opportunity, or neglect the care of Absolution. But
wicked men who hazard their fouls and eternal happiness, that they may gratify
their lusts, where they have no encouragements of hope proposed to them, will
much more do so where they have such great encouragements. And according to
this Doctrine, this hazard does not seem exceeding great, when they may
frequently confess and be absolved, and especially after they have committed
any mortal sin, and thereby set all things again even and strait, between God
and themselves, so far as concerns their being in a justified state. And what
may be pretended to remain as an obligation upon them to bear temporal pains
and satisfactions, this also may be v. Sect. 9. n. 14, etc.
otherwise provided for.

9. And we may further consider, how little goes to the making up of Contrition
according to the Romish Casuists, Of Contrition.
or such a repentance as avails to justification, without the Sacrament of
Penance. Of this I shall give an account from Father Theol. Mor. l. 5. Tract.
6. c. 4. n. 1.
Layman. He declares that the substance of Contrition consists in detesting sin
above all evil: but ib. n. 2.
any continuance of time is not necessary to that contrition, by which a sinner
is justified, but one simple act of grief is sufficient: and it is most
probable, that without calling his sins to remembrance he may be perfectly
converted, and justified by contrition, temporis momento, in a moment of time.
And he farther says ib. n. 3.
that any express purpose, of keeping Gods Commands, or abstaining from sin is
not necessary, further than it is vertually included in an act of detestation
of sin, in which he has no thought of his future course of life. But this
notion of Contrition I shall not pursue; nor yet those others in their
Casuistical Writers, whereby they very rarely allow such affirmative precepts,
as that great one of loving God, to oblige us to exercise any act of love to
him: which is much consequent upon their usual assertions concerning Attrition.
For my intention is to wave many things declared by considerable Doctors, and
mainly to insist on those, which have the public allowance and establishment
of the Church.

10. Secondly, Another obstacle to a pious life, 2. Of their prohibiting the
common use of the Scriptures.
which I shall consider is, the debarring the people of the best guide and help
to piety, which is the use of the Holy Scriptures. The Divine Scriptures are by
the Fathers often called the Letters, and Messages which God sends to men, to
invite them to him, and guide them in their way: and then surely they to whom,
and for whom they are sent, ought to know and read them, both out of Reverence
to God, and out of respect to themselves. de Tempore Sermon. 112.
S. Austin observes this double benefit in reading the holy Scriptures, that
they teach us knowledge, and right understanding, and that they carry men off
from the vanities of the world, unto the love of God; and observes how greatly
efficacious they are, to the promoting piety in very great numbers, and that
they were designed for our Salvation.

11. The Scriptures greatly promote piety.
These Scriptures were written by the inspiration of God, and contain the sure
rule for Faith and Life, and were so accounted of in the ancient Church. Herein
is comprised the Will and Counsel of God, declared by the Holy Ghost himself.
And the precepts and holy rules there proposed, the promises declared, the
threatenings denounced, the judgments executed on the disobedient, and the
blessings bestowed on the obedient, are great incitements to piety; and are of
the greater force and weight, as they are contained in the Scriptures, because
the Divine Authority goes along with every one of them. And the end for which
they were written, is for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. And the punishments there recorded,
which were inflicted on evil doers, were for ensamples, and written for our
admonition, 1 Cor. 10.11. These holy Books, the Primitive Christians were not
denied the use of, and they so highly esteemed this privilege, that rather
than they would deliver up these Books to their persecutors, the best
Christians chose to undergo the utmost torments and sufferings; and of such
Baron. Annal. Ecc. An. 302. n. 22.
Baronius observes, that there was numerus prope infinitus eorum qui ne codices
sacros traderent, lubentissimo animo mortem oppetiverunt; almost an infinite
number of those, who with the greatest readiness of mind, chose death rather
than to deliver up the Holy Books. And they who did deliver them, were
accounted grievous offenders, and called Traditores (the name given to Judas
who betrayed our Lord) and of these, as Advers. Parm. l. 1.
Optatus says, there were many of all ranks both Laics and Clergy.

12. The use of the Scriptures is of such excellent advantage, to promote piety
and the happiness of men, that the Psalmist under the infallible guidance of
the Holy Spirit, declares the blessed and good man, to delight himself in the
law of the Lord, and to meditate therein day and night, Psalm. 1.2. And this
makes him so to increase, and be fruitful in good works, that v. 3. he is
resembled to a tree planted by the rivers of water, which brings forth his
fruit in due season. And the excellent use of this Divine Law is described,
Psalm. 19.7-11. in converting the soul, making wise the simple, and other great
benefits. Yea they are of such manifold and complete use for the good of man,
that the Apostle declares them able to make one wise unto Salvation, and to be
profitable for doctrine, reproof, correction, and instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. And they have that mighty efficacy, to prevail on the hearts
and consciences of men, that our Lord acquaints us, that they who would not
hear Moses and the Prophets, would not be persuaded though one arose from the
dead, Luke 16.31.

13. But the Romish Church prohibits the use of the Scripture to the generality
of their Communion; as is manifest from the Index of prohibited Books, Conc.
Trident. Sess. ult. prope sin.
which was ordered by the Council of Trent, and was completed about the end of
that Council; but the confirmation thereof, was referred to the Pope, by the
Decree of that Council; and it was approved by the Authority of Pius the
Fourth. In this Indic. Reg. 4. How far vulgar Translations are prohibited in
the Roman Church.
Index it is declared, That since it is manifest by experience, that if the
Holy Bible in the Vulgar Tongue, be permitted generally without distinction,
there would thence from the rashness of men, more hurt arise than advantage; in
this matter it must be left to the judgment of the Bishop or Inquisitor, that
with the advice of the Parish Priest or Confessor, he may grant to them the
reading of the Bible, in the Vulgar Tongue, translated by Catholic Authors,
whom they shall understand may receive by such reading not hurt, but increase
of faith and piety; which faculty they should have in writing. But whosoever
without such a faculty shall presume to read or to have them, may not obtain
the absolution of their sins, unless they first deliver their Bibles to the
Ordinary. And then follows the penalty of the Bookseller, who shall sell, or
otherwise procure such Bibles, to them who have not a faculty. And from this
Index, the substantial part of this rule is expressed in Panstrat. Cath. Tom.
1. l. 10. c. 1.
Chamier, and somewhat more at large in the Book of (t) Jacobus Ledesima the
Jesuit, Ledes. c. 15.
De scripturis divinis quavis lingua non legendis, and is mentioned in some
English Writers. It is therefore condemned, as a very heinous and mortal crime,
without all these cautions, to have or read a Bible in the Vulgar tongue,
though it be in a version of their own. And if it be considered how liable to
censure and dislike, the use of such Bibles are, in the Romish Communion, as
their own Writers declare; it may thence be concluded, that many zealous
Papists will be backward to desire any such thing, which others must not expect
to obtain. And upon further consideration, of what difficulties may be
expected, in the gaining this faculty, and the procuring the consent of those
by whose authority and with whose advice it must be obtained; any reasonable
man will discern, that such faculties are not like to be very common.

14. This prohibition is many ways evil.
But such a prohibition is upon many accounts evil. First, It being a duty and
pious practice for men to acquaint themselves with the Holy Scriptures, Psalm.
1.2. Psalm. 78.5, 6. Jo. 5.39. Act. 17.11. it is an opposition to God and
goodness to deny them the liberty, to do that, which pleases him, and is their
duty. Secondly, Since God gave this as one great gift to his Church, that they
should have the Sacred Oracles of the Holy Scriptures, which they might all
acquaint themselves with, (as our Lord said, they have Moses and the Prophets,
Luke 16.29.) and it is one of the advantages Christ has bestowed on his
Church, that they may have the knowledge of the Doctrine of the Gospel, as it
was dictated by the infallible inspiration of the Holy Ghost, as will appear
from n. 17. it is high injustice and sacrilegious fraud, to deprive the Members
of the Christian Church, of that excellent good, which the will of Christ
bequeathed to them, and is their right. Thirdly, The reading the Holy
Scriptures being of such excellent usefulness to men, (as was observed n. 10,
11, 12.) this prohibition is a thing very uncharitable to men. Fourthly, The
ground on which they proceed, that the use of the Scriptures, if generally
permitted, is more to the prejudice, than advantage and benefit of men, when
the Holy Spirit himself declares them to be greatly profitable, as was observed
n. 12. this is to charge the wisdom of God with folly, as if in his great acts
of favor and kindness, he had not wisely consulted the good of man; but had by
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost made such Books public, which if the Church
of Rome did not take care, that they might not come into the hands of the
greatest part of men, would do a great deal of hurt to the World. And now I
need not make remarks to show how little there is of piety in such things as
these.

15. The Churches of God of old, steered another course, The Scriptures were
generally allowed to be read by the Jews and ancient Christians,
from this of the Romanists. That amongst the Jews at the time of our Saviors
coming, and his Apostles preaching, the people were not debarred the use of the
Holy Scriptures, though they were clearly opposite to the Traditions and
corrupt Doctrines of the Scribes and Pharisees, may appear from our Saviors
putting them upon searching the Scriptures, Jo. 5.39. from S. Peter's
commending their taking heed to the sure word of prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19. as also
from the Bereans searching the Scriptures daily, Act. 17.11. and Timothy's
having known them from a child, 2 Timothy 3.16.

16. That the ancient Christians had the Scriptures translated into the several
languages of the Countries, in which there were any Christian Churches founded,
is manifest from the testimonies of S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom and Theoderet,
which have been produced In their Epistle prefixed to the Bible.
by the Authors of our last English translation. In which they particularly
mention the Egyptians, Indians, Persians, Armenians, Scythians, Aethiopians,
Romans, Goths, and some others. And Ep. ad Phil. p. 23. ed. Usser.
Polycarp declares to the Church of the Philippians, to whom he writes, that he
trusts they were exercised in the holy Scriptures. And de Lazaro.
Chrysostom exhorts his Auditors, that they would diligently read the holy
Scriptures at home in their houses: and the like is frequently done by S.
Austin, and diverse other the most eminent ancient Writers. Nor was the
Scripture then forbidden to be read even by children: but Eusebius Eus. Hist.
Eccl. l. 6. c. (...).
tells us how usefully, and to what good purpose, for the guiding and
establishing of ^any Christians in the time of Persecution, Origin had been
exercised in the holy Scriptures in his very childhood.

17. and were so designed of God.
But we need go no further in this case than to the Holy Scriptures themselves.
S. Paul directs his Epistle to the Church of Rome, Romans 1.7. To all that be in
Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints; and his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.2. To the Church at Corinth, called to be Saints, with
all that in every place call on the name of Christ; and his second Epistle to
the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the Saints which are in all
Achaia, 2 Cor. 1.1. Now it is plain from hence, that he intended they might all
know and read the matter of his Epistles; and that these (and consequently
other) parts of the Canon of the holy Scripture, were not under a prohibition,
that they might not be read by the major part of Christians. And when the
hearers of S. Peter at Rome, as Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 14.
Eusebius relates, were not satisfied with hearing, (...), and Doctrine of the
Divine declaration without writing, they prevailed with S. Mark, to write for
them the sum of the Christian Doctrine, and leave it with them, and this their
desire was very well approved by S. Peter. But let him who can conceive such
strange things, suppose that to gratify their desire, of being rightly guided
in the Christian Doctrine, and for their future instruction, when these
teachers should remove to another place, the Gospel of S. Mark was left with
them, but under such a prohibition, that none might read it, or know the
particular contents thereof, unless he should obtain a particular faculty in
writing from S. Peter, or S. Mark, to that purpose. And when S. Peter wrote his
Epistles, that the Christians even after his decease, might have those things
always in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13, 15. and chap. 3.1, 2. it is something
hard to imagine, how they should be able to make such use of these Epistles, as
to keep in memory the Christian truth and precepts, if they were not permitted
to read them, or to know the contents thereof. And when Saint John's Gospel was
written, Joh. 20.31. that men might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of
God, and that believing they may have life through his name; surely no man can
think, that what was written for this purpose, might not be read for the same
purpose, by those who were concerned to believe and obtain life.

18. Some of the Church of Rome have pretended, Pretended reverence reflected
on.
that they show reverence to the holy Scriptures, and treat them as Sacred
things with veneration, when they take care, they may not come into the hands
of every common person. But a due reverence to any Divine institution, is not
to forbid it to the generality of Christians, but to take care that there be a
diligent and pious use thereof. Thus a right veneration to the solemn worship
of God, and the holy Sacraments, is not performed in prohibiting Christians to
attend thereupon, and partake thereof, but in their devout communicating in
these duties of Religion.

19. But the chief thing objected is, that by the use of the Scriptures, many
are led into errors and vain opinions: and the danger of heresy by the
Scriptures being translated, is insisted on by de Div. Script. quavis lingua
non legendis.
Ledesima, and other Writers of the Papists; and they take care to provide
against this miscarriage. To this I answer. 1. The plea of avoiding error, is
ill made in this case, by them who keep all of their communion who read not the
Scriptures, blindfold under so many and great errors. The Objection from the
abuse of the Scriptures by some men to promote Heresies, considered.
2. The Scriptures are indeed very proper to lead men into that truth, which
they unjustly call heresy, in that as an excellent rule, they discover to
diligent, pious and unpiejudiced enquirers, what is straight and what is
crooked. And Ledesima the Jesuit acknowledges, that when the Protestants took
counsel for the translating the Scriptures, and the dispersing them abroad,
this was a most apt and fit means to promote their interest; ibid. c. 1.
de sacrorum librorum versione, consilio ad eam rem appositissimo, omnibus
promulganda, inter ipsos haereticos agitari est coeptum. Now it is some honor
to the Protestant cause, that the Scriptures do so much favor them, that the
having them made known to all men, is so apt a means to promote their interest.
And when for this cause the Romanists design to keep them secret, the
politickness of this contrivance may be some advantage to their cause, as to Us
interest amongst men, but it is withal a great disparagement to it with respect
to its truth and goodness.

20. Thirdly, If some men do miscarry by their vanity, in wresting the
Scriptures to serve their errors, this is no just reason to prohibit the
general use of a thing so excellent. If some men eat to surfeit themselves, or
use their understandings to abett error, and to cheat others by overreaching
them; or shall yield their eyes to behold vanity, their ears to be pleased with
lewd discourse, or their wills to choose evil; must the greater part of men be
forbidden to eat, to consider, or to choose any thing at all, and must their
eyes be blindfolded, and their ears stopped, lest they should abuse them to
evil? And the like might be urged concerning the use of men's hands, tongues,
and almost of all natural and acquired perfections, and also of the profession
of Christianity and the means of grace. And since the right knowledge of God
and Religion, are things of so great excellency and high benefit; there is the
less reason why the best means to obtain them should be rejected, because they
may possibly be abused.

21. Fourthly, The Scriptures read with piety and humility, are excellently
fitted to improve those who read them, in wisdom and goodness. And the goodness
and purity which they recommend, and the eternal interests they propose, and
the authority of God they bring along with them, have a great influence,
through the grace of God there tendered, to work these humble and pious
dispositions. And therefore though some men may err and miscarry, and be bad by
abusing them; it is far more probable that they should do amiss, who either
want, or neglect the diligent and frequent use, of such an excellent help.
Praef. in Epist. ad Romans
S. Chrysostom observes that a vast multitude of evils proceed from the
ignorance of the Scriptures, and amongst others, he mentions the pest of
Heresy and a bad life. And S. Austin, while he was speaking of the excellency
of the holy Scriptures, and the great benefit of the use of them, says de
Tempore Sermon. 112.
saepius caecus offendit quam videns; the blind man, or he who wants the
advantage of seeing by the light, more frequently stumbles than he who can see.

22. Fifthly, The wisdom of God has thought fit, to place man in such a
condition in this world, even under the Covenant of grace, that he is not out
of all capacity of offending, in any case or circumstances. They had a great
privilege who heard the words of the Gospel, from the mouth of the holy Jesus
himself, or his Apostles; but this great blessing might be ill used by bad men,
who were far from being benefitted thereby, if they were perverse and
obstinate. And they who enjoyed these great advantages, if they were not
careful and diligent to make a good improvement of them, were the more highly
guilty, and under the more heavy condemnation. And so all ministerial helps;
and even various and frequent influences and aids of divine grace, may be
abused by ill disposed men, and so may be also the Holy Scriptures, by man who
is a creature endued with liberty and choice. And it has pleased God thus to
order the state of man in the world, that the performance of his duty, by the
Divine assistance, may be an act of his care and choice. Hereby his obedience
becomes a virtue, and himself capable of reward or punishment in the performing
or neglecting it. But there are no means or motives which men do enjoy, which
more usefully conduce, to the promoting goodness, holiness and piety, than the
holy Scriptures do. And there is no more reason to reject the use of them from
any persons, because they may by some be wrested and used amiss, than there is
to condemn the use of any other excellent means of piety, for the like reason;
and to disapprove of the circumstances under which God has placed man under
the Gospel.

23. Amongst the Papists, Vulgar Translations have been very sparing.
But besides what respects the rule above mentioned, in the Index of Books
prohibited, the Church of Rome has used another way of debarring the people
from the use of the Holy Scriptures; in being very sparing, of having any
allowed translation into vulgar languages, composed by men of their own
Communion. They take care that even Breviar. Romans passim.
such lessons as are read out of any part of Scripture, in their public
Service, may not be read in the Common or Vulgar tongue of the Country. This
Bellarmine acknowledges and asserteth to be prohibited, Bell. de Verb. Dei. l.
2. c. 15.
Prohibetur ne in publico and communi usu Ecclesiae, Scripturae legantur vel
canantur vulgaribus linguis. And in this he refers to the Conc. Trid. Sess.
22. c. 8.
Council of Trent, which declares that it is not fit, ut (Missa) vulgari passim
lingua celebraretur. And the word Missa here, (as very frequently) is not
confined solely, to that which is peculiar to the Eucharist, but it takes in
the whole public Service. To this purpose De Eucharist. l. 5. c. 1.
Bellarmine observes, Missa accipitur pro tota celebratione divini officii, in
quo Eucharistia consecrabatur, ut comprehendit simul Missam Catechumenorum, and
haec est communissima acceptio. And hence such portions of Scripture as are
parts of the public service, are included in that rule and Constitution, which
relates to the whole. And the de Verbo Del, c. 15.
Cardinal declares, that what is done by the Protestants, is a real and
practical asserting their heretical opinion against the Church, whilst they
ordinarily translate the Scriptures into the German, French and English
tongues, and publicly read and sing them in the same tongues. In England
before the Reformation, I know of no allowed translation into English, made by
any whom they own to be of their Communion. That of Wiclef though out of the
Vulgar Latin, must not be owned as such. Since the Reformation, the Romanists
have translated the Testament into English: but though these Books may be
procured by some few persons, they are not easily had by very many. And it is
probable that in some Popish Countries they may have no translation of the
Scriptures into their Vulgar tongue to this time, which carries any public
approbation or allowance with it.

24. A third impediment of piety in the Romish Church, 3. Of their public
Service and Prayers, in a tongue not understood by the people.
which I shall instance in, is their having the public Prayers, and the
administration of the Offices of the Church, in a language not understood by
the people, which is a great hindrance to their devotion. That this practice is
generally used, and is established and appointed in the Church of Rome, is
sufficiently known, and is manifest from the foregoing Section. But that the
Primitive Church did generally own the fitness and usefulness, of having the
public service and Prayers of the Church, in a language understood by the
common people, is evident enough, from what was then practiced and established.
Public Offices in the Primitive Church were performed in a tongue commonly
understood.
In a great part of the Eastern Church, where the Greek language was then the
common speech of the Country, as is well known, and does appear from the
popular Homilies of the Greek Fathers, which they spoke in that language: they
had their public prayers and service of the Church in the Greek tongue, and
not in the Latin; and some of the ancient Liturgies, then used in that tongue,
are still extant. And in that part of the Western Church in which the Latin was
then the Vulgar or commonly known language, as in Italy and many other parts,
the public prayers and service were performed in that tongue, and not in the
Greek, or any other not commonly known in that Country. And this is proved from
those parts of the ancient Latin Offices which are still preserved.

25. But in such other Countries, where neither of these languages were
commonly known, there are sufficient instances of the use of other languages
which were known. In those Eastern parts where the Syriack language obtained,
they had their public Offices in that language. And a Collection of sixteen
Syriack Offices, are declared by Gabr. Sionit. de Ritib. Maronit. in init.
Gabriel Sionita to be in a Manuscript in his possession, many of which were
used together in the same Church; and others probably in other Churches and in
other Ages. And after the first Centuries, when the Arabic and the Coptick or
Egyptian language prevailed much in Egypt, and the Patriarchate of Alexandria,
they had also the Coptick Liturgies as In Epist. ad Nihusium praef. Rituali
Cophticarum.
Athanasius Kircherus testifies. And that part which might seem least needful
to be in the Vulgar tongue, which concerns the Ordination of their
Ecclesiastical Officers, who might be presumed to understand other tongues, was
translated by Kircher into Latin, out of a very ancient Manuscript, in which
all the Ritual was in the Coptick tongue, except the exhortations which were in
the Arabic. This translation was by Kircher sent to Nihusius 1647, and by him
published five or six years after. And several other Liturgical forms, both in
Syriack and other languages used in those Eastern Churches, are mentioned by
Ecchellensis, in the account he gives of several Authors and Books, written in
those languages, in the end of his Eutychius vindicatus. And I doubt not but
further proof may be given of this matter, That the people might understand the
Service. care was taken by the Imperial Law.
by them who have the opportunity of seeing and consulting such Writers.

26. To this general and practical testimony of the Church, in former ages, I
shall add three particular testimonies, but all of them of a public nature,
all which acknowledged the usefulness, of the people understanding the public
Offices of the Church; and in the two former there was care taken thereof. The
first is out of the Imperial Law: in Justin. Novel. 137. c. 6.
which it is enacted, that the Bishops and Priests should express the Prayers
at the holy Communion and at Baptism, with a voice that might be heard by the
faithful people; for the raising the souls of the hearers into a greater
devotion, and affectionate giving glory to God. And then that Law cites the
words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.16. Else when thou shall bless with the Spirit,
how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen, at thy giving
of thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? Which imperial Law takes
care, that the Prayers of the Church may be understood by the people for their
profit, providing that the words thereof should be audibly pronounced, and
supposing these Prayers to be expressed (as they then were) in a language
commonly understood. A second testimony is from the Roman Pontifical, in which
was continued down to the Council of Trent, by the Roman Pontifical.
a direction at the Ordination of Lectors, as is noted in Hist. Con c. Trid. l.
6. p. 470.
the History of that Council, ut studeant distinct and articulate legere, ut a
populo intelligantur. From whence it is easily collected, that when that
Pontifical was composed, the service of the Roman Church was then in that
language, which was understood by the people; and the sense of the Roman Church
then was that it was requisite it should be understood: and by its authority it
took care that it might be so expressed as to be understood. But when after
some time, the Latin tongue by degrees grew out of vulgar use, especially under
the various Mutations in the Empire, there was then want of care to order the
expressions of the public service to be such, as would suit the capacities of
the people.

27. The third testimony is, from the Council of Trent: which declares, Sess.
22. cap. 8.
Etsi Missa contineat magnam populi eruditionem, Patribus tamen visum non
expedire, ut vulgari passim lingua celebraretur. Quamobrem retento Ecclesiae
Romanae ritu, ne oves Christi esuriant, mandant Pastoribus, ut, inter Missarum
celebrationem, aliquid ex iis quae in Missa leguntur exponant, What the Council
of Trent acknowledge.
praesertim festis diebus. Though the public Service or Mass contains much
instruction for the people, it does not seem fit to the Fathers that it should
be usually celebrated in the Vulgar tongue. Wherefore retaining the rites of
the Church of Rome, they command the Pastors, that, in the time of its
celebration, they expound somewhat of those things which are read in the Mass,
especially upon Festival days. Now here is an acknowledgment, that it is for
the benefit of the people to understand the Service for their instruction, and
yet a course is taken, that a main part thereof should not be understood, that
they may still keep up the Romish usage, which has for many ages thus
practiced. Only they shall be suffered to understand so much of what is
contained therein, as may keep them from famishing.

28. But these words seem to carry along with them, some intimation of guilty
consciences in this decision. As if a Physician should declare, that he knows
such a Medicine to be mighty useful, to recover his Patient to his health, but
however he does not intend he shall have it, but he may apply to him such a
part of the ingredients, as will keep him alive (and yet possibly he may be
mistaken herein). Or this is something like, as if a Judge when he had
considered a Case of right, concerning a temporal estate, should declare that
there is a very fair and ample Patrimony, that belongs to Sempronius, and he
ought to have the profit thereof: but nevertheless it seems fit to him, that
Sempronius should not enjoy this Estate, that so no alterations may be made in
present possessions. However he adjudgeth them who keep him out of his
Patrimony, and debar him of his right, at some times, and especially upon
festival days, to give Sempronius some such relief, as themselves shall think
fit, for the satisfying his hunger, lest he should be famished for want of all
supply of food. Now if such a Physician's practice be honest dealing, and the
determination of such a Judge be doing justice in secular interests; then has
this Council done right to the members of the Church, and determined this case
according to the rules of Christian integrity. For as it is the duty of the
Pastors to feed the sheep of Christ, so it is the right of the sheep or people,
to receive this food, and therefore to deny them much of that, which is
acknowledged proper for them, is to defraud them of that, which justly belongs
unto them.

29. But that the public Prayers of the Church, Public Service in a known
language greatly useful.
should be in a language commonly understood by the people, is both reasonable
and suitable to the public Service, and greatly useful and profitable to
promote piety and edification. For the public Worship of God rightly
performed, is a great part of practical Religion. And devoutness therein, is
both an eminent exercise of piety, and has a great influence upon the minds of
men to fix in them pious dispositions for the right ordering the whole course
of life. This devoutness is a vigorous, lively and holy exercise of the mind
and affections, and the whole man toward God, and in his service: and whilst
fit and proper words would tend much to excite the people hereunto, this
advantage is lost in the use of an unknown tongue, which is to no more purpose
to him that understands it not, than if nothing at all was spoken. And what is
here said by the defenders of the Romish practice, does generally confute it
self. Sometimes it is said, Coster. Enchir. c. 17. p. 496, 497.
Nonest necessum a vulgo intelligi, etc. that it is not needful the people
should understand the Prayers and Hymns of the Church, because they are not
intended to instruct the people by understanding the words, but suavi melodia,
majestateque actionis, by the sweet melody and majesty of the action, The plea,
that Prayers are not to instruct the people, considered,
to dispose them to Religious reverence toward God. But if words in the
worship of God be not needful to be understood, what need is there of any words
at all, when grave actions and melodious sounds are sufficient? But if it be
said, that words being understood by the Priests and learned men, are useful to
quicken their devotion, and to fix and unite their minds, in joining together
in the same supplications and praises in public Service; it is easy to
observe, that this might have the same effect upon the devoutly disposed
people, if the Prayers and other parts of the Service, were in a language which
they understood. And therefore it must either be granted, that it is
unnecessary that any should understand the particular expressions of the
Service, and then it is to no purpose to use any language at all; or else that
it is desirable that all should understand it.

30. Sometimes we are told that it is requisite the public Service should be
in Latin, Coster. Enchir. ubi sup.
because otherwise Priests; who come out of other Countries, could not
celebrate the Offices, neque promiscue lauds Dei decantare, nor jointly with
others sing the praises of God. But surely such Priests though they should not
understand the language, may as well join in the praises of God, as the people
at home can do in the language they understand not. And this charitable
consideration toward foreign Priests, might be extended so far, and the care
concerning foreign Priests.
as to prove (if it had any weight in it) that the service of the Romish
Church, ought to be in Arabic, that if any Priests should come from those
Eastern parts, where that language is understood, and the Latin is not; they
might bear a part in the service. But if this would be ridiculous, when by this
method the generality even of the Priests at home would not understand it, let
it be considered what tolerable account can be given, why they should hinder
the generality of the people from understanding it; especially when the Apostle
himself has so plainly determined, that when prayers or praises are in an
unknown tongue, The Apostolical precept observed.
the unlearned Auditor cannot so well join therein, and his edification is
thereby prejudiced, 1 Cor. 14.16, 17. And what the Apostle speaks in that
Chapter, does plainly disallow the use of an unknown tongue in the public
worship of God, though they who spoke, spoke by the extraordinary gift of
tongues; which thing was apt to excite the Christian Auditory, to a particular
admiration of the Divine gifts, and so might well be esteemed an extraordinary
general help to devotion, and adoration. And the particular exceptions, against
this plain and full Apostolical testimony, are so inconsiderable, and have been
so often refuted, that I think them not worthy to be named.

31. But Ledesim. de Scrip. qu. Ling. non legendis. c. 13. Coster. Ench. c. 17.
several Writers of the Romish Church tell us, that it is not necessary, the
people should understand the expressions of the public prayers and praises
(and consequently not say Amen to them) because these services are not directed
to them, but to God: and they may partake of the benefit of these services,
though they do not understand them, Bellarm de Verb. Dei, l. 2. c. 16.
as an ignorant Country man may have received advantage from a Latin Speech
spoken on his behalf to a Prince, Of the pretense that prayers are directed to
God, and not to the people.
by whom it is well understood; or as absent persons may be advantaged by the
prayers, which others put up for them, though themselves do not hear them. But
that this is an insufficient defense may appear, 1. Because though the Lessons
are directed to the people, yet these also are read in a tongue they understand
not. 2. Because the thing here to be considered, is not whether one may not be
benefitted by another prayers and Religious addresses to God; which is
supposed to be true, when we pray for one another: but we are here to take
notice, whether the people ought notto bear a part, and to join in those great
exercises of Religious piety, of prayers, thanksgiving and glorifying God, in
the right performance of his public worship and service. For the whole
exercise of Divine worship, is not only to seek for blessings from God, but
also to praise him and glorify him, which the people cannot particularly join
in, and go along with, unless they understand what is expressed in the service.
And therefore if they ought to join therein; by being debarred from
understanding it, they are hindered from these acts of piety, which they ought
to perform, and God is deprived of a great part of that glory that is due to
him; and consequently Religion and piety are much prejudiced thereby.

32. Now it may be reasonably presumed, The people are concerned to-worship God.
that if the people have such beings and souls, as are endued with capacities
of worshipping and glorifying God, they ought to be employed to this purpose:
but if they have none such (which would be to suppose them not to be Christians
or men, and to be incapable of doing acts of duty and Religion, and of
receiving rewards) then will they not be concerned to attend Gods public
worship. And these pleas used by these Writers, are as plausible, to excuse
their absence from the public Assemblies, as their not understanding the
public Service. But that the people are to join in the duties of Religious
worship, is not only supposed by S. Paul, in that discourse upon this subject,
1 Cor. 14. but may be proved from the Psalms, and many other Scriptures,
calling upon all people, to praise, and laud and glorify God, and from S.
John's Visions of the Gospel Church, where sometimes the 144000, sometimes so
great a multitude as no man could number, are represented joining together in
the worship of God.

33. But a thing so manifest as this is, stands in need of no further proof,
siince there are such frequent precepts for prayer, thanksgiving, and giving
glory to God, directed to all Christians. And the Christian Church from the
beginning acknowledged the people to be much concerned, in the performing the
public worship of God. Just. Apol. 2.
Justin Martyr declares, how in the prayers before the Eucharist, all the
Christians together rose up, and presented those prayers, and in those at the
Eucharist they joined their consent by answering, Amen. Tertullian declaring
the Christian practice, says, Tert. Apol. c. 39.
we go together to the Assembly and Congregation, ut ad Deum quasi manu facta
precationibus ambiamus orantes, that we may earnestly call on God by prayers as
with a joint strength; and this force (says he) is acceptable to God. And
before both these Ignatius urging and commending the public service, said,
Ign. Ep. ad Ephesians.
if the prayer of one or two has so great a force, (...), how much greater is
that of the Bishop and the whole Church? And in the Primitive times sometimes
an Amen, and sometimes other responsals, were directed to the people, in the
ancient Liturgies. The result of all this is, that whereas the peoples actual
joining in the several parts of Gods worship is a great part of their duty, and
the pious and devout performance of it, both tends to the honor of God, and to
their edification; the present Church of Rome by establishing their service in
a tongue not understood by the people, both unjustly and impiously hinders the
due worship of God, and that piety of men which is conjoined with it; and
derived from it.

34. I might give a fourth instance, Immoral Doctrines hinted at.
of the hindrances to an holy life, in the Church of Rome, from those loose
rules of practice delivered by diverse of their Doctors and Casuists, and the
allowance their rules give, to those gross enormities and heinous vices, which
the Philosophers and virtuous Pagans would abhor, being opposite to the laws of
nature, and that honesty which prevailed amongst the better part of the
Gentiles. Of such things as these a large account has been given, in the
Mystery of Jesuitism, and several other Books: as their giving allowance to
perjury, Murder, and other such heinous sins, upon slight occasions, as to
preserve ones reputation, and the like. And what endeavors have been used by
the doctrine of probability, and other methods, to uphold those positions which
debauch Morality, has been manifested from the Books of Father Bauny,
Caramouel, Estrix, and diverse others. It is acknowledged that vigorous
endeavors were used by some of their Bishops, to suppress these wretched
Principles of immorality, but there was as earnest and vigorous diligence used
to uphold the same by many Casuists and Divines, especially in Flanders, and
France. I do not therefore charge these Principles upon the Church of Rome in
general, but upon many Doctors therein. Some of these abominable and immoral
positions were condemned by Pope Alexander the Seventh, and many were Sentenced
by Pope Innocent the Eleventh, and the Inquisition at Rome: of the latter of
which I shall take some particular notice.

35. Amongst sixty five Propositions, condemned in the Vatican Decree of Innoc.
11. March. 2. 1679.
by the Pope and the Cardinals, the general Inquisitors, these were some, Prop.
5.
That we dare not condemn him of mortal sin, who should but once in his whole
life, put forth an act of the love of God, Prop. 10, 11.
We are not bound to love our Neighbor with an internal and formal act; We may
satisfy the precept of loving our Neighbor by only external acts. Prop. 15.
It is lawful for a Son to rejoice at his having murdered his Father when he
was drunk, because of the great riches thence accrewing to him by Inheritance.
Prop. 17.
It is sufficient to have an act of faith once in the life time; Prop. 24.
To call God to witness to a light lie, is not so great irreverence, that for
it he either will or can damn a man. Now such horrid Positions as these, and
many others in the same Decree, deserve the severest Censure, and it may amaze
any one, that such things should be asserted, by those who take upon them to
instruct others, in the Principles and Practices of Christianity. And what
wretched lives may they lead, whose practices are directed by such Guides?

36. Now though these Positions are condemned to be at least scandalous and
pernicious in practice, and therefore all persons are in that Decree strictly
forbidden to practice upon them, and all who shall maintain them are declared
to be under the Sentence of Excommunication: Yet this very Sentence is too kind
and favorable to the Authors of these Positions upon a threefold account.
First, In that such impious and irreligious Doctrines were not condemned as
false, wicked, blasphemous or heretical, but only as at least scandalous and
pernicious in practice, which is but a very mild Censure of these Doctrines
themselves; and speaks no more against them, than is declared against some
other positions contained in the same Decree, which are not so abominable. For
instance, Prop. 19.
That the will cannot effect; that the assent of faith should be more firm in
it self, than the weight of the reasons which move to that assent do deserve:
and Prop. 42.
That it is not usury to require something besides the Principal, as being due
out of benevolence and gratitude, but only when it is demanded as due out of
justice. For whatsoever may be said against these Positions, it is a gentle and
easy Censure of the other, to put them in the same rank with these, and under
no heavier condemnation. Secondly, In that the authors of these unchristian
Doctrines, and those who till the time of this Decree, have taught them and
maintained them, are not by this, nor so far as I can learn, by any other
Decree brought under any public censure which may embolden and encourage
others, to vent other wicked Principles against common morality in time to
come, though but with a little variation from the same. Thirdly, In that the
Books in which these wicked Principles are contained, and owned, are not by
this Decree, and I think by no other, prohibited to be read; no not so far as
the holy Scriptures themselves are under a prohibition.

SECT. III.
Those Doctrines and Practices are publicly declared and asserted in the
Church of Rome, and are by the Authority thereof established, which are highly
derogatory to the just honor and dignity of our Savior.
Dishonor done to Christ
THose practices and opinions which vilify the dignity, and authority of
Christ are infamous, and bring a deserved dishonor upon the authors of them,
and on them who embrace them. And as he is worthy of all glory, so his Church
and the members thereof, are deservedly zealous of his honor. But herein the
Romanists miscarry, which I shall manifest in some particulars.

2. by Invocating Saints,
First, In their prayers and supplications to Saints and Angels: their practice
herein, being not consistent with the honor due to our Lord, as our Advocate
and Intercessor. This invocation of Saints, is declared by Sess. ult.
the Council of Trent to be good and profitable. And in the Oath enjoined by
Pius the Fourth, in Bull. Pli 4.
to be taken of all the Clergy, a profession is required, that the Saints are
to be worshipped and invocated: and in the public Offices of the Romish
Church, both in their prayers, and more especially and fully in their hymns,
supplications for all manner of Heavenly blessings, are put up unto them.
Cassand. Consult. de Cult. Sanct.
Cassander indeed tells us, that these things are not done for any such intent,
as if praying to them, should be thought simply necessary to salvation. And in
the same discourse he declares, that they did not adjoin the Saints, as if God
either could not or would not hearken, and show mercy, unless they be
intercessors for it. But it is well known, that his mild and moderate
expressions, are displeasing to the greater part of that Church. And however,
though the error in Doctrine is the greater, when that is declared necessary
which is not so; the error in practice is not the less, if in doing that which
is on other accounts blameable, it be declared not necessary to be done.

3. Now the blessed Jesus is constituted of God, and confidence in their
intercession and merits.
our Advocate and Intercessor, that we may in his name, and through him, draw
nigh to God: And it is part of his Kingly authority, and headship over his
Church, to dispense those blessings for which we seek unto God in his name; and
he is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give repentance and remission of
sins, Act. 5.31. But in many Books of Devotion, used and approved by the Church
of Rome, their addresses are much more frequent to Saints, and sometimes to
Angels, and especially and most frequently to the Blessed Virgin, than to our
Lord and Savior himself; and to these they apply themselves, that by them they
may find acceptance with God, and that by their merits they may obtain help,
grace and blessing. And even the title of intercessor and advocate also, is
oft-times given to them, both in the more ancient Offices, and in the present
Roman Breviary, together with expressions of trust and confidence in their
merits, frequently joined with them. On S. Andrew's day they in Missal. sec.
us. Sarum and in Brev.
pray with respect to him: Sit apud te pro nobis perpetuus intercessor; that he
may be with thee for us a perpetual Intercessor. And the blessed Virgin is
styled Br. Romans ad complet. a Vesp. Trin.
our Advocate. And they some times with respect to a Saint use such expressions
as these in their addresses to God, Ejus intercedentibus meritis, ab omnibus
nos absolve peccatis, ibid. Com. Confess. Pont.
Absolve us from all our sins, through the intercession of his merits. And with
respect to Pope Nicholas, both in the present Roman Breviary, and in the Office
secundum usum Sarum which was most in use in this Kingdom before the
Reformation, is a prayer for the sixth of December, that by his merits and
prayers we may be freed from the fire of Hell. And of this nature numerous
instances may be given. And such like expressions concerning the Saints, and
applications to them, encroached so far upon our Saviors Intercession, and
being our Advocate, that with respect hereto, Cassander says of diverse of the
Romish Communion; Cassand. Consult. de mer. and interces. Sanctorum. They
pretend that they only desire their prayers. But 1. It is unknown to us, that
they know our desires.
advocationis Christi officio obscurato, Sanctos atque imprimis Virginem Mariam
in illius locum substituerunt, that the Office of Christ's Advocateship being
obscured by them, they substituted the Saints and principally the Virgin Mary
in his place.

4. But the most considerable men who write in defense of this practice
declare, that they only invocate the Saints to obtain the assistance of their
prayers, but First, If this was true, and no more was either intended by the
Church of Rome, or practiced by its members, yet there is no assurance that
particular Saints departed know our particular wants and supplications and
desires; and much more may they be unacquainted with that inward devoutness,
and pious temper of soul, which does qualify men for the obtaining the favor
of God, and his heavenly blessings. And a wise man would not think it
reasonable, to place any considerable dependence in a special case, upon the
care and assistance of such a friend, who is at a distance from him, and of
whom he has no sufficient ground of confidence, that he knows any thing either
of his need or of his special desire from him. The ways assigned by the
Romanists, to declare how the Saints departed are acquainted with things here
below, especially so far as to discern the special motions of the minds of all
particular persons, are but expressions of great words without evidence: and
the speculum Trinitatis may as well serve to show that the Angels in glory,
were from the beginning of their confirmation in happiness acquainted with all
things future, by seeing the face of our heavenly Father, (when yet our Lord
declares, they knew not the time of the day of Judgment) as that the Saints in
glory, have such a clear understanding of things and persons in this world. Now
if they understand not our requests and desires, supplications directed to
them, are not only imprudent, but an abuse of Religious Worship, by employing a
considerable portion of it, and of our devotion therein, about that which at
least signifies nothing, but is wholly useless, and to no purpose. And to
perform acts of Religion upon the uncertain supposition of this being true, (of
which we can have no certain knowledge, and there is much to be said against
it) is to show our selves too forward to run the hazard, of being guilty of
this miscariage.

5. And whereas God and his Gospel does instruct men, Our Religion gives no
direction for such prayers.
in the parts and duties of Religion, but has given neither direction nor
encouragement, to the invocation of Angels or Saints departed, or to perform
any Religious Worship to them; it is no duty incumbent on men, to make such
addresses to them; and in this case concerning the object of Religious worship,
it is not their due to receive, what is not our duty to perform. And we may
reasonably fear, lest God should account our giving such honor to those
glorified creatures in Heaven, as to acknowledge them to know the desires of
the hearts of men, and addressing our selves to them thereupon, to be a
misplacing that honor, which is only due to himself, and our blessed Savior;
and this might bring us under his displeasure. And when I consider, how
frequently the Apostle desires the prayers of the Christian Churches on earth,
and directs them to pray for one another, and to send to the Elders of the
Church, to obtain their prayers: I cannot but think, that he would have been as
forward to have directed Christians, to seek for the prayers of Saints departed
(of which he speaks nothing) if he had accounted that to be lawful and useful;
and from hence it may seem highly probable if not certain, that the Souls
departed, do not understand, and are not particularly affected, with the
requests and desires of men here below. Besides this, though I conceive holy
Angels may be frequently present in the Assemblies of the Christian Church, I
cannot think it allowable, though I had special assurance of their presence at
any particular time; to direct the acts of public worship in that case
sometimes to God and Christ and sometimes to them, in the same gesture of
adoration, and especially in the use of such words of address to the Angels,
(however they be understood) as may fitly be applied to Christ: For this would
give too much of that homage to the Servant, which is due unto the Lord.

6. (...) greatly honor the Saints departed.
But we who do not direct our prayers and Religious supplications to Saints
departed, have a high honor for them, endeavoring to follow their good
examples, praising God for them, and hoping to be hereafter with them in the
mansions of glory. And since their goodness and love is not diminished, but
increased by their departure, and they are still members of the same body, I
esteem them to have affectionate desires of the good of men upon Earth, and
especially of pious men, who are fellow members with them. And I account it one
great privilege that I enjoy, from the Communion of Saints, that by reason of
membership with the same body, I have an interest in the Religious
supplications of all the truly Catholic part, of the diffusive Church Militant
upon Earth, and in the holy Services of the triumphant part thereof in Heaven.
I can also willingly admit what Cyp. de Mortalitate, Magnus illic nos charorum
numerus expectat, parentum, fratrum, filiorum -- copiosa turba -- adhuc de
nostra salute sollicita.
S. Cyprian sometimes expresses, that departed friends have a particular
desire of the good of their surviving relations; and what in another place he
recommends Epist. 57. ad Cornel. The Papists do directly pray for blessings to
the Saints.
, that departing Christians continue their affectionate sense of, and prayers
for, the distressed part of the Church on Earth. But upon the foregoing
considerations, this will not warrant Religious addresses to be directed to
these Saints.

7. Secondly, The petitions used in the Romish Church, in their supplications
to the Saints, do plainly express more than their desiring them to pray for
them. I shall not insist on the high extravagances, in diverse Books of
Devotions, and in the Offices formerly used in some particular Churches, as
that in the Missale sec. usum Sarum to the Virgin Mary In Nativit. B. Matiae.
, Potes enim cuncta, ut mundi Regina, and jura Cum nato omnia decernis in
soecla, Thou can do all things as the Queen of the World, and thou with thy
Son determinest all rights for ever; which, with many expressions of as high a
nature, place a further confidence in the Saints, and expectation from them,
than merely to be helped by their prayers. But I shall instance in two or three
expressions, in the present Roman Breviary. They apply themselves to S. Peter,
Br. Romans Jun. 29. in Hymn.
Peccati vincula Resolve tibi potestate tradita, Qua cunctis coelum verbo
claudis, aperis; Loose the bonds of our sins, by that power which is delivered
to thee, whereby by thy word, thou shuttest and openest heavent to all men. And
to all the Apostles, they direct their prayers on this manner Br. Romans in
Commun. Apost. and in Festo S. Andr.
Qui coelum verbo clauditis, Serasque ejus solvitis, nos a peccatis omnibus
Solvite jussu quaesumus, Quorum praecepto subditur Salus and languor omnium,
Sanate aegros moribus, nos reddentes virtutibus; Ye who by your word do shut up
Heaven, and loose the bars thereof, we beseech you by your command loose us
from all our sins, ye to whose command the health, and the weakness of all is
subject, heal those who are sick in their life and practice, restoring us to
virtue. I am apprehensive, that many may think these instances the less
blameable, because the expressions of them have a manifest respect to the
commission and authority, which Christ gave to his Apostles, in the keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and the power of remitting and retaining sin: and the
other Apostles are here owned to have the power of the keys as well as S.
Peter. But that our Saviors Commission to them, referred wholly to the
Government of his Church upon Earth, is sufficiently manifest from those words
both to S. Peter, and to all the Apostles, whatsoever thou, or ye shall bind on
earth -- and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth. And though the Apostles are
eminently exalted in the glory of the other world; yet to acknowledge them in
Heaven, to acquit or condemn all men, and to receive them into Heaven, or
exclude them from it, by their command, and by that power, which is committed
to them, must include an owning them to be the full and complete Judges of the
quick and the dead.

8. And since the Romish Church asserts all their Bishops, to derive and enjoy
the same authority which was committed to S. Peter; and if this be not only an
authority upon earth, but in the future state; then all their deceased Popes
(and much to the same purpose may be urged concerning all Priests) must still
enjoy the same heavenly power, which they ascribe to S. Peter, though there is
great reason to fear, that diverse of themselves never entered into Heaven. To
these, other numerous instances might be added, of their prayers to the Blessed
Virgin, and to other Saints for grace, pardon, protection, and to be received
by them at the hour of death: and such instances have been largely and fully
produced, by some of the worthy Writers of our own Church, and Chamier, and
other Protestant Authors, and particularly by Chemnitius in his Examen Conc.
Trid.

9. But when Cardinal Bellarmine discoursed of these supplications to the
Saints, he particularly instanced in some, as that to the Virgin Mary, Tu nos
ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe; do thou defend us from the enemy,
and receive us at the hour of death; but will have them all to be understood,
as desiring only the benefit of their prayers. But because the words they use,
do not seem to favor this sense of his, he tells us Bellarm. de Sanct.
Beatitud. l. 1. c. 9.
Notandum est nos non agere de verbis, sed de sensu verborum; It must be noted
that we dispute not about the words themselves, but about the sense and meaning
of them. Now I acknowledge it fit, that words should be taken in their true
sense, being interpreted also with as much candor as the case will admit. Yet I
shall observe, 1. That it cannot well be imagined, that when they expressly
declare their hopes, of obtaining their petitions to the Saints, by their
command, and by their power which is committed to them, which is owned
sufficient for the performing these requests, as in the instances I mentioned,
no more should be intended, than to desire the assistance of their prayers; and
this gives just reason to suspect, that more is also meant in other expressions
and prayers, according to the most plain import of the words. 2. That though
some of the Doctors of the Roman Church, would put this construction upon the
words of their prayers; yet it is manifest the people understand them, in the
most obvious sense, so as to repose their main confidence upon the Saints
themselves and their merits. This may appear from the words I above cited, n.
3. from Cassander, who also tells us that Cass. Consu t. de Mer. and Interc.
Sanct.
homines non mali; men who were none of the worser sort, did choose to
themselves certain Saints for their Patrons, and in eorum meritis atque
intercessione, plus quam in Christi merito fiduciam posuerunt; they placed
confidence in their merits and intercession, more than in the merits of Christ.

10. The invocation of Saints and Angels will appear the more unaccountable, No
such practice in the Old Testament,
by considering what is contained in the holy Scriptures, and the ancient
practice of the Church of God. In the Old Testament there is no worshipping of
Angels directed, though the Law was given by their ministration, and that state
was more particularly subject to them, than the state of the Gospel is, as the
Apostle declares, Heb. 2.5. In the Book of Psalms, which were the Praises and
Hymns used in the public Worship of the Jews, there is no address made to any
departed Saint, or even to any Angel; though the Jewish Church had no advocate
with the Father in our nature, which is a peculiar privilege of the Christian
Church, since the Ascension of our Savior. That place in the Old Testament,
which may seem to look most favorably toward the invocation of an Angel. Genesis
48.16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads, is by many
ancient Christian Writers not understood of a created Angel. But however it is
to be observed that these words were part of the benediction of Jacob to the
Sons of Joseph. Now a benediction frequently does not exclude a prayer to the
thing or person spoken of, but a desire of the good expressed, with an
implicit application to God, that he would grant it. Thus in the next words,
Genesis 48.16. Let my name be named on them, and the name of my Fathers Abraham
and Isaac; which contain no prayer to the names of his Fathers, or to his own.
So Isaac blessed Jacob, Genesis 27.29. using these expressions, Let People serve
thee and Nations bow down unto thee. And this Clause of Jacob's Benediction is
well paraphrased by one of the Targ. Jonath. in Genesis 48.16.
Chaldee Paraphrasts, Let it be well pleasing before him (God) that the Angel,
etc. But the Holy Angels themselves declared against the giving to them any
acts of Worship, and refused to receive any such, both under the Old Testament,
Judge. 13.16, 17, 18. and the New, Rev. 19.10. chapter 22.9. Yea the Apostle
cautions against the worshipping of Angels, Col. 2.18. and the ancient Church
prohibited it by her Conc. Laodic. c. 35. nor in the New,
Canons.

11. And in the Gospel God himself whose right it is to direct and appoint in
whose name we should approach unto him, has directed us to come to him, in the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and has encouraged us thereto, by promising
that what we so ask he will give, Joh. 16.23, and that our Lord himself will do
what we so ask, Joh. 14.13, 14. And that Christ is able to save to the
uttermost those that come unto God by him, and he ever lives to make
intercession for them Heb. 7.25. And what further encouragement need be given
or desired? But not a word is spoken, to direct us to any deceased Saint, or to
any Angel, to make any of them our Intercessor. And this is the great
encouragement proposed to us in approaching to God, that having a great
High Priest who is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, and who can
be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, we may come boldly to the
Throne of Grace, Hebr. 4.14, 15, 16, and that if any Man sin we have an
Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the Righteous 1 John 2.1. And in the
Precepts our Savior gives, to guide our Prayer and Worship, he directs us to
referr them only to God, Matt. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
him only shall thou serve; and Luke 11.2. when ye pray, say, Our Father which
art in Heaven.

12. And though S. Stephen suffered Martyrdom in a short time after our
Savior's Ascension; and S. James (whose Martyrdom Annal. Eccl. an. 44. n. 2.
Baronius places in the forty fourth year of Christ) and the Blessed Virgin
also in all probability, died before the writing of any part of the New
Testament: nor in the Primitive Church.
Yet in all the New Testament where there are such frequent expressions of
praying to and calling upon God, with Supplications to our Blessed Savior,
there is not the least intimation of any adoration, or invocation, to these
eminent Saints or any others who were departed. And yet S. Paul assures us,
that some of the Brethren who were Witnesses of our Savior's Resurrection were
fallen asleep before the time of his writing the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.6. And it has been at large observed, and proved by
sufficient evidence, that no genuine Writer of the first Centuries has any
thing in him to express or favor invocation of Saints. This is showed by in
Letter of Invocation of Saints.
the Bishop of Lincoln, for the first three hundred years, and Voss. These.
Theol. Disp. 10.
Vossius speaks of three hundred and seventy. After which time, some
expressions were used, which made way for this practice; but yet no such thing
was brought into any public Liturgy, for some hundred years after.

13. It may be here added, that if we consider the Saints they invocate, Of the
Canonization of Saints.
besides what Objections may be made against particular Persons, it may be
noted, that the general Worship given to Saints, has respect to all those who
are Canonized by the Roman Bishop: And there is no sufficient reason to believe
that all such are truly Saints. The form of Canonization declares the Person
canonized Sacr. Cerem.
ut Sanctum a Christi fidelibus venerandum, that he is to be worshipped of
Christians as a Saint. That none may receive public adoration but they who are
canonized by the Pope, is owned by De Sanct. Beat. c. 19.
Bellarmine; who also declares, that ib. c. 9.
it is to be believed, that the Pope does not err in Canonizing. But he who
believes the truth of this, must frame an higher notion of the Papal
Infallibility than that Cardinal has given us. For he tells us de Romans Pont.
l. 4. c. 2.
it is a thing agreed betwixt Catholics and Heretics, that the Pope as Pope
and joined with all his Council, may err in matters of Fact, and such as depend
on the information and testimony of men. He tells us indeed in the same place,
that in propounding matters of Faith, or enjoining rules of Duty and Practice,
he cannot err. But since no matter of Fact is more liable to mistake, than to
discern whether a person be eminently and sincerely holy or no; especially as
they proceed in the Church of Rome, where the Testimonies concerning their
working Miracles are of great moment in this case; it may therefore according
to the Cardinals own position, be thought at least doubtful, whether the Pope
may not mistake in judging a Man to be truly a Saint, and then it may seem hard
to believe, that all must needs be Saints whom he declares to be such by
Canonization.

14. Of denying the Cup in the Eucharist to the Laity,
A Second Instance I shall here consider, is, That they at Rome debarr the
people of the Cup in the Holy Communion, which was manifestly one part of that
Holy Sacrament, as it was instituted, and commanded to be received, by our
Savior. And therefore this contains an Opposition to what was established by
Christ. In the Church of Rome, both the Laity and the Clergy (except in
ordinary Communions, only the person consecrating or, as they speak the
conficient Priest) receive only the one element in the Eucharist, and not the
other of the Cup. And though the Council of Sess. 22. in fin.
Trent wholly waved the determining this Question, concerning the Cup, Whether
it might be granted to any of the Laity? And referred this wholly to the
prudence of the Pope, who has still continued the former use in one kind; yet
that Council freely declared their sense, concerning the Doctrines and Rules of
Duty, referring to the Sacrament. Here it declares, that Sess. 21. c. 1.
the Laity and the Clergy, who do not consecrate, are obliged by no Divine
Precept to take the Eucharist in both kinds, and that it cannot be doubted
salva fide, but that the Communion in one kind, is sufficient to Salvation; and
that whole Christ and the true Sacrament is taken under either kind alone, and
therefore they who so receive, are deprived of no grace necessary to Salvation.
And they so declare these things, with others concerning the Sacrament, that if
any person shall speak contrary thereto, even to say that the Catholic Church
was not moved by just (or sufficient) reasons, in ordering the Laity and Clergy
who do not consecrate, to communicate only under the Species of bread, he shall
be under an Anathema; and they also forbid all Christians for the future -- ne
de iis aliter credere audeant; that they do not dare to believe otherwise of
these things. But that which is here to be enquired and examined is, Whether
the Sacrament of the Eucharist ought not according to the institution of Christ
and by his authority, to be administered in both kinds?

15. That Christ did institute this Sacrament, against Christ's Institution:
in both kinds of Bread and Wine, is so plain from the words of its
Institution, that this is acknowledged in the Ubi sup. c. 1.
Council of Trent. And that he gave a particular command to all Communicants to
receive the Cup, seems plainly owned in one of the Hymns of the Roman Church.
Sacris, etc. in Brev. To. in festo Corp. Christ.
Dedit fragilibus corporis ferculum, Dedit and tristibus sanguinis poculum,
Dicens, Accipite quod trado vasoulum, Omnes ex eo bibite. Sic Sacrificium istud
instituit. He gave the entertainment of his body to the Frail, to the Sad he
gave the Cup of his blood, saying, Take this Cup which I deliver, drink ye all
of it. Thus did he institute that Sacrifice. These expressions have a
particular respect to that Command concerning the Cup, Matt. 26, 27. Drink ye
all of it. And it may be further observed, that those words in the Institution,
Do this in remembrance of me, are a Precept, which has special respect to the
receiving both the kinds, both the Bread and the Cup. For though I acknowledge
these words, Do this, to establish the whole Institution, that as Cyp. Ep. 63.
S. Cyprian expresses their sense, ut hoc faciamus quod fecit and Dominus, --
and ab eo quod Christus and docuit, and fecit, non recedatur; that we should do
what our Lord did, and should not depart from what Christ taught and did: Yet
these words have a more especial regard to the distribution or participation of
the Sacrament. For Do this, etc. in S. Luke, and S. Paul, comes in the place of
take, eat, etc. in S. Matt. and S. Mark: and in these words of S. Paul, Do this
as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me; the words, as often as ye drink it,
do plainly import thus much, that the Command do this, in that place, does
peculiarly respect the receiving the Cup.

16. This Institution of Christ was anciently even in the Church of Rome,
acknowledged to be so fair a Rule to all Christians, that from hence de
Consecrat. di. 2. c. 7. Cum omne.
Pope Julius undertook to correct the various abuses, which had in some places
been entertained: Insomuch that he declares against delivering the Bread dipped
in the Cup; upon this reason, because it is contrary to what is testified in
the Gospels, concerning the Master of truth, who when he commended to his
Apostles, his Body and his Blood, Seorsum panis, seorsum and calicis
commendatio memoratur; his Recommendation of the Bread and of the Cup is
related to be each of them separate and distinct. And that the Apostolical
Church did give the Cup to the Laity, is plain from the Apostles words to the
Corinthians, where he uses this as an Argument, to all particular Christians,
against communicating in any Idolatrous Worship, 1 Cor. 10.21. ye cannot drink
the Cup of the Lord and the Cup of Devils: And the same will appear manifest
from other expressions hereafter mentioned. And the Council of Trent Sess. 21.
c. 2.
owns, that from the beginning of Christianity, the Sacrament was given in both
kinds. But they following much the steps of the Council of Constance, account
neither the Institution of Christ, nor the practice of the ancient Church, to
be in this case any necessary guide, but they declare, the custom then
received, to be changed upon just reasons.

17. But that the Argument from the Institution and Command of Christ, might be
eluded, and a Mist cast before the Sun, diverse Romanists, and particularly de
Euchar. l. 4. c. 25. which binds all Communicants.
Bellarmine, declare, that Christ's command, drink ye all of it, was given to
the Apostles only, and not to all Communicants. To which I answer 1. That the
Apostles, at the time of the Institution of this Sacrament, were not
consecrating, but communicating; and therefore the Command given to them, as
receiving the Sacrament, is a rule for Communicants, Which binds all
Communicants.
and can by no reason be restrained to the consecrating Priest: And indeed the
ancient Church made no such distinction in this case, between Priest and
People, but acknowledged, as Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in 2 Epist. ad Corinth.
S. Chrysostom expresses it, that the same Body is appointed for all, and the
same Cup: And agreeable hereunto are the Articles of the Church of England,
which declare Art. 30.
that both the parts of the Lord's Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance and
Commandment, ought to be ministered to all Christian men alike. 2. That this
device would serve as effectually (if it were considerable) to take away the
Bread, with the Cup, from the people, that so no part of Christ's Institution
should belong to them. 3. The Command of Christ, with the reason annexed, Matt.
26.27, 28. Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the New Testament, which
is shed for many for the Remission of Sins; does give sufficient light to
discern, to whom this Precept is designed; to wit, to all them, who desire to
partake in the Communion of the blood of the New Testament, for the Remission
of sins, and that is to all Communicants in that Sacrament. 4. S. Paul 1 Cor.
11.25, 26. plainly applys Christ's Command, concerning the Cup, to all who come
to the Holy Communion; in that after the rehearsal of that part of the
Institution, concerning the Cup, he immediately says to the Corinthians, For as
often as yet eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till
he come. And he re-inforceth this Command of partaking of the Cup, indefinitely
to all who are to Communicate, v. 28. Let a Man (not only the Priest) examine
himself, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup.

18. But here, the Council of Trent acquaints us with a claim of the Churches
authority and power in the Sacrament Ubi sup. c. 2.
in dispensatione Sacramentorum, salva illorum substantia, statuere, vel
mutare; to appoint and change things, in dispensing the Sacraments, still
preserving their substance. And they seem to intimate, that the Communion in
both kinds, No power of the Church can take away the Cup from the People.
is not of the substance of the Sacrament, because whole Christ and all
necessary grace is contained under one kind. But 1. If by being of the
substance of the Sacrament, we mean all that is enjoined by Christ's Precept,
and is necessary for the right administration of the Sacrament, according to
his Institution: The use of both kinds is proved to be of this nature; and
therefore to change this, is not within the Churches authority. 2. They may as
well say, that whole Christ is in one kind, and therefore there needs no
consecration of the Cup, as that therefore there needs no distribution: And so
the Cup may be wholly rejected, with as much Piety, as the Laity are now
deprived of it. 3. What is contained in the Sacrament, is contained in it
according to the Will of Christ, and his Institution; and thereby the Bread is
the Communion of the body of Christ, and the Cup is the Communion of the blood
of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. And Ration. l. 4. c. 54. n. 13.
Durandus did truly assert, that the blood of Christ is not Sacramentally in
the Host; because the Bread signifies the Body, and not the Blood. So he with
somewhat more to this purpose. And this is the more considerable, because in
the Holy Eucharist, the death of Christ is represented, and in the Cup, his
Blood, as shed. And Gelasius, who was once Bishop of Rome, when he heard that
some received the Bread only and not the Cup, declared what then it seems was
Catholic Doctrine at Rome, that they must either receive the whole Sacrament,
or be rejected from the whole, because de Consec. Did. c. 2. comperimus.
divisio unius ejusdem mysterii sine grandi Sacrilegio non potest provenire;
the dividing one and the same Sacrament cannot be without grand Sacrilege.
Which words contain a more full and plain censure of what since his time is
practiced in the Church of Rome, than can be evaded by the strained and
frivolous Interpretations, either of Gratian, of Binius, or Baronius. And we
have also much greater authority than his: For besides what I have above
mentioned, this use of the Cup was part of what S. Paul received of the Lord,
and delivered to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.23-25. and it was matter of praise
in the Corinthians, that they kept the ordinances as he delivered them, v. 2.

19. And what is asserted in the Council of Trent, that the Church had just
reason, to order the Communion in one kind; and what others say, that it is
more profitable to Christians, and contains an honor and reverence to that
Ordinance; must suppose that their wisdom is greater than our Savior's, who
did not know or consider, with so much prudence as they do, what is fit to be
appointed, and established in his Ordinance. And since the Holy Ghost declared,
both the Bread and the Cup to be appointed to show forth Christ's death till he
come, 1 Cor. 11.26. they must therefore be both used to this purpose, until his
second coming, and then no power was left to any Church, to alter and change
this institution. And whilst some pretend reverence to God, and this Sacrament,
in taking away the Cup from the people, it would be considered, that there can
be no honor to God in acts of disobedience. But if pretenses of honoring God,
in acts of disobedience, could render actions commendable, Saul's Sacrificing
must have passed for a pious attempt, and the Doctrine of the Pharisees, for
the observing their vow of Corban, must have been esteemed a Religious
assertion.

20. A third Instance I shall consider; Of the propitiatory Sacrifice of the
Mass.
is their pretending to offer a proper expiatory Sacrifice, of the Body and
Blood of Christ in the Mass; which is derogatory to Christ's own Priestly
oblation, whereby he once offered himself a complete Sacrifice of expiation.
But the Sess 22. c. 2.
Council of Trent declares, that in the Mass is Sacrificium vere
propitiatorium, a truly propitiatory Sacrifice, and that it is offered both for
the sins, punishments and other necessities of the living Christians, and also
for the dead in Christ, who are not fully purged. And it pronounced an Anathema
against him, who shall say, in missa non offerri Deo verum and proprium
sacrificium; that in the Mass is not offered to God a true and proper
Sacrifice, or that it ought not to be offered for the quick and the dead. And
they declare it to be the very same Sacrifice which was offered upon the Cross.
And the Catech. ad paroch. jux dec. Trid. p. 247.
Roman Catechism says, that this Sacrifice of the Mass, does not only contain
an efficacious meriting, but a satisfying also; and even as Christ by his
passion did both merit and satisfy. So they who offer this Sacrifice do
satisfy. And the Council of Anath. 3.
Trent will have it offered for satisfactions.

21. Now it is acknowledged, that that perfect Sacrifice, which Christ himself
once offered, is lively represented and eminently commemorated in the holy
Communion, and the benefits thereof are there received by the worthy
Communicant: and on this account this Sacrament especially, is a Christian
Sacrifice in a large sense; The Eucharist how a Christian Sacrifice.
as that Jewish Feast was called the Passover, as it was a memorial and
representation of the original Passover, when the destroying Angel passed by
the Houses of the Israelites. And it may be called a Sacrifice, as it contains
the performance of such a chief part of service, and worship to God, as renders
them who do it aright, pleasing and acceptable to God. And therein we present
our selves to God, with our homage and oblations; and our praises, and
supplications, that we and the whole Church may obtain remission of sins, and
all other benefits of Christ's passion. And such great actions of Religion, are
in a more large sense, though not in a strict sense, frequently called
Sacrifices, both in the holy Scriptures, as in Psalm. 51.17. Romans 12.1. Phil.
4.18. Heb. 13.15, 16. 1 Pet. 2.5. and frequently in the Fathers, as may be
showed from Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus and diverse others.
But this sense is so far from satisfying the Council of Trent, that it
pronounces ubi sup.
an Anathema against him, who shall say, it is only a Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, or a commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, and
not a propitiatory Sacrifice.

22. Now that there is not, nor can be in the Sacrament, a proper Sacrificing
Christ's Body and Blood, to make expiation for the sins of men, may appear from
four Considerations.

Cons. 1. Christ's once offering himself a Sacrifice, Cons. 1. The Sacrifice of
the Mass derogates from the death and pussion of Christ,
was so complete, that it neither needs, nor admits of any reiterating, or that
this or any other propitiatory, or expiatory Sacrifices, should be again
offered. This is observed by the Apostle, to be one excellency of the Sacrifice
of Christ once offered, above the legal Sacrifices; that whereas by reason of
the imperfection of them, the Priests offered oftentimes the same Sacrifices,
Christ by one offering had fully perfected his work; and the Apostle therefore
expressly says, he should not offer himself often, Heb. 9.25, 26, 27, 28.
chap. 10.10-14. de Missa, l. 2. c. 4.
Bellarmine was so apprehensive, of the force and reasonableness of this
consideration, with respect to the Mass, and the frequent repetition thereof,
that he thought it necessary to assert, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is not
of infinite value; for says he, si missae valor infinitus esset, frustra
multae missae; if the value of the Sacrifice of the Mass was infinite, it would
be in vain that there should be many Masses. But he might also have discerned,
that upon the same reason, he would be obliged to acknowledge, in derogation
from the Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, and in opposition to the testimony
of the Scriptures, that that offering of the Sacrifice of Christ, which he
himself made in our nature, was but of a finite value, and not complete, so as
thereby to perfect for ever them who are sanctified; because if this had been
effected by that one offering, it would be in vain to have repeated offerings
of that Sacrifice.

23. But others of their Writers, entertain different notions and opinions from
this, and conclude Barrad. Concord. Evangel. Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 16.
that the merits of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist must be infinite, because
they are the same merits, with those of the Sacrifice upon the Cross. And this
must needs be so, according to the Council of Trent, which declares Sess. 22.
c. 2.
it to be the very same Sacrifice, which is now offered by the Priest, and
which was then offered upon the Cross, and differs only in the manner of
offering, and then its merit and virtue must be the same. Now this conception
of the value of the Sacrifice of the Eucharist, in asserting it to be so
completely propitiatory, does not only derogate from the Sacrifice of Christ,
which himself offered upon the Cross, but in truth it makes it so void, as to
take away any necessity thereof. For since our Lord instituted, and makes them
void.
and consecrated the Eucharist before his death; if he had therein offered
himself a complete expiatory Sacrifice, then the work of redemption and
expiation, must have been fully performed, before that great work of his
passion upon the Cross; and consequently his death upon the Cross, as a
Sacrifice must be in vain. This was Hist. Conc. Trident. p. 443 and 451.
again and again urged in the Council of Trent, by some whose apprehensions
were not agreeable to what that Council determined. Nor can it be otherwise
solidly answered, than by acknowledging, that our Lord when he instituted and
celebrated the Eucharist, did not in that action, properly offer himself a
propitiatory Sacrifice. And whereas in the Institution of the Eucharist, our
Savior spoke of his blood which is shed, not only diverse particular Writers of
the Romanists own the expression of the present tense, to denote what was
future, but soon to be accomplished; but even the Vulgar Latin, both in S.
Matthew and S. Luke, expresses it effundetur, shall be shed, to which agrees
the expressing the same in the Canon of the Mass. The like may be observed
concerning the phrase of his Body being given, or broken, which the Vulgar
Latin also in the words of the institution, 1 Cor. 11.24. renders tradetur,
shall be given. Nor is it either pious or reasonable to think, that the
Eucharist celebrated by an ordinary Priest, must be more properly and fully an
expiatory and propitiatory Sacrifice, than that which was celebrated by Christ
himself, in the first institution of it; when his act then was made the Rule to
guide theirs, by his giving this commandment, Do this in remembrance of me.

24. Cons. 2. Cons. 2. The body of Christ is not now capable of being
Sacrificed.
A proper Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood, is not now capable of being
offered, in the Eucharist. Indeed that Sacrament bears a particular respect
to the death of Christ, to his Body as broken, and his Blood as shed; and
therein his death is showed forth, 1 Cor. 11.26. But after his resurrection, he
dies no more; death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. And therefore
his Body as having been once really dead, and his Blood as once shed, may be
commemorated, and represented in the Eucharist. But there is now no exhibiting
his Body and Blood in that Sacrament really dead (which cannot be) and so
properly offered a Sacrifice to God. And the defenders of the Romish Sacrifice,
seem here to be put to a great loss.

25. In de Missa. l. 1. c. 2.
Bellarmin's definition of a Sacrifice, the last clause thereof declares that
the thing sacrificed, ritu mystico consecratur and transmutatur; is by a
mystical right consecrated and changed. And explaining the former of these, he
says, it must ex prophana fieri sacra; of a profane thing be made sacred, and
that Sacrificare is Sacrum facere. But though the elements of the Eucharist,
before the consecration may be called profane things, or not sacred, and so may
be consecrated by the Priest; the glorious body of Christ is capable of no such
thing. And explaining the latter clause, he says it must be changed, so, ut
destruatur, that it may be destroyed, or that desinat esse quod ante erat, that
it may cease to be what it was before: and this is as far from agreeing with
the uncorruptible body of Christ as the other; and therefore the Cardinal, in
making and explicating this definition, seems to have laid aside, or else to
have forgotten the interest he was to maintain.

26. And Conc. Evang. To ^. l. 3. c. 6.
Barradius acutely tells us, that immolatio, oblatio, and consumptio; staying,
offering and consuming, are the things essential to a Sacrifice; and he
undertakes so great an adventure, as to show, how all of them, even the first,
and the last, may be affirmed concerning the body of Christ in the Sacrifice of
the Mass. He says, that as a lamb is slain, when the blood is separated from
the body by a knife: Christ is here slain, when vi consecration is sanguis
Christi a Corpore Christi separatur; by force of the Consecration, the blood of
Christ is separated from the body of Christ. Now it is a thing very hard to be
conceived, how such a real division, and actual shedding of blood, should be
suffered by the incorruptible and glorious body of Christ; and it is yet more
difficult to conceive, how this can be reconciled with the Council of Trent,
which declares that after the Consecration Sess. 21. c. 3.
in the Sacrament of the Eucharist sub singulis speciebus totum atque integrum
Christum sumi, all and whole Christ is by the Communicants received under each
of the species, (which could not be done unless whole Christ was there) and
they anathematize him who shall say the contrary, which I suppose this Author
was not aware of.

27. With like nicety and trifling, he further says Barrad. ibid.
the Body and Blood of Christ are consumed by the Priest on the Altar, under
the species of Bread and Wine, because those species are consumed. Now it is
strange enough, to speak of the glorified body of Christ being consumed, which
is capable of no corruption: and it is yet more strange, that it should be
consumed by consuming the species, when it is not the subject of those species.
Surely it would be more rational to assert the mortality of the soul, and to
think it sufficiently proved, by the death of the body.

28. To avoid this difficulty, some steer another course, Coster Enchir. c. 9.
de Sacrificio Missae.
Costerus a third Jesuit, in a manner deserts the cause. He first gives such a
large description of a Sacrifice, as may agree to other acts of Divine worship.
But when he speaks of the nature of this Sacrifice, he declares it to be
representative of the passion and Sacrifice of Christ. He says indeed that
Christ is here offered, but then he says, Christ upon the Cross was truly
slain, by the real shedding his blood; but here is tantum illius mortis
repraesentatio, sub speciebus panis and vini, only a representation of his
death, under the species of Bread and Wine. Now though repraesentare be
sometimes observed to signify rem praesentem facere, to make the thing
present, as some learned men have observed, the sense of Costerus must be, what
we generally understand by representing; because he sometimes speaks of the
species representing the dead body of Christ, which cannot be by making it so;
and sometimes he declares, the Sacrifices of the Law to represent the death of
Christ, but not so excellently as the Eucharist. And concerning the effect of
this Sacrifice, ibid. p. 324, and 334.
he declares this difference, between that Sacrifice on the Cross, and this of
the Mass, that the former was offered to satisfy God, and pay the price for
the sins of the world, and all other needful gifts; but the latter is for the
applying those things, which Christ merited and procured by his death on the
Cross. And to this purpose again, Hoc efficitur per Missae Sacrificium, ut quod
perfecit Christus in cruce, id nobis singulis applicetur: illic pretium est
solutum pro peccatis omnibus, hic nobis impetratur hujus pretii applicatio.
Quod orationibus quoque in Ecclesia praestatur, quibus rogatur Deus, ut
efficiamur participes passionis Christi. This indeed, if it were the true
Doctrine of the Romish Church in this particular, would be a fairer account of
it, than either it self or others give. But in truth, this is so different from
the sense of the Council of Trent above expressed, that it seems to import,
that this Writer thought it hard to clear and defend the true sense of that
Church, and therefore chose to represent it under a disguise; and in this
Controversy in most things he comes nearer to the Protestant Doctrine, than
the Romish. We own such a representation of Christ's death in this Sacrament, as
consists with his real presence, in a Spiritual and Sacramental manner. We
acknowledge such a Relation between the Passion of Christ on the Cross, and the
Memorial of it, in this Sacrament, that the Communion of the body and blood of
Christ, and the benefits procured by his passion, are exhibited in this
Sacrament, and are therein by the faithful received. And we account the
elements of Bread and Wine, to be offered to God in this Sacrament, as an
oblation according to the ancient Church; since the setting apart and
consecrating the elements, is a separating them to God, and to his service; but
we do not look upon them, to make way for a proper propitiatory Sacrifice, in
the Eucharist. But I now pass from the consideration of the Sacrifice to
consider the Priest who is to offer it.

29. Cons. 3. The Sacrifice of Christ peculiar to his incommunicable Priesthood.
Cons. 3. It is peculiar to the Office of Christ's high Priesthood, after the
order of Melchisedec, to offer up himself to be a propitiatory Sacrifice: and
this high Priesthood is communicated to no other person besides himself. The
Sacrifice of our Savior, as Athan. cout. Arian. Orat. 3.
Athanasius says, has completed all, (...), being once made; and he adds,
Aaron had those who succeeded him -- (...), but our Lord having an high
Priesthood, which is not successive, nor passes from one to another, is a
faithful High Priest. And this was the Apostles Doctrine, Heb. 7. Now
Bellarmine says, de Mis. l. 1. c. 24.
no Catholics affirm, other Priests to succeed to Christ, but they are his
Vicars or suffragans in the Melchisedecian Priesthood, or rather his Ministers.
But here it must be considered, 1. That if they be Priests of such an order, as
can offer Christ himself, or the Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, to be a
Sacrifice of atonement and propitiation, they must be capable of performing all
the necessary rites of that Sacrifice. And one great rite thereof is, that as
the legal High Priest, in making an atonement, was to enter into the holy of
holies, with the blood thereof, so he who offers the great Sacrifice of
atonement, which is the Body and Blood of Christ, must enter into Heaven it
self, and there appear in the presence of God for us, presenting his Sacrifice
to God in that Holy place, Heb. 9.11, 12, 24. but this none but Christ himself
can do. 2. He who is a Priest, after the order of Melchisedec, must be a Priest
for ever, since the order of the Melchisedecian Priesthood does not admit
succession, as that of the Aaronical did, Heb. 7.3, 8, 17, 23, 24, 28. And
therefore such persons as succeed one another in their Office, cannot be of the
Melchisedecian Priesthood. 3. Since an High Priest is chiefly appointed, to
offer gifts or Sacrifices for sins, Heb. 5.1. chap. 8.3. and thereby to make
reconciliation, and execute other acts of his Office, in pursuance of his
Sacrifice; the offering that Sacrifice of reconciliation, for which he is
appointed, is a main part of his Office, and therefore not to be performed by
him, who has not the same Office. Wherefore since no man has that Office of
High Priesthood, which Christ himself has, none can make the same
reconciliation, by offering the same Sacrifice of atonement or propitiatory
Sacrifice.

30. But we are told in Catech. ad Paroch. de Euch. Sac. p. 249.
the Roman Catechism, that there being one Sacrifice on the Cross and in the
Mass, there is also one and the same Priest Christ, the Lord, and the Ministers
who sacrifice non suam sed Christi personam suscipiunt, they take upon them the
person of Christ, and they say not this is Christ's body, but this is my body.
Now if these words should intend more, than that the Minister acts by Christ's
authority (who has given to none, authority to be High Priests, or Priests, of
that order which himself is) and that it is the person of Christ who offers,
and not of the Minister, then indeed there is a fit Priest for the Sacrifice.
But then it must be proved, which can never be, that Christ in his own person
undertakes this Office in every Mass; and then it must also be granted, that no
man in the Church of Rome can pretend any more to offer this Sacrifice, than he
can pretend to be the person of Christ.

31. Wherefore de Mis. l. 2. c. 4.
Bellarmine gives us their sense, to this purpose: The Sacrifice of the Mass is
offered by Christ, by the Church, and by the Minister, but in a different
manner; Christ offers it by a Priest, a man, as his proper Minister; the Church
offer, as the people offer by their Priest; so Christ offers by an inferior,
the Church by a superior; the Minister offers as a true, but ministerial
Priest. Now this pretends an authority from Christ, but the Office of
performing this Sacrifice to be in the Priest. And to this purpose the Council
of Trent, Sess. 22.
both declares Christ to have commanded his Apostles, and their successors in
the Priesthood, that they should offer this Sacrifice; and also bestow one of
their rash Anathema's on him who shall say, that Christ did not make his
Apostles Priests, or did not ordain, that they should offer his Body and Blood,
when he said, Do this in remembrance of me. But as there is no expression in
these words of Christ, or any other, to show that he instituted his Apostles
and their Successors to be such Priests, as to offer a proper propitiatory
Sacrifice; so it appears, that the state of the Gospel does not admit of any
person, but only Christ himself, to offer his own Body and Blood, as a proper
and complete propitiatory Sacrifice; since none else are or can be of that
Office of Priesthood, to which it belongs to offer this Sacrifice, nor is any
other capable of performing the necessary Rites thereof.

32. Cons. 4. The great effects of Christ's Sacrifice cannot be attributed to
any repeated Sacrifice.
Cons. 4. The great benefits from the merits of Christ's Sacrifice, are wholly
procured by that one offering of himself, when he died and gave himself a
Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor, and now lives for ever to pursue the ends
thereof. And therefore there neither can, nor need be any other propitiatory
Sacrifice of Christ's Body and Blood. For that Sacrifice of Christ which was
offered by himself, and made satisfaction for sin, did thereby obtain the
grace, and gave a complete and abiding sanction to the terms of the Gospel
Covenant, that through his name, all who believe, and obey, may through his
mediation receive remission of sins, and all other blessings of the Covenant.
Now the Eucharist as a Sacrament confirms the benefits of this Covenant, and
exhibits the blessings thereof. But the Eucharist cannot now, since the death
of Christ, give such a Sanction and establishment to the new Covenant, that
from it that Covenant should receive its sureness and validity, as it did from
Christ's real Sacrifice; nor are any new terms of grace, superadded to that.
But the validity of the new Covenant is supposed, in the administration of the
Eucharist. And Christ's own offering, obtained to himself that high exaltation,
whereby he can give repentance and remission of sins, and is a continual
Intercessor and Advocate, and therefore lives to execute his own last Will and
Testament, and to bestow the benefits of that propitiatory Sacrifice, which he
has offered. Now these which were the great things procured by his Sacrifice,
have such a peculiar respect to his own offering himself, that it is impossible
they should have any dependence upon any after-celebration of the Eucharist;
especially when this Sacrament must have its virtue from that new Covenant
established, and from the exaltation of Christ. And since by that Sacrifice,
Christ is a propitiation for the sins of the whole World, there is need of no
renewed expiatory Sacrifice, to extend or apply the benefits thereof to
particular persons, which is sufficiently done in the Eucharist as a Sacrament,
and in other Ministerial administrations, dispensing in Gods name and by his
authority, the blessings of the new Covenant to pious penitent and believing
persons.

33. I might here also observe, that Barrad. Conc. Evang. Tom. 4. l. 3. c. 16.
some of the Romanists themselves declare, that Christ does not merit in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, because the state of heavenly Glory in which he is,
excludes merit; but here are presented to God, the infinite merits of his death
on the Cross. Now if this be true, (and the reason given for it is not
inconsiderable) it must needs exclude any propitiatory Sacrifice from the
Eucharist. But I shall further observe, that those admirable acts of the
obedience of Christ, in the wonderful humiliation of his life and death, and
submitting himself according to his Fathers will, to suffer even the death of
the Cross, were of high value, for the making his propitiatory Sacrifice, which
himself offered, available in the sight of God, to procure his blessing to man.
But now since our Lord sits at Gods right hand, there is no such further
humiliation (nor need there be, since what he once did, was of such unspeakable
merit and worth) to give any new merits of like nature, to renewed proper
propitiatory Sacrifices. But the merits of his life and death are of infinite
and sufficient virtue. And whereas Christ neither appointed that there should
be, nor declared that there is, any proper propitiatory Sacrifice in the
Eucharist, he who can think against plain evidence, that in the first
celebration of the Eucharist, Christ offered himself a proper propitiatory
Sacrifice; and consequently that he died really, the night before he was
crucified, and was dead when his Disciples heard him speak, and conversed with
him alive; has a mind and belief, of a fit size to receive this and several
other strange Doctrines of the Church of Rome. But besides what I have here
said, if Transubstantiation be a Doctrine contrary to truth, of which I shall
discourse in the Sect. 4. n. 14-25.
next Section, the foundation of the Proper Propitiatory Sacrifice is thereby
removed.

34. Of additional Doctrines in the Church of Rome.
To these Instances I may further add, that the Romish Church superadding to
the Christian Religion many new Doctrines, as necessary points of Faith, does
hereby also derogate from the authority of our Savior. For this casts a
disparagement upon his revelation. Christ and his Apostles made a full
declaration of the Christian Doctrine, insomuch that whosoever shall teach any
other Doctrine, is under the Apostolical Anathema, Gal. 1.8, 9. which Cont.
lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 6.
S. Austin extends so far, as to apply that Anathema to him, whosoever he be,
who shall teach any thing concerning Christ or his Church, or any matter of
faith, or rule of Christian life, which is not contained in the Scriptures. But
there was nothing taught in the Apostolical Doctrine, to assert or give any
countenance to the Popes infallibility, or his Universal Supremacy; to the
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, to the Doctrine of Purgatory, Invocation of
Saints, and many other things now delivered as points de fide in the Church of
Rome, of which diverse are mentioned in this Chapter. And these new matters of
faith, have so altered and changed the ancient Christian Religion, that with
these mixtures, it is very unlike what was declared by Christ and his Apostles.

35. The Council of Trent declares their Sess. 4. c. 1. All these under the
name of Traditions made equal with the Scripture,
receiving the holy Scripture, and their Traditions to be pari pietatis affectu
and reverentia; with the like pious affection and reverence. Indeed it calls
these Traditions, such as were from the mouth of Christ, or were dictated by
the Holy Ghost, and received in the Catholic Church. But since after their
declaring thus much, and expressing the Canon of the Scripture, with the
additional Books received in the Romish Church, they tell us that this was
done, that all men might know, what foundation they would proceed on, in their
confirming Doctrines and reforming manners; it is manifest, that all Doctrines
of Faith or practice, delivered in that Council, which are not contained in the
Scriptures, are reputed to be such Traditions, as are of equal authority with
the Scriptures. And in the Form. Juram. an. 1564.
Bull of Pius the Fourth, many of these Doctrines are particularly expressed,
and in the end of it an hearty acceptance is declared, of all things defined in
the Council of Trent, and it is added that this is the true Catholic faith,
extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, out of which no man can be saved. And this
all who have cure of souls, and preferments in the Church, must own by their
solemn Oath and Vow. And yet how little that Council in its Decisions, kept to
the true Rules of Catholic Tradition, is sufficiently evident from what they
at this very time declared, concerning the Canon of the Scripture: for their
taking into the Canon several of those Books which we account Apocryphal, has
been plainly proved by Bishop Cosins, to be contrary to the Universal Tradition
of the Church.

36. And if no man may with honesty, and above it.
add any thing to a man's Deed or Covenant, as if it were contained therein, how
great a crime is it to deal thus with Gods Covenant? But the Church of Rome not
only equals her Traditions (containing many new points of Faith) with the
Scriptures, and what is the true Christian Doctrine, but it really sets them
above the Holy Scriptures, though they be in many things contrary thereunto.
For they make Tradition such a Rule for the Scripture, that it must signify no
more than Tradition will allow. Sect. IV.
And to this purpose their In Bull. pii 4.
Clergy swear, to admit the Scriptures according to that sense, which the holy
Mother the Church has held, and does hold; who is to judge of the true sense
of Scripture. And hereby they mean the Church of Rome, there called the Mother
of all Churches.

SECT. IV.
Of the public allowance or injunction of such things amongst the Papists, as
either debase the Majesty of God, or give divine honor to something else
besides God.
THose things deserve to be condemned as greatly evil, which debase the Majesty
of God, or deprive him of that peculiar Glory and Worship, which is due to him
alone; and they who practice or uphold such things, ought to be esteemed as
evil doers in an high degree. Honor, which, in a suitable measure, belongs to
every Superior, as to a Father or a Prince, in the highest measure of it, is
proper to God; and that reverence which is due to him, is necessary to be
reserved solely for him, both from the rules of Justice and Piety, and also
because God is in this respect a Jealous God.

2. 1. Images of the Deity are used by the Papists
But, First, It is an abasing the Majesty of God, to represent the glorious,
infinite, and invisible God, who is a pure Spirit, by a material Image. This is
frequently and publicly practiced in the Church of Rome, and is there allowed
and defended by many of its Writers. De Eccl. Triumph. c. 8.
Cardinal Bellarmine has one Chapter on purpose to prove, Non esse
prohibitas-imagines Dei, that Images of God are not prohibited; and he cites
Cajetan, Catharinus, and others, as defending the same; and one chief argument,
which he uses to prove this, is Ex usu Ecclesiae, from the usage of the
Church. And he there declares, jam receptae sunt fere ubique ejusmodi imagines,
that now such Images are almost every where received; and that it is not
credible, that the Church would universally tolerate any unlawful thing: Where
he also declares, that these were approved both in the second Council of Nice,
and in the Council of Trent. But the making an Image of the true God, stands
condemned in the holy Scriptures, even in the Second Commandment, against the
Divine Law.
Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image -- thou shall not bow down to
them nor worship them. And that the Divine Law does not only forbid the Images
of a false God, or an inferior Deity, but such also as were intended to
represent the true God, is manifest from Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16. Take good heed to your
selves (for you saw no manner of similitude, in the day the Lord spoke unto you
in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire) lest ye corrupt your selves, and make
you a Graven Image, the similitude of any figure, or the likeness of Male or
Female. And this Command is the more to be considered, because of that
emphatical caution, which is used by way of Preface thereto.

3. It was one of the heinous sins, which generally prevailed in the Pagan
World, that they changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God, into an Image made
like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, etc. Romans 1.23. This is agreeable to the
Pagan practice.
And though I charge not the Roman Church, with running parallel to the Pagan
Idolatry; yet this disparaging the Divine Being, by setting up visible Images
and Representations thereof, and giving Worship to them under that relation,
was one of the great Miscarriages of the Gentiles, and yet the chief part at
least of the Gentiles, did not think these very Images to be the proper Beings
of their Gods. For besides their acknowledgment of the Wisdom, Purity,
Goodness, and Power of the Deity, which many Testimonies produced by Justin
Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, and other Christian Writers do express,
there was also retained amongst them, such Notions concerning the Deity, as to
acknowledge God to be incorporeal. It is observed by Cont. Cells. l. 1. p. 13.
Origin, that Numenius, a Pythagorean Philosopher, had enumerated those Gentile
Nations, who asserted God to be an Incorporeal Being. And that great expression
of Euripides is very plain, wherein he calls God, one who sees all things, but
himself is invisible Cl. Alex. Adm. ad Gent.
(...). And agreeable to this, is the expression of Orpheus, that no Mortal
sees God, but he sees all.

4. No such thing in the Primitive Church.
The Primitive Christians not only had no Images of God, as appears from
various expressions of Origin, Minutius Felix, and other Writers of those Ages;
but they also greatly condemned any such thing. The ancient Council of Conc.
Elib. c. 36.
Elvira took care, ne quod colitur and adoratur, in parietibus depingatur, that
that Being which is worshipped and adored should not be painted upon walls;
which words must needs forbid and condemn the making Images of God. And
Eusebius speaking of representing the Divine Being by dead matter, says Praep.
Evang. l. 3. c. 7.
, (...); what can offer more violence to reason? And when he spoke of the soul
of man being the Image of God, as being rational, immaterial, immortal, and not
subject to hurt and force, and that no Figure or Image could be made of this,
he adds, ibid. c. 10.
(...); who can be so mad as to think, that the most high God may be
represented by an Image made like to a man?

5. Some Romanists are not willing to own this general practice.
But in the Church of Rome, the Blessed Trinity is frequently pictured, and
represented by an Image. And though this be a common and public practice, yet
some of the Romanists are so unwilling, either to defend, or to acknowledge it;
that they deny their having any Images of the Trinity. To this purpose Enchir.
c. 11. Nulla igi^ur ratione dicendum est Christ anos vel colere vel asservare
Sanctae Trinitatis vel Patris vel Spiritus Sancti imagines.
Costerus having showed from the Scripture, that nothing can resemble God,
adds, It must therefore upon no account be said, that Christians do either
worship or keep the Images of the holy Trinity, or of the Father, or of the
Holy Ghost. And, says he, when the Father is painted, as the ancient of days,
this is not the image of the Father, but a representation of the vision of
Daniel, or of S. John; and the Dove that is painted, is not the image of the
Holy Ghost; but of that Dove, in which at Jordan the Holy Ghost descended. And
to the same purpose speaks an English Catechism, said to be Printed at Doway.
But though these Writers are not willing to defend, but would rather conceal,
what is allowed by their Church in this matter; the frequent use of the
Pictures of the three persons of the Trinity all together, and where there is
no decyphering of these visions, will not admit that account they give thereof.

6. Whereof De Eccles. Triumph. c. 8.
Bellarmine, who as I above showed, freely acknowledges the practice, of
making Images of God, does as plainly assert it to be allowable, Licet pingere
imaginem Dei Patris, etc. It is lawful to paint the Image of God the Father in
the form of an Old Man; and of the Holy Ghost in the form of a Dove. And the
Council of Sess. 25. Images of God approved by the Council of Trent.
Trent, which in its last Session coucheth several things under few words,
expresses its allowance of the picturing God, when it orders the people to be
taught, that the Divinity is not to that purpose represented in a figure, as if
it could be seen by bodily eyes, or could be expressed by colors and figures.

7. But such representations are wholly unlike to the infinite and immense
Divine Nature, They are unsuitable to the Divine Nature,
in which are the perfections of wisdom, power, goodness, truth and purity, and
other such like. And where these spiritual excellencies are in a considerable
degree, there is indeed a true partaking of the Divine Image, and a likeness to
God. But the resembling him by a corporeal Image is the making a false, and a
low and mean representation of God, which abateth that high reverence, which is
due to his Majesty. And what finite material thing can be thought like to him,
who is so infinitely above all things, of whom the Prophet Esaias says, Isaiah
40.18. To whom will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him?
And if a man would think himself injured, if he be represented in the shape or
form of another Being, far inferior to his nature; how great an offense may it
well be to the Glorious God, to be pictured against his express command, in the
shape of an old man?

8. The Catech. ad Paroch. de Decal. pr. Praecepto.
Roman Catechism observes two ways, whereby the Majesty of God is greatly
offended by Images; the one, if Idols and Images be worshipped as God, and the
other, if any shall endeavor to make the form, or shape of the Divinity, as if
it could be seen by bodily eyes; and proves by the Scripture, that such a
figure of God neither can be made, nor may be lawfully attempted. And it
further acknowledges, that God to the intent he might wholly take away
Idolatry, imaginem divinitatis ex quavis materia fieri prohibuit; did forbid
the Image of the Deity to be made of any matter whatsoever; and that the wise
Lawgiver did enjoin, ne divinitatis imaginem fingerent, that they might not
frame an Image of the Deity, and give the honor of God to a Creature. But
after all this it requires, that no man should think there is any offense
against Religion, when any person of the most Holy Trinity, is expressed by
certain signs or figures, under which they appeared in the Old Testament or in
the New: and it is there said, that this is done to declare their properties or
actions; as according to the vision of Daniel, the representation of the
ancient of days, with the Books open, shows the eternity and wisdom of God.

9. and unfit to represent the Attributes of God.
But the Divine Attributes and perfections are so infinite and spiritual, that
they are as incapable of being represented by an Image as his nature is. And
the shape of an old man does directly express nothing of Wisdom or Eternity:
and such conceptions as may be suggested, by the sight of such a Picture, are
very imperfect and below the Divine excellency; since such a Being as is so
represented, is infirm and decaying, and become unfit for action, and can see
but a little way before him, and also is of such a nature, as is stained and
infected with sin. And if such pretended defective resemblances, of the
properties of God, could be a sufficient defense, for the making Images of the
Deity, the Pagans might then be justified in many of their Images, who spoke
more on their behalf than all this comes to. For besides what perfections the
figures of their Images might darkly express, it was pleaded by in Eus. pr.
Evang. l. 3. c. 7.
Porphyry on their behalf, that as to the matter of their Images, they framed
them of Crystal, Marble, Gold, and such like pure Metals, because the Divine
Being is not capable of being stained, (...), Gold does not admit of any
defilement or corruption. And that which represents the purity, excellency and
incorruption of the Divine Nature (if it were done worthy of God) has respect
to none of the least Divine perfections.

10. And concerning the Argument, The forms under which God appeared in vision,
or otherwise, in the Old Testament or the New, were not resemblances of his
Being, but testimonies of his more special presence at that time and place.
made use of from the visions in the Scriptures, or the appearances, under
which God manifested his presence to men, as the Holy Ghost descended in a
bodily shape, like a Dove, Luke 3.22. and the ancient of days, is intended to
signify God, Dan. 7.9. it is to be considered, that these appearances (the one
in vision, and the other in plain view) with others, were not representations
of the Divine nature, as if that was like to these things, or might be pictured
by them; but they were extraordinary testimonies, visibly evidencing a more
eminent, and signal presence of God, at that time, and place. And of this
nature was also the bush burning and not consumed, the pillar of cloud and
fire, that led the Israelites; the darkness, blackness and tempest on Mount
Sinai; the Cloud on the Mercy-seat; and that which sometimes filled the
Tabernacle and the Temple, as at the first Consecration of each of them. Such
also was the appearance of fiery cloven tongues, which sat on the Apostles, at
the descent of the Holy Ghost, and the fire which often came down from Heaven,
upon the Sacrifices, in testimony of Gods acceptance. All these were
manifestations of a more special presence of God, but none of them were
intended to express any such likeness of the Deity, that it should be lawful to
picture it in that figure. And those words I above mentioned, Deuteronomy. 4.15. Ye
saw no manner of similitude in the day the Lordspake unto you in Horeb, out of
the midst of the fire, do sufficiently show, that though there was an
extraordinary, and particular presence of God, manifested in the fire, upon
Mount Sinai; the appearance of that fire, out of which the Lord spoke, was far
from being intended to be any similitude of God, or to give us a liberty to
make any similitude of him whatsoever. And if any Image of God should be
pretended to be of like nature with those appearances now mentioned, so as to
contain a peculiar testimony of the signal presence of God in them; this would
render them the more manifestly Idolatrous.

11. But besides this, de Eccl. Triumph. l. 2. c. 8.
Cardinal Bellarmine urges, for the lawfulness of resembling God in the figure
of a man, that Angels are painted though they be incorporeal; and that the
Scripture speaks of his hands, face, feet, and attributes to him all the parts
of a man, when it speaks of his standing, sitting and walking. Of the Picturing
of Angels,
To which I Answer, 1. The picturing of an Angel, if it be only done to suggest
to our minds, some general notice of an Angel, or to put us upon framing a
conception of that Being, is a thing which may be allowed. But if a glorious
Angel should be purposely presented to us, as an object for our great honor,
under such a representation as is usual in the picturing an Angel, he would be
much misrepresented thereby, to the disadvantage of the excellencies of his
nature. But yet there would not that great injury be done to the Angel thereby,
that is done to the Majesty of God, in debasing him, against the duty of a
Creature, and also against his express Law and Command. 2. and the expressions
of the face, and eyes of God.
That the Scripture speaking of the face of God, and his hands and eyes, since
these phrases are to be understood in a sigurative sense, does give us no more
allowance, to take them in a proper literal sense, and thereupon to picture
God, with such a corporeal face, and hands, against his particular Command, and
in derogation from his Majesty; than it gives countenance to our affirming that
God has a body, and such corporeal parts, which are contrary to his Spiritual
nature. And it might be added, that the picturing God, in such a bodily shape,
may have an ill influence, upon the gross conceptions of some men, concerning
the Deity. And men are not so wholly out of danger of these misconceptions,
when it was once so openly and hotly asserted Socr. Ecc. Hist. l. 6. c. 7. Soz.
l. 8. c. 11, 12.
by the Egyptian Monks, that God had a body, and an humane shape, and that
Theophilus then Bishop of Alexandria complied with this opinion, though that
was probably done out of design: and even Epiphanius is reported by Socr. ibid.
c. 9. Soz. ibid. c. 14.
Socrates, and Sozomen, to be more heartily a favourer of that Opinion. And
this was also propagated by Audaeus, of whom Theoderet gives some account,
Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 9.

12. But ubi supra. Bellarmin 's distinction considered.
Bellarmine further endeavors to evade, all that can be said against the
Images of God, by distinguishing between 1. An Image to express a perfect
similitude of form, and this he grants is not to be admitted, concerning God.
2. To represent an History. And 3. without respect to History, in resembling
the nature of a thing, not by proper similitude, but analogically, and by
metaphorical significations, and he says, thus they paint Angels as young men,
and hoc modo pingimus Deum patrem, cum eum extra historiam pingimus, humana
forma; on this manner we paint God the Father, when out of History, we paint
him in the shape of a man. But this distinction will not be to any great
purpose, because, 1. Even the Pagans did not think their Images to have a
likeness of shape unto their Gods. 2. It seems to be no great commendation of
any Image, that it is unlike the thing it represents, and does not truly
express it. 3. That all the Images of the Roman Church are also of this nature,
even the Images of Saints departed. For the Roman Church worships only the
Souls and Spirits of Saints deceased, as enjoying this beatifical vision, not
their bodies, which till the Resurrection are dead in their graves. And
therefore the Images of these Saints do not express a likeness of shape to
their souls, but referr to them, by expressing the resemblance of the bodies,
in which they once dwelt, and to which they were, and shall be again united,
though now separated from them. And therefore this notion allows the Images of
God, in like manner as the Church of Rome sets up Images of Angels and Saints
deceased; not making any considerable difference betwixt these, so far as
concerns the representing every one of them by their Image; and consequently
must allow the worshipping every one of these Images, with a proportionable
honor in relation to the Beings represented by them. 4. If this notion were of
any weight, the Jewish Church might then have been warranted, in setting up
Images of God (and worshipping them also with respect to God) provided they
were not like him, nor esteemed so to be. And yet God plainly forbad their
making any Image of him, in the likeness of male or female, or any other thing;
though he had sufficiently taught them, and they well knew, that the Deity was
not in shape like to any of these. And God declares his dislike, against any
such Images; because they could frame nothing which they could liken to him:
which being a reason of perpetual and abiding truth, does concern the Christian
state as well as the Jewish; and the laying down this reason, does sufficiently
declare, against all such Images as are not like to him.

13. Secondly, Of the Romanists worshipping the Eucharist with Divine Worship.
I shall show that the Romanists give proper Divine worship to that which is
not God. And here I shall particularly instance in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, to which they profess to give that Latria, or high worship, which is
due to the true God alone. This is the plain Doctrine of the Council of Trent,
Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. c. 5.
fideles omnes Latriae cultum qui vero Deo debetur huic Sacramento defer,
that all good Christians do give to this Sacrament that properly Divine worship
which is due to the true God. And in the beginning of that Session, they
strictly forbid all Christians thenceforward to believe otherwise, and their
sixth Anathema is against him, who shall say that Christ in the Eucharist is
not to be adored with that which is the proper Divine worship. In like manner
it is expressed in the Roman Catechism, published by the authority of Pius the
Fifth Catech. ad par. de Euch. Sacr. in init.
, huic Sacramento divinos honores tribuendos esse, that Divine honor is to be
given to this Sacrament. And the words of Adoration in the Missal, and the acts
of adoration unto this Sacrament, are accordingly to be understood, to give
Divine honor thereunto. And Azorius is for giving this Divine worship even to
the Instit. Mor. part. 2. l. 5. c. 16.
species, or appearances of Bread and Wine in this Sacrament. But the Council
of Trent seem not to extend it so far, and the Roman Catechism declares, that
when they affirm this Sacrament is to be worshipped, they understand this of
the Body and Blood of Christ therein.

14. We greatly reverence the holy Sacrament, as an excellent institution of
our Savior, but reserve the Divine honor to God alone: for there is nothing
which is not truly God (be it otherwise never so sacred) to which such worship
may be given. S. Paul was an eminent Apostle, but, with detestation, disclaimed
the receiving it, Act. 14.13, 14, 15. The brazen Serpent under the Law was of
Gods institution, for the healing those Israelites, who looked upon it, but yet
it was a great sin to worship it with Divine honor. If the homage peculiarly
due to a Prince, be given to any other in his Dominions, though it be to one he
has highly advanced, he will account this a disparaging his dignity, and
practicing Treason and Rebellion: and God who is a jealous God, will not give
his worship to another. But this practice of the Roman Church depends upon
their Doctrine of Transubstantiation: This is grourded upon transubstantiation.
for if that substance which is in the Sacrament, be no longer Bread and Wine,
but be changed into the substance of the very Body and Blood of Christ, in
union with his Divinity, then and only then, may Divine honor be given unto
it. And if it be in truth the very same glorified Christ, who is at Gods right
hand, and nothing else, then is that worship which is due to Christ the Son of
God, which is proper Divine Worship, as much to be performed to this Sacrament,
as to him in Heaven, since both is substantially one and the same thing, wholly
and entirely. The Sess. 13. c. 1, 4, 5. and Anath. 1. and 2.
Council of Trent declares, that by the consecration of the Bread and Wine,
there is a conversion of their whole substance, into the substance of the Body
and Blood of Christ: And they say, the Body and Blood of Christ with his soul
and Divinity, and therefore whole Christ, are contained in the Eucharist, but
the substance of the Bread and Wine remains not, but only the species or
appearance thereof, and that this the Church calls Transubstantiation. On this
Doctrine it founds the Divine worship of the Sacrament, and it anathematizeth
him, whosoever shall speak against this Transubstantiation, and forbids all
Christians, that they shall not dare to believe or teach otherwise concerning
the Eucharist, than as this Council has determined. Now if this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation be true, the giving Divine worship to this Sacrament is but
just: but if this be false, as the Article 28.
Church of England declares, then is the giving Divine honor thereto certainly
and greatly sinful and evil.

15. It is acknowledged that this holy Sacrament, administered according to
Christ's institution, does truly and really exhibit and communicate Christ's
Body and Blood, with the benefits of his Sacrifice, in an Heavenly, Mystical
and Sacramental way: but the manner of this gracious presence, it is needless
curiously to enquire. And though the elements of Bread and Wine remain in their
proper substances; yet are they greatly changed, by their consecration, from
common Bread and Wine, to contain under them, such Spiritual and Divine
Mysteries; which is the effect of Divine power and grace. Nor is it possible
that these elements should tender to us Christ, and the benefits of his
Passion, if this work had not been ordered by the power and authority of God,
in his Institutions, who has the disposal of this grace. But that the elements
of Bread and Wine, remain in their substance, and that they are not
transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Christ, is generally asserted by
all Protestants, whilst the contrary is universally affirmed by the Romanists,
and is made one great branch of the true Catholic Faith, and the new Roman
Creed, according to the famous Bull of Pius the Fourth, which is so solemnly
sworn unto. Indeed there are such expressions frequently used in the Church of
Rome as these, Conc. Trid. ubi sup. c. 1.
that Christ who is present in Heaven by his natural presence, is present in
other places in substance, by that way which we can more easily believe than
express by words; and the Roman Catechism says, de Euch. Sacr. post med.
this change must not be curiously enquired into, for it cannot be perceived by
us; and Baronius declares, that Baron. An. Eccl. an. 44. n. 49.
modo ineffabili transubstantiatur, it is transubstantiated by an unspeakable
manner. But it is manifest from their plain decisions, that these and such like
expressions relate either to the manner of the Divine operation, or to the way
of explicating, how he can be substantially present, in every Sacrament while
he is ascended into Heaven, and sits at Gods right hand: for the manner of
his presence it self, they have expressed to be by Transubstantiation, as above
explained.

16. But that the elements of Bread and Wine, No Transubstantiation is proved
from Scripture:
have not their substance changed, into the proper substance of the Body and
Blood of Christ may appear, First, Because there is nothing in the Institution
of this Sacrament (from whence the nature of this Sacrament must be discerned)
or any where else in the holy Scripture, which affords any proof for
Transubstantlation. It is observed by Hist. Transubst. c. 5. n. 3.
Bishop Cosins, that Scotus, Durandus, Biel, Occam, Cameraoensis, Bishop Eisher
against Duther, and Cardinal Cajetan; did all acknowledge, that
Tiansubstantiation could not be proved sufficiently from Scripture, and their
words are by him produced; and that Bellarmine declared himself doubtful
thereof. Those words of our Savior so much urged by the Romanists; This is my
Body, do not determine the manner of his presence, or that he is
Transubstantially there, and so carnally, that according to the Catech. ad Par.
p. 223.
Roman Catechism, his bones and nerves, and whole Christ is there substantially
contained. But this may well be so understood, that he spiritually and
sacramentally, under visible elements, exhibits the Sacrifice of himself, so as
to apply it to true Christians, and interest them in it, and the blessings and
benefits thereof. Nor do the use of the like phrases in Scripture, import any
substantial change of the things themselves. When S. Paul speaks of the
Israelites, 1 Cor. 10.4. that they drank of that spiritual rock that followed
them, and that rock was Christ: it cannot be supposed, that the substance of
the Rock should be changed into the substance of Christ, who was not yet
Incarnate. When S. John declares, Joh. 1.14. The word was made flesh, it
cannot be thence affirmed, without Heresy and Blasphemy, that his Divine
Nature was changed into his Humane Nature. And when our Lord had spoken, Joh.
6. of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, and added upon his Disciples
being offended at those sayings, v. 63. It is the spirit that quickens, the
flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak unto you are spirit, and they
are life: he hereby (and also by what he speaks of believing, both in the
beginning and ending of that Discourse, and toward the middle of it, v. 35.47,
48, 64.) sufficiently directs them to a Spiritual sense of those things which
he had spoken. And a like interpretation of those words, Take, eat, this is my
Body, is somewhat directed by the same expressions; and is also most suitable
to the nature of the Sacrament: nor can those words mentioned both by S. Luke
and S. Paul, Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25. This Cup is the new Testament, be
otherwise understood, than Sacramentally, and somewhat figuratively, and these
also are expressed as part of the institution of the Eucharist.

17. It was not owned in the Primitive Church.
Secondly, The Doctrine of Transubstantiation is inconsistent with the sense of
the ancient Church. This is particularly and purposely manifested in that Book
of the late Reverend Bishop of Durham, which I referred unto in the foregoing
Paragraph; and therefore I shall only mention some few Testimonies, Tertullian
arguing against Marcion, who denied the reality of Christ's Body (as other
ancient Heretics asserted him to have had only the appearance of a Body)
says, Tertul. cont. Marc. l. 4. c. 40.
Christ took Bread, and distributing it to his Disciples, made it his Body,
saying this is my Body; that is, the figure of my Body: but there had been no
figure, unless the Body had been in truth. Now the manner of his expression
concerning the figure of Christ's Body, shows him not to have accounted the Body
of Christ to be substantially, but representatively in the Sacrament. And his
manner of arguing, shows him not to have understood, or owned the Romish
Transubstantiation. For it might be said to one who should thus argue, and hold
the Romish Principles, by one of the Disciples of Marcion, that there is in the
figure the appearance of such a Body, which after consecration is not real,
viz. Bread and Wine; and therefore it is then fit to resemble what is of like
nature. In the Dialogues of Theoderet, it was urged in the defense of the
Heresy of Eutyches, that as the Symbols of the Body and Blood of Christ, after
the invocation of the Priest, are made other things and changed; so the Body of
Christ after its assumption, is changed into the divine substance and nature.
But this is answered by the Orthodox person to the Heretic Theod. Dial. 2.
, that he is here taken in the Nets which himself made; for the symbols or
mystical signs, do not after their Sanctification depart from their own nature,
but remain in their former substance, form and shape. And Prosper speaking of
the Eucharist says, this De Cons. Did. 2. c. Hoc est.
heavenly bread, after its manner, is called the Body of Christ, when it is
indeed the Sacrament of his Body; and it is called the Sacrificing his Flesh,
and the Passion, Death and Crucifixion of Christ, non rei veritate sed
significante mysterio; not being so in the truth (or substance) of the thing,
but in the Mystery which signifies it. To these particular testimonies, I
shall add two things. The one is, that it is attested by Hesych.
Hesychius, to have been an ancient usage in the Christian Church, that after
the Communion was ended, the remaining elements were burnt in the fire. But if
Transubstantiation had been then believed; that what remained in these
elements, was no other substance but the Body and Blood of Christ, which
continued to be such, so long as the species of the elements remained; it must
needs have been an horrid and profane thing for Christians to cast their
Savior into the fire to be consumed there; and no such thing could certainly
have entered into their hearts.

18. The other thing I shall add is, that when in the beginning of
Christianity, the Pagans falsely aspersed the Christians, with being so
inhumanly savage, that in their private Religious Assemblies, they murdered an
Infant, and sucked and drunk his blood: it was among other things answered by
Tert. Apol. c. 9.
Tertullian, In Octav. p. 100. Ed. Oxon.
Minucius Felix, and Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 1.
others, that the Gentiles might be ashamed to charge any such thing on
Christians, who were so far from taking any human blood, that they carefully
avoided all blood, even of Beasts. But this defense could not well have been
made on this manner, if they had accounted themselves, to have taken the Blood
of Christ substantially in the Eucharist, and not only such a mystical
representation thereof, as is not void of efficacy and reality. And though I
think it manifest; that blood may lawfully be eaten, and that the Apostolical
prohibition thereof, was but a provisional Decree for those times, from the
general declaration in the New Testament, that nothing is unclean in it self;
from the liberty which Christians were allowed to eat whatsoever was sold in
the shambles, or was set before them when they were invited to eat with
unbelievers, asking no question for conscience sake; and also because blood was
for this reason forbidden to be eaten under the Law, because it was given upon
the altar, to make an atonement for their souls, Lev. 17.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Yet it may not be amiss observed, that according to the computation of time
fixed by Rhenanus, as it is from him mentioned by Pamel in Apolog. Tertul. n.
138.
Pamelius, it is now about five hundred years, since eating blood was generally
allowed in the Western Church: and about that time the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation had prevailed, which was publicly established under the
time of Innocentius the Third, above four hundred and fifty years since. And
that general prohibition of blood, so long continued, though upon mistake or
more than necessary cautiousness, might well be accounted not consistent with
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or not fairly reconcilable thereunto.

19. Thirdly, Transubstantiation does plainly contradict the evidence of sense.
Transubstantiation is contrary to the testimony of sense,
Now the testimony of our senses is so considerable, that this is that which
assured and manifested, the certainty of the mighty Miracles, wrought by Christ
and his Apostles; yea of the birth of Christ, of his converse with men in the
world, and of his being crucified, risen again, and ascended into Heaven. Upon
the evidence of sense, Thomas was convincingly persuaded of Christ's
resurrection; and the other Apostles had such an esteem for this testimony,
that they could not but Preach the things which they had seen and heard, Act.
4.20. And the certainty of what they taught concerning Christ and Christianity,
they founded upon the evidence of their senses, in that it was what they had
seen with their eyes, and what they had heard, and their hands had handled of
the word of life, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18. 1 John 1.1. And therefore the denying
the evidence of sense, would undermine Christianity, and withal take away all
possibility of certainty, concerning the plain matters of fact in the world.
And there could be no assurance given, that Christ taught any Doctrine, nor
could what he did teach, be otherwise conveyed to us, than by our eyes and
ears, unless men pretend to Enthusiasm. And as that pretense is vain, so if it
were not, no other men could be taught by such Enthusiasticks, but by the
exercise and use of their senses, and upon supposition of the certainty thereof.

20. But our eyes, our taste, our feeling, and the inward sense of nourishment
received from the consecrated elements, do all of them testify, that the Bread
and Wine remain in their proper substances after their consecration. But here
the Church of Rome thinks it her interest to Catech. a^^ arochos. p. 218.
Curandum est ut fidelium mentes, quam maxim fieri potest, a sensuum judicio
abstrahantur.
take care, that the minds of Christians, should as much as is possible, be
drawn off from the judgment of their senses. And yet they who do lay aside the
judgment of their senses, must not believe, that they do truly either read or
see any such instruction, as this, directed to them. And if the evidence of
sense in the Sacrament be denied; there will then be no certainty to the
Communicants, whether there be any Priest present to consecrate, and
consequently whether there be any words of consecration spoken, or whether
there be any elements to receive consecration. And the senses of the
Communicants, do give a more joint testimony, to the elements remaining in
their proper substances, than to these other instances.

21. and is also opposite to reason.
Fourthly, Transubstantiation is opposite to the principles of reason and
understanding, and includes manifold gross absurdities and contradictions. 1.
That the whole substance of the Body of Christ should be in many thousand, yea
many millions of places at the same time, is sufficiently inconsistent with the
nature of a body. And as there are consecrated Hosts in many thousand places at
once, the Catechism framed according to the Decree of the Council of Trent,
agreeably to that Council declares, that Ibid. p. 223, 225. Inquavis urriusque
speciei par^icula totum Christum contineri.
under every least part either of the Bread or Wine, whole Christ is contained
(even with his bones, sinews and whatsoever belongs to the true state of his
body, as I above observed from the same Catechism). 2. And in purfuance of this
Doctrine of Transubstantiation, the Romish Doctors do assert if a Mouse, or any
other brutish Animal or Insect, do eat any part of the consecrated Host, they
do eat what is truly and substantially the Body of Christ. This is acknowledged
by Part. 3 q. 80. a. 3.
Aquinas; and though the Sent. l. 4. did. 13. A.
Master of the Sentences would not admit this for truth, but declared himself
of the contrary opinion: yet his Authority is here rejected; and by the Censure
of Lib. 4. Art. 9.
the Divines of Paris, this is reckoned among one of his errors. But it is a
thing dishonorable to the glorious Body of Christ, to be eaten of Brutes, and
to pass into the draught, and to be substantially present there where even the
Romanists, who assert that presence, do not require Divine Worship to be given
to it. 3. And it is contradictory to assert, that the substance of Bread and
Wine being gone, the accidents thereof do remain, without any subject or
matter, being, as the Roman Catechism says, Catech. p. 219. and 230. Edi.
Lovan. 1567.
accidentia quae nulli substantiae inhaerent, and species sine aliqua re
subjecta. Thus for instance, the extension that was in the Bread, is supposed
to remain, when the substance of the Bread is gone; and that extension which
can be measured and felt, is in its own nature an extension of matter, and of
that which has parts added to one another; and yet here is extension, and
consequently several parts distant from one another, but still there is nothing
extended, nor any matter, nor any thing that has parts. And the like may be
said of other accidents. 4. If it could be imagined, that the substance of the
Bread and Wine was abolished by consecration (though it is not usual for the
blessing of God to destroy, but preserve the thing he blesses) the accidents,
or appearances thereof only remaining; and that the substance of Christ's Body
and Blood should be there substituted, without any corporeal accidents, even
this could not be Transubstantiation, according to the Romish description
thereof. For if a corporeal substance should cease to be, its accidents or
modifications remaining, this must be by annihilation; and if there be a new
substance, this must be by a new production, not a changing the former
substance into a latter; since corporeal substances are not capable of being
changed, but by the difference of their modifications or accidents: but the
ceasing or abolishing of the substance it self, which is the being of a thing,
the subject matter which must be supposed in the changing things is wholly
removed.

22. And 5. That there must be new matter continually prepared, in the
Sacramental elements, out of which the true substance of the Body and Blood of
Christ is to be produced, this also includes manifest contradiction. For then
the Body and Blood of Christ, must be supposed to be produced, out of a
different matter, at a different time, and in a different manner from that
Body, which was born of the Blessed Virgin, and in which he assumed our nature;
and yet this Body which is so many ways differing, from that substantial Body,
which is ascended into Heaven, must be acknowledged to be substantially the
same. When I consider such things as these, with which this Romish Doctrine is
full fraught, I must acknowledge that the belief of Transubstantiation includes
so much of self-denial, that it is a believing against Reason. But there is one
thing wanting which hinders it from being an act of Christian self-denial, or
of true Religion; and that is that it is not a believing God or Christ, who
never declared any such Doctrine; but must resolve it self into the believing
the declaration of the Roman Church, which both Scotus and Cajetan cited by the
Reverend Hist. Transubst. c. 5. n. 3.
Bishop Cosins, make the necessary ground and support for this Doctrine.

23. What account may be given, that so many knowing men in the Church of Rome
should own such unreasonable and unaccountable Doctrines.
And I have sometimes set my self to consider, hour it should come to pass that
so many understanding and learned men, as are in the Church of Rome, should
receive such monstrous Doctrines, as this and some others are; and I have given
my self some satisfaction, by observing; 1. That education, and Principles once
imbibed and professed; have a mighty force upon many men's minds, insomuch that
bad notions embraced do almost pervent their very capacities of understanding,
as appears in the followers of many Sects, and in the Pagan Philosophers, who
set them selves against Christianity: and these things especially when linked
with interest, have such a commanding influence upon many men of understanding,
that they hinder them from attending to the clearest evidences, against their
assertions; as was manifest from the Scribes and Pharisees, in our Saviors
time, who generally stood up for their Traditions, against his Doctrine and
Miracles also. And they of the Church of Rome are politickly careful in the
training up and principling the more knowing part of their youth in their
Doctrines. 2. That when gross corruptions formerly prevailed in that Church,
through the blindness and superstition of ignorant and degenerate ages, the
politic governing part think it not expedient now, to acknowledge those things
for errors, lest they thereby lose that reverence, they claim to their Church,
when they have once acknowledged it to have erred and not to be infallible. And
therefore all these things must be owned as points of faith, and such other
things added as are requisite to support them. 3. Many more modest and well
disposed persons, acquiesce in the determination of the Church, and its
pretense to infallibility; and by this they filence all objections, and suffer
not any doubtful enquiry, since whatsoever the Doctrine be, no evidence can
outweigh that which is infallible. And these also are the less inquisitive,
from the odious reprensentations which are made of them who depart from the
Romish Doctrine; and from their being prohibited the use of such Books, which
might help to inform them better. 4. Others are deterred from making impartial
search into truth, by the severity of that Church, against them who question
its received Doctrines, both in the tortures of the Inquisition, and in the
loud thundrings of its Anathemas. 5. The specious and pompous names of the
Churches Tradition, Antiquity, Universality and uninterrupted succession, have
a great influence upon them, who have not discovered the great falsehood of
these pretenses. And very many knowing men have not made such things the
business of their search: and others who have made search, are willing to take
things, according to the sense and interpretation, the favorers of that Church
impose upon them, and they are herein influenced by some of the things above
mentioned. 6. The just judgment of God may blind them who shut their eyes
against the light, that through strong delusions they should believe a lie.

24. Fifthly, This Romish Doctrine is contrary to the holy Scriptures. The
Scripture declares, the Body of Christ to be in the Sacrament, and our Church
acknowledges that Art. of Relig. Art. 28.
this Body is given, taken, and eaten, in the Sacrament; but then it tells us
that this is only after an heavenly and spiritual manner; Transubstantiation is
against the Scripture,
and this is according to the sense of the Scriptures, as I noted, n. 16. But
the Scripture is so far from owning Transubstantiation, to be the manner of
Christ's presence, that it plainly declares, the elements to remain after the
consecration, and at the distribution of them: S. Paul therefore mentions not
only the Bread which we break, 1 Cor. 10, 16. but speaking also of receiving
the Eucharist, thrice in three verses together, he expresses it by eating that
Bread, and drinking that Cup, 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. and this must suppose the
element of Bread to be remaining, when the Sacrament was administered to the
Communicants. But Coster. Enchir.
some object that Bread here is not to be understood of that which is properly
and substantially Bread, but of Christ who is called the bread of life. But 1.
The Apostle having spoken before of Bread and the Cup, 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. where
he understood thereby, that which was properly and substantially Bread and
Wine: and continuing his discourse upon the same subject, concerning the
Eucharist, and in the three verses immediately following, using the same
expressions of the Bread and the Cup, cannot from the order of his discourse,
be otherwise properly understood, than to have respect to the same things;
though by consecration advanced to a more excellent mystery. 2. When the
Apostle declares the eating this Bread, and drinking this Cup, to show forth
the Lords death till he come: He both declares this action to be commemorative
of Christ's death, by somewhat which represents the death of him who can die no
more; and by those words till he come, he shows the proper substantial presence
of Christ's Body, not to be in that Bread. But the Catech. ad Par. p. 128.
Roman Catechism says, the Apostle after consecration calls the Eucharist
Bread, because it had the appearance of bread, and a power to nourish the body.
Now (to pass by the strangeness of the body being nourished, by that which is
no substance) it may be considered, 1. That if the Romish Doctrine had been
true, it cannot be conceived, that the Apostle purposely discoursing of the
Eucharist, and laying down the Christian Doctrine concerning it; should so
often call it what it was not, and not what it was. 2. Especially when this
must have been a truth greatly necessary to be known. And 3. Since it still
continued in appearance Bread, the Apostle would not have complied with those
errors, which the reason and senses of men were apt to lead them to, if these
had been truly errors, but would have been the more forward to have acquainted
them with the truth.

25. Sixthly, and is not favored, by some Traditions of the Romish Church.
I shall add (though I lay no further stress on this, than as it may speak
something ad homines) that if we may give credit, to the approved Ritualists of
the Romish Church, there are ancient usages in that Church, which bear some
opposition to Transubstantiation. It was a custom received and constantly
observed in the Roman Church, that the Eucharist must never be consecrated on
Good Friday. Div. Offic. Explic. c. 97.
Johannes Beleth, an ancient Ritualist, undertaking to give an account of this,
says there are four reasons hereof, his first is, because Christ on this day
was in reality and truth sacrificed for us, and when the truth comes, the
figure ought to cease and give place unto it. And his other three reasons have
all respect to this first. And Rational. l. 6. c. 77. n. 34,
Durandus in his Rationale, undertaking to give an account of the same custom,
makes the same thing to be his second reason thereof, and uses these very
words also, that the truth coming, the figure ought to cease. The intent of
which is to declare, that the Eucharist is a figurative representation of
Christ's Passion: and therefore on Good Friday, when the Church had their
thoughts of Christ, and eye to him, as upon that day really suffering, they
thought fit to forbear the representation of his Passion in the Eucharist. But
this notion of the Eucharist is not consonant to Transubstantiation.

26. What guilt there may be in worshipping what is not God, though the belief
of the true God be retained?
Having now discharged Transubstantiation, as being neither founded in the
Scripture, nor consonant thereto, as being opposite to the Doctrine and usages
of the Primitive Church, and as contradictory to sense, and the principles of
reason; I shall upon this foundation proceed to add something concerning the
dishonor done to God, in giving Divine Worship to that which is not God; and
the great guilt thereby derived upon man. Now it is confessed generally, that
the giving Divine honor intentionally to a Creature, is Idolatry and an
heinous transgression. But it may be worthy our enquiry to consider how far
guilt can be charged upon such persons, who profess the only true God to be
God, and that there is none other but he, and design to give the proper and
peculiar Divine honor to him aalone, (for such we may suppose the case of the
Romanists, in this Controversy, waving here their exorbitant adoration of
Saints, the relative Divine Worship to Images, and somewhat higher yet, to the
Cross) but actually through mistake and delusion, do conferr this Divine honor
upon that which in truth is not God, in confidence and presumption that it is,
what it is not; and that it is an object to which Divine honor is due, when in
truth it is not so. Now in what I shall discourse of this case in general, the
instances I shall first mention of some bad men, are only proposed to give some
light to the general resolution of this enquiry, and therefore are by no means
mentioned to any such purpose, as if I intended to write or think, any thing
dishonourably of the Holy Sacrament, which I would not think of but with a
pious Christian reverence and due veneration.

27. Wherefore I shall here lay down three Assertions. Assert. 1. The
misplacing Divine Worship upon an undue object, may be a very gross and heinous
sin of Idolatry, Assert. 1. There may be an Idolatrous misplacing Divine
worship consistent with believing one only and the true God.
though the profession of one only God, and of him who is the true God be still
retained, with an acknowledgement that none other ought to be worshipped. This
with respect to outward acts of worship, was the case of diverse lapsed
Christians, who being prevailed upon, by the terrors of persecution, did
sometimes either offer Sacrifice, or incense to Pagan Deities, or otherwise
communicated in their Worship, or did swear by them, or the Genius of Caesar,
or did make profession of such things being God, which they were sufficiently
convinced were not God. And the like miscarriages concerning outward acts of
worship, may arise from an evil compliance with others, or from the great
vanity and evil dispositions of men's own minds. And concerning inward worship,
it is easy to apprehend, that such acts as proceed from the heart and
affections, as the highest practical esteem, love, reverence and fear, may be
misplaced upon that, which men in their judgments do not esteem to be God,
whilst they either do not consider these things, to be acts of worship; or else
are more governed by their affections, than their judgments. But concerning
such inward acts of worship as proceed from the mind and understanding, such as
to acknowledge in ones mind such a Being to be God, and that Divine honor is
due unto it, and all Divine excellencies are inherent in it, these cannot be
performed to any Being, but to that only which is thought, judged and believed
to be God. But notwithstanding this, even these acts may by delusions be
Idolatrously misplaced, whilst there is still continued this general
acknowledgement, and profession of one only God, who is the true God.

28. Simon Magus, as de Praescrip. c. 46.
Tertullian declares, did own himself to be the most high God; and as Irenaeus
relates, Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 20.
that it was he, who appeared as the Son amongst the Jews, and descended as the
Father in Samaria, and came as the Holy Spirit in other Nations: and they who
were his followers both in Samaria, Rome, and other Nations did worship him,
(...), as the chief God, as Justin. Apol. 1.
Justin Martyr affirms, and Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 13. gr.
Eusebius from him. Now if it should be supposed, that the Gnostics should own
the true God, and that there is no other God besides him, and should therefore
design to give Divine honor to him alone; but should be persuaded, that he was
incarnate in Simon Magus, and thereupon should worship him with Divine honor,
this could not excuse them herein from being Idolaters. And whereas Montanus,
and the propagators of his Heresy, did declare him to be the Paraclete, as is
often expressed in Tertullian; and is affirmed also by diverse Catholic Writers,
as Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 14.
Eusebius, Basil ad Amphil. c. 1.
Basil, and others, or as de Consec. did. 4. c. Hi vero.
Gregory expresses it, that he was the Holy Ghost: if any of his followers,
professing Divine Worship to be due only to the True God, and the three persons
of the glorious Trinity, should upon a presumptive delusion, believe that the
Holy Ghost was imbodied in Montanus, and thereupon yield to him that Divine
Worship, which is due to the Holy Ghost, this could not excuse them from
Idolatry.

29. Assert. 2. All Idolatry is not equally heinous.
Assert. 2. In Idolatry, which is in its nature a great and grievous sin, all
the acts and kinds thereof, in misplacing proper Divine Worship, are not
equally heinous and abominable. There is a great difference from the temper of
the persons, whence acts proceeding from sudden surprise, from weakness of
understanding, or from great fear, are not of so high a guilt, as those which
proceed from carelessness of duty, neglect of instruction or contempt of God, or
wilful enmity against the true Religion. There is also difference in the acts
of worship, which I mentioned n. 27. as also from the plyableness of temper to
be drawn from them, and the resolved obstinacy of persisting in them. And there
is a difference also, with respect to the object, to which Divine Worship is
given: whence the worshipping of Baal, or the Gods of other Nations, in
opposition to the God of Israel, was more heinous than the Idolatry of
Jeroboams Calves, because it included a professed departing from the true God:
and the worshipping of Simon Magus, was the more abominable, as including a
following him, and consequently rejecting the fundamental Articles of the
Christian Religion. But the Idolatry of the Calves was not of so high a nature,
nor did it utterly exclude the ten Tribes from all relation to the Church of
God: though even this would exclude those persons, who designedly espoused it,
or who perversely or negligently joined in it, from the blessing of God.

30. Assert. 3. All misplacing Divine honor upon an undue object (which is
Idolatry) is a very great sin. Assert. 3. All sorts thereof are greatly evil.
To suppose that ignorance and mistake, should be any sufficient plea or
excuse; is to reflect upon the goodness and wisdom of God, as if even under the
Christian revelation, he had not sufficiently directed men, in so important a
duty, as to know the object of Divine adoration, or whom we are to worship. And
how little any misunderstanding, upon the grounds laid down by the Romanists,
is like in this case to be available for their excuse, I shall manifest by
proposing another case, which may well be esteemed parallel hereunto. As our
Savior said concerning the Eucharistical Bread, This is my Body; so there is a
greater plenty of expressions in the Scriptures, which are as plausible to
confer Divine honor upon pious Christians. They are said to be partakers of
the Divine Nature, to be born of God, The Remish Adoration of the Host
paralleled.
to be renewed after the Image of God, and that God dwells in them; and that
Christ is formed in them, and is in them, and that they are members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones, and with respect to them he said to Saul,
why persecutest thou me? and he will say to others, I was an hungered, and ye
gave me no meat, etc. and the Spirit of God dwells in them. Now if from such
expressions as these, any sort of men should give Divine Worship to every Saint
(in pursuance of that fond notion of some Fanatic heads, that they are Godded
with God, and Christed with Christ) and consequently to those in Heaven, as
well as to those on Earth, and thereby multiply the objects of Divine
Adoration, really beyond all the Polytheism of the Gentiles, I doubt not, but
they of the Church of Rome would account this abominable Idolatry. Nor would
they think it sufficient here to be pretended, that these worshippers own only
one true God, and give Divine Worship to the Saints, only because they believe
them to receive a new Divine Nature in becoming Saints, and to put on Christ,
and to be changed into the nature and substance of that one God; and though
this may seem as contrary to sense and reason as Transubstantiation does, they
therefore believe it, because God has said it, (if their manifestly mistaken
sense of Scripture be allowed) and they can confidently rely on his word. And
if we compare these two together, the grace of the Sacrament is very excellent,
but it is that which is to be communicated to the communion of Saints, and
conferred upon them. But the nature of the pious Christian, is so much advanced
above that of the Sacramental elements, that that must be confessed to be true,
which was affirmed by Bishop Bilson, Differ. of Christ. Subject. and Unchr.
Rebel. Part. 4. p. 713.
that Christian men are members of Christ, the Bread is not; Christ abides in
them and they in him, in the Bread he does not; he will raise them at the last
day, the Bread he will not; they shall reign with him for ever, the Bread shall
not. But these and such like words we mention not, as having any low thoughts
of the Holy Sacrament; but as owning the truth of the Sacramental elements,
remaining in their created substances, and even these we duly reverence as set
apart to an holy use and purpose; but we most highly value the great blessings
of the Gospel, and the spiritual presence of Christ, which though it be tendered
in the Sacramental elements, yet being the invisible grace of the Sacrament, is
to be distinguished from the visible sign thereof. To this we have our eye
chiefly in the Sacrament, according to that ancient admonition Cyp. de Orat.
Dom.
sursum corda, lift up your hearts unto the Lord. And we glorify the grace of
God, who bestows upon them who truly repent and believe, such unspeakable
benefits in the use of those means or signs, which are otherwise mean, than as
they are sanctified to an holy and excellent use, by the Institution of God,
and the right celebration of his Ordinance.

SECT. V.
Integrity too much neglected, and Religion so ordered and modelled, by many
Doctrines and Practices in the Church of Rome, as to represent a contrivance of
deceit, Interest and Policy.
1. IN this last Section, Of the Politic interests driven on in the Roman
Church.
I shall consider some such things in the Church of Rome, which represent
Religion as it is by them professed to be a crafty contrivance of human policy;
or a cunning method, to serve the particular interests of some men in the
world. True Religion which has respect to the chief good and happiness of men,
does indeed bring the greatest satisfaction to men in this world; but this is
not done by gratifying their inordinate affections, but by commanding and
subduing them. But this being from God, and having to do with him, is a thing
of the greatest simplicity and sincerity in the world; and therefore proposes
nothing, but what is true and good, and suitable to God and his Honor. And
when things manifestly false or evil, which are fitted to advance the outward
interest of the proposers, are obtruded under the disguise of Religion, and
required as things sacred, to be received with the greatest veneration; this
gives too much appearance, that under the name of Religion, politic designs,
and fraudulent ends and purposes of men, are managed. And where such things are
done, Sect. V.
it may tempt many of those who discover and understand them, to cast off the
serious sense of Religion it self. Now very many things in the Romish Church,
appear designed to impose on, and delude the people; and by false pretenses, to
advance the honor of the Pope especially, and of their Clergy also, and to
gratify the avarice of the Romish Court, and enervate piety.

2. Their Doctrine of Attrition and Absolution, Diverse of their errors carry on
some interests.
seems contrived, to make loose men, who have little regard to God, to have a
mighty veneration for their Priest, who, notwithstanding their wicked life,
both can and will (if they be taught right) secure them in the other world,
upon such terms as Christ and his Gospel will not admit. Their Service in a
tongue not understood by the people, is fitted to uphold the reputation of the
Clergy, among the Ignorant Vulgar, as does also the prohibiting the Scriptures
in the vulgar tongue, as is observed by de Scr. q. l. non legendis c. 21.
Ledesima. Their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, propitiatory Sacrifice, and
the conficient Priest alone receiving the Eucharist in one kind, tend much to
extol the dignity and greatness of their Clergy: but the falseness of all these
I have above discovered. Their exempting their Clergy, that as M. Bec. Part. 2.
Tr. 3. c. 6. Q. 11.
Becanus says, they are not subject to Secular Princes, nor can be punished by
them, nor are bound to observe their Laws out of obedience, does jointly tend
to the advancement both of the Pope, and the Clergy, but is contrary to the
true rules of Christianity, as I have in another Discourse showed. And though
amongst us the true honor of the Ministry, which our Lord conferred upon it,
be by many too much neglected and disregarded, we make not use of false methods
for its support. Besides these, their feigned revelations and visions,
concerning matters of truth and Doctrine; their many counterfeited Relics, as
objects of veneration; and their falsely pretended Miracles for the confirmation
of their Doctrine, are manifestly designed delusions, to impose upon others,
that they may be admired by them.

3. But because this Chapter has been already very large, I shall wave many
things which might have been insisted on, and shall only consider a few things,
which have a chief respect unto the Pope himself. That the claim of the Papal
Supremacy is in all the branches thereof groundless, I have somewhat declared
in the first Section of this Chapter, and more fully in another Discourse there
referred unto. And that this is adapted to exalt the Papal dignity, grandeur
and Sovereignty, and to bring in vast revenues for its support, needs not be
suggested to any considering men. And the Popes pretense to be S. Peter's
Successor, seems not to be ordered with plain and honest sincerity, in his
first entrance thereupon. For at the time of his Coronation, among other Rites
one of the last is, that Sacr. Cerem. l. 1. Sect. 2. c. 3. fol. 40.
the Pope must take his handful of money from his Chamberlain (in which he must
be sure to have neither silver nor gold) and scattering it among the people,
must use those words of S. Peter, Silver and Gold have I none, Some things in
the form of the Papal Coronation observed.
but what I have, that give I you. Now it seems not very fair and upright
dealing, that the Pope by being advanced to his See, should pretend himself to
be a Successor of S. Peter's poverty; especially when in order to his expressing
thus much, there is care taken beforehand, that he must cautiously avoid, the
having all silver or gold in his hand. If S. Peter himself had been known to
have done thus, when he used those words, this would have been looked upon in
him, as a cheat and imposture; which is one of the first things declared by his
pretended Successor, in such a case where he might uprightly and infallibly
have spoken truth. And a like abuse of holy Scripture is in that other Rite at
his Coronation, which goes immediately before this; when the Pope is sat down,
or almost lies along, upon a Marble Seat at the Lateran Church at Rome, which
Seat is called Stercoraria, and one of the Cardinals lifts him up ibid.
using those words in Psalm. 113.7, 8. Suscitat de pulvere egenum, and de
stercore erigit pauperem, ut sedeat cum principibus, and solium gloriae teneat.
Where what the Psalmist calls a dunghill, the Roman Church who would be
accounted the faithful Interpreter of Scripture, interprets concerning a
stately Marble Seat. But waving such things as these, I shall enquire into two
other things of greater moment and concern; the one of Infallibility, the
second of delivering Souls from Purgatory by Indulgences, and applying to them
a fit proportion of the Churches Treasury.

4. Concerning Infallibility. Infallibility calculated for design.
This is a strange claim, in such a Church, where there are so many palpable
errors, contrary to the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and the ancient Church. But
this pretense mightily serves their interest: for if this be once believed and
received, all their other errors must thereupon be received with great
veneration, as being founded upon the highest evidence; since no evidence can
be above infallible certainty; and there can be no evidence against it, but
what appears to be such is a mistaken fallacy; and therefore no doubts ought to
be admitted: for there cannot be any need of reforming the Doctrine of such a
Church. By this method also, so far as men believe this, they are kept in a
peaceable subjection, but in a way of fraud, and neglect of truth. We account
all honest and prudent ways, to promote peace with truth, to be desirable. But
if stedfastness in errors, such as those of the Scribes and Pharisees, or of
any Heretics or Schismatics, be more desirable than to understand or embrace
the truth, then may the devices of the Roman Church be applauded, which have
any tendency to promote peace. And yet indeed all their other projects would
signify little, if it were not for the great strictness and severity of their
Government. This pretense to Infallibility, is in the consequence of it
blasphemous, because as it pretends to be derived from God, it makes him to
approve, and patronize all their gross errors, and Heretical Doctrines. And if
any other persons should have the confidence, to require all they say to be
received upon their authority, as unquestionable and infallibly true; though it
appear never so unlikely to the hearers, or be known by them to be false; such
a temper would not be thought tolerable for converse, but it is only admired in
those of Rome, where there is as little reason to admit it as any where else,
and no proof at all thereof, but very much to be said to confute it. For,

5. First, It is hard to believe, The asserters of Infallibility are not agreed
who is the keeper thereof.
that that Church should have been possessed of Infallibility for above 1600
years, which does not yet agree where to fix this Infallibility. It is great
pity that if they have Infallibility, they should not know where it is: And it
is strange, it should be accompanied with so much uncertainty, that those of
the Romish Communion should still disagree and be to seek who the person or
persons is or are, that are Infallible, and whether any be such or not. Many of
the Romish Church claim Infallibility, to belong to the Pope. This way goes
Bellarmine, and many others; who assert the judgment of Councils, Whether the
Pope,
whether General or Provincial, to receive their firmness from the Pope's
Confirmation, and then de Pont. Romans l. 4. c. 1, 2, 3.
asserts, that he cannot err in what he delivers to the Church as a matter of
Faith. And yet de Pont. Romans l. 2. c. 30.
he grants that the Pope himself may be a Heretic, and may be known to be
such, and by falling into Heresy, may fall from being Head or Member of the
Church, and may be judged and punished by the Church: And this is to give up
his Infallibility, since he who may fall into Heresy, and declare it, may err
in what he declares. And Theol. Mor. l. 2. Tr. 1. c. 7. n. 1, 2.
Layman who asserts that the Pope in his own Person may fall into notorious
Heresy, and yet that in what he proposes to the whole Church, he is by Divine
Providence infallible, still acknowledges, that this latter assertion is not
so certain, that the contrary should be an error in Faith: Yea he admits it
possible, and to be owned by grave Authors (such as Gerson, Turrecremata,
Sylvester, Corduba, and Gr. de Valentia) that the Pope may propose things
against the Faith. And this is to profess his Infallibility to be uncertain,
and indeed to be none at all. And some of the Popes have been so unwary, as in
their Public Rescripts, to let fall such expressions, which betrayed
themselves, to have no confidence of their own Infallibility. Pope Martin the
fifth determined a case proposed, concerning the Extrav. Com. l. 3. Tit. 5. c.
1.
sale of a yearly Revenue to be no Usury, because one of the Cardinals had
given him an account, that such parts were allowed to be lawful by the Doctors:
Now it is not like, that if that Pope thought his own judgment to be
Infallible, that he would profess himself to proceed in his Declaration, upon
the judgment of others. And Pope Innocent the third, considering those words of
S. Peter, Submit your selves therefore, to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's sake, whether to the King as Supreme, etc. would have it observed, that
the King is not expressly called Supreme, Decretal. l. 1. Tit. 33. c. 6. Solite.
sed interpositum, for sitan non sine causa, tanquam, but this word [as] is
interposed perhaps not without cause: but for sitan, and perhaps, are not a
style becoming the pretense to Infallibility, since the one acknowledges and
the other disclaims the doubtfulness of the thing declared: But so much modesty
was very needful in this Epistle, when both this Observation it self, and many
other things in that Epistle were far enough from being infallibly true; as the
founding the Pope's authority upon Jer. 1.10. and on God's creating two great
Luminaries and such like things, of which above.

6. But others of the Romish Church, or a General Council,
own the infallible judgment in matters of Faith, to be only fixed in a general
Council. That Adrian the sixth was of this Opinion, is owned by de Pont. Romans
l. 4. c. 2.
Bellarmine, to whom L^ym. ubi sup.
Layman adds Gerson, and others of the French Church. Now there is much more to
be said for this, than for the former Notion. And though a General Council
cannot claim absolute infallibility of judgment in all cases, because it is
possible, the erring Party may happen in some cases, to be the greater number;
as appeared in some of the Arian Councils, which so far as concerned the
greatness of them, bad fair for the Title of General ones. Yet if a General
Council be regularly convened, and proceed orderly, with a pious intention to
declare truth, and without design of serving interests and Parties, there is so
much evidence concerning Matters of Faith, that it may be justly concluded,
that such a Council will not err in them, but that its Determinations in this
case, are infallibly true. But the admitting the Infallible Decision of such a
General Council in points of Faith, is so far from the interest of the Church
of Rome, that the eager promoters of the Popish interest, will by no means
close with this. For a General Council having respect to the whole Catholic
Church, and not being confined to the particular Roman limits: The Church of
Rome can upon this principle, plead no more for any Infallibility resident in
it, than the Church of Constantinople or the Church of England may do. To this
purpose the General of the Jesuits, Lainezius Hist. Conc Trid. l. 7. p. 497.
at the Council of Trent, declared against the Infallible judgment of Councils,
and thought he had proved that sufficiently, by observing that all the
particular Bishops there assembled were fallible; and that therefore the
firmness of its Constitutions and Anathemas, must depend on the Popes
Confirmation. And yet it might be thought that the Providence of God, may as
well order the decisions of General Councils to be infallibly true in points of
Faith for the guidance of his Church; as that it should infallibly guide the
Bishop of Rome, whenever he teaches Doctrines of Faith, who in other cases,
and in his own person, is acknowledged by his chief Advocates to be fallible,
even concerning Matters of Faith.

7. But there are others, or Oral Tradition.
who call themselves Members of that Church, but are in no great favor and
esteem at Rome, who lay no stress upon the unerring judgments of either Pope,
or Council, more than of other men; but place a kind of Infallibility upon the
certainty of Oral Tradition, and thence conclude, that whatsoever is delivered
down in a Church by way of Tradition, must be infallibly true; because no Age
could make any change therein: This is Mr. White's way, and particularly
asserted in J. S. h. sure footing,
the Discourses of Mr. Sergeant. But what is said in defense of this way, is
pure Sophistry. And if such persons, furnished with these Notions or Fancies,
had lived in the beginning of Christianity, they might have been Advocates
either for Paganism, or the Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees, on whose
behalf the indefectiveness of Tradition, might have been urged, as well as for
the Church of Rome, and almost in a persect Parallel.

8. Secondly, Infallibility is not owned by the chief of the Romanists, who
neither own the Pope's judgment nor the Councils, in deciding controversies.
There is good reason to think, that the chief men of the Church of Rome, give
little credit themselves to the pretense of Infallibility. For in such great
Controversies, wherein considerable numbers of that Church are engaged on both
sides; these have some of them for many Ages continued without any satisfactory
decision, from their Infallibility; even in such cases, where such a decision
would contribute much to truth, would end quarrels, and be greatly useful for
the guiding all men's Consciences. And therefore the determining such things,
would be an excellent work of charity, but the leaving them undetermined, or at
least the allowing the liberty of rejecting any pretended or real
determination, may be politic, lest they should disoblige the contrary party.
I shall instance in that Question, which is at some times of concernment, to
all Men's Consciences of their Communion, whether the authority of the Pope, or
a General Council, be the greater? Which has never yet been decided, by the
consent of a Pope, and a General Council. Indeed in some smaller Councils 70
Decret. l. 3. Tit. 7. c. 1.
Leo the tenth did at the Lateran assert the Authority of the Pope above a
Council: And Pius the second, in a Provincial Council at Mantua, declared Ibid.
l. 2. Tit. 9. c. 1.
appeals from a Pope, to a future Council to be void and Schismatical: which
was also confirmed Ibid. c. 2.
by Julius the second. But this way of decision, is so little satisfactory
among themselves, that the Cardinal of Lorrain did in the Council of Trent
openly declare, Hist. Conc. Trid. l. 8. p. 580.
that the Council was above the Pope, and that this was the general sense of
the French Church. And diverse other Bishops spoke their judgments there, to the
same purpose.

9. And the General Councils of Basil and Constance asserted the authority of
the Council above the Pope; and yet this is no satisfactory decision, to them
of the contrary opinion. So that here we have the pretense to Infallibility,
whether in the Pope, or in a General Council, slighted by themselves as they
think fit. And this is a thing of such concern, that if the highest authority
be in the Council, this must fix the Infallibility there also (if there be any
such thing) because infallible determination must be by a Divine guidance, and
so must include God's Authority in that Determination, to which none can be
Superior. If this be seated in the Council, it would take down the Pope's
Plumes: If in the Pope, the World might be spared the trouble of General
Councils, as a needless thing, and then all those Christian Churches, Emperors
and Bishops (which will take in diverse Bishops of Rome) were very imprudent,
who either labored much for them, or took any great satisfaction in them.
Wherefore it must needs be a business of design, and not of integrity, to make
a loud noise about Infallibility, to prevail thereby upon the Consciences of
other men, when they have so low an esteem of it themselves.

10. Thirdly, No Infallibility of the Roman Church, Romish Infallibility
unknown to Primitive Christianity.
was ever known or owned in the Primitive Church; and therefore was never
delivered by Christ or his Apostles; but the pretense thereof is an Innovation
of later date. And whereas the Pope unjustly pretends to a singular right of
Succession, to the Authority and Prerogatives of S. Peter; it is observable,
that S. Peter himself, though an eminent and prime Apostle, even in a Council,
had no peculiar gift of Infallibility or judgment of decision above other
Apostles. For in the Council of Jerusalem, Acts 15. when after much
disputation, S. Peter had declared his sense, v. 7, 11. and after him S. James
expressed his judgment, v. 13, 21. the final determination of that Council, did
much more follow the words of S. James, than of S. Peter, v. 19, 20. with 28,
29. Wherefore the claim of Hist. Conc Trid. l. 7. p. 552.
Pius the fourth, in his Epistle to the Emperor, must have an higher Plea, than
that of Succession to S. Peter, that if the Bishop of Rome be present in a
Council, he does not only alone propose, but he also alone decrees, and the
Council adds nothing but Approbation.

11. Nor can it be imagined, that if the Primitive Church had owned any
Infallibility in the Pope, or Romish Church, that so Pious and good a Bishop as
Cyprian would so earnestly have opposed the declaration of Stephen, Bishop of
Rome, concerning the Baptism of Heretics. But he not only declares Stephen to
Cyp. Ep. 74.
be in an error, but declares him to have written proudly, impertinently,
ignorantly and imprudently; which sufficiently shows him to have known nothing
of his Infallibility. And Inter Ep. Cyp. Ep. 75.
Firmilianus a renowned Bishop of Cappadocia, declares his sense against the
Epistle and Judgment of Stephen also, approving S. Cyprian's answer to it, and
using severe expressions against the behavior and determination of Stephen, as
bold, insolent, and evil, improbe gesta. And Sent. Episcop. Conc. Carth. in
Cypr.
a Carthaginian Council of eighty seven Bishops, did unanimously declare their
judgment, for the baptizing Heretics who returned to the Church; which was
contrary to what the Bishop of Rome had determined. And that this Council did
sit, after Cyprian had received the Epistle, and Judgment of Stephen. Bishop of
Rome, is observed by Argum. Ep. Cyp. 73.
Pamelius. Now though all these Bishops were in an error, in accounting the
Baptism of all Heretics to be null, and that they ought generally to be
Baptized, when they returned to the Church; yet it cannot be supposed, that
they were so obstinately resolved in their error, as to reject the infallible
evidence of truth: When many of these very Bishops, who lived to understand
their error did, as Dial adv. Lucifer.
S. Hierome testifies, disclaim and reject it; and that Cyprian himself did so
(as did also those parts of the Eastern Church who adhered to Firmilian) is
judged not improbable by S. Aug. Ep. 48.
Austin, though it was not certain. But hence it appears, that since Stephen's
determination was slighted, and opposed by such eminent Bishops, both of the
Carthaginian and Eastern Church, who sincerely designed to embrace the truth,
no such thing was then owned as the Infallibility of the Romish Bishop. And if
Stephen did so generally declare, against the Baptizing any who returned from
any Heresy whatsoever, as he seems to do in the words of his Epistle, cited by
Ep. 74.
S. Cyprian, si quis a quacunque Haeresi venerit ad nos, etc. he erred on the
one hand, as they did on the other; and the determination of the general Conc.
Nic. c. 19.
Council of Nice and of Conc. Constable. c. 7.
Constantinople takes the middle way, requiring some sort of Heretics, who
kept the substantial form of Baptism, to be received upon their former Baptism;
and that others should be baptized, when they returned to the Church.

12. And the Practical judgment of the ancient Church, is concerning this case
sufficiently manifest in that when Heresies arose, and their errors and
impieties appeared necessary to be condemned, and the Catholic Doctrine was
necessary to be declared and confirmed by the greatest and fullest judgment
which could be made in the Church; this was not done by application to the
particular Church of Rome only, but by the summoning General Councils; which,
with all the troublesome Journeys and expenses attending them, had been a very
needless and vain thing, if the Romish Infallibility had then been owned. And
in the four first General Councils, the Bishop of Rome was personally present
in none of them, nor was his particular Sanction thought necessary to confirm
them: but they were all held in the Eastern parts of the Church, and all of
them desired, and obtained the Imperial Confirmation with respect to their
external force and effect. And the v Crackenthorp's Vigilius Dormitans. None
infallible who oppose the Doctrine of Christ, and contradict themselves.
fifth General Council was managed, perfectly contrary to the mind and sense of
Vigilius then Bishop of Rome.

13. Fourthly, Since so many Doctrines and Practices are asserted in the Church
of Rome, which are plainly contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles
(of which several instances are given in this Chapter) that Church ought not,
nor cannot be owned infallible, by those who own the Holy Scriptures and Christ
and his Apostles to be so. Besides this, I might add that the Romish Bishops
themselves have often some of them at one time contradicted, what others of them
at other times have affirmed. The Constitution of Boniface the Eighth, was
revoked by Clement. in l 3. Tit. 17. c. 1.
Clemens the Fifth, as scandalous and dangerous. And I above observed that
regal Supremacy in temporals, is owned by Innocentius the Third, but is
disowned in the style of many Bulls of Deposition by other Popes. But there
needs no other testimony against any pretended Infallibility, than its being
contradicted in what it delivers, by that evidence which is certainly
infallible. And there can scarce be a greater imposture and delusion, than such
a false pretense as this; which is designed both as a prop to uphold the whole
bulk and fabric of Popery, and a contrivance, to raise a very high veneration
thereof.

14. Secondly, Of Indulgences, and the pretense of freeing souls from Purgatory
thereby.
I shall consider the pretended power, of securing offenders from Purgatory, or
releasing their souls out of it, partly by the Priests Masses, and chiefly by
the Popes Indulgences, and being interested thereby in that treasure of the
Church, which he has power to dispense. For the Romanists tell us, that as
there is in sin a fault, and in mortal sins an obligation to eternal
punishment, which is discharged in the Sacrament of Penance and Absolution; so
there is an obligation to temporal punishment even in venial sins, and if this
be not sufficiently undergone in this life, by way of satisfaction, it must be
made up by the sufferings of Purgatory. And thus a model is contrived and drawn
up, to show how sinners may escape these evils of sin, without amendment. Now
sin indeed is of that pernicious and hurtful nature in every respect, that by
reason of it, God sometimes punishes persons and Families, even after true
repentance, and receiving the person into his particular favor; and such were
the judgments on David's House, after his Murder and Adultery. And I esteem
the practices of sin and vice, to be so hurtful, that though they be sincerely
repented of, if that repentance and the fruits of it be not very exemplary,
they will make abatements in the high degrees of the future reward. And strict
penitential exercises ought to be undertaken by all Penitents for greater
offenses, according to the quality of their transgressions. This in the
ordinary discipline of the ancient Church, was performed before the Church gave
Absolution, which often included the severe exercises of diverse years; and this
was the Exomologesis often mentioned in Tertullian and Cyprian. And if in danger
of death, such penitents were reconciled, who had not completed their
penitential exercises, Conc. Nic. c. 13.4. Conc. Carth. c. 76.
the Canons required that if they recovered, these must afterward be
performed. And these things were testimonies of their abhorrence of the sin,
their high value for the favor of God, and the privileges and Communion of
the Church, and that they had exercised themselves to undergo difficulties and
severities, rather than to forfeit them.

15. But concerning the Romish Purgatory; though God never revealed any such
thing, nor did the ancient Church believe it, I shall not here engage in that
dispute; but shall only observe, that this fiction of temperal punishment of
sin in Purgatory is somewhat unequal, since the body which is so great a
partaker in, and promoter of the sin, is wholly freed from all these
punishments, and rests quietly in its grave, whilst the soul is left alone to
undergo all those pains. And if the pretense of freeing offenders from great
sufferings in Purgatory be a fictitious thing; it serves the ill designs of
undermining holiness and true Christianity, and tends to raise a great
admiration of the Popes power in them that believe it, and to engage those to
the Romish. Church, who can please and satisfy themselves with the thoughts of
such Indulgences.

16. Now for the right understanding this, I shall take notice of so much as is
needful to be considered, out of their own approved Authors. Layman says,
Theol. Mor. l. 5. Tr. 7. c. 1. n. 1.
this indulgence is a remitting temporal punishment, which is due to God, out
of the Sacrament, by the application of the satisfaction of Christ and the
Saints: and is ibid. n. 4.
a free forgiving the punishment to be undergone in Purgatory, for sins
committed; or a commutation thereof into some light thing, by the mercy of God.
And ibid. c. 3. n. 1.
that a plenary Indulgence does dismiss all the pains, for sins which are to be
punished in Purgatory. And M. Becanus says, Sum. Th. Part. 3. Tr. 2. c. 28. q.
2.
Defunctis indulgentiae conceduntur, etc. Indulgences are granted to those who
have depaerted this life, in that the Pope applies to them so much of the
Churches treasury, as is sufficient to compensate the punishment, they should
undergo in Purgatory. And this Treasury consists of the Sufferings of Christ
which are infinite, and the sufferings of the Blessed Virgin, Apostles and
Saints, which was more than was needful for their own sins. And Bellarmine
having laid this as a foundation, on which Indulgences depend, de Indulg. l. 1.
c. 2.
that there is a treasure in the Church; and ibid. c. 3.
that the Church can apply this treasure, further declares, that such
Indulgences do set men free, ibid. c. 7.
a reatu poenae, non solum coram Ecclesia, sed coram Deo; from the guilt of
punishment, not only before the Church, but also before God: and that the
plenary and most full Indulgences do extend ibid. c. 9.
ad remissionem totius poenitentiae quae a Deo exigipossit, to the remitting
all that penance which can be required by God. Nor do these Indulgences avail
only according to their Doctrine to remit Penances, which are injoined in
Confession or other wise, but Laym. ubi supr. c. 3. n. 2.
ad omnes poenas etiam non injunctas se extendunt, they reach to all Penances
or punishments, even to such as are not enjoined: and that an Indulgence ibid.
n. 1. Bell. ubi sup. c. 9.
for one year, or for seven years, is a remitting so much punishment, as would
be taken off by the Penitential exercises of one year, or of seven years.

17. Now First, I shall observe, how this by rendering a holy life unnecessary,
tends to oppose the great design of the Gospel, and to render it ineffectual.
These under mine true piety of life.
For the precepts of the Gospel are the indispensable Laws of Christ's Kingdom,
which he will have observed, or else will say to such workers of iniquity as
will not obey his Gospel, depart from me, I never knew you. And the judgment to
come, the punishments of another world, and the manifold promises of the
Gospel, are all laid down as powerful Motives in the Religion of our Savior,
that men may be holy here, that so they may be happy hereafter. But how is all
this enervated and made void, if Attrition with Absolution will v. Sest. 3. n.
1. etc.
free sinners from the stain and fault of their sin, and from eternal
punishment: and when no further danger or evil can remain but some temporal
pains, these may be discharged (either by the exercises of some injoined
penances, or without them) by the kindness and favor of an Indulgence? and all
this may be done without any real exercises of mortification or an holy life.
Indeed the Romish Writers require, that the person who receives the benefit of
an Indulgence, should be in a state of grace: but then they also assert that
Absolution with the Sacrament of Penance, is sufficiect for this. And some of
the forms of Indulgences express this condition, si cordis and oris egerint
poenitentiam; if they shall practice repentance in heart and word: but then
their Doctors acknowledge this done by Attrition in the Sacrament of Penance,
and Confession.

18. There is indeed some act of Obedience required to be performed by the
person, who will interest himself in the benefit of these discharges from
punishment, but they usually are of little or no concern at all, with respect
to true inward and serious piety. Sometimes indeed the saying over some
particular prayer is enjoined; but even the bare visiting some place is also
sufficient to obtain plenary Indulgence; of which nature I shall mention two
instances. The one is that mentioned by Boil. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 12.
Bellarmine, that whosoever shall stand before the doors of S. Peter's Church at
Rome, when the Pope pronounces his solemn blessing at Easter, does receive a
plenary Indulgence: but this as the Cardinal there tells us, is no light thing,
being useful to profess the Faith, concerning the Head of the Church, and ad
honorem sedis Apostolicae, qui est finis illius Indulgentiae; and to promote
the honor of the Apostolical See, which is the end of that Indulgence. Which
last words are somewhat unwarily plain. The other Instance I shall mention is,
the visiting the Church of the Lady at Laureto, to which after some Indulgences
had been granted, by Benedict XII. Martin V. and Nicholas V. and some other
Popes, Horat. Tursellin. Lauretan. Hist. l. 5 c. 20.
Clemens VIII. so far enlarged these Indulgences, that he bountifully granted
the pardon of all their sins, to all persons who at any time of the year shall
orderly go to visit the Cell of the Virgin at Laureto. Now if any man can truly
think, that such acts as these, can so reconcile God to man, as to take off all
his displeasure to offenders, he must be a man so far of no Religion, as to
have no serious sense of the nature of God: and this is that state to which
such methods tend to bring men.

19. Secondly, Indulgences are a contrivance of gain,
It may be observed, that this contrivance includes in it a design of
Covetousness, and loving the wages of Unrighteousness, and cannot be excused
from being Simoniacal: and the feigned imparting to others an interest, in the
pretended treasury of satisfactions in the Church, is really made use of as a
color, whereby they increase their own treasuries of wealth. Indeed 70 Decret.
l. 3. Tit. 14. c. 1.
the selling Indulgences, or any Spiritual thing, is declared against, but the
enriching themselves by them is not; and how far the methods they use can be
called selling, I shall not be curious to dispute. Their Authors grant, that a
Priest is bound M. Bec. Sum. Th. P. 3. Tr. 2. c. 25. p. a. qu. 10, and 12.
ratione stipendii, upon account of his stipend, specially to offer and apply
the Sacrifice to him that gave the stipend, applying to him also illam
portionem satisfactionis, that portion of satisfaction, which that Priest has
a power to distribute. And in their Indulgences, there has been often expressed
the Condition of raising moneys, if that were to be employed in the regaining
the Holy Land, or the subduing Heretics, or enemies of the Roman Church. To
which purpose in the Bull of Innocentius the Third, to promote an expedition
into the Holy Land, to those who should give moneys according to their ability,
Urspergens. Chr. p. 329.
he grants full pardon of all their sins, and to them who would also go in
person, over and above, in retributione justorum, aeternae salutis pollicemur
augmentum, he promises an increase of eternal happiness, in the reward of the
just. And these are very great and liberal proposals, especially being assured
upon such terms, as may be performed by men destitute of true and serious
piety. But that which is most to be considered, is what is ordinarily
practiced, and generally known to be intended, and designed, in the grants of
these Indulgences, especially when they are annexed to certain places as to the
Lateran, and Laureto, and many others. For those persons are not accounted to
come regularly, and in such a manner as is proper for such as expect to receive
such great benefits, unless they bring along with them such oblations as are
suitable to their state. Of this nature Horatius Tursellinus throughout his
five Books of the History of the Cell. and Church of Laureto, takes notice of
diverse instances, of Princes, Cardinals, Noble men, and Women, Cities, and
diverse persons of great fame, who when they came in peregrination thither, some
of them offered golden Crosses and Crowns, rich Rings and Shrines bedecked with
costly Jewel, and other things of great worth and value, of which by reason of
the high worth and value of them, he gives at least two hundred particular
instances: when others also offered according to their ability, coming thither
in a daily concourse. The like kind of devotions are upon the same account paid
at Rome upon the like occasion, especially every twenty fifth year, being the
year of Jubilee: and in other places also, though not in so high a degree.

20. Besides the gainfulness of this contrivance, and a method to raise an high
admiraetion of the Papal power.
which was unknown to the Primitive Ages, it is hugely adapted to advance the
high esteem of the Papal power in all them who promise themselves any advantage
thereby. For if our Savior was justly and greatly admired for healing
diseases, and casting Devils out of the Bodies they possessed, and the Angel's
opening the Prison doors, and bringing forth S. Peter was deservedly esteemed a
work of wonder; how admirable must the power of the Pope be accounted, who by a
word speaking, can secure thousands from, or bring them out of the pains and
Prison of Purgatory; and has its effect upon the souls of men, and at such an
unknown a distance. Indeed some of their Authors speak doubtfully of the Popes
power in Purgatory, telling us that Laym. Theol. Mar. l. 5. Tr. 7. c. 7. n. 1,
3.
he can give Indulgences to them certainly, to wit, by offering to God
satisfactions for them, per modum suffragii, with prayers that he will deliver
their fouls: but that this has no certain and infallible effect, and God is
not bound to do what he requires, since this case is not within the Papal
Jurisdiction; for, quicquid solveris fuper terram, whatsoever thou shall loose
on earth, gives limits to the Jurisdiction of the Pope. But others speak
confidently of the effect, and de Ind. l. 1. c. 14.
Bellarmine's doubt whether Indulgences are profitable to the dead, ex justitia
and condigno, out of justice and desert, or whether it be ex benignitate Dei
solum and ex congruo, out of Divine benignity only, and from congruity. Both
these ways, neither of which the Cardinal dare reject, do render the Popes
Authority admirable: and if the latter way could be proved true, so far as it
imports what the Pope does herein, to be highly favored of God (which it
cannot be so long as the Gospel Covenant is in force) I should account this
more available, than the pretense of desert and proper worth. But
notwithstanding these differences in their notions; they who doubt of the
certain effect of Indulgences to deceased persons, to deliver them out of
Purgatory, acknowledge their efficacy, whilst applied to living persons to keep
them from it, and account the other at least very likely.

21. It is also a Politic Contrivance, Indulgences out of policy reserved to
the Pope alone,
to reserve the pretense of this Authority to the Pope alone to set free souls
out of Purgatory. For if there were any such thing as Purgatory, and any such
Treasury in the Church of Satisfactions, and any power left to the Church to
dispense these at pleasure to them who want a share in them (in all which the
Roman Church runs into strange exorbitancies) there can be no reason to
appropriate this power to the Pope, unless we will call a device of Policy to
exalt the dignity of the Roman See, a Reason. Their Writers grant, that other
Bishops may give to the living some Indulgences, but this Laym. ubl sup. c. 4.
n. 2.
to the souls departed, and with respect to Purgatory, they make peculiar to
the Pope. And both their private Authors, and the Bulls of Indulgence
themselves, found this Authority in the power of binding and loosing, and of
remitting and retaining sins, (which indeed contains an excellent and great
authority, which deserves to be better understood, but is grossly abused in the
Roman Church) and therefore in this special case, every Priest has as much a
right to claim this authority, as the Pope himself; since he can do altogether
as much in this case. The order of Priesthood is acknowledged to be the highest
order in the Ecclesiastical Offices, by the great Patrons of the Papal power,
and is so declared in de Ord. Sacram. p. 323.
the Roman Catechism; they grant the Priest to have a power to offer
propitiatory Sacrifices, for the quick and the dead, and own him to have such a
power of absolution, as thereby to put persons with Attrition into a state of
grace, and to deliver them from eternal destruction, and give them a title to
eternal life. But that the power of delivering souls out of Purgatory, by the
Benefit of Indulgences, may still be reserved to the Pope, they of the Church
of Rome declare, that the grant of Indulgences is Bell. de Ind. l. 1. c. 11.
Laym. ubi sup. c. 1. n. 4.
not from the power of order but of Jurisdiction, and thereupon they place it
in the Pope alone. But as to this case of delivering souls out of Purgatory,
they forget themselves when they again assert Bell ib. c. 14. q. 2. Laym. ib.
c. 7. n. 3.
that the Pope does not do this by a power of Jurisdiction, but by proposing or
exhibiting to God satisfactions, and by suffrages and prayers, entreating Gods
acceptance of them. But thus much can be also done, according to their
Doctrine, by every Priest, who offers the Sacrifice of the Mass, Conc.
Trident.
for the Quick and the Dead, for Sins, Punishment and Satisfactions. The Pope
indeed in his Indulgencies, is pretended to present to God the Satisfactions of
the Saints, together with those of Christ; but besides that the Satisfactions
of Christ must be of themselves sufficient, the act of the Papal Indulgence
being done out of the Sacrament, does not include a proper propitiatory
Sacrifice, and is therefore inferior to the act of the Priest in the Mass: And
it is the propitiatory Sacrifice, which must give the value to the
Satisfactions of the Saints. So that this great claim of peculiar authority in
this case unto the Roman Bishop, is without any solid foundation upon their own
Doctrinal Principles, and is wholly founded upon Policy, to create the higher
apprehensions of the Papal excellency: Only something is said, to make it
passable and plausible.

22. The last thing I shall here consider, and to Rome in the year of Jubilee.
is, the policy of making void all Indulgencies though plenary, and all
faculties of Indulgence granted to any other place, or persons, or upon any
conditions whatsoever, save only what is granted at Rome on the year of
Jubilee, which is now every twenty fifth year; save that it was a peculiar
favor of Greg. 13. Tursellin. Hist. Lauret. l. 4. c. 22.
to the Lady at Laureto, that Indulgentiis toto terrarum orb, ut fieri solet,
suspensis in Vrbis gratiam, unam excepit Aedem Lauretanam; When Indulgences
were suspended according to custom, throughout the whole World, for the benefit
of the City of Rome, that singular place was alone excepted. Had the good of
men been the principal design of these Indulgencies, it would have been a Work
of much greater mercy, and care of the welfare of men, that plenary
Indulgencies might constantly have been granted in all Countries, to them who
should perform the conditions required. But as the benefit of Indulgencies, is
wholly appropriated to Rome every twenty fifth year; so the Papal Bull requires
the performance of three days fasting, and also Prayers and giving Alms. And
some of their Casuists assert, Laym. Th. Mor. l. 5. Tr. 7. c. 8. n. 10.
that all this must be done in one week, or others at farthest affirm it must
be done within fifteen days whilst the Jubilee continues, as a Condition
necessary to partake of the benefit of the Indulgence. And consequently their
alms, being confined to those days, must by all persons then attending at Rome
be given there, to the great enriching the Wealth and Revenues of that Church:
or though some may be there devoted to the service of the Church in other
places; it is to be expected, that that Church in a more particular
consideration be then regarded, and interested therein.

23. The result of this whole Chapter is, that if disorderly disturbing the
peace of the Church and the World, and the unjust invading others rights; if
undermining and disregarding true piety; if undervaluing the dignity of Christ,
and the Majesty of God; and setting up and serving politic interests and
designs instead of Religion and true goodness, be things loathsome and contrary
to Christianity; there must then be sufficient cause for great dislike of, and
averseness from the Church of Rome, which promotes all these things by its
Doctrines and allowed and enjoined practices.

CHAP. III.
Of our Dissenters, where some of the different sorts of them are first
particularly considered, and then follows a more general consideration of them
jointly.
SECT. I. Of Quakers.
Dissenters do not only lie under the Censure of private persons, but even of
our public Laws and Constitutions; and therefore I shall faithfully and calmly
without prejudice enquire, Whether there be not in them just and great cause of
blame. Now these are not all of one Body so much as the Romanists are, (though
they also have their different parties) but are more divided in their several
ways of Communion and profession; and are only united so far, as to espouse the
same general interest against our established Government. And therefore that I
may be the more clear and impartial, I shall first take some view of the
several most famed Parties of them separately and distinctly; and then consider
them jointly.

2. And it is a matter of sad reflection, that when the ancient Christian zeal
contended so much for that Unity which our Religion earnestly injoineth, the
Spirit of Division has so far prevailed amongst them who withdraw from our
Church; that besides their unwarrantable separation from it, great numbers of
them have run into other select and distinct parties, and many of them very
monstrous. S. Austin observed that when the Donatists forsook the Catholic
Church, Cont. Epist. Parmen. l. 3. c. 4. and lib. de Haeres. n. 69.
they fell into diverse parties among themselves, inter ipsos multa facta sunt
schismata, alii atque alii separant, and of these the Maximinianists were the
most inonsiderable. And amongst us we had formerly wretched improvements of
Antinomianism into the lewdness of the Ranters; of seditious Principles, into
the fierceness of the Fifth Monarchy men; and of separation into Quakerism,
which is farthest removed from the Communion of the Christian Church, and from
many weighty points of the Christian Doctrine. The giddy progress of separation
was complained of in this Kingdom by one who (if I mistake not) is now not only
a practiser, but a Patron thereof, who not amiss resembled it J. H.
to the several peelings of an Onion, where first one is taken off by it self,
and parted, and then another, till at last there is nothing left but what is
apt to draw tears from the eyes of the Beholder. And the ill effect of our
divisions is so manifest, that Dr. Owen acknowledges that Of Evangelical Love,
p. 2.
it will be granted, that the Glory of God, the Honor of Christ, the progress
of the Gospel, with the Edification and peace of the Church, are deeply
concerned in them, and highly prejudiced by them. And since the several parties
condemn and disapprove each other, it is manifest from thence that all of them
(at most one only excepted) must be justly blameable for proceeding upon false
Principles, and unsound Assertions. And if any separating party can justify it
self, it must be able to plead truly, and manifest, that the Church from which
it departs, is so corrupt in Doctrine or Worship, that it cannot Communicate
therewith without sin; and that its differing from it is founded upon its
casting off such things as are really sinful and evil, still retaining and
embracing all such things as are true and good, even all the rules of Faith and
Life, and due Order, which the Christian Religion does direct and include.

3. Beginning with the Quakers, I might take notice of their want of ordinary
civil and courteous behavior, and outward expressions of reverence to
Governors; when Christianity injoins kindness, humility, courteousness, and
the due expressions of them to all men, and honorable respect to be given to
Superiors. I might also mention their condemning the use of an Oath, even in
judicial proceedings, which if rightly undertaken, is an act of Religion in a
solemn acknowledging the Omniscience and righteousness of God; and is the most
effectual way for the discovery of truth, the maintaining justice, preserving
rights, and ending strife. But waving very many blameable errors received
amongst them, I shall insist on four things, which their Teachers have both in
their Writings and Discourses, vigorously asserted; which are of such a nature,
that those who embrace these Principles, and practice according to them, may
well be esteemed to be as far from true Christianity, as any persons who
pretend to the name of Christians. Yet in so wild and Enthusiastic a Sect, I
do not undertake to give assurance that they in all things do all of them hold
the same opinions, but do hope some of them may be drawn off from some of these
evil Doctrines and Positions.

Here I shall observe,

4. First, Their denial of, and casting reproachful expressions upon the Holy
and Glorious Trinity. The acknowledging the Trinity is a great part of the
Christian Faith, our Creed directing us to believe in God the Father Almighty,
and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, and in the Holy Ghost. And Conc.
Nicen. and Constantinopol.
the two first General Councils of the Christian Church, were in a good part
employed in vindicating and asserting this Doctrine against the Arian and
Macedonian Heresy. And this Christian Faith is not only contained in, and
plainly deduced from the Holy Scriptures; but is summarily expressed in that
form of Christian Baptism which our Savior established, when he commanded his
Apostles to Baptize in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. And this Baptismal form which the Holy Scriptures express, is so
considerable a testimony to the Doctrine of the Trinity, that many of those
Heretics who denied the Trinity, thought themselves concerned not to own this
generally established form of Christian Baptism, but boldly undertook to
innovate and change that form our Lord had ordained, and his Church from him
Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Tert. de Bapt. c. 6. and 13.
had universally received. Upon this account Sozom. Hist. l. 6. c. (...).
Eunomius altered the Baptismal form, not Baptizing in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, but into the death of Christ. And
amongst the Arians, who owned not the Son to be coeternal and of the same
substance with the Father, the form of Baptism was perverted; and Theod. Lect.
Collect. l. 2.
Theodorus Lector relates concerning an Arian Bishop, who Baptized into the
Name of the Father by the Son, and in the Holy Ghost. And before these, when
Paulus Samosatenus denied the Divinity of Christ, his followers the Paulianists
were injoined by the Council of Conc. Nlc. c. 19.
Nice to be rebaptized, since the Baptismal form by them used v. Justel. in
Cod. Ecel. c. univ. 19.
was not into the Holy Trinity, which he did not acknowledge. And that one God
in Trinity in whom the members of the Catholic Christian Church believed, and
into whose Name they were Baptized, he is the object of the Christian Worship
and Service; and with one heart does that Church give glory to the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost: but they who disown the Trinity, cannot be expected to
perform this Worship and Service thereto.

5. But besides what might be cited out of some of the Quakers Books against
the Trinity, I shall take the liberty to give a little account of what my self
has formerly been concerned in. Almost three and twenty years since, some of
the chief Quakers being busy in these parts, two of their Principal Teachers
sent to me Nine Questions, or Positions rather, challenging me to dispute with
them; the first of which was against the three Persons of the Deity, and the
other took in all those things I here discourse of against the Quakers, with
more also. I then accepted this challenge, and we went through all these nine
in three days discourse. In the first day they plainly declared themselves
against the three Persons of the Trinity; much as they had done about the same
time in their Conference with The Quaker disarmed.
Mr. Smith at Cambridge. At that time in the Year 1659, I had the opportunity
of charging George Whitehead, in the presence of George Fox, and as great a
number of other Witnesses as the specious room in which we were could contain,
with as horrid and blasphemous words against the Trinity as I ever read or
heard of, which were contained in a Book written by him, and three other
Quakers against one Mr. Tounsend, which was Entitled Ishmael and his Mother
cast out. I even tremble to write the words, which the licentiousness of those
times gave way to, Ishmael, etc. p. 10.
The three Persons which thou would divide out of one like a Conjurer, are
denied, and thou shut up with them in perpetual darkness, for the Lake and the
Pit. But he neither did nor could deny that this wicked assertion was written
and published by him and his Companions: and the same thing was urged against
him out of the same Book at the Conference at Cambridge.

6. Sometime after this, as if they had a mind to show themselves particularly
zealous in the opposition of the Holy Trinity, I received a paper Directed to
them, that affirm that there are three distinct Persons in the Godhead, and
that the Father is the first, and the Word the second, and the Spirit the
third: and that the second was begotten as to his Godhead.
of Five Queries, containing very many branches under them, wholly levelled
against the Doctrine of the Trinity, and subscribed by George Whitehead, and
George Fox. And after I had returned an Answer to these, I received another
large paper containing a long Harangue against the Holy Trinity, with George
Whitehead's name alone subscribed. In this paper which I have by me, it is
declared, That to call three distinct persons in the Trinity, are Popish terms,
and names the Papists do call the Godhead by. And concerning the eternal
generation of the Son of God, it is there said, Thou art one with the Papists
in thy Doctrine in this thing, who in one of their Creeds do affirm, That
Christ is God begotten before all Worlds, when he was begotten as to his
Sonship and Manhood, and in time brought forth and manifest amongst the Sons of
men. Thus the most excellent truths may be misrepresented under odious names,
and by erroneous persons be called Popish.

7. Secondly, Their disparaging the Holy Scriptures, which are the Rule of the
Christian Faith and Religion. The Scriptures contain the Prophetical and
Apostolical Doctrine; and this Doctrine is so certain and full, that if an
Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, S. Paul denounces him to be
accursed. But their denying the Scriptures to be the word of God, (though they
admit them to contain truth) and their setting up the Light within them as
their great Rule (both which are done frequently in their Writings and
Conferences) is that which tends to undermine the Authority of the Divine
Writings, and to substitute another rule which is very defective, various and
uncertain, and of dangerous consequence. For if we consider men as they truly
are, the Light within them is the light of Reason and natural Conscience, with
those improvements of knowledge and understanding which the Christian
Revelation has made in the mind and sentiments of men. Now though this be
very considerable and needful to be attended to; yet to make this and not the
Holy Scripture the main Rule and Guide in matters of Christian Faith and life,
is to prefer the light of Nature with the advantages it has from Christian
converse and Oral Tradition (or the delivery of truth from one to another,
according to the thoughts, opinions and judgments of men, though mixed with
many errors and much uncertainty) before the infallible and unerring direction
of the Holy Spirit in the Divine Scriptures. And while the Scribes and
Pharisees disparaged the Scriptures in preferring the Traditions of their
Elders; and the Romish Church does much to the same purpose, this Position of
this Novel Sect is rather more unaccountable, than either of those other
practices. For though they established mistaken, false and erroneous Rules, yet
the things dictated thereby were approved by the joint consideration of many
select men, whom they esteemed men of greatest understanding; while this way
directs every man, how corrupt and erroneous soever his mind may be, to set up
his own thoughts and apprehensions, to be a sufficient Rule and Guide. And this
must suppose every man's own conceptions to be infallible, though they be never
so contrary to one another, or to the Divine Revelation.

8. But if we consider the followers of this Sect according to the pretenses of
many of them, the Light within them, must have chief respect to some
Enthusiastic motions and impulses. Such things were pretended to by the Theod.
Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 10.
Messalians and other Heretics of old: But besides what may be said against
such pretenses in general, the manifest falsehood of them is in these particular
cases apparent from the plain errors they assert contrary to the sure Doctrine
of Christianity. And to set up any Enthusiastic rule of Religion includes a
disparaging the Revelation of Christ and his Apostles, which is the right
instruction in the true Christian Religion; and this is ordinarily also
blasphemous against God, in falsely making him the author of such errors by
vainly pretending inspiration, which are evidently contrary to what he has
truly revealed by Christ and his Gospel.

9. Thirdly, Their disowning Christ's special Institutions; to wit, the
establishing the Communion of his true Catholic Church, and his Ministry, and
the Holy Sacraments. Their disregard to the Communion of the Christian Church,
and their frequent reproaches against it, and the Ministers thereof, are very
notorious. But I shall here chiefly insist on what concerns the Sacraments,
which Holy institutions they generally disuse; and against the use of these
their Teachers have both spoken and written. Now this is a thing so evil and of
such dangerous consequence, that besides the disobedience to what our Lord has
constituted and commanded by his plain precepts, they hereby reject those
things which the Gospel appoints to be eminent means of Communion and Union
with the Church and Body of Christ. Such things are both the Sacraments, both
that of Baptism and that of the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 12.13. chap. 10.16, 17.
And this Union and Communion according to the ordinary method of the Gospel
Dispensation is necessary to Membership with the Catholic Church. And the
disowning and rejecting these things, is the refusing the means of grace which
God has appointed, for the conveying the blessings of his Covenant, and
particularly the remission of sins, to such persons, who by performing the
other conditions of the Covenant, are duly qualified for the receiving the same
in the use of these administrations, Act. 22.16. Mat. 26.28. Our Lord appointed
Baptism to be a part of the condition of obtaining salvation, Mar. 16.16. He
that believes and is Baptized shall be saved. And the ancient Christians had
such an high esteem thereof, that Tertullian begins his Book de Baptismo on
this manner, Foelix Sacramentum aquae, quia ablutis delictis pristinae
caecitatis, in vitam aeternam liberamur; Happy Sacrament of Baptism, because
the faults of our former blindness being washed away, we are set free unto
eternal life. And our Lord has declared, that except we eat his flesh, and
drink his blood, we have no life in us, Joh. 6.53. and has appointed the Holy
Communion to be an eminent and peculiar way of eating his Body, and drinking
his Blood. And what then can be said for them who grossly neglect, and
especially for them who declare against, and totally reject these Sacred
Institutions? And if under the Old Testament God was so highly displeased with
him who neglected Circumcision, as to denounce him to be cut off from his
people, Genesis 17.14. and declared that they who attended not on the Passover,
should bear their sin, Number. 9.13. he cannot be pleased with the violating those
Institutions which are of an higher nature, being established by the Son of God
himself under the Gospel.

10. Fourthly, The Doctrine of perfection as held by them who declare
themselves thoroughly free from sin. For this undermines all penitential
exercises, which take in the great part of the true Christian life; and makes
void confession of sin, and sorrow for it, together with prayer and application
to the Sacrifice of Christ for remission; and a diligent care of amendment. We
acknowledge and assert that every pious Christian does overcome the power of
sin, so that he does not serve it, but lives in the practice of good Conscience
toward God and man. This is such a life that the Holy Scriptures speak much of
the excellency and real holiness and purity thereof, and its freedom from sin.
And the ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, give large and high commendations
thereof. Polycarp says Ep. ad Philip. p. 16.
that he who has charity is free from all sin: which has some affinity with
those words of the Apostle, Romans 13.8. he that loves another, has fulfilled
the Law. And Origin speaks of the Christian man as being pure from sin, Cont.
Cells. l. 3. p. 148, 149.
and having left off to sin; which is of like nature with not continuing any
longer therein, Romans 6.2. as having departed from a vicious, wicked and impure
life. And the Christian life is a perfect life, as it greatly outdoth the
practice of evil men, and is in it self excellent, and contains a resemblance
of God, Mat. 5.44-48. and as it is guided by the fear of God, and directed to
the eschewing evil, and doing what is just and good, Job 1.1. Psalm. 37.37.

11. And every true Christian does and must perform all the necessary
conditions in the Gospel Covenant for acceptance with God, and obtaining
Salvation; or otherwise he can never be saved. And the practice of Faith and
true holiness; the subduing lusts and evil affections; and being renewed after
God, is included in these conditions. But the terms and conditions of the
Gospel Covenant are not the same thing, but must be differently considered from
the rules of duty which the Gospel injoins. For a constant practice of every
duty toward God and man, and a careful performance of every moral precept
without any transgression thereof is injoined more highly under the Gospel,
than ever it was before. But the conditions of the Gospel Covenant, are upon
more mild and gentle terms of grace, than were contained under the foregoing
Dispensations: for they admit and approve true uprightness and sincerity of
obedience, though there may some failings and imperfections attend it; and they
allow of repentance, and promise mercy and pardon to those offenders who are
truly penitent. So that the rules of duty considered in their large extent, do
so far show what we are obliged to perform, that whenever we fail in the
least part thereof, we thereupon need the benefit of the pardoning mercy of
God, and the atonement and expiation of our Savior; to which when we discern
our failing in the exercise of self-reflexion, we are to apply our selves
according to the directions of the Gospel, with a pious and penitent behavior.
But the great and necessary conditions of the Gospel and the Covenant of grace,
contain those things which are of such indispensable necessity to be performed
and observed by us, that the mercy of God will never accept of those who
neglect them, nor will it pardon the omission thereof. Such conditions under
the Gospel Revelation, are the embracing the Christian Faith, the diligent
exercise of a holy life, and under the sense of our failings, an humble address
to God through Christ for his mercy, pardon and supplies of further grace, with
penitential exercises.

12. And in the best of men who exercise themselves diligently in piety and the
discharge of a good conscience, there may be many things wherein they fail and
come short of the exact performance of what they ought to do. And therefore our
Savior taught his Disciples ordinarily to pray, forgive us our Trespasses; and
appointed that petition to be part of that prayer which he directed and
commanded them to use. Upon which words of the Lords Prayer, Cyp. de Orat. Dom.
S. Cyprian observes, how every one is hereby taught and instructed that he
offends every day, when he is commanded daily to pray for the pardon of his
sins. And he observes also how constant a need every person has of seeking for
and obtaining pardon for his failings, in that upon this account our Lord
urges the necessity of our constant care of forgiving others, because
otherwise our heavenly Father will not forgive us; and therefore he gives this
as a rule to be always practiced whenever we pray, Mark 11.25. When ye stand
praying, forgive if ye have ought against any, that your Father also which is
in Heaven may forgive you your trespasses. And from the consideration of the
Lords Prayer, Aug. Ep. 89.
S. Austin well observes, that if the Christian state here were so far perfect
as to be free from all offenses, our Savior would never have taught such a
Prayer to his Church, to be constantly used by his Disciples when they pray,
and even by the Apostles themselves. And in the Institution of the Lords
Supper, our Savior tendered the Sacrifice of his Body and Blood to be received
by Christians in the continued administration of that Ordinance, for the
remission of sins. All which does manifest that Christian life and
Gospel-obedience, which is accepted upon the conditions of the Covenant of
grace, is not an absolute sinless obedience, though it does include a real
purity of heart, and integrity of conversation. And the pious Christian is
sometimes called perfect, with respect to that excellency to which he has
attained, Phil. 3.15, 16. and yet at the said time in a different sense is not
acknowledged to be perfect, Phil. 3.12. by reason of the defects which are
still remaining. Hence the Holy Scriptures often speak to this purpose, that in
many things we offend all, and that there is no man that lives and sins not,
and that if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us.

13. And we further assert and acknowledge, that in the Christian state there
is also a perfection by way of comparison, in them who have arrived to greater
degrees, and a more eminent height and growth in Christian graces and virtues,
than others: and this excellent state is very desirable, and ought to be
diligently endeavored by every pious man. But no such persons either will or
can truly say, that henceforth they have no need of any interest in the mercy
of God for the forgiving their failings, or in the benefits of Christ's Merits
and Sacrifice, for obtaining thereby pardon and remission. But Ep. ad Ephesians. p.
18. and Philad. p. 41. Ed. Vos.
Ignatius, when ready to lay down his life by Martyrdom, acknowledged his
imperfection. And Paed. l. 1. c. 2.
Clemens Alexandrinus describes the Christian, that his failings must be as
little as is possible, and he must strive against all disorders of affections,
and disown all customs of sin: and it is an excellent thing to be free from all
fault, but this is the state of God. The imperfections of such men as Asa and
Job, and others who are called perfect, are noted in the Scripture. And that
same Epistle in which S. John speaks so much of him that is born of God that he
sins not, as having rejected a vicious and evil life, and being set free from
the service thereof, he also declares against him who says he has no sin, 1 John 1.8. directs confession of sin, v. 9. and speaking concerning those who
are in a true Christian state, says, that Jesus Christ the righteous is the
propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. And who, who examines himself, can
pretend himself free from every disorder in any passion or affection, from all
failure in word or thought; and that he can be charged with no neglect of any
duty at any time, either toward God or man, in any relation whatsoever, nor
with any blameable defect in the manner of the performance thereof? And the
pretense to perfection and sinless practice is the more fond and unreasonable
in this Sect, because of the gross and heinous errors of judgment, and
consequently of practice which they are guilty of, together with many words of
falsehood, censoriousness or uncharitableness.

14. Now the great hurt and danger of this opinion, concerning perfection is,
First, That it makes void such duties as confession, repentance, and
application to the benefits of Christ's expiatory Sacrifice, which things are
not only injoined upon Christians by the frequent commands of the Gospel; but
are also proposed as the conditions for obtaining the pardoning mercy and
favor of God: and the exercise of repentance, and bringing forth fruits meet
for repentance, contains very much of the practical part of the duties of the
Christian Religion. Secondly, It greatly misrepresents the Covenant of Grace,
as if together with the rules of an holy life, and the assistances enabling
thereto, it did not, for the encouraging our best and sincere endeavors, make
allowances for the imperfections of the upright man's obedience, and propose
pardon to them who are truly penitent. If the Gospel did not admit these
gracious terms and conditions, the state of the best sort of men would be
miserable. But S. John joins these two together, 1 John 2.1. the strictness of
the Gospel rule, that will not allow of any sin, My little children these
things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and the gracious conditions of pardon
through the merits of Christ; if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation, etc.

15. Wherefore we acknowledge the Christian life to have in its degree an
Evangelical perfection; whereby in the upright Service of God it is free from
the dominion of sin, and is diligent in the progress of grace and piety, and
obtains pardon for its offenses. But with respect to its practice, as Aug. ad
Bonif. l. 3. c. 7.
S. Austin observed, ad ejus perfectionem pertinet ipsius imperfectionis and in
veritate cognitio, and in humilitate confessio: It is a branch of his
perfection truly to know, and humbly to acknowledge his imperfection. For as he
speaks in another place, Retrac. l. 1. c. 19.
Who can be completely perfect, but he who observes all the Commandments;
amongst which this is one, injoined upon all Christians, that we must pray,
forgive us our trespasses, quam orationem usque ad finem seculi tota dicit
Ecclesia, This is the prayer which the whole Church makes to the end of this
world.

SECT. II.
Of the Fifth Monarchy men, and the Millenary Opinion.
Seekers, Ranters, and various Enthusiasts; I shall take some notice of the
Fifth-Monarchy men, who, since his Majesty's return to his Kingdom, made an
attempt to put in practice their evil and wretched Principles. The notion of
our Savior's personal Reign a thousand years upon Earth, has deceived many
persons in the Christian Church, through their misunderstanding some
expressions in the Apocalypse (to which purpose also they applied many other
Scriptures): though the ancient opinions of many worthy persons in the
Christian Church who were led away by this error, did still retain the meek and
peaceable temper of Christianity. In Esai. l. 9. in fin. l. 15. in init and
passim.
S. Hierome in many places speaks of this opinion as a Jewish error, and
perstringeth the embracers thereof as Judaizers. And indeed this notion had
some considerable affinity with the Jewish expectation concerning the Messiah,
that he should appear as a Temporal Prince, to Reign gloriously and powerfully
upon Earth: and those Christians who were led away with this mistake, looked
for the restoring and rebuilding the City of Jerusalem, when this Kingdom
should appear, with other things too much savouring of Judaism.

2. And that this earthly and worldly Reign of Christ was very agreeable to the
dreams and fancies of the Jews, may be yet somewhat further manifested by
observing that even Gem. in Sanhed. c. 11. n. 11.
the Jewish Talmud speaks of the time of a thousand years; when God shall renew
the World, and he alone shall be exalted and Reign, and the righteous shall
enjoy outward and temporal delights in the world. And some of the Rabbis do
more particularly express their sense concerning this state, insomuch that in
the Commentaries of R. Abraham on Dan. 12.2. as his words are related by in
Exc. Gem. Sanh. ib.
Cocceius, it is said that as he understands that Prophecy, the just who died
in exile out of the Land of Israel, at the coming of the Messiah, should be
raised again, and have all manner of delightful Food, Fishes, Fowls and great
Cattle; and then should die a second time, and be raised again at the
Resurrection of the dead, and then should be in the other world, where they
should neither eat nor drink, but enjoy the brightness of the glory of God. But
so far as these things relate to earthly and sensual pleasures, they might well
enough suit the temper and disposition of the Jews, and were agreeable to those
carnal delights which Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. (...).
Cerinthus talked of in the Kingdom of Christ on Earth for a thousand years;
but such things savor not of the true Spirit of Christianity, but are plainly
opposite thereto.

3. But it must be acknowledged that there have been diverse worthy persons in
the ancient Church, and some of late, who have embraced the Millenary opinions,
but have still retained such Principles and Opinions as are suitable to the
peaceableness and Spiritual purity of Christianity. Such besides Papias, were
Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Apollinarius, Tertullian, Lactantius and others of
old, and Mr. Mede in this last age. These looked for the coming of our Savior
with his Martyrs and other Saints raised from the dead, to Reign on Earth
before the end of the World. Their chief ground was from Rev. 20.4. But their
interpretation of those words concerning the Souls of them that were beheaded,
etc. living and reigning with Christ a thousand years (besides much that may be
otherwise said against it) cannot agree with v. 7, 8, 9. Where after the
thousand years are ended, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and shall go
out to deceive the Nations, and Gog and Magog shall compass the camp of the
Saints, and the beloved City. But such things cannot agree to the time of a
thousand years after our Saviors second coming, nor is there indeed any
mention made in the foregoing Verses of Christ's coming to Reign here upon
Earth. And therefore the Millenary Opinion was deservedly rejected and
disclaimed by Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. ult.
Eusebius, as being against the true sense of the Prophetical Scriptures.

4. But according to the Prophetic style, the living again of those who were
dead, (yea so long dead that their bones were dry) is an expression of a Church
or State delivered out of affliction and calamity, and advanced to a more
prosperous and flourishing condition, as is manifest from Ezekiel. 37.2, 3, and v.
11, 12, 13, 14. and Isai. 26.19. and the continuing under a depressed state is
expressed by being so dead as not to rise, v. 14. And when the Church or the
Saints of the most high are represented to possess the Dominion and Government
of the World, or that the Empire of the World should become Christian, and the
Rule and Government thereof be administered by them who professed Christianity,
this is signified by the Dominion of one like the Son of man, and giving him a
Kingdom, Dan. 7.13, 14. and the Saints of the most high possessing the Kingdom,
v. 18, and 22. and by being caught up to God and to his Throne, Rev. 12.5.
which are expressions of like import with that of reigning with Christ.

5. But though this mistake of the Chiliasts had so far spread it self, that it
was entertained by many worthy men in the first ages of the Church, I cannot
think it to have had so universal a reception in that time, as some very
learned men are inclined to believe. S. Hierome mentions Papias de Script.
Eccl. in Pap.
to be accounted to have given the first rise to this opinion, and Hist. Eccl.
l. 3. c. (...).
Eusebius speaks to the same purpose, who also observes him to have been a man
of good note and esteem, but of a mean judgment; and that while he was
inquisitive concerning whatsoever he could learn to have been spoken by the
Apostles, and some Apostolical men, he being too credulous, delivered some
things as Doctrines and Parables spoken by our Savior, which were fabulous. In
Just. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph.
Justin Martyr, there are plain expressions that himself and many other
Christians embraced this Opinion of the Chiliasts, but still it appears that he
granted other Christians not to own this assertion. And when Eusebius. Hist Eccl.
l. 7. c. (...).
Dionysius of Alexandria, writing against the Book of Nepos an Egyptian Bishop,
which he had composed to maintain the opinion of the Chiliasts, does declare,
that this Opinion spread from Arsenoites had occasioned Schisms and defections
in some whole Churches in those parts; this is a plain evidence that the
Churches of Egypt, and those under Alexandria had remained free from receiving
the error of the Chiliasts till the time of Nepos, which was in the beginning
of the third Century, and diverse of them also were soon reduced from it again
by the labors and diligence of Dionysius, as is expressed in the same place.

6. But though this Opinion in its general consideration be an error manifest
enough, occasioned by the misunderstanding of the Prophetical expressions,
which suitably to the visions and representations they had of things, is more
Figurative and Emblematical than other parts of the Scriptures: yet that which
I chiefly aim at, is a far worse superstructure, which is built upon this
foundation. For there have been a furious and fierce sort of men who embracing
this error, have therewith espoused such pernicious Principles and Practices,
that the bare naming them, is enough to show them grossly inconsistent with
Christianity, whilst under a pretense of making way for Christ's Kingdom, they
do in disorderly and unchristian methods, set up themselves in opposition to
other Governors. These are of a seditious temper, but are far from being
governed by those Laws and Precepts of Christ's Kingdom, which injoin the
necessity of peace, and meekness, and being subject. These men when they think
fit, are for taking the Sword, as was done by Venner and his Company, to fight
against the Government and Authority, which they were bound to submit unto;
which besides the open Rebellion in resisting the higher Powers with a
presumptuous and daring confidence, Sect. III.
shows such a cruel and bloody Spirit as is extremely contrary to the
innocence, gentleness and meekness of the Christian Religion. These also were
of that ambitious and haughty temper, that whilst they made use of the name of
Christ, they attempted thereby to claim to themselves against all right, the
possession of Authority and rule, opposing herein the order of the World, the
Ordinance of God, and the Gospel rules of humility and obedience. And this
behavior in all these particulars mentioned, is so contrary to the plain
Principles of humanity as well as of Christianity, that it may be a convictive
instance to let all men see into what strange and abominable miscarriages, the
prevalency of the wretched vanity of a wild Enthusiastic Spirit may misguide
those men who are deluded thereby.

SECT. III. Of Anabaptists.
1. IN discoursing of those who are ordinarily among us called Anabaptists, I
shall take no notice of many evil Opinions and cruel Practices, which those who
go under that name have been guilty of, especially in foregin Countries, but
shall confine my self wholly to the consideration of Anabaptism, not in the
strict notion of the word, but as it is commonly understood amongst us. And in
this sense it especially includes Antipaedobaptism, as denying Infant Baptism,
and disowning the persons Baptized in their Infancy, from being truly Baptized,
and thereby Members of the Church; and asserting thereupon, that it is
necessary they should be rebaptized. But the evil of this their opposition
against the Baptism of Infants, consists especially in three things.

2. First, In that the foundation of this Opinion is untrue, and gives a false
representation of the grace of God in the New Covenant. For God by his grace,
does receive Infants born in the Church, to be under his Covenant, and to
partake of the benefits and blessings thereof: and therefore they ought to be
admitted to that Ordinance, which is a Seal of that Covenant, and contains a
particular tender and application of the benefits thereof unto those who are
duly qualified to receive them. And since this Covenant owneth Infants to be
Members of the Church of God, they ought not to be debarred from the solemn
admission thereunto. When God made his Covenant with Abraham, he extended it to
him and to his Seed: and whereas God then appointed Circumcision to be a token
of this Covenant, Genesis 17.11. and a Seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans
4.11. he still commanded that all the Males in their infancy should be
Circumcised, Genesis 17.12. which is a manifest evidence that they were interested
in this Covenant made with Abraham. And this precept of Circumcision concerning
the Infant Males, continued in force until the coming of our Savior, and
thereby Infants born in the Jewish Church, were owned and received to be
members of that Church. Now our Saviors coming was not to confine the Church
to narrower limits, but to extend and enlarge it.

3. And it may not be amiss to observe, that the Jews themselves did generally
acknowledge that the privilege of having such Children admitted into their
Church in their infancy, whose Parents were members thereof, was not peculiar
to that Nation alone, but did also belong to those who from among the Gentiles
became Proselytes to the Jewish Religion. When they admitted the chief sort of
Proselytes which were called the Proselytes of righteousness, this was usually
done Seld. de Syned. l. 3. c. 3. p. 34, 37-40. Hor. Hebr. in Mat. 3.6.
by Circumcision together with a kind of Baptism, or washing them (with respect
to their uncleanness in their Gentilism) and Sacrifice, as Mr. Seldom, and Dr.
Lightfoot and others have observed: who also have manifested from the Jewish
writers, that they did usually admit Children, even Infants with their Parents.
And if the Mother was admitted into the number of this sort of Proselytes when
she was with Child, that Child afterward born, was supposed not to need any
other washing, but if it was a Male, was received only by Circumcision. And it
also appears by the testimonies produced by the latter of these Writers Hor.
Heb. ibid.
that they ordinarily admitted the Infants of Gentiles to be Proselytes, if
they were taken into the care and education of Israelites: and this was
agreeable to what God had established concerning him who was born in Abraham's
House, or bought with money of any stranger not of his Seed.

4. And that the New Testament does particularly admit Infants into the Church
of God, and gives them a right to partake of the benefits of his Covenant, as
well as the Old Testament did, might be justly presumed, because there is not
any thing said or done by our Savior which does exclude them, nor is there any
thing declared by God, whereby he expresses his altering the terms of his
Covenant, so as in this particular to confine it into a less and straiter
compass under the Gospel. But besides this, there are plain expressions in the
New Testament, that Infants are received as Members of the Church of God, and
interested in the promises of his Covenant under the Christian Dispensation.
Our Savior says of them, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mar. 10.14.
and S. Peter persuades the Jews, Act. 2.38, 39. Repent and be baptized -- for
the promise is to you and to your Children; and the same thing may be inferred
from other Texts of Scripture. And these expressions especially considering
what God had established and injoined in the time of the Old Testament, do
sufficiently declare this sense of the Gospel Covenant, that Children and
Infants are included therein.

5. And whereas the Judaizers did earnestly contend with the Apostles, about
the necessity of Circumcision, and other Jewish Rites to be continued in the
Church, we read of no contest about the admission of their Children into the
Church. Had the Apostles and the Christian institution herein differed from the
Rules received under the Old Testament, in not admitting Children into the
Church of God; these men would no doubt as eagerly have contended with the
Apostles about this thing as about the other; since this was a branch of Gods
ancient Covenant, and such a branch as they could not but think to be of high
concernment to themselves and their Posterity. But the Christian Doctrine
plainly acknowledges that Children were reputed holy, if but one of their
Parents were Christians or Believers, 1 Cor. 7.14. and therefore such Children
which otherwise had been unclean, were accounted to belong to the Church, by
virtue of that relation they had to such Believing Parents. And when the
Apostles are said to have Baptized persons and all theirs, or all their
Household, upon the consideration now mentioned, it is not to be doubted but
Children and Infants were included in these expressions, Act. 16.15. and v. 33.
1 Cor. 1.16. and also in that other precept of Baptizing all Nations, and
making them Disciples, Mat. 28.19. And this will receive further confirmation
from the ordinary and usual practice of the ancient Christian Church in
Baptizing Infants, which I shall by and by mention.

6. Indeed under the Gospel it was necessary that adult persons, both Jews and
Gentiles, should first be taught the Christian Doctrine, and own their belief
thereof, and undertake the practice of repentance and obedience, before they
could be Baptized into the Christian Church. But this gives no support to them
who oppose the Baptism of Infants; since even under the Old Testament, such
persons who being adult, were received as Proselytes to the Jewish Church, were
first to be acquainted with the Law of God, (d) and then to profess their
owning and believing in the God of Israel, Seldom. ubi sup.
before they were admitted into that Church by Circumcision, and other solemn
Rites. And this reasonable and necessary observation, with respect to those who
attained to years of discretion, was well consistent with their Circumcising
Infants: and the Divine Law injoined, that when strangers were desirous to
embrace the Jewish Religion, and were admitted thereto, all their Males (and
therefore even those which were Infants) must be Circumcised, Exodus 12.48.

7. And those words of S. Paul, from which the favorers of Anabaptism have
endeavored to prove, that under the New Testament none (and therefore no
Infants) are interested in the Gospel Covenant and Membership of the Christian
Church, by being born of Christian Parents, are greatly mistaken. S. Paul
says, Romans 9.6. They are not all Israel, which are of Israel. v. 7. Neither
because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children: but in Isaac shall
thy Seed be called. For, 1. These words have no peculiar respect to the time
and state of the New Testament; but they give an account how the promise to the
Seed of Abraham was to be understood, from the very time in which it was made
to Abraham. And the Apostle here shows, that this Promise and Covenant was
particularly fixed upon Isaac and his Family, v. 7. and then upon Jacob, v. 13.
and yet then Infants were constantly Circumcised. 2. The true sense of these
words is, that the Promise and Covenant of God, to and with Abraham and his
Seed, did not bind him to continue all the posterity of Ishmael or other Sons
of Abraham; nor yet the Posterity of Esau, to be his peculiar Church and
people, though these were Circumcised, and lineally descended from Abraham, but
had departed from the Religion, Piety, Faith, and Obedience of their Father
Abraham. And from hence the Apostle proves that the same promise can be no
security to the Jews or the Posterity of Jacob in their unbelief and
disobedience: but God can otherwise accomplish his promise made to the Seed of
Abraham, by accomplishing it to them who walk in the steps of the Faith of
Abraham. 3. As this true sense is wholly alien from proving Infants not to be
members of the Christian Church; so the sense imposed upon them by the
Anabaptists, is neither agreeable to the words themselves, and the scope of
that place, nor to such other expressions of the New Testament, as I have above
mentioned.

8. Secondly, This Opinion and Practice of Anabaptism, is very uncharitable to
Infants born in the Christian Church, upon a double account. For, First, The
consequence of this Position will be to take away that great hope of Salvation
which the true Principles of Christianity do afford, concerning Christian
Infants dying in their infancy. I acknowledge that this consequence concerning
all Infants is not owned by those who hold this erroneous opinion in denying
Infant Baptism, who run into other errors to avoid this. But yet this is
deducible from their Assertion; and therefore I charge this uncharitableness to
be a proper consequent of this opinion. For since Christians are Baptized into
the Body or Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. and are thereby entered as members
thereof: if Infants be denied to have any right to Baptism, or to be capable of
being Baptized, they cannot then be owned to be members of the visible Church
of Christ, and parts of his Body. And they who are supposed to be excluded from
the visible Church by Gods special institution, and to be thereby made
incapable of being received as members thereof, cannot well be presumed to be
admitted into membership with the invisible Church; if we consider what God
himself has declared concerning the power of the Keys, and of Binding and
Loosing upon Earth. And those great privileges of the New Covenant, of which
eternal Salvation is the chief, belong to that Church, which is the Body of
Christ, and to the lively members thereof: For Christ is the Savior of this
body, Ephesians. 5.23. And this Body which is his Church, is that which he will
present to himself, having neither spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing, v.
27. And whereas Baptism is the laver of regeneration, Tit. 3.5. if Infants are
not capable of being partakers of that washing of water whereby the Church is
cleansed and sanctified, Ephesians. 5.26. and of the laver of regeneration, and of
regeneration it self also, they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3,
5.

9. But this opinion is further uncharitable to Infants, in denying to them
such means of grace as the Gospel of our Savior does afford them, and the
Christian Church has from the beginning always acknowledged to belong to
them. All the Ordinances and special Institutions of Christ tend to the great
advantage and good of them who do aright partake of them, and are useful to
their spiritual and eternal welfare and benefit; and so particularly is
Christian Baptism. Of this I have particularly discoursed in Libert. Eccles. B.
1. c. 5. Sect. 3.4.5.
another place. And as the Scriptures sufficiently express the great benefit of
Baptism, with respect to regeneration and remission of sins; so whosoever has
a due reverence for our Lord and Savior, can by no means entertain such low
thoughts of his Institutions, as to think them of no considerable usefulness to
them who duly receive them. But this piece of uncharitableness to Infants, is
much worse, and more hurtful and prejudicial to them than the former. For the
opinion from whence the former consequent was deduced, being untrue, the
consequence it self is also false, and so has no real influence or effect upon
the state of Infants, nor are damaged thereby, whereas they are truly
prejudiced by being denied the means of grace.

10. On this account the Chiristian Church in the first ages thereof, and in a
continued succession from thence to this time, has admitted Infants to be
Baptized, and thought it self bound so to do. S. Austin, de peccar. Mer. and
remis. l. 1. c. 26.
declares this practice to have authoritatem universae Ecclesiae, proculdubio
per Dominum and Apostolos traditam: the Authority of the Universal Church,
without doubt delivered by the Lord and the Apostles: and the Doctrine of
Infant Baptism, is called by S. Austin, Ep. 28.
firmissima Ecclesiae fides, a Doctrine of Faith, most firmly and constantly
believed in the Church. And much to the same purpose is frequently expressed by
S. Austin. To this purpose the determination of Ep. 59. ad Fidum.
S. Cyprian, and an African Council with him, is very manifest. When Fidus had
written to Cyprian his opinion, that Infants ought not to be Baptized within
the second or third day of their Birth, or until the eighth day, which was the
time appointed for Circumcision; though this opinion allowed and asserted
Infant Baptism, S. Cyprian largely declares, that not any one of this Council
did agree to this opinion; but every one of them judged, Nulli hominum nato
misericordiam Dei and gratiam denegandam, That the mercy and grace of God is to
be denied to no Child of man, i. e. upon account of their age. And he there
shows, that Infants from the time of their Birth, are not to be prohibited
Baptism. And of how great consequence they in those early times judged
Infant Baptism, is apparent from this expression relating thereto, ibid.
quantum in nobis est, si fieri potest, nulla anima perdenda est; as far as is
in our power, if it be possible, no soul is to be lost. The plain testimonies
of Origin, both upon Leviticus, and the Epistle to the Romans, and of diverse
other Fathers and Councils might be added, to manifest the universal reception
of Infant Baptism in the Catholic Church. But this having been clearly and
sufficiently evidenced by the Historical Theses of These. Theolog. p. 429, etc.
Vossius, upon this Subject of Paedobaptism, I shall refer him thither, who
would have more large and ample proof hereof.

11. But that learned man truly observes, that there is something which may
seem singular in some expressions of Tertullian and Nazianzen, who though they
deny not Infant Baptism, yet intimate the usefulness of deferring the Baptism
of Infants, and incline to persuade the same. Now though any singular
apprehension of one or two men is not to be laid in the balance against the
general sense of the Church; I shall however observe something further
concerning the sense of both these ancient Writers. Gr. Nazianzen does indeed
in his Oration Orat. 40. p. 458.
concerning Baptism, advise, that if Infants be in no danger of death, their
Baptism may be deferred till they be three years old, or somewhat less or more,
that themselves may hear something of that Mystery, and give answer. But though
he might proceed upon a notion peculiar to himself, it is manifest, that he was
no favourer of Anabaptism, because in that very place, he both declares the
lawfulness of Baptizing Infants as they were Circumcised the eighth day, and
the profitableness of Baptism to them that die in their infancy, and also
presses the practice thereof when the Infant is in any danger. But besides all
this, it seems to me not improbable, that these words of Nazianzen have respect
to some special case, and probably to that which was then very ordinary and
usual in the Christian Church concerning such Infants, whose Parents were yet
unbaptized, either continuing Catechumens according to the discipline of the
Church, or else after their embracing Christianity, did long by their own
choice and neglect, defer their Baptism. Of this latter sort he discourses
much in this Oration, p. 647. 650, 658, 660.
and oft-times, and even in this very place, reprehends the fault of many adult
persons who neglected Baptism, and urges them to be Baptized, and then
proposes this Question, and gives this Answer concerning Infants.

12. And there are three things which incline me to think that these words must
have respect to some such special case as this I have mentioned, besides that
this is very suitable to the Scope and Coherence of his Discourse in this place
it self. 1. Because he does in p. 448.
another place of this Oration persuade to the Baptizing Children, even those
who are Infants, (...), etc. and that they should be sanctified while they are
Babes, (...), and this he recommends to be done before any evil be embraced, as
being greatly useful for the future life of the Child. 2. In the same Oration,
he declares his judgment, that even Infants dying without Baptism, p. 453.
should not be admitted to future glory, though they would be free from future
punishment. And therefore it cannot be supposed, that he would advise that to
be ordinarily done, which might run a needless hazard of the loss of future
glory to Infants, in that case where they were certainly qualified for the
receiving Baptism, and being benefitted by it, as the Infants of Believing and
Baptized Parents were. But in such a case as that abovementioned, where there
might be doubtfulness concerning such Infants being in a capacity to receive
Baptism, he might account that advice he gave, to be proper and useful. 3.
Because the Christian Church did generally admit those who were in the very
entrance of their infancy, unto Baptism, and it cannot well be imagined that so
peaceable a man as Gregory Nazianzen was, would advise against the general
practice of the Christian Church in ordinary cases; while yet he professedly
allowed the lawfulness and usefulness of that practice.

13. Tertullian advises the deferring Tertul. de Bapt. c. 18.
the Baptism of Infants till themselves be instructed. But this place also may
I suppose have a good account given of it, by considering the state and
discipline of the Primitive Church. And therefore, 1. Pamelius thinks, In
Tertul. de Bapt. n. 126.
that this might probably be spoken concerning such Infants, whose Parents were
Infidels; but I had rather understand this also concerning those whose Parents
were professed Christians, but not yet Baptized. 2. Tertullian, c. 12, 13.
both in this very Book and elsewhere and de Anima c. 39, 40.
, asserts that Baptism is necessary to salvation, and the privileges of
Christianity, and to that purpose he applys to Baptism, as other ancient
Writers generally did, those words of Christ, Except a man be born of water and
of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And therefore he
plainly asserts, Nemini sine Baptismo competere salutem. And this shows, that
the advice of deferring Baptism, in persons fitly disposed to receive it, and
further than the just rules of trial fixed in the ancient Church did require,
was unreasonable and dangerous. And this may incline us to think that he
intended not to plead for any other procrastinating Baptism, (so far as his
words can be fairly reconciled to this sense). And he seems plainly enough to
speak his judgment, that the Infants of de Anima ubi sup.
Christian Parents were fitly qualified for Baptism. 3. He advises also grown
persons to defer their Baptism, and particularly Virgins de Bapt. c. 18.
and Widows, till they either Marry, or were of tried and confirmed constancy.
But all this seems to require the careful observance of that which the
Primitive rules of order established; that all those who were born Gentiles,
and were by Baptism to be solemnly entered into the Christian profession, must
first give evidence by due and sufficient trial, both to themselves and to the
Church also, that they were steadfastly resolved to be constant and serious
practisers of the holy rules of the Christian life. And till they had done
this, he persuades them not to put themselves over forwardly upon Baptism, lest
they should deceive themselves and the Church too by failing in their practice;
for as he says here, ibid.
omnis petitio and decipere potest and decipi

14. If any person will contend that Tertullian intended to persuade to a more
general delay of Baptism, than what this fair account of his words does admit;
he must acknowledge also, that he advises this forbearance as well in the case
of the adult, as of Infants. But though the very long deferring of Baptism was
practiced by several persons, it was generally disliked, by all the wisest and
best men in the Christian Church. Hence the particular Fathers set themselves
vigorously to reprove and dissuade this practice, which was undertaken by
several persons upon different accounts, insomuch that many chose to defer
their Baptism until they had apprehensions of approaching death, and then were
Baptized in their Beds. But the ancient Church gave that public testimony of
its dislike of this practice, in that such Clinicks if they recovered, were
adjudged unworthy to be admitted into any Office in the Ministry not only by
the Conc. Neoc. c. 12.
Council of Neocaesarea, but by earlier rules of more ancient observation which
were urged by Eus. Hist. l. 6. c. (...).
Cornelius against Novatus. And if Tertullians words should be construed (as I
think they need not be) to persuade what the Church so generally disallowed,
this would only speak him to err, but would be far from giving any allowance to
this practice. And thus having now considered the custom of the ancient Church,
for the Baptizing Infants, we have from thence in compliance with the
Scripture, a further confirmation thereof, and a sufficient evidence that the
Primitive Church were not, nor durst be so uncharitable to Infants as to debar
them of Baptism.

15. Thirdly, Anabaptism so far as it thoroughly prevails, must utterly rend the
peace and unity of the Church, and renounce the Communion thereof, and
therefore is deeply Schismatical and unpeaceable. For they who assert those not
to be owned right members of the Church who were Baptized in their infancy,
unless they be Baptized again, do and must maintain that those Churches can be
no true Churches of Christ, whose members were Baptized only in their infancy,
and thereupon pass that heavy and unjust Censure upon the generality of all
Christian Churches since the time of the first founding them, that they are no
true Churches. Hence they are put upon rejecting the Communion of the true
Catholic Christian Church, and the setting up for new Churches, in an high
opposition to Charity and Unity, and in an open and avowed practice of
Universal Schism. To this purpose, Bullinger, Calvin, Zanchy, Beza, and other
Protestant Writers have complained greatly of Anabaptists, as laying a
foundation of all disorder and confusion. Indeed they described those
Anabaptists they wrote of, not only to hold this erroneous Opinion concerning
Baptism it self, but to be Enthusiasts, and undervalue the Holy Scriptures; to
engage in such Libertinism, as to disallow the just authority of Magistrates,
and the settled Government of the Church; to embrace the Principles of
Antinomianism, with practices suitable thereto, with other hurtful errors:
hence the Anabaptists were by Explic. Catech. Par. 2. Qu. 74.
Vrsin called a Sect, quae sine dubio a Diabolo est excitata, and monstrum est
execrabile, ex variis haeresibus and blasphemiis conflatum: which (says he)
without doubt was raised by the Devil, and is an execrable Monster made up of
various Heresies and Blasphemies. But this Principle of theirs concerning
Baptism is such, that thereby they cut themselves off from the Church or Body
of Christ, and its Communion, and involve themselves in a very heavy sin, and
dangerous condition.

16. And whatsoever may have any usefulness toward piety and goodness, which
any of these men may seem to aim at in a way of error, and with a various
mixture of other things hurtful and evil; is provided for by us (if good rules
be carefully practiced) in a better manner, and in a way of truth. That every
man ought to make Religion his own act, and make a free and voluntary
profession thereof, and yield his hearty consent to engage himself therein, and
in the practice thereof, we assert to be very necessary in persons who are of
age and capacity of understanding. And though Infants cannot do this in their
infant state; yet their future obligation is then declared on their behalf, and
when they come to a sufficient age, they are certainly bound to believe and to
do what in their Baptism was promised and declared in their names. And this is
afterward solemnly promised by themselves, when in their younger years they
are confirmed, and they likewise in a sacred manner engage themselves hereto,
when at a fuller age they receive the holy Communion: and it would be of great
advantage to the Church of God, and the holy exercises of piety, if these two
offices were more generally, seriously and devoutly attended upon. Men also
oblige themselves to the faith and duties of Religion, by their whole
profession of Christianity, and all those acts whereby they own and declare
themselves Christians; and particularly in joining in all duties of Christian
Worship, Sect. IV.
and professing the Creed or Christian Faith: and the performance of what is
thus undertaken, runs through the whole practice of the Christian life. The
result of what I have said concerning Anabaptism is, that the miscarriages
therein contained, are of a very great and weighty nature; it being no small
evil and sin, to offend greatly against the truth, and withal to confine and
derogate from the grace of the Gospel Covenant, and the due extent of the
Christian Church, besides the comfort and encouragement of Christian Parents;
and to be so injurious to Infants, as to deny them those means of grace which
they have a right to partake of, and which are useful to their Spiritual and
eternal welfare, in neglecting also what God establishes, and keeping off
Infants from that solemn engagement to God which he requires; and to undermine
the very foundations of Peace and Unity in the Church.

SECT. IV. Of Independents.
1. IN discoursing of Independency, and the Practices and Principles thereof, I
shall not search after all things that might be spoken to, since in several
things the Independents or Congregational Men differ from one another, and
alter their own Sentiments, and it was the profession of those five chief
Persons who espoused this Cause in the time of our Civil Wars and Confusions,
Apologet. Narration.
not to make their present judgments and practices, a binding Law to themselves
for the future. And therefore I shall consider only some things which are
mainly essential to the Congregational way, and are the chief distinguishing
Characters of that Party, and the things they mainly urge and contend for. And
I shall show that these things are so far from being desirable or warrantable,
that they are chargeable with much evil. And here I shall treat of three
things. First, Of single Congregagations and the power thereof, not being
subject to any Superior Government in the Church. Secondly, Of their gathering
Churches out of Christian Churches by separation, and modelling these by a
particular Covenant with a private Congregation. Thirdly, Their placing the
Governing Power and Authority of the Church in the People, or major Vote of the
Members of their Church.

2. First, Their asserting single Congregations not to be subject in matters of
Ecclesiastical Order and Government, to any higher Authority among men, than
what is exercised by themselves. This is that Principle which denominates this
party Independents. Indeed some of themselves did at sometimes express their
dislike of this Name; and the Authors of the Apologetical Narration above
mentioned, called it the proud and insolent Title of Independency. But as this
Name is ordinarily owned by the Congregational men, as in the end of their
Preface to their Declaration of their Faith at the Savoy, and very frequently
elsewhere; so the Answer to the Thirty two Questions from New England, gives
this account of it: Answer to 14. Qu.
We do confess the Church is not so Independent, but that it ought to depend on
Christ: but for dependency on men or other Churches, or other subordination
unto them in regard of Church Government, or power, we know not of any such
appointed by Christ in his Word. And this they speak concerning a particular
Congregation. And whilst we assert that such Congregations ought to be under
the inspection of Bishops or Superior Governors in the Church, and under the
Authority of publicly established Rules and Canons of the Church, and under
the Government also of Princes and Secular Sanctions: they of this way own no
such higher Governing Power and Authority, above that of a single Congregation.

3. Concerning the Civil Magistrate, they declare him bound Decl. of Faith. c.
24. n. 3.
to promote and protect the profession of the Gospel, and to take care that men
of corrupt minds do not divulge Blasphemies, and errors inevitably destroying
the souls of them that receive them. But in other cases, such as differences
about the ways of the worship of God, they say, there is no warrant for the
Magistrate under the Gospel to abridge Christians of their liberty. And when
the Declaration of Faith in the Congregational Churches was the same with that
of the Presbyterian Assembly, except in such things as they thought fit to
alter: there were several things in the Chapters concerning liberty of
Conscience, and the Civil Magistrate; there were diverse expressions relating to
the power of Secular Rulers in matters of Religion, which they expunged. Among
others this was one, Assemb. Confess c. 23. n. 4.
It is his (the Magistrates) duty to take order that Unity and Peace be
preserved in the Church -- and all corruptions or abuses in Worship and
Discipline prevented or reformed, and all the Ordinances of God duly settled,
administered and observed. And these things give intimations of disliking any
Uform establishment of a settled Order in the Church, confirmed and fixed by the
Sanctions of the Secular Authority as a standing Rule, to which the Members of
the Church should conform themselves. And one of their chief Writers has
declared himself against this with more than ordinary fierceness, much
exceeding the bounds of Christian sobriety (which I think is but a mild
expression for such violent words) as if this were a grand part of
Antichristianism. He says, Dr. O. Of Evang. Love. c. 3. p. 43.
those who by ways of force, would drive Christians into any other Union or
agreement, than their own light and duty will lead them into, do what in them
lies to oppose the whole design of the Lord Christ toward them, and his rule
over them. Now to call the enacting any Uniform rules of Order, and the
establishing them under any Penalties, the opposing the whole design of Christ,
and not only so, but the doing it as much as in them lies, as if this were
equal to the persecutions of the Christian Name by the most furious of the
Pagan Emperors; is an expression which will easily appear to speak great
passion, but little or no consideration.

4. And not long after we are told among other things, that for Christians
Ibid. p. 44, 45.
by external force to coerce or punish those who differ from them upon account
of various apprehensions relating to the Worship of God, or of any Schisms and
divisions ensuing thereon, is as foreign to the Gospel, as to believe in
Mahomet, and not in Jesus Christ. And now whither are we come? and what do we
hear or read? that the care of Governors, and the use of their Authority to
maintain the peace and Union of the Church, and the due order of Divine Worship
and Service, should be made to be parallel to the renouncing Christianity, and
embracing Enthusiasm? Surely this is such a speaking evil of Dignities, and
even for their pious care and zeal, as Michael the Archangel durst not have
undertaken. But as all pious Princes under the Old Testament, took care of the
due order and establishment of Religion by their Authority: and when the people
did amiss as to worship in high places, or were guilty of other miscarriages in
Religion, this is in the Scripture charged as a fault upon the Prince: and they
were commended when they kept up a right method of Religion, and particularly
when they pulled down the high places. I suppose it may be said by some, that
these high places were prohibited by the Divine Law: but they ought also to
consider (besides what might be otherwise said) that Schisms and Divisions are
also plainly prohibited by the commands of God: and the worshipping in high
places was a sort of Schism. And under the New Testament, the power and duty of
Rulers, is declared to be for the punishing evildoers, and the praise of them
that do well. If therefore the disobeying the Divine precepts in a case where
piety and charity thereby becomes neglected, the interest of Religion weakened,
its friends grieved, its enemies encouraged, peace undermined, and the glory of
God hindered, all which are contained in unwarrantable Schisms and Divisions: I
say if this be evil-doing, the Secular Ruler is not only warranted by the
Christian Doctrine, but is obliged in duty to God, duly to endeavor by his
power to put a check thereto. And this is that which the most pious Princes
have been sensible of, and careful to perform, as appears by many Imperial
Constitutions and practices, and the Laws of other Kingdoms.

5. But it is more particularly asserted by those of the Congregational way,
that a particular Congregation has by the Institution of Christ such a power
within it self, that there is no other Ecclesiastical Authority, whether of any
more extensive part of the Church, or of any Synods, or of any other Superior
Ecclesiastical Governor, which has any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over such
a Congregation, or the members thereof. To this purpose they in New England
declared, Answ. to Q. 3.
We do not know any visible Church of the New Testament properly so called, but
only a particular Congregation. And they who met in the Assembly at the Savoy
declared, Of the Instit. of Churches, n. 6.
besides these particular Churches, there is not instituted by Christ any
Church more extensive or Catholic, entrusted with power for the administration
of his Ordinances, or the executing any Authority in his name. And herein this
more general Assembly seem not to allow so much, as some of them had before
granted, that against an offending Church persisting in its miscarriages,
Apolog. Narrat.
the Churches offended may and ought to pronounce the heavy Sentence of
renouncing all Christian Communion with them until they repent. And concerning
Synods, (and consequently the Canons of Councils) we are told that Of the Inst.
of Chapter n. 26.
in Cases of difficulty and difference, they allow Synods to consider and give
advice; but they are not entrusted with any Church Power properly so called; or
with any Jurisdiction over the Churches themselves, to exercise any Censures,
either over any Churches or persons, or to impose their determinations on the
Churches or Officers. And they of New England particularly denying any such
Authority to Synods or Councils, declare that Answ. to Qu. 18.
Church Censures of Excommunication, or the like, belong to the particular
Church of which an Offender is member, out of the Communion whereof a man
cannot be cast, but only by his own Church. Now from all this it is manifest,
that this is a great Principle of Independency, that every particular
Congregation, and all the members thereof, are exempt from all Superior
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nor is there any higher Church Authority appointed
by Christ, to which they ought to be subject, besides that of this particular
Congregation.

6. But First, This is contrary to what the Holy Scriptures declare, and all
the ancient Churches of God, agreeably thereto, have practiced concerning the
right order and Government of the Church. What is more evident in the
Scriptures than that the several Churches of Christians were under the
Authority and Government of the Apostles themselves; which is sufficient to
manifest, that it was no Institution nor intendment of Christ, that particular
Churches should not be subject to any Superior Ecclesiastical Authority. Nor
was such Governing Authority peculiar to the Apostles themselves, but was by
them thought requisite to be committed to the care of others. Hence for
instance, Titus was in Crete, appointed by Saint Paul, to ordain Elders in
every City, and to set in order the things which were wanting, Tit. 1.5. and
other expressions of his Governing or Episcopal power, are contained in diverse
expressions of that Epistle. But it must be a strange strength of imagination
that can enable any man to conceive, that when Crete was a Country almost three
hundred miles in length, and so greatly peopled, that it was very anciently
called Hecatompolis, as having a hundred great places or Cities within its
Territories, and Titus was to ordain Elders in every City; yet all these should
make up but one particular Congregation, unto which the power of Titus should
be confined.

7. And concerning the Authority of Councils, it is manifest, that upon
occasion of some Judaizing Teachers disturbing the Christian Church at Antioch,
the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15. met together and gave their authoritative
decision concerning Circumcision and other Jewish Rites, not to be imposed on
the Gentile Christians, any further than they particularly injoined. This may
well be called a General Council, since it not only pronounced a decisive
determination concerning the Universal Church, expressing what the Gentiles
were not to admit, or were obliged to practice, and on what terms the Jews were
bound to admit, and not scruple Communion with the Gentiles; but also had in it
such persons, who being Apostles, had an undoubted universal Authority over the
whole Church. And whereas the decision of the Apostles themselves alone, and
their Authority had been of it self abundantly sufficient to lay an obligation
upon the Christian Church in that particular case, the Apostles notwithstanding
this, took in with them the Elders of the Church to debate, and consider of
this matter, Act. 15.6. which is a sufficient evidence that the Apostles did
allow such Elders or Church Officers, as they established in the Church, to
have a power in Councils, to order and determine what related to the affairs of
the Church by Synodical Authority: for otherwise the Apostles would never have
joined them with themselves to this purpose.

8. And S. Paul was so forward and zealous to require a general obedience to
the decision of this Council, that in his Ministry he delivered to the Cities
where he preached, the decrees for to keep, which were ordained of the Apostles
and Elders which were at Jerusalem, Act. 16.4. And here that expression of his,
delivering these Decrees as not only ordained of the Apostles, but of the
Apostles and Elders also, deserves to be considered, as thereby laying a more
clear and manifest foundation for the Authority of future Synods and Councils
of the Officers and Bishops of the Christian Church. And it may be further
observed, that case in which S. Paul rebuked S. Peter, Gal. 2. was his not
acting according to the rules of this Council, and a complying further with the
Jewish Rites, and the favorers of the Circumcision, than was here determined;
and not being ready to own that liberty of the Gentile Church which was
contained in this Synodical decision.

9. And consonant hereunto, the ancient Christian Churches did all along
greatly reverence the authoritative decision of Catholic Councils and Synods,
the Canons of which are so well known to all men of ordinary reading, that he
must be a man greatly ignorant of Ecclesiastical affairs, who knows nothing of
them. And in several General and Provincial Councils, and in those Canons
particularly taken into that ancient Code, called the Canons of the Apostles,
or into the Codes of the Universal Church, of the Western Church, or the
African Church; many things were established by them for the peace, unity and
order of the Church, and especially for the promoting purity therein; and the
degrees of the punishment by suspension, deposition, excommunication, and the
continuance thereof upon the offenders, are there plainly determined to be a
Rule for the several Churches to act by. And in these ancient Councils, when
there was great occasion for such heavy sentences, the most eminent Officers,
or the Bishops of those most renowned places in the Christian Church, were
deposed, or excommunicated by their Synodical Authority, and not by their own
particular Church. Thus was Paulus Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch, deposed by
the Council at Antioch, Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, by the General
Council of Ephesus, and Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, by the General Council
of Chalcedon; to which multitudes of other instances may be given. And in
particular Churches the great and eminent authority fixed in Bishops, though
the Canons allowed but one Bishop in the greatest City with its precincts, is
sufficient to show that the particular Congregations in that City had no such
Independency of power and Government. So that this branch of Independency
opposes the Apostolical order, and the constant practice and sense of all
primitive Christian Churches from the Apostles.

10. Secondly, This notion of Independency, lays a foundation for perpetual
confusion and division in the Church, and subverts the precepts for Christian
Unity. For according to this Principle, so far as concerns power and authority,
any company of men may set up for themselves apart, and multiply Sects and
distinct Communions: and none having any Superior Government over them, these
parties and divisions may be perpetuated and subdivided to the scandal and
Reproach of Christianity, and no way left for any authority in the Christian
Church to check and redress them. So that this notion is perfectly fitted to
serve the interest of Schism and discord, and to heighten and increase, but is
as fully opposite to the Unity and honor of the Christian Religion. For if we
should admit for the present the scanty and imperfect notion of Schism, which
Dr. O. Review of Sch. against Mr. Cawdr. c. 8, 9.
has framed, that it is needless divisions of judgment and discord in a
particular Congregation, when departing from it is no Schism, if the guilty
party should so far unchristianly foment such discords, as to deserve the
censure of that Church; and shall withal proceed so far, as openly to separate
and depart from it; they have by this means according to this notion, after a
strange and admirable manner, set themselves free, and clear both from sin and
censure. For when they have thus openly separated from their former Communion,
they themselves become a distinct particular Congregation, and thereby are
under no Superior Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nor can they be authoritatively
censured by any: and by this open separation, they according to this principle,
are become a particular distinct Church, and the Schism is healed; and by being
parted into two distinct Societies, there remains no longer any such division
as there was before in one Congregation, which is Schism; but by going further
asunder, and separating from one another, they are in a wonderful manner
brought to Unity in two opposite Congregations. And thus by the late rare
inventions of men, which have been unknown to all former times, the rending
things asunder, and breaking them in pieces, are the new found methods to make
them one. But such a way of Unity, if it can please some singular fancies, will
appear monstrous to the generality of mankind.

11. That these notions and practices are great promoters of discord and
division, is not a bare speculation, but has been manifested by sufficient
experience. In Amsterdam the separate Communion of the Societies of Mr. Johnson
and Mr. Ainsworth under Brownism; and in Rotterdam, the like of those of Mr.
Bridge, and Mr. Simpson, proceeded upon this principle. And this very principle
of Independency, helped many forward in this Kingdom in our late times of
discord, to set up new parties of Anabaptists, Seekers, and other Sects, many
of which were the off-sets of fermented Independency, and its adulterine
offspring. And the sad and lamentable relation of the Bermudas Islands, called
the Summer Islands, is also very considerable, where after this Congregational
way was there undertaken, the rejected part are said to have neglected all care
of Religion, and the gathered or separated part, to have run on in dividing,
till they in a manner lost their Christian Religion in Quakerism. And thus many
have made a further improvement, than the asserters themselves allowed, of the
allowed liberty for them who Instit. o Chur. n. 28.
are in Church Fellowship, (as they call their way) to depart from the
Communion of the Church where they have walked, to join themselves with some
other Church, where they may enjoy the Ordinances in the purity of the same.

12. Wherefore this notion of Independency would misrepresent the Christian
Society, and the Institution of Christ, as if whilst Unity was earnestly
enjoined therein, the state of this Society should be left without that Order
and Government, which is necessary to preserve it. For under this model the
Church would be as far from an orderly and regular state; as an Army would be
when every several Troop or Company were left wholly to themselves, and their
own pleasure, allowing some respect to be had to the conduct of their own
Captain and inferior Officers, but not owning any Authority of any General, or
higher Commander than what is in their own Troop. Or it might be somewhat
resembled by the state of such an imaginary Kingdom, where every Village in the
Country, and every Parish in a City, should have such a chief power within
themselves; that there should be no appeal for justice to any higher Court, nor
any other power to punish them, but what is executed by themselves. If such
things as these were put in practice, they would not only hinder the
serviceableness and usefulness of such an Army or Kingdom, (if it could be
allowed to call them so) but here would be also wanting the beauty and
comeliness of Unity and Order, and a door opened to frequent discords and
dissentions.

13. Secondly, I shall consider their gathering Churches (as they call them)
out of those who were Christian members of the Church of Christ, and entering
them into their Societies, by a particular Covenant made to and with a private
Congregation, and pretending this Covenant to be the main ground, and true way
of the establishment and Union of a Church. The value they set upon this
Covenant, may appear from the declaration of the Churches in New England, who
say, Apol. for Chapter Cov. p. 5.
First, That this is that whereby a company of Christians do become a Church:
it is the Constitutive form of a Church. Secondly, This is that, by taking hold
whereof a particular person becomes a member of a Church. And though they
frequently speak so fairly to such Christian Churches as do not admit this
special Covenant with a single Congregation only, as to declare their owning
them to be true Churches; yet all this cannot well be reconciled with this
principle. And therefore those of this way in England, at their public
meeting, speak more openly and more consistently with their own notion, when
they declared Of Instit. of Churches, n. 23.
every Society assembling for the celebration of the Ordinances according to
the appointment of Christ, within any civil Precincts and Bounds, is not
thereby constituted a Church -- and therefore a Believer living with others in
such a precinct, may join himself with any Church for his edification. But
since this in truth is a separating members from that which really is a true
part of the Christian Church, the Presbyterians truly declared that Pref. to
Jus div. Regim. Eccles.
gathering Churches out of Churches, has no footsteps in Scripture, is
contrary to Apostolical practice, is the scattering of Churches, the Daughter
of Schism, the Mother of Confusion, but the Step mother to Edification. But I
must acknowledge, that the present practices of this party also, looks as if
they had now laid aside this opinion.

14. But this Congregational method does suppose, that Baptized Christians are
not obliged by any Church-relation they are already in, to Communicate with any
particular Church, or part of the Christian Church: when the natural
consequence of the Unity of the Christian Church, will be to lay an obligation
upon all its members, to Communicate with that regular part thereof, within
whose Precincts they reside. And this new notion gives a larger discharge to
multitudes of Christians from the duties of Communion, than the rules of
Religion will allow, until they shall enter into such a particular Covenant,
which is not only unnecessary, but unwarrantable also, as will hereafter
appear. And there seemed too much reason for that complaint of the
Presbyterians, by the Provincial Assembly (as they styled themselves) that the
removing the Parochial Bounds, would open a gap to thousands of people, to live
like Sheep without a Shepherd, and instead of joining with purer Churches, to
join with no Churches, and in a little time (as we conceive, say they, adding
in the Margent, as our experience abundantly shows) it would bring in all
manner of profaneness and Atheism. And whilst they unwarrantably declare, the
fixed state of our Church to be such, that Christians are not obliged to hold
Communion therewith, and thereupon both themselves depart from it, and teach
others to do the like; it deserves to be more seriously considered by them,
than hitherto it has been, how this dividing, principle and practice can be
justified before Christ himself. For if Christ will say to them who neglect to
express kindness and respect to the rest of his members, In as much as ye did
it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me, Matt. 25.45. May not
they fear lest they hear the same, who rashly and unjustly cast contempt,
reproach and disrespect, upon that Church which he owneth as his; and disown,
and reject its Communion?

15. But this which they call gathering of Churches, by taking to themselves
those who either were, or ought to have been under other Guides and Governors
of the Church, in a different, but more justifiable way and order, is indeed a
making divisions in a settled Church, and separations from it. And this practce
of division and separation, is so greatly displeasing to the Holy Spirit of
God, that there are many earnest and vehement expressions in the Holy
Scriptures against it. To which purpose the Apostle beseeches the Romans, to
mark them who cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine they had
received, and avoid them, Romans 16.17. even them who by good words and fair
speeches, deceived the hearts of the simple. Against such separations the
ancient and Primitive Christians were very zealous (as I have noted in Libert.
Eccles. B. 1. C. 1. Sect. 3.
another place) and so are also the generality of the Protestant Writers.

16. Such a way of separation, which in the phrase and language of the ancient
Christians, was expressed by a Presbyter, contemning his own Bishop, and having
a separate Congregation, and erecting another Altar (or different Communion, as
to Sacramental administrations) was severely censured in those early times of
Christianity. In that most ancient Can. Ap. 31.
collection of Canons, such a Presbyter, and as many of the Clergy as joined
with him, were sentenced to be deposed, and the Laity to be Excommunicated
after admonition. The Code of Canons of the Universal Church, further determine
concerning a Presbyter or Deacon, who shall thus separate, Cod. Can. Eccl.
Univ. c. 85.
that his deposition shall be without any way of return to his former honor
and dignity in the Church; and that if he persist in disturbing the Church, he
should be reduced by the Secular Power, as being seditious. And the African
Code in this case declare, Cod. Eccl. Afr. c. 10, 11.
that such a Presbyter should be ejected from his place, and that he should be
anathematized; and the inflicting this double punishment, which was not usual
in the Church for a single crime, shows of how heinous a nature this offense
was then accounted, when the Primitive rules of discipline were received.

17. Amongst such Protestant Writers as are most in esteem with our Dissenters,
Calvin asserts it to be certain Calv. in 1 Cor. 11.9.
that this stone is continually moved by the Devil, that he might break the
Unity of the Church: and he purposely opposes, and smartly condemns Inst. l.
4. c. 1. and in Ps. 26.5.
all separation from a true Church, where the Holy Sacraments are duly
administered, and the true rule of Religion is embraced. The Synops. pur. Theol.
Disp. 40. n. 37, 41, 42.
Leyden Professors, account the erecting separate Assemblies, in the breach of
Communion, by them who hold the foundation of the Faith, and agree with the
Church therein, upon occasion of external indifferent Rites, or particular
miscarriages in manners, to be properly Schismatical, and that this is one of
the works of the flesh, and renders a Society impure, and that it is not lawful
to hold Communion with such a Schismatical Church; to which purpose they urge
many Texts of Scripture. And Zanchy treating largely hereof, does Zanch.
Miscel. de Eccles. c. 7.
particularly undertake to maintain, that though there be some diversity of
Doctrine, but in things not fundamental; though different ways of Rites and
Ceremonies; though there be vices in Ministers, or corruptions in people; or
want of due care in rejecting offenders from the Communion; he that shall
separate from a true Church upon these pretenses, shall not, says he, escape
the wrath of God, and ira Dei manet super illum, the wrath of God abides upon
that person.

18. How far such separations from our Church, are made use of by the Romanists
to serve their interest, might be showed of many of their Authors. But I shall
content my self here to observe what was noted by one of our own Camd. Annal.
Eliz. an. 1583.
learned Historians Mr. Camden, concerning the time of Queen Elizabeth. That
when in her Reign, some of the Ministry in dislike of the Liturgy, Order and
Government of the Church, templa adire recusarent, and plane schisma facerent,
did refuse to come to our public Worship, and manifestly made a Schism, this
was done Pontificiis plaudentibus, multosque insuas parts pertrahentibus,
quasi nulla esset in Ecclesia Anglicana Vnitas; the Papists rejoicing at it,
and drawing away many to their party, as if there were no Unity in the Church
of England.

19. I shall now examine their particular Covenant whereby they engage
themselves to walk together as constant members of that particular Society, or
Congregation to which they join themselves. Now this Covenant in a way of
separation, is no other but a bond of division, and was to that purpose
invented by the Brownists. And that it was their practice, is Apol. for Chapter
Cov. p. 41, 42, 43, 44.
acknowledged by the Churches in New England. Against which, such things as
these may be justly alleged: 1. That this contradicts another of their avowed
Positions, That nothing not instituted of Christ, ought to be received or
submitted to as terms of Communion with a Church; and some of them more largely
declare, that Answer to 32. Qu. qu. ^8.
particular Churches have no power to make Laws for themselves or their
members, but to observe the Laws of Christ: and if any Church presume further,
they go beyond their Commission -- and it would be sin to be subject to such
Laws. But such a particular contract with a single Congregation, especially a
separating one, was never any part of Christ's Institution. But because this
other opinion of theirs is also erroneous, it is of greater concernment to
observe, that this way of Covenanting, is opposite to the Institution of
Christ, in that by division and separation, it breaks the Unity of the
Christian Church, which Christ has established to be one Church, and one Body.
But the dividing the Church into several Independent Societies, which is
contrary to what the Institution of Christ appoints, is so much designed by
this Covenant, that some of themselves tell us, ibid. Answ. to Qu. 8.
without this kind of Covenanting, we know not how it would be avoided, but all
Churches would be confounded into one. Now this is as much as to say, that
Christ and his Apostles, who appointed not this kind of Covenanting,
established the Christian Church in that way of Unity, that it was one Church,
but these have ordered this method for the dividing it.

20. Secondly, This casts a disparagement on Christ's Institution of Baptism, as
if this Ordinance of his was not sufficient and effectual for the purposes to
which he appointed it, whereof one was the receiving Members into his Church,
and the Communion thereof. The Scriptures declare Christians to be Baptized
into one Body, 1 Cor. 12.12. and that they who are Baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. and therefore by this Sacramental Ordinance, members
are received into fellowship with Christ, and communion with his Church. But
these expressions in the Assembly-confession of Conf. c. 27. n. 1.
Sacraments being Instituted -- to put a visible difference between those that
belong unto the Church, and the rest of the World. And of Baptism being
ordained by Christ, for the solemn admission of the party Baptized into the
visible Church, are rejected, and left out in the declaration of Faith, by them
of the Congregational way. And we are told by the New England Independents,
that Answ. to 32. Qu. to qu. 4.
they do not believe that Baptism does make men members of the Church; and they
there say strangely enough, that Christ Baptized, but made no new Church.
Wherefore when Christ appointed Baptism, to receive members of his Church, this
Covenant which he never appointed, is by them set up thus far in the place and
room of it.

21. Thirdly, By making this Covenant, the only right ground of
Church Fellowship, they cast a high reflection on the Apostolical and Primitive
Churches, who neither practiced nor delivered any such thing: as if the
Apostolical Model must give place to theirs, and those first Churches must not
be esteemed regularly established. But this Covenant managed in the dividing
way, is somewhat like the practice of Novatus, who has been ever reputed
guilty of great Schism; who engaged his followers by the most solemn Vow, that
they should never forsake him, nor return to Cornelius their true Bishop: only
his Covenant had not a peculiar respect to a particular Congregation. But this
bond of their own promise and vow, was intended to keep them in that
separation, which the more solemn Vow of Baptism, and undertaking Christianity,
engaged them to reject. And it is a great mistake to imagine, that the former
ought to take place against the latter; or that men may bind themselves to act
against the will of God, and that thenceforth they ought not to observe it.

22. Fourthly, The confinement of Church Membership to a single Congregation,
entered under such a particular Covenant, is contrary to several plain duties of
Christianity. For according to this notion, the peculiar offices of Brotherly
Love, as being members one of another, and that Christian care that follows
thereupon, it limited to a narrow compass (together with the exercise of the
Pastoral care also) which ought to be enlarged to all those professed
Christians, with whom we do converse. And it is of dangerous and pernicious
consequence, that the duties of love, and being helpful to one another, and
provoking to love and good works, upon account of our membership with the
Church visible, (though these things be in practice too much neglected) should
be straightened by false and hurtful notions and opinions. It was none of the
least miscarriages of the Jews, that when God gave them that great Commandment,
to love their Neighbor as themselves; they should satisfy themselves in the
performing this duty with a much more restrained sense of the word Neighbor,
than the Divine Law intended. And it must not be conceived, that false
imaginations concerning the bounds of the Church, and fellowship therein, will
be esteemed in the sight of God, a sufficient discharge from the duties he
requires men to perform to others: nor will this be a better excuse under
Christianity, than the like mistake was under Judaism.

23. Thirdly, I shall consider their placing the chief Ecclesiastical power and
authority in the Body of the people, or the members of the Church. To this
purpose by some of them we are told, that Answ. to 32. Qu. to Q. 14.
in Peter and the rest, the Keys are committed to all Believers, who shall join
together in the same confession, according to the Ordinance of Christ; and they
give the people the power of Answ. to Qu. 15.
censuring offenders, even Ministers themselves if they be such. And on this
account, at least in part, I suppose the Congregational Churches in their
Declaration of Faith, omitted the whole Chapter of Chapter 30.
Church censures contained in the Assembly's Confession, in which they had
declared the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to be committed to the Church
Officers. Now besides that the way of Government and Censure by the major Vote
of the people, has been the occasion of much confusion in some of their
Congregations; that which I shall particularly insist on, is the great sin of
intruding upon any part of the Ministerial Authority, or neglecting due regard
or reverence thereto. How plain is it in the Scripture, that the Apostles
governed and ordered the state of the Christian Church, and that Timothy and
Titus, and the Angels of the Churches did, and were to do the like. It was to
the Apostles as chief Officers of the Christian Church, that Christ declared,
Joh. 20.23. whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted, and whosesoever sins
ye retain, they are retained; and Matt. 18.18. whatsoever yet shall bind on
Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose in Earth, shall
be loosed in Heaven. And by these, and such like words, the power of inflicting
Censures; and receiving to, and conferring of the privileges of the Church; as
well as of dispensing all those Ordinances whereby the grace of God, and
remission of sins are particularly tendered, are appropriated to the Officers
of the Church as part of their Office.

24. In this plain sense were these Christian Laws generally understood by the
Primitive Church, which practiced accordingly, which they who read the ancient
Canons must necessarily confess. And the same is manifest from the particular
Writers of the first Ages. For instance, even Cyp. Ep. 27.
S. Cyprian from what our Lord spoke to S. Peter of the power of the Keys, and
of binding and loosing, infers the Episcopal honor, and that every act of the
Church, must be governed by those Prefects or Superiors. And from those words,
and what our Savior spoke to his Apostles, Jo. 20. about remitting sins, he
concludes, that only the Governors in the Church Ep. 73.
, can give remission of sins. And when Rogatianus a Bishop complained to
Cyprian, concerning a Deacon who behaved himself contumeliously toward him, S.
Cyprian commends his humility in addressing himself to him, Ep. 65.
when he had himself power by virtue of his Episcopacy, and the authority of
his Chair, to avenge himself of him, and might be certain that what he should
have done by his sacerdotal power, would be acceptable to all his Colleagues. In
which words he plainly asserts the authority of inflicting an Ecclesiastical
Censure even upon a Deacon to be wholly in the Bishops power by virtue of his
Office. And it is indeed no mean authority, which is committed by the
Institution of our Lord, to the Officers of the Christian Church, who are
appointed to be as Shepherds, (...), to feed and to rule his flock, Joh. 21.16.
Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2.

25. Indeed they of the Congregational way do assert some special authority to
the Pastors and Teachers of their Congregations; and to them they particularly
reserve the administration of the Sacraments. They declare Of Instit. of
Churches, n. 16.
that where there are no teaching Officers, none may administer the Seals, nor
can the Church authorize any so to do. But then they also place the power of
making these Officers, and committing authority to them, in the people, and
attribute very little to the power of Ordination. Indeed concerning a Pastor,
Teacher or Elder, they tell us, that Ibid. n. 11.
it is appointed by Christ, (but no such appointment can be produced) he be
chosen by the common suffrage of the Church it self, and solemnly set apart by
fasting and prayer, with imposition of hands of the Eldership of that Church,
if there be any before constituted therein. But if there be no Eldership in
that Congregation (as there can be none in the first erecting any particular
Congregational Church, and in the after appointing a Pastor, it must be at
least of those who are in inferior Office) Answ. to Qu. 13.
they think it neither lawful nor convenient, to call in the assistance of the
Ministers of other Churches, by way of authority, when the Church is to ordain
Officers. But this Position proceeds upon their dividing notion, in not owning
the true Unity of the Catholic visible Church, and thereupon they assert, that
as to Answ. of Eld in New Engl. to 9. Posit. Pos. the 8.
acts of authority and power in dispensing Gods Ordinance, a Minister cannot so
perform any Ministerial act to any other Church but his own. But how little
they esteem that irregular way of imposing hands, which themselves speak of as
Christ's Institution, may appear from their declaring that a Pastor, Teacher, or
Elder chosen by the Church, Inst. of Chapter n. 12.
though not set apart by imposition of hands, are rightly constituted Ministers
of Jesus Christ. To the like purpose, the Elders of New England speak; who also
give power Answ. to Qu. 21.
to those who are no Officers of the Church, to ordain Officers; and also
judge, that a Minister Ordained in one Church, if he afterward becomes a
Minister in another Church, must receive a new Ordination. But surely those who
let loose their fancies at such a strange rate, used no great consideration of
what they wrote.

26. And it greatly concerns the people, since they undertake to act in the
name of Christ, in dispensing any part of the power of the Keys, as in
inflicting Spiritual censures; and to exercise his authority in constituting
Officers in his Church, by giving Office-power to them; that they be well
assured, that they have sufficient authority from him to warrant their
proceedings: especially since such things as these are represented in the Holy
Scripture, and have been ever esteemed in the Ancient Church, as well as the
Modern, to be peculiar acts of the Ministerial power in the Chief Officers of
the Church. And they whom they call Pastors, or Teachers, but have no better
authority than this to warrant them to be so, had also need to beware, how they
undertake to dispense the Christian Mysteries, as Officers appointed in Christ's
name. For if they to whom God has given no such Commission, presume to set
apart Officers in his name, and to impart to them his authority, this is like
the act of Micah in consecrating Priests, Judge. 17.5, 12. or like Jeroboams
Sacrilegious intrusion, in making those to be Priests, who were not so
according to the rules of Gods appointment, 1 Kings 12.31. chap. 13.33. which
thing with its concomitants, was so highly offensive to God, that the very next
words tell us, verse. 34. this thing became a sin unto the house of Jeroboam,
even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth. Nor can
it be thought a lesser affront to the Majesty of God, to set up chief Officers
in his name, without his Commission; than it would be against the Majesty of a
King, to erect Judicatures in his Kingdom, or to confer the great Offices of
the Realm, and places of eminent Dignity and Trust, without any Authority from
him, or from his Laws.

27. And to exercise any proper Ministerial power in the name of God or Christ,
without sufficient authority, is no small offense. The severe punishment of
Readiness Sacrificing, by the loss of his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 13.13, 14. and of
Vzziah's offering Incense, by his being smitten with Leprosy, which rendered
him incapable not only of Governing the Kingdom, but of having society with the
Congregation of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 26, 19, 21. testify how much God was
provoked thereby. The dreadful Judgment upon Corah and his Company, for
offering Incense, and pleading the right of all the Congregation of Israel
against Moses and Aaron, as if they had taken too much upon them, was very
remarkable. And much more is it sinful and dangerous to entrench upon the
Office of the Gospel Ministry: because the Institution of Christ, the authority
conveyed by him, and the grace conferred from him, are things more high and
sacred, than what was delivered by Moses.

28. But the making and Ordaining Ministers in the Church, was both in the
Scripture, and in all succession of antiquity, performed by those who had the
chief authority of Office in or over the Christian Church; as particularly by
Christ himself, his Apostles, and the succeeding Bishops. Christ himself sent
his Apostles as his Father sent him; and he, not his other Disciples, gave them
their Commission. S. Paul and Barnabas where they came, ordained Elders in
every Church, Act. 14.23. and so must Titus do in every City of Crete, Tit.
1.5. And when S. Paul sent his directions to Timothy, concerning the due
qualifications of those who were to be Bishops and Deacons in the Church, 1 Timothy 3. and wrote this for this end, that Timothy might know how he ought to
behave himself in the house of God, v. 14, 15. this plainly shows, that he had
the main care of appointing and admitting Officers in the Church of Ephesus.

29. In the Ecclesiastical History of the next ages, there is nothing more
plain than that the Bishops of the Christian Church (who as de Praescrip. c. 32.
Tertullian, adv. Haer. l. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus, and Eus. Hist. l. 2. c. (...).
others affirm, were made and appointed by the Apostles themselves) did Ordain
the several sorts of Ecclesiastical Officers, Bishops, Priests and Deacons.
That the ancient Church did generally acknowledge, that a Bishop was regularly
to be Ordained by three Bishops, (who must be of other Churches) may partly
appear from the industrious care of ibid. l. 6. c. (...).
Novatus, (though very ill managed against peace, honesty, and other rules of
common morality, as Cornelius relates it) to send about to find three obscure
Bishops, who might Ordain him in opposition to Cornelius. But this is more
fully evident from the great contests concerning the validity of Cecilians
Ordination, against which the Donatists earnestly objected, as the main
pretense for their Schism, that Felix one of the Ordainers of Cecilian was not
a regular Bishop, and therefore his Ordination was insufficient, which case was
canvased in Africa, Italy, France, and other places. So that that first Canon
of the old Code, Can. Ap. 1.
that a Bishop was to be Ordained by two or three Bishops, was so far
manifestly agreeable to the ancient practice and sense of the Church, that they
usually insisted upon having the greater number of three in this Ordination.
And so it was particularly expressed in the Canons of the first General
Council, Conc. Nic. c. 4.
which also requires the consent of the other Bishops of the Province, and
particularly the ib. c. 6.
Metropolitan, which was included in the more ancient practice. And this may be
sufficient to satisfy any man, that Ordination, and regular Ordination of the
chief Officer in the Church, was, in the first Ages of Christianity, accounted
greatly necessary; and that the Bishops of other Churches (there being but one
Catholic Bishop of one Church) three at least must meet together to confer
this Ordination. Much more might be added, if it were needful in so plain a
case.

30. And whereas so great a stress is laid upon the election of the people, as
if this were the great essential thing, which constituted any one in the Office
of the Ministry; it is also manifest, that the choice of any person for the
Ministry which was by way of recommendation of him to those who were to Ordain
him, was sometimes done by the people, and sometimes by others. But there was
no rule in the Scripture which requires any necessity of the peoples election,
nor was there ever any constant practice hereof, either in the time of the Holy
Scriptures themselves, or in the next ages of the Primitive Church. When Christ
chose his Apostles, he called to him his Disciples, and of them he chose
twelve, whom he named Apostles, Luk 6.13. but he did not appoint his other
Disciples to choose them. James who was made the first Bishop of Jerusalem, is
related to have been chosen by the Apostles, Eus. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
particularly by Peter, James and John. Many times the Holy Spirit guided the
Ordainers to fix upon the particular person to be ordained. Thus Timothy was
chosen by Prophecy, 1 Timothy 4 14. And the Spirit directed the other Prophets and
Teachers, that they should separate Saul and Barnabas for the work to which he
had called them, Act. 13.2. And Cl. Romans Ep. ad. Cor. p. 54, 55.
Clemens Romanus declares, that the Apostles appointed Bishops and Deacons,
proving them by the Spirit. And that the Spirit of God should then guide the
Ordainers to choose persons for the Ministry, rather than the other Believers
and Disciples, may be of use to acquaint men, that our Savior never made the
peoples choice either necessary, or the main thing essential to the Ministry.
In some places the Presbyters of the Church, were the persons who elected their
Bishop: and this Hieron. ad Evag.
S. Hierome says, was the practice at Alexandria, from the time of Mark the
Evangelist, unto Heraclas and Dionysius. And since Mark died, whilst many of
the Apostles were alive, and several years before the Martyrdom of S. Peter and
S. Paul; this also gives a fair evidence that popular elections, were no
Institution of Christ or his Apostles.

31. Sometimes even under the early ages of Christianity, Bishops were chosen
by Councils of other Bishops. And so was Eus. Hist. l. 7. c. (...).
Domnus chose Bishop of Antioch, by the Council which deposed Paulus for
Heresy. And there are frequent instances of like nature. And after the Empire
was Christian, this election was sometimes made by the Emperor himself; and
thus was Nectarius chosen by Theodosius at Constantinople, even whilst a
General Council was there sitting, and had been deliberating about the choice
of a Bishop of Jerusalem. Now the considering how variously such elections or
recommendations were made, is sufficient to manifest, that the Apostolical and
first Primitive Churches accounted no one particular way of election, to be the
main thing essential to the Ministry. And the popular way has the least of all
to plead on this account, that the various inconveniences of admitting that,
were found so great, that this was forbidden to be practiced by one of the
ancient Canons which was received in the general Code. And the result of all
this is, That the insisting on this, and those other things above mentioned,
which are the support of Independency, are plain errors and mistakes, and
deviations from the true Christian Rule and Practice; and are much the worse,
because they are imposed upon men in the name of God, as if they were his
special Institutions; and thereby tend to create the greater disturbance to the
best and most regular Constitutions of the Christian Church, as if they had
departed from the Divine Institutions; and their form and establishment is
such, that it is not fit to be Communicated with, but may most safely be
forsaken.

FINIS.
AN ANSWER TO Mr. SERJEANT's DISCOURSE ENTITLED, Sure Footing IN CHRISTIANITY.

By WILLIAM FALKNER. D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIV.

The first Discourse examined, showing what properties belong to the Rule of
Faith.
THis Author J. S. intending,

In this Discourse he examines the sense of these words, RVLE, which (he says)
signifies a thing able to regulate or guide him who uses it,. 2. and FAITH,
which is a believing God in revealed Truths,. 8. which imports some knowledge
of supernatural things. He considers that Faith or the knowledge of God, the
vulgar may both have, since they may be saved,. 8, 9, 10. and they may have
doubts concerning it,. 11. and since this Faith is a rational assent,. 12.
which they who are out of the Church should embrace,. 13. and eminent Wits may
be satisfied in,. 14. and the most skilled Adversaries cannot show its Rule
possibly false,. 15. and this Rule must assure us what Christ said,. 16. From
this he gathers seven Properties of the Rule of Faith,. 17. 1. It must be plain
and self-evident, as to its existence unto all. 2. Evidenceable as to its
Ruling Power to Inquirers, even the rude Vulgar. 3. Apt to settle and justify
undoubting persons. 4. To satisfy fully the Skeptical Dissenters, and rational
Doubters. 5. To convince the most obstinate and acute Adversaries. 6. Built
upon unmovable grounds; that is, absolutely certain in it self. 7. And
absolutely ascertainable unto us.

Having given some account of his Discourse, Rule and Faith, is not
sufficiently sure and stable: for since these words, Rule of Faith, even as he
treats of them, do admit of some ambiguity in their sense; it had been
necessary to have first declared, what was here intended to be signified by
them. For besides that the phrase of regula fidei, or the Rule of Faith, is by
Irenaeus and Tertullian, and other Ancients, sometimes made use of for a kind
of Creed, or comprisal of the chief Articles of Christian Faith: I say besides
this, the word Rule, being here a Metaphor, the true meaning of it in this
place, must be searched into. Nor does he sufficiently describe his Rule by
saying, it is able to regulate or guide him who uses it: for still by a Rule
may be understood, either that which is able to guide him who uses it, that by
it something to be inquired after, may be discovered knowably; or else a Rule
is that from which all things about which such a Rule may be made use of, may
receive the most exact, perfect, and complete way of trial and discovery. Now
that is not the Rule of Faith by which a man may be guided to believe some
Divine revealed truths, or most truths, which yet may either misguide in some
others, or not most exactly guide to the knowledge of them: but it is that by
which all Divine revealed truths are sufficiently discovered, by which there
may be had the best determination of all Questions about such truths which are
necessary to be decided; and which is the most sure and firm ground of
believing every Divine revealed truth.

The want of considering and observing this, First, He has omitted the most
principal and necessary property of the Rule of Faith; which is, that it is the
way to know, try and determine all matters of Faith, or revealed Truth; and
that it is sufficient to do all this, so far as it is requisite it should be
done. For if this property be omitted, all those laid down by this Discourser,
will not have light enough to discover which is the Rule of Faith certainly and
infallibly. For instance, this sentence, God Created the Heavens and the Earth,
or any other such like, so delivered to us, that it appears certainly to come
from God, though it cannot be called a Rule of Christian Faith, because it
contains not so much Divine truth as is necessary either for every man's
Salvation, or for the determining Controversies in Religion, so far as it is
requisite they should be decided; and this is received as much amongst the
unbelieving Jews, as amongst Christians: yet all the properties mentioned by
this Discourser, may be applied unto it, as much as to the Rule of Faith. 1. It
may be to all self-evident as to its existence, That there is such a truth
delivered. 2. It may be knowable, to have a ruling power even to the Vulgar. 3.
It may settle them, who undoubtingly receive it. 4. It may satisfy either
Dissenters, or Doubters. 5. It may convince Adversaries. 6. It may be certain
in it self, and, 7. Ascertainable to us.

A Second miscarriage hence arising, is, Rule of Faith in a very uncertain,
fallacious and ambiguous sense; sometimes to signify one thing, and sometimes
another. For under Faith, as he treats of it, he sometimes includes all Divine
revealed truth, so far as to a general ending of Controversies about them. So
Praef.. 7. he says, Controversy, or the skill to know what is Faith -- if a
Science must be grounded on some self-evident Principle; and soon after he
tells us, he has endeavored to show the first Principle Catholics proceed on
self-evident; and this he calls the first principle in controversy. Where it
is plain he includes under Faith, all Divine revealed truths, concerning which
there are any Controversies raised. But in Disc. 1.. 8. where he lays as a
ground, that the Vulgar are to be saved, that is, are to have Faith or the
knowledge of God, he cannot mean, that they must be surely and rationally
determined (as he grants Faith must be such an assent) in all points of Faith,
about which there is any Controversy: for it is plainly evident, that even
amongst the Papists the Learned men have not been determined in all points, de
Fide, by the help of their Tradition. So by the Rule of Faith, he sometimes
means an only way to come to Faith, as Disc. 2.. 9, 10. he says, Faith is not
possible to be had without the Rule of Faith; other times he understands by it
only a sufficient way to come to Faith, as Disc. 1.. 8, 9. he calls it, the
means to arrive at Faith, or come to Faith. Sometimes he calls it, the ordinary
way to Faith; so Corol. 1. and yet thence concludes, none can pretend to have
Faith, who hold not to the true Rule; and yet as having his heart misgiving him
in this confidence, he says, Disc. 1.. 11. The Rule of Faith is the best, if
not the only means to come to the knowledge of Faith. Now to treat of the Rule
of Faith in such a manner, as not to keep to one sense, but some time by his
Rule, to mean an only way, sometimes a sufficient way, sometimes an ordinary
way, other times the best, if not the only way; and by Faith, of which it is
the Rule, sometimes to understand such Faith as is in all the believing Vulgar,
and at other times under Faith, to take in all Controversy about matters
revealed of God: this is a strange jumbling of different things together, and
as it discovers much want of accurateness and rational proceeding in the
Author, so it occasions incoherency and confusion in this his Discourse.

A Third miscarriage hence arising is, Rule of Faith, so Disc. 1.. 8, 9.
whence. 14. he calls the Rule of Faith, the immediate producer and cause of the
assent of Faith; both with reference to the ruder sort, and to the Learned. Now
though the Rule of Faith be the surest way to beget Faith, or to try any point
of Faith, yet is not all Faith in all persons immediately produced by it, but
many times by other means. Thus the Discourses of Origin, Tertullian, and
Cyprian, and their Writings, have doubtless persuaded and prevailed with many
to receive the Christian Faith by them, and believe many things declared in it:
yet neither their words, nor writings, were any Rule of Faith, since both in
some things appear erroneous. The Goths were brought in to Christianity by the
preaching of the Arians, and by that means believed many Christian truths: and
of later years, many Pagans have believed the Christian Doctrine, some by the
preaching of Protestants, and others by the Papists; yet cannot all these ways
of delivery be called the Rule of Faith, nor indeed any of them. Yea it is
sensibly evident, that many Christian truths are received and believed both
among Protestants and Papists by the Vulgar, either from the teaching of a
Parent, or from a private Doctor or Teacher, which may be subject to some
error, and so are not the Rule of Faith, since they may misguide: and yet in
many things of revealed truth, this is the common case of the Vulgar, before
they come to understand the Rule of Faith, or that which they own as such; even
before the Protestant comes to understand the Scripture, and what is in it
contained; and before the Papist understands the Tradition of the Church, and
how he may know what is as such delivered; since all that is taught or written
by some particular persons cannot be as such received.

I come now to examine the particular properties of the Rule of Faith above
recited. Faith, are incapable of any skill by speculation,. 3, 4, 9, 10. But
First, This proves not that it must be self-evident; by which he means, as
appears in the following Discourse, that that which is the Rule of Faith,
appears evidently to be such, barely by considering this Rule in it self,
without any other helps and advantages: since without this way of
self-evidence, it may be sufficiently evidenceable to all capacities, in such a
manner as the Vulgar are capable of knowing it. The Statutes of England, are a
Rule for the decision of Cases in the Law, concerning the matters contained in
them; but that they are so, cannot appear satisfactorily in all these Laws, by
the bare reading of them: but their being sufficiently and generally attested,
and acknowledged to be enacted by the Legislative Power, and unrepealed,
evidenceth them to be such. The Vulgar know that the last Will and Testament of
a man, is as a Rule, to show who has title to the Goods of the deceased; and
they are capable of knowing which is the last Will and Testament of a person,
otherwise than from the bare reading of it; to wit, by the full witness and
evident testimony of credible persons concerning it. The ordinary Jews were
capable of knowing the ten Commandments, and the Books of Moses to be given
them from God, to guide them, otherwise than by the reading of them; to wit, by
delivery of them as such, by the constant testimony of all the Jews, in that
and the succeeding Ages. Whence it may appear to be self-evident, that the
Vulgar are capable of receiving other proof than self-evidence, though not by
deep speculation, yet by testimonial evidence. Nor 2. Will it hence follow from
his proof, that the Rule of Faith should be evident to all as to its existence.
By all he cannot here include them, who have no knowledge of Gospel Revelation:
But I suppose he intends all who have faith, or are in the way to attain it.
But in this latitude, it is no property of the Rule of Faith, to be actually
evident to all these; since there may be some Faith which is not immediately
grounded upon the Rule, as was before showed. Howbeit since the Rule of Faith
is intended to confirm and determine matters of faith, so that they may be
received with a full and firm assent, and is thence of great use to all, to
settle and stablish them in the faith; I assert, that the Rule of Faith is
evidenceable unto all, or may be made evident unto all who have capacities of
reason, both that it is, and that it is a Rule, if they be willing to receive
that evidence which is sufficient.

The second property,

The third property I admit,

The fourth property is, Disc. 3.. 3. he speaks of his Sceptick, as one who
would find somewhat to reply rationally, or at least would maintain his
suspense, with a, Might it not be otherwise? If he indeed includes persons who
set themselves to reject evidence; I answer, the Rule of Faith needs not be
able to satisfy them, nor can it; since they are not capable of satisfaction:
and such were many of the Heathen Philosophers, of the Heretics among
Christians, and probably of the Scribes and Pharisees. All he said for the
proof of this property was, That those who are out of the Church, are intended
by Christ to be brought in to embrace the faith, and persons of highest reason
and enquiry in the Church may be satisfied concerning the faith,. 13, 14. This
is true of them who will embrace light and evidence where they find it, but not
of them who reject it; and Protestants will affirm, that the Rule of Faith
(taking in the testimonial evidence which is given concerning that Rule) is
able to satisfy all Dissenters or Doubters, who are ready and willing to
receive rational satisfaction.

The fifth property is, Because such Adversaries the Church will have, and the
highest advantage they can have against the Church, is, to show her Rule
uncertain. But this only proves, that enough may be said for the Rule of Faith,
to vindicate it against all such Adversaries, which is indeed true; yea, and
more than this, that enough may be said to convince them, if they will attend
to it, and be not obstinate; and however to satisfy all unprejudiced men, that
these obstinate Adversaries are in error, and may be confuted. But more than
this, is no way necessary to provide for the conviction of the obstinate. If
Porphyry, Celsus, or Julian were not convinced; shall any conclude, that God
was wanting in the Rule of Faith to his Church? But indeed the satisfaction of
such Heathen Adversaries must be procured, not only from the Rule of Faith,
which will show what was delivered by Jesus, and the Apostles, and Prophets,
but also from other arguments and testimonial evidence, not only to prove, that
this Rule was delivered by Jesus, but also to show the things so delivered, to
be of God, and therefore true.

The sixth and seventh properties, ascertainable to us, we understand, that we
may be sufficiently certain concerning the Rule, and what is contained in it)
include all the former, so far as they are truly applicable to the Rule of
Faith. For to be certain and ascertainable to us, includes so much of his two
first properties, as belong to this Rule of Faith; that is, it is evidenceable
to all, both as to its being and its ruling power; seeing to be evidenceable,
and to be ascertainable, is one and the same thing. Yea, if it be certain, and
it is certainly thus ascertainable or evidenceable to us, his third, fourth and
fifth Properties will be the consequent effects hereof, so far as they of right
appertain to this Rule of Faith; that is, where there appears certainty
ascertainable, it will have these effects; it will justify them who most
steadfastly and undoubtingly rely on it, and will satisfy inquisitive
Dissenters and rational Doubters, and will be able to convince the most acute
Adversaries: Whence it appears, that his seven Properties are needlessly and
without sufficient distinction multiplied, and all the rest are well reducible
to the two last: to which, if we add what I before observed concerning this
Rule, that it must be the best Guide in all matters of faith, we have then
three Properties, which alone are sufficient to direct us to the Rule of Faith;
to wit, its certainty, its evidenceableness; and its fullness, exactness and
compleatness as to all points of faith. But since his Discourse I now examine,
is ordered according to his seven Properties, saving that he himself Disc. 2.
confounds, or at least conjoyns the two former, it is necessary for me to
follow him in his own way, and to examine the Rule of Faith, by what we have
found to belong to it in all these Properties.

Answer to Disc. 2. showing, that the two first Properties of the Rule of
Faith, do agree to Scripture.
OUR next work is to examine by these marks, Rule of Faith is. He tells us,. 1.
That the owned pretenders to it, are only two, Scripture and Tradition; but
withal insinuates, That Protestants do indeed make private Spirit, private
Reason, and the Testimonies of Fathers the Rule of Faith; because these are
they which do ascertain them of Scripture sense. Now, we Protestants do own
Scripture as our Rule of Faith, which was surely delivered to us, by succession
from the Apostles; and do assert, that what ever Properties do belong to the
Rule of Faith, are truly and fully applicable to the Scripture: but unwritten
Tradition we reject from being this Rule, knowing that there is no certain and
infallible delivery of Christian Doctrine thereby. Nor do we any way make
either private Reason or a private Spirit (whether he mean an Enthusiastic
Spirit, which Protestants disclaim, or the same thing with private Reason) or
Testimonies of Fathers our Rule of Faith. For if Protestants should try any
Doctrine by any of these immediately, without referring them to Scripture, they
would, as to that Doctrine, make them their Rule: but this no Protestant will
do in matters of mere belief, or supernatural Revelation. But if they make use
of their reason to apprehend the words, phrases and sense of the Scripture,
that thereby they may more fitly judge, what the Scripture will determine as to
any matter of faith, this is no more to make this a Rule, than an Artist who
measures any Materials by an exact known Rule, can be said to make his eye his
Rule, because he judges by his eye, how his Rule is applied to the thing
measured: but in case he shall make use only of his eye, without any other
Rule, then only can his eye be called his Rule. Indeed the followers of
Tradition and all rational men, may as well be charged with making private
reason their Rule, as the followers of Scripture: since by reason they are
ascertained of Traditions sense: for they make use of reason to judge what the
words signify which are delivered to them, and what ground they have to
receive them; else could not their assent of Faith be, as this Author
acknowledges it must be, rational, Disc. 1.. 14. unless he can imagine, a man
to give a rational assent, which is not directed by reason.

Nor can we be said to make the Testimonies of Fathers our Rule, though in
plain truths we value them, owning the same truth which we embrace, as
delivered by the Rule.

. 2. He notes, that when we make Scripture our Rule, we must understand not
Scripture sens'd, but to be sensed; that is, their characters in a Book with
their aptness to signify. I answer, We assert the written words of Scripture
to be a Rule of Faith, as the words therein contained do manifest their own
sense, being in themselves in all things fit and necessary to be known,
sufficiently intelligible by men whom God has endued with reason and
understanding. That is, the words of Scripture which are written by inspiration
from God, do in the same manner declare Gods meaning in what he reveals, which
is the Doctrine of Faith; as words written and spoken by men, declare their
sense and meaning to one another; and thus we own them to be the Rule of Faith.

. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Rule of Faith. First, They cannot be certain by
self-evidence, that this is Gods Word; which cannot be discovered, but by deep
speculation; nor can this be concluded, till all seeming contradictions are
solved,. 3. Secondly, Nor can they know how many Books are divinely inspired,
either by self-evidence, or by any skill they are possessed of,. 4. Thirdly, Nor
is it evidenceable to their capacities, that the originals are any where
preserved entire; nor can they be assured of the skills of others by which they
know it,. 5. Fourthly, Nor can they know that the Scriptures are rightly
translated; for they are not capable to judge of the honesty and skill of the
Translators,. 6. Fifthly, If it be most truly translated, yet innumerable
Copies, before Printing, and since Printers and Correctors of the Press are to
be relied on, by which means they can have no evidence of the right letter of
Scripture,. 7. Lastly, Still they are far to seek, unless they were certain of
the true sense of Scripture, which the numerous Commentators and infinite
Disputes, about concerning Points and Christ's Divinity, show not to be the task
of the vulgar,. 8.

Ad. 3. as to the truths contained in Scripture; by observing that it contains
powerful and heavenly Doctrines, suitable to God, and great Prophecies
wonderfully fulfilled: yet as to the writing which contains these truths, we
have another more plain way, and generally evidenceable to all persons, to
assure them, that these Books are Gods Word: which is, that by the general
delivery or tradition of the Church of Christ, or of all who appear to have the
chief care of their own souls, these Books have in all Ages since Christ, and
almost in all Countries been preserved, as the Writings of the Prophets,
Apostles and Evangelists; they have constantly and publicly read them as such,
and given them to us, as containing that Doctrine which was so wonderfully
confirmed by Miracles. In this manner we receive all the Books of Holy
Scripture as Gods Word; and by this way we have a plain, and withal a very full
certainty; or by this means in S. Austin's words De Civ. Dei, lib. 15. c. 23.
The authority of the true Scriptures comes to us from the Fathers, by a most
certain and known succession.

Compare the certainty of it, in any thing; and especially, in the delivery of
such Monuments which are of Divine Inspiration. To all this add the great
evidence we have from the Writings of the ancient Fathers, that they did
religiously own and honor this Book, as the Word of God. Lastly, Compare the
certainty of this truth of the Word of God being contained in Scripture, with
the certainty of Doctrine by unwritten Tradition, or rather with its
uncertainty; wherein we must consider, that this delivering to us the writing
of the Holy Scriptures, is of the same nature with that, whereby Monuments,
preserved Records or Charters are delivered from one generation to another;
which the common apprehensions of men show, to be a much surer way of delivery,
than this Tradition by way of hear says: since in every Corporation, which
has a Charter delivered down safely from their Predecessors, if the Members of
it would be sure what are the Privileges that belong to it, they will not
think it the safest way to enquire, what are the common Opinions of that
Society, and rely on this, which is like the way of Oral Tradition: but they
will consult the Charter it self, and so rest satisfied in what is there
contained in their sure Records. And the vulgar Christians will conclude the
truth of Christian Doctrine, or what God delivered, to be more fully in the
Scripture, than in the words of other Christians or Tradition, by the same way,
but by much greater evidence, than that, by which men of all Societies, will
conclude the truth of what concerns their Privileges, or what Emperors or
Kings have granted them, to be more fully contained in their Charters, than in
common reports.

Nor is this Tradition which we honor, he does not exercise his reason, to
prove the truth of the thing by rational evidence, but submits his reason to
rely on the credibility of the Divine Testimony, and upon this Testimony, owns
what is attested by it: but when we say, we own the Scriptures to be Gods Word,
by the forementioned way of Tradition, we act our reason as to the thing
received by us; and do own and acknowledge this as truth, from that rational
evidence which Tradition affords to our reason; and so do receive it as true in
a way of rational knowledge, which by this Traditional evidence we prove truth.
The things contained in Scripture we receive by faith, because contained in a
divinely inspired Writing; and here we enquire not for rational evidence, to
prove them true. Here then we can be no more said to build our faith on the
Rule of Tradition, than public Justice can be said to be administered by the
Rule of Tradition, when Cases are decided by Acts of Parliament which have been
successively delivered from one Age to another.

But as he has hitherto builded on a mistake, Austin had in his forsaking
Manicheism, who makes this Confession to God, Confess. lib. 6. c. 5. Thou did
persuade me, that they were to be blamed, not who believed thy Books, which
almost in all Nations thou have established on so great authority, but who
believed them not. Therefore when we were unable by evident reason to find out
truth, and for this cause had need of the authority of the holy Scriptures, I
now began to believe, that thou would by no means have given to that
Scripture so excellent authority throughout all Lands, unless thou would that
thou should be believed by it, and that thou should be sought by it. Now
the absurdities which used to offend me, I referred to the height of the
Mysteries.

Ad. 4. England as Canonical, to be the divinely inspired Scriptures, or the
Word of God? Now they may safely and with good ground receive all these Books,
because they are so owned by the same abovementioned Tradition or delivery of
all Churches, as they received them from the beginning: nor was there ever in
the Church any doubt of the Books we receive of the Old Testament, or of any of
the Evangelists, or of the most of the Epistles. And though there was some
doubt at some time, in some places, concerning some few Books; yet these doubts
were never general: nor did they in any place continue, but were checked by
known consent in the beginning of Christianity; of which S. Hierom speaks ad
Dardanum Ep. 129. We receive them following the authority of ancient Writers.
Now that all these Books have been always thus delivered by the Catholic
Church as the Word of God, the Vulgar has sufficient reason to acknowledge,
since it has the same certainty with the way of delivering so many preserved
Records, by the agreement of such multitudes of Societies, which is a much more
certain way than Oral Tradition of Christ's Doctrine, as was showed n. 6. This
delivery of these Books, is commonly asserted by the present Age, and by men of
greatest knowledge amongst the Protestants: nor at this time does the Roman
Church reject any of them. Though indeed S. Hierom tells us, That in his time
the Latin Custom did not receive the Epistle to the Hebrews amongst Canonical
Scriptures, in his Commentaries upon Isa. 6. and Isa. 8. and elsewhere. Which
Eusebius also takes notice of, Eccl. Hist. lib. 3. c. 3. and lib. 6. c. 21. So
that the Roman Church was not then the most faithful preserver of what was
delivered in the Church Catholic, which did acknowledge this and the other
Scriptures, by which they are sufficiently delivered to us, and by which S.
Hierom did receive even this Epistle, as he particularly writes in the
abovementioned Epistle ad Dardanum.

Now being secure of these Books, Roman Church, does pretend to any other Book
of Scripture in the New Testament: so S. Luke chap. 1. has assured us, that in
his Gospel are written what things are necessary to be believed as the
Christian Faith. So that hitherto it appears, how common Christians may know
enough for their salvation: and yet further, they knowing all these Books to be
of God, can thence conclude, that whatever is declared in them is true, and
what ever is condemned there, is false or evil; and by this means they may
attain much knowledge.

And though these vulgar Christians may safely be unacquainted with the
Controversy concerning the Apocryphal Books, as is evident from what is above
said; Jewish and Christian Churches Tradition in this point; yet the vulgar may
possibly, be sufficiently satisfied, that none of those Books are part of the
Scriptures divinely inspired. For since they can understand from men of
knowledge and learning, that none of those Books were received in the Jewish
Church, to whom the Oracles of God were committed: Nor were they any of them
generally received as of divine inspiration, and for proof of Doctrines, by the
Catholic Christian Church; they may thence conclude, that it is as safe for
them not to own them as such, as it was for the Catholic Christian Church, and
the Jewish Church, whom neither Christ nor his Apostles charged with any sin
and corruption in this particular. And likewise they may see, that they have as
little reason to be guided by the particular Romish Church, in opposition to
the Church Catholic concerning these Books, as S. Hierom had concerning the
Epistle to the Hebrews; especially since they of Rome have not fixedly kept and
declared the same Books at all times for Scripture.

Thus we have a certainty of the Canon of Scripture, Romish Church.

Ad. 5. these Books of any others in the world, and the greatest care of them,
and that there are infinite Copies of them, in several Regions of the World,
both in Originals and Translations, which that they all contain in them an
agreement in the same matters of truth, he has good reason to believe, because
it is generally asserted by the best and most learned men this vulgar Christian
knows; and even the Romanists who design to speak all they can against the
certainty of Scripture, have never yet dared to affirm the contrary: for though
there be many various readings, yet not such which will mis-guide in any matter
of Faith. These things will make him more secure of the Scriptures being
preserved entire, than any man can be of the Statutes of the Land, or of any
Histories, or any other Records whatsoever; that is, he has the greatest
evidence of its integrity, that can be of any Writing in the World, which had
its original some Ages past, and infinitely a greater evidence than can be
given for Oral Tradition being preserved. For if one Record be commonly
acknowledged a more certain preservative of truth, and in it self less liable
to corruption, than common fame; much more when so numerous Records, or
carefully and religiously transcribed Copies all agree. Again, when he
considers that in the Jewish Church the Scriptures were, until the coming of
Christ, in very corrupt times, and amongst very corrupt persons, preserved so
entire, that Christ sends to them to learn Religion; he has great reason to
judge the New Testament preserved entire, since we cannot suppose Providence
less careful of the New Testament than of the Old, and there are now abundantly
more Copies, both Translations and Originals (and old Translations speak the
agreement of the old Originals whence they were translated) and these
Scriptures highly valued, and publicly read in a constant manner, in so many
places of the World; and all agree in all points of Faith. Nor could they
possibly be any where all corrupted to one purpose, in a way so apparent to
sense, as words written are, since there never was any General Council,
collected out of all parts of the World, to determine any thing concerning the
various Scripture readings, or the alteration of any Copies; if any such had
been, it is possible there might have been some corruption general, if not by
confederacy, yet by mistake, unless the former Copies should yet remain to
discover this, as it is certain many very ancient Copies, and probably more
ancient than any General Council, yet remain in the World; as for instance,
that written by Tecla, in our Kings Library, sent from Cyrill Patriarch of
Constantinople.

Ad. 6. Austin observed de Doct. Christiana, lib. 2. c. 4. The holy Scriptures
being spread abroad far and wide, by the various Tongues of the Interpreters,
are made known to the Nations for their salvation. And a man of mean capacity
may be satisfied concerning Translations, if he consider that he has reason to
judge, that the Original Languages may be understood by men of learning, partly
because himself by use and observing, has learnt his own Mother Tongue, and
therefore has reason to think, that others by the same means, may learn other
Languages; and particularly those wherein the Scriptures were written: partly
because he thinks it injurious to the Goodness and Wisdom of God, to imagine,
that he should give forth a writing to guide the World, and that it should be
in a Language which was not intelligible; and partly because he hears that so
many Churches have these Books translated, and that even such as this
Discourser, who would cast and suggest all doubts they can concerning Scripture
translated into the common Tongues, yet dare they not say, that it is not
capable of being translated, so as to deliver the same matters of Faith: yea,
the Papists themselves both use, allow of, and many of them endeavor to make
new Translations. Having gone thus far, he may further consider, that if it can
be truly translated, he has reason to judge, that such men who have the common
fame, even amongst the Learned, for men of skill in Languages, are best able to
give the sense of the words contained in those Languages; and he can conclude,
that whatever God thought requisite for him to know from this Book, is so
written, that such men of Learning are able to give the sense of it: and that
whatever in any phrase cannot by such be understood, is something fit to be
further enquired into, but not necessary to be now known. Yea further, he can
conclude, that he has reason to conceive, that the Translation with us in use,
does contain in it the true Doctrine of Christ, which is in the Original;
because he hears this often averred by honest and learned men amongst us, and
because the Papists who are professed enemies to this Translation, yet dare
not, nor do not assert the contrary; but raise only some more inconsiderable
Cavils about phrases. By this I suppose our vulgar Christian satisfied: if this
Discourser be not with this answer, let him consider a parallel case. If many
English men should purposely go to France to give a description of that
Country, and they take a particular view of all places, and write this, and
all agree together, and many thousand others who after go to see it, all agree
in all material things; yea, and when many others shall go over on purpose to
find fault with this description, who yet can find nothing very material to
object, but only carp at small things; will this Author say, that all this can
signify nothing to inform him satisfactorily who stays at home, unless he
could be able to demonstrate to himself, that they indeed were in France, as
they all agree, and that they did see what they wrote. Either this is something
very considerable, and rational to engage assent; or else against all reason,
most English men have confessed, that there is such a place as Rome, and such a
person as is called the Pope, when we never saw either it or him.

Ad. 7. To the fifth Objection, suspicious in the whole Book, here is
manifestly evident, either a piece of gross ignorance in the Writer, or a
designed cheat upon his Reader: for since he apparently designs his Book for
English men, and all our English Translations now in ordinary use, had their
original since our departing from Popery; and our generally received
Translation is not above Fifty Three Years older than his Book, yet he would
have the vulgar to imagine, that there might be many faults in transcribing
these Translations, in innumerable Copies before Printing, when Printing was
long before these Translations were first made. But to pass this by, ordinary
Protestants may be thus satisfied concerning the Printed Copies of the
Scripture, by considering that there is as great care taken about Printing
Bibles, as about copying Records, and more than about Printing any other Books:
and yet this Author (who would persuade other to doubt so much of the Printers
keeping to the truth of the Copy before him, as to the sense of it) I suppose
would not have sent his Book to the Press, if he had thought indeed, the sense
of it was not like to be expressed in Print: He may further consider, that our
English Bibles are daily read, publicly or privately, by learned men, and
compared with the Originals, and found to agree with them, except in some
particular errors of Print, which as they are not in many expressions, may be
discerned by common observation. And the ordinary Christian has the more cause
to be confident, of our ordinary Impressions of the Bible, because even the
Papists, who are enemies to them, and do peruse them, yet dare not charge them
to vary from the first translated Copies, more than is above expressed.

Ad. 8. and such like, are so plain, that he who can understand any thing of
common speech, may understand so much of them, as is necessary for him to know:
yea, they are in Scripture often delivered in the very words and phrases, which
Christ himself and the Apostles and Prophets made use of to their hearers, to
instruct them in the faith and holy life: and therefore he who will censure the
Scripture as not sufficiently plain to teach the great truths of God, must
condemn the Apostles likewise and Christ himself, as not teaching, so as to be
understood; and then must impiously tell the World, that either none were by
them brought to the faith, or that they who were, did not understand it. Indeed
he thinks strangely of man, who imagines that he must go to an Oracle, to
understand such things as these, That Christ came into the World to save
sinners, That he dyed for our sins, and rose again, and shall judge the World:
If these and such like plain words, which are abundantly in the holy
Scriptures, cannot be understood by common capacities, I dare affirm, that they
can never know these truths, by any words and phrases, and so can never be
helped by such men as this Discourser, who can show no other ordinary way to
teach the matters of mere belief, but by words, unless they will embrace
Enthusiasm. Indeed many things in Scripture are hard to be understood:
concerning which, this ordinary Christian may satisfy himself, that since God
gave him this Book to lead him to God, it is evident from Gods end in writing
it, that he has expressed so much as is necessary for him to know, that it is
not beyond his capacity to discern it, if he diligently attend to it: and what
he is not capable of understanding, he may be ignorant of, without fear of
losing salvation by such ignorance; provided he be careful to use such means as
God affords him, and be willing to receive further instruction, as he shall be
capable of further knowledge. And then this ordinary Christian may by this
means be of a sound mind, and of a more knowing head in matters of Faith, than
most Papists are, who know as little, or less of the things which are obscure
in Scripture, than Protestants do; and by this means he may own Christ's
Divinity, as may appear, n. 23.

Having now showed, Rule of Faith, there is nothing rational; I shall now
briefly show, that the promoting such Cavils as these, or being persuaded by
them, would be a way very much to hinder Piety, and even wholly to disown
Christianity, which I shall do, in applying most or all his Arguments to some
particular Cases.

We read that Josiah when the Book of the Law was found, Kings 23.2, 3, 4. and
from thence received the determination of very considerable Points of Doctrine,
which no Oral Tradition had brought down to him: to wit, what great wrath God
had denounced against Judah and Jerusalem, for the neglect of keeping that Law,
2 Kings 22.13, 19. This pious work of his, for which he was so highly commended
by God himself, 2 Kings 22.19, 20. and Chap. 23.25. That there was no King like
him, before or after him, should never have been performed by him, had he
hearkened to such a Tempter as this Discourser. For 1. Josiah could not more
certainly know the Book of the Law, to be the Word of God, than Protestants now
do the Book of Scriptures. 2. And Josiah had only the Books of Moses, 2 Chronicles.
34.13. and could then no more know the whole Canon of Scripture, than we do. 3.
And before this Book was found, he knew not that these Scriptures were any
where preserved; and after it was found, having only one Copy, and that
probably written by they knew not whom, he had not so much evidence of its
integrity, as Protestants now have of the whole Scriptures, by the consent of
all Copies. 4. And if he was not capable of knowing the sense truly, he should
neither have humbled himself, nor have reformed Judah. Thus we see it would
have destroyed his Piety, to have been guided by these irrational Objections.

Consider next the state of Christianity. Messiah, who and what manner of
person he should be, etc. Christ sends his hearers to the Scriptures to learn,
John 5.39. and S. Peter when he spoke of the glory of the Transfiguration, yet
says, 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, to which you do well
to take heed. Yet the Jews then had no more certainty than we have, that
Scriptures are Gods Word, how many Books there are, that they were preserved
entire, that they were rightly translated, and rightly copied; and that they
had the right sense. Now he who thinks not this a Rule sure enough, to reject
the then contrary Traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees (as that he must be a
great Temporal Prince, and such like) must own the Pharisees to be rather in
the right, than our Savior and his Apostles. And yet all these Arguments of
our Discourser would here take place, even those which concern Translations;
for at that time the Jews (who after the Captivity did not commonly understand
the Hebrew) did make use of, some the Syriack or Chaldee Translations, which
though of Hebrew Original, as much differs from it as our English from the
Saxon; and others, and those very many, of the Greek Version, which is as much
different from the Hebrew, as our English is from either of them.

His. 9, 10, 11. contain what he would persuade his Reader, a Protestant would
say against his Discourse,

. 12. Some will reply, fundamentals are clear in Scripture. True indeed, some
do reply to this purpose, and not only Protestants, but the ancient Fathers,
upon the like occasion. Thus Origin when Celsus in opposing Christianity, urged
the obscurity and uncertain sense of Scriptures, Orig. lib. 7. cont. Cells.
answers, That whatever was useful for their hearers to understand, and might
confer any thing to the amending of their lives, these things the Prophets
spoke without all covertness, according to the will of God. But such things as
were mystical, and matters of higher enquiry and speculation, than the vulgar
were capable of, these things they declared by allegories and dark sayings.
Austin, de Doct. Christiana, lib. 2. c. 9. says, Among those things which are
plainly set down in Scripture, are found all those things which contain faith
and manners. And Athanasius with his Council of Egypt, in their Synodical
Epistle to Jovian the Emperor, tell him, That the true and religious faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ is plain to all, being both known and read out of the
divine Scriptures: and all these sayings include fundamentals being clear in
Scripture.

Against such Answers or Replies, de fide, or can yet agree to do it, which he
knows they cannot; against himself as well as against reason) tells us, That a
perfect Catalogue of fundamentals was never yet agreed upon, and without this
all goes to wrack; and then he enquires, Whether this be a fundamental, that
Christ is God? and Whether this be clearer in Scripture, than that God has
hands, feet, nostrills and passions like ours? Concerning the Catalogue of
Fundamentals, though as to matters of mere belief, Protestants have often
asserted, that the Creed contains them all; yet the requiring such a Catalogue,
in this case, from Protestants, as it is needless, so to a sober Enquirer will
seem ridiculous: and the only true way to disprove this Assertion, is to show
something to be fundamental, which is not plain enough in Scripture to be
thence believed. To put a like case, If I should assert, That in England may be
had all things, which are necessary for the convenient subsistence of man:
would it not be a thing ridiculous to say, that till I could distinguish all
things necessary for this subsistence, from things unnecessary, and produce a
Catalogue of them, this cannot be truly asserted. For, suppose such an
enumeration of things necessary attempted, if any thing be omitted, which to
another seems necessary, and is in England; or if some thing be inserted, which
seems not necessary, and yet is in England, still this assertion of all things
necessary for subsistence being here, may stand good, and can no way be
disproved, but by showing, that there is somewhat necessary for man's
subsistence, which cannot be had in England.

This I suppose this Author did discern, John, who tells us, he wrote for this
purpose, that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, John
20.31. So that he must either grant, that this is so plain in Scripture, that
there is sufficient evidence there for our believing it; or else he must say,
that when the Evangelist wrote that we should believe him to be the Son of God,
he had no eye to our believing his Divinity, or his being God; and he who will
so assert, will deny this to be a fundamental; or else he must say, that the
Evangelist, and the Holy Ghost who inspired him, mistook in supposing enough
written to declare his Divinity. But he here seems to object, and elsewhere,
that some who seem to follow the letter of the Scripture deny this, as the
Socinians. What then? This is not for want of evidence in Scripture, but from
making or devising ways to avoid this evidence. Will this Author say, that
there was no evidence, of there being Angels and Spirits, amongst the Jews,
because the Sadducees, who had opportunity of observing all such evidence,
believed neither Angel nor Spirit? And will he say, that there was no clear
evidence from the Word of Christ and his Miracles, that they were from God,
because the Pharisees and other unbelieving Jews, who conversed with him, and
saw his Miracles, and heard his Word, yet did not acknowledge them from God.

Now if this be so clear from Scripture, etc. like ours, I know not of the
least intimation of any such thing in the letter of Scripture, though it should
not be allowed the common and usual Figures of Speech, which are intelligible
enough to men of Reason; since when it speaks of Gods Hand or Arm, or the like,
it plainly shows them not like ours, as God said to Job, Job 40.9. Have thou an
arm like God, and can thou thunder with a voice like him?

These two properties therefore of the Rule of Faith are agreeable to
Scripture, notwithstanding all this Author has jointly objected against it.

An Answer to his third Discourse, showing, that the three next Properties of
the Rule of Faith, are agreeable to Scripture.
IN. 1. and 2. Rule of Faith; That it must be apt to settle and justify those
unlearned persons, who rely undoubtingly upon it; that this may be done, such a
person, he says, must proceed on such Principles as he takes to be true ones.
Thus he cannot act in receiving Scripture; because as he can himself have no
self-evidence of its being Gods Word, so it is senseless for men to believe a
multitude, which says, it may possibly err in what it tells them. Or if here
skill in History, Language or Fathers, may secure them from error, this he
cannot judge of: And principally when he considers, that they who pretend to
Scripture, differ, and condemn and persecute each other; his reason will tell
him, that since there is but one truth, for want of the light or directive
power of that Rule, they all but one party, and may be that also, go miserably
astray.

To this I answer, The Principles which he relies on, the understanding of a
man, because he who is Master of the best reason, may in some things
misapprehend? if this Author would thus argue, he must disclaim all pretenses
to demonstrations and Science, yea, and certainty likewise in all things in the
World. We know in common affairs that all men are capable of being mistaken;
where they have not sufficient evidence: and yet we do not thence discredit the
preservation of Records and Charters, as if that could be no way assured, since
we know men are capable here of sufficient evidence to inform them; and
Protestants are no more fallible, nor acknowledge themselves no more fallible
than all men are; that is, they may be deceived where they have not sufficient
light, and evidence to discern by: but where they have this light, and discern
and receive it, there they neither are, nor can be deceived; and such evidence
as we have showed, they have of the Scriptures; so that the knowledge thus
grounded in Protestants, is infallibly certain, not from the infallibility of
the persons, as if they were no where liable to error; but from the
infallibleness of the clear evidence of truth, which whoever receives, is
certainly, as to that thing so evidenced, free from error. Yet we receive Gods
Word not only from the delivery of Protestants, but of all ancient Churches,
who yet were, and owned themselves to be men subject to error. Yea, the Church
of Rome, and even the Council of Trent, who pretend to infallibility, do also
deliver all the Books we receive; but we have no more reason to believe them
for this pretense, than we should have to believe certainly all that man shall
say, who has the confidence to declare his tongue not liable to utter
falsehood, when we can certainly know this very speech cannot be truth.

There is nothing else in these Paragraphs which has not been before answered,
over eagerly inquire after, and too rashly determine, which, it may be, God did
not think fit to determine in his word, though all things requisite and
necessary are clear enough; and there are many things clear enough in the
Scripture, to diligent inquirers, whilst some err about them by too hastily
closing with some conceptions of their own, not grounded on sufficient
evidence, and then too passionately promoting of them: and in neither of these
cases the Rule is to be blamed, but the persons; and to one of these heads
belong all our differences. This same Argument was urged both by Jews and
Heathens, (and particularly by Celsus against Christian Religion) as is related
by Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. and Orig. lib. 3. cont. Cells. who pleaded that
Christian Religion was not to be heeded and believed, because they who
professed it, differed so much from each other, or opposed, contradicted and
blamed each other, and many Heresies were spread amongst them. To which they
returned answer, That such differences were common in all cases, where men
entertained any thing by their judgments, if the things were any way eminent
and excellent: such there was amongst Philosophers who were Gentiles, and such
amongst the followers of Judaism; so that he who would close with this
Argument, must reject all ways of knowledge and professions of Religion. They
observed likewise, that men will not refuse all Physic, because amongst
Physicians there are many various opinions; nor will Travelers refuse to go in
the Kings Highway, because some went out of this Roadway to bypath, which
bring them to Precipices; nor should we for this reject the Scriptures and
Christian Religion, but more diligently seek into them, since it is foretold,
that there must be Heresies, and that the Tares will be with the Wheat. To this
purpose those Fathers answered for Christianity; and the same answer pleads for
us. But if this Author do indeed believe, that there cannot be evidence enough
in that Rule, where they who profess to follow it, are of different opinions;
let him begin at home, and put it into practice; and it will engage those of
the Romish Communion to renounce their Rule of Faith; since it is plainly
evident, that there have been many different opinions, and high animosities
amongst the pretended followers of that Rule; not only formerly amongst the
followers of different Schoolmen, and their different Orders of the Clergy;
but also more of late amongst the Jesuits, and the Priests of other Orders,
more especially the Jansenists; and the same continue to this day.

To all this I shall add, Beraeans to be condemned, who searched the Scriptures
to examine the Apostles Doctrine, for which S. Luke commends them, Act. 17.11.
Nor could they justify Timothy's receiving them from a Child; yet S. Paul
commends that in him, and says, they were able to make him wise unto
Salvation, 1 Timothy 3.15. For as they could have no more self evidence of
Scripture than we have; so they received these Scriptures from men whom
themselves believed to be fallible; for the Scriptures they received as
delivered by the Jewish Church, which if they had not judged fallible, they
could not have given heed to the Apostles Doctrine, which condemned much which
was delivered by the Jews, and delivered other Doctrines by them not received.
Yea, they must conclude the delivery amongst the Jews certainly false, when
they believed the Apostolical preaching. And even these Jews who delivered
these Scriptures, did differ from each other, and condemn each other; which is
evident not only in observing the three great Sects of the Jews, the Pharisees,
Essens, and Sadduces; but also in observing the dissentions, betwixt the
followers of the two great Jewish Doctors, Hillel and Shammai, who opposed one
another to the death, even about the times of the Apostles. So that according
to this Authors Principles he lays down, this was a senseless proceeding of
Timothy and the Beraeans, and they were no way justifiable. Nor can this Author
plead that these persons received the Scriptures from the delivery of the
professors of Christianity as such, though they supposed them also fallible in
trying their Doctrines, since it is evident they closed with the truth of
Christianity, by searching the Scriptures: and indeed even then there were
great contentions amongst the professors of Christian Religion, as appears in
the Acts of the Apostles, concerning the observation of the Rites of the
Mosaical Law.

Since therefore we certainly know that they were justifiable who received and
relied on Scriptures as we do, and since his Objections to plead against us,
appear no way rational, I may well assert this third Property to agree to
Scripture.

. 3. Rule of Faith, to satisfy Skeptical Dissenters, and rational Doubters;
which, he says, nothing but demonstration can do, if they be true to their
reason, and otherwise, their Faith it self would be a vice. But if some things
here were demonstrable, yet it may be the task of a man's life, and this
rational man would smile at his endeavors, who should go about to demonstrate
all the difficult things here to be evidenced; That the Scriptures are the Word
of God, having no real contradiction in them; that they are contained in just
so many Books, and are still preserved entire; that they are rightly
Translated, and that this is the sense.

I answer; If by Skeptical, be here meant only inquisitive, Rule of Faith; and
do assert, that the most inquisitive Dissenters and rational Doubters, may be
satisfied concerning Scriptures, if they be willing to attend to sufficient
evidence; and be persons who desiring to have their souls saved, would readily
choose that, which shall appear the best way to God. How all these things here
mentioned may be known with sufficient certainty, and by plain and natural
evidence, and without spending a man's life in searching, we have showed in
answer to the former Discourse. But these things are not indeed plain
demonstrations, nor are such things as are matters of fact, capable of them,
but of rational testimonies and evidences, which are so clear, that there can
no rational way of doubting remain, where this evidence is discerned. Does this
Author think that no man can rationally judge himself to be the Kings natural
Subject, because he can have no demonstration that he was born in England, or
other his Dominions? will he not eat or take Physic till he can demonstrate
that his Food or Physic are proper for his Stomach? either he counts a very
small rational evidence a demonstration; or else daily acts in things
concerning his life without it; and yet we have much greater security
concerning Scripture, than a man can have in any case concerning the
suitableness of his Food. If this rational man be to pass the Seas, can he have
no evidence of the safety of an Harbor, by the Mariners testimony, and a long
testified experience, until he can demonstrate there are neither Rocks nor
Quicksands there? Obj. But where the soul is concerned, there is need of the
highest evidence. Ans. There is in this case need of sufficient evidence to
command assent; but if it would be folly not to receive such things as may
preserve the life on sufficient evidence, it is yet greater folly not to
receive such things upon sufficient evidence as may make the soul happy. S.
Austin while a Manichee, as he says, Confess. 6. chapter 4. would have had such
certainty of things not seen, as of seven and three being ten; but at length he
considered, how many things he had firmly received upon other testimony; as
concerning places, and men whom he had not seen, and of what Parents he was
born, and therefore resolved it was reasonable to close with Scripture upon its
so general delivery. But let this Author begin at home, and he will soon see
demonstrations not necessary for satisfaction. The Council of Trent, Can. 4. De
Baptism. anathematizeth them who shall say, Baptism is not necessary to
Salvation; and Can. 11. de Sacramentis, requires a necessity of the Ministers
intention in the Sacrament. Can this Author direct all the members of his own
Church to Demonstrations, to prove themselves Baptized, because it is a matter
which concerns their souls? If he thinks the testimonies of Parents and
Godfathers sufficient; yet no rational man will call this a demonstration, nor
can these prove the intention of the Minister; yea, how can this Author or any
other demonstrate that he was the person who was seen at such a time to be
Baptized? If he will satisfy himself with the common testimonies of a
sufficient number of credible persons, in a matter where they were capable of
discerning truth; this indeed will be a rational assent, and more than this
cannot be expected; but this is not a demonstration, but an evidence inferior
in many circumstances, and those considerable ones, to the evidence we have of
Scripture.

He further says, he who would know the sense of Scripture, Grammar,
Criticisms, etc. universally necessary to help men rightly to understand plain
words; such as in most places are the Gospels and Epistles, and many other
parts of Scripture, must assert, That one man cannot understand another, nor a
child his Father, until he have learned several Sciences; and so all delivery
of words amongst the Vulgar, and therewith the Romish Oral Tradition, must be
utterly impossible, to come down in any thing, so much as one step, either
right or wrong, so as to be perceptible.

But he says, his Sceptick may find somewhat to reply rationally, or at least,
may maintain his ground of suspense, with a, Might it not be otherwise? If he
may do so, is this any fault in the Rule of Faith? or any excuse to him to
suspend his assent, when he can make no rational exception? Were not the
Miracles of Moses sufficiently convictive, so long as some Egyptians said,
Might they not be otherwise than from God? and was not all that Christ did and
spoke, enough to declare his Doctrine to be from God, and a Rule of Faith,
because the Jews not only said, May it not be otherwise, but that it is
otherwise? and must the Rule of Faith now be needs made another thing by us,
from what it was made in the beginning by Christ himself? shall the Scripture
now be required to have that condition of a Rule of Faith, which it is certain
did not at the beginning of Christianity belong to the Rule of Faith?

If this satisfy not, Beraeans in S. Paul's time, there should have been, or
were some, of this Authors principles, who thought Faith a Vice, if not founded
on demonstration, and would smile at any man, who should talk of demonstrating
so much of Scripture as was requisite to found their belief in it, and so
should refuse to assent to, and believe S. Paul, when others searching the
Scriptures, did believe: Will this Author so own these principles of this
Discourse, to say that these skeptical Unbelievers acted more rationally, than
S. Paul's Converts? and that they who believed his Doctrine by searching the
Scriptures, did betray their reason, and their Faith was a Vice, when S. Luke
owned them of a noble Spirit, and declared them to have searched diligently?

. 4. convictive of the most obstinate and acute Adversaries. Though obstinate
persons are capable of no conviction, yet we acknowledge, that the Rule of
Faith is defensible against all opposition; and is such, that the most acute
Adversaries may be satisfied concerning it, if sufficient evidence will prevail
with them. And this we assert concerning Scripture. He now supposes a Deist to
enquire, How we know the Book of Scripture to be Gods Word? and supposes us to
answer, By its excellencies. These excellencies indeed give considerable
evidence, especially, as he says, to eyes enlightened by faith; and do further
strengthen and satisfy them; yet we need not, nor do not assert, this alone
sufficient to give a rational account to all men, without taking in how these
Books were received, and delivered in the Church, as we formerly showed.

But he says, his Deist will show you Texts against known science, and in his
judgment, contradictions. Will he show Texts against known science? but what
if he cannot? and what if some expressions in Scripture are more suited to
vulgar apprehensions than the Sciolists notion, shall any reject so excellent a
Writing, because it condescends to speak intelligibly to the lowest capacities?
Nor where there is proof given of this being Gods Word, can seeming
contradictions to his judgment be sufficient not to receive it; since somewhat
mysterious and sublime may come from God; and to understand aright all things
written by the Penmen of Scripture, it is requisite to be acquainted with the
circumstances of History, measures, proverbial expressions, and the like; and
then he might reconcile, as learned men have done, many things which now to him
seem contrary.

But he says, Deist will show you many absurdities and Heresies in the letter
of Scripture, as that God has hands, feet, and passions like ours. Here, as
his former words are unsavory, his latter are untrue. Scripture speaks indeed
of Gods hands and feet, but no where says, he had such like ours. Such things
as are thus spoken of God in Scripture, have a true literal sense, if that may
be called literal, which is tropical; and why may not Scripture be allowed to
make use of Tropes or Metaphorical expressions, as well as all other Writers,
and all Discoursers? where the sense is easily discernable to reason, which is
requisite to be used, that we may understand any Writing. Now the considering
what knowledge we have of God by reason, and the pondering other places of
Scripture, which plainly speak God to be a Spirit; and considering likewise,
how these words of hands and feet, etc. are often used in a figurative sense:
this will plainly convince, that they must be understood so, when they are
applied to God. When the Romanists by Tradition deliver, that the Pope is the
Head of the Church, will they not expect, that man's common reason, and what
they otherwise teach of the Church, should teach all to allow a tropical sense
of the word Head, and not that they should forthwith imagine, that that Church
whereof the Pope is the Head, should have the outward shape of Man, Woman or
Beast? Thus Celsus, whose Arguments against Christianity, were much of the
nature of this Discoursers, makes this an Objection against Christians, that
they speak unworthily of God; as of the work of his hands, the mouth of God,
and the voice of God. And Origin, lib. 6. cont. Cells. thought it sufficient to
answer, that Christians did understand all these in a spiritual, not a
corporeal sense; and that if Celsus had read other places of Scripture, he
might thence know, that Christians would not think otherwise of God. It is an
unchristian assertion, to charge the letter of the Scripture (which is the very
words of the God of Truth) with heresy, where we have sure ground of it is
interpretation, both from other Scripture, and from Reason.

Against the latter he objects, Scripture Rule, and make our Reason and other
knowledge our Rule: I answer, when we include Scripture, we cannot disown it;
yet withal, we own Reason, as that whereby we judge of the significancy of
Words and Phrases, as well in Scripture as elsewhere: he who does not this,
either does not understand Phrases, or has a prodigious art of understanding
without reason. Yea, we do profess, to make use of that knowledge we have of
God by Reason, thereby to understand the better other expressions which concern
God in Truths revealed; since we are certain, that God gave the Scriptures, as
a further revelation to man, who was supposed to have that Reason and
Conscience which God had endued him with.

But he further in. 5. consciousness of our own thoughts, whether we do not
bring thoughts along with us to interpret Scripture by, and these from
Tradition, or what we have heard and received. Here I shall give him a true and
faithful account of the Protestants carriage in this thing, which must be by a
distinction of Persons and Texts of Scripture. In such Texts as appear plain
where the necessary truths are contained, none of us bring any such thoughts to
interpret by, but discern the evidence plainly in it self, and from thence we
hold such Truths as Points of Faith. In Texts of Scripture which appear more
difficult, all Protestants do prepossess themselves with such truths as they
have learned by plain Scriptures, or other certain evidence, and therefore know
no difficult Text can be so interpreted, as to contradict any such truth. Here
the vulgar Christians do suppose many times that to be the true sense of such
places, which they have received from those they judge able and faithful; but
such a sense of such Scripture, they do not own as a necessary Point of Faith,
but admit it as most probable, until themselves be able fully to search; and
then if they discern this a true exposition, they will receive it upon their
own knowledge; but if they find it a mistake, they will lay down that former
apprehension, and will entirely be guided by what they see is the true sense of
Scripture. And persons of great abilities to make the best search into the
sense of more difficult Texts, do not prepossess themselves with any particular
sense of such Scripture, but are every where entirely guided by that which
appears the best evidence to recommend any sense, as knowing that it is not our
interest or benefit, that this or that opinion or interpretation should be true
in things doubtful; but our great concernment is to own that which is, and God
has declared to be, the Truth.

. 6. concerning any place of Scripture, that it is not altered, and that [not]
is not inserted or left out? I answer, this as to any matters of Faith is
discovered sufficiently by what we showed to prove the Scriptures preserved
entire in the foregoing Discourse. Yea, the common principles of Reason and
Conscience in man, will evidence to him in many necessary truths, that if [not]
was left out or put in, they could never have been from God. That God is
Eternal, Powerful, Good, and to be worshipped of his creatures, that he treats
man with great mercy, that men must be holy and righteous, that God will judge
the World; such things as these appear so evident, that man wherever he hears
them, cannot but acknowledge them to be true and from God, and that the
contrary cannot be so. But further, the consent of all Copies in several
Countries, is in this case an abundant rational evidence; especially
considering, that these Writings were dispersed into all Countries presently
after they were first written, and so no miscarriage in the Faith could be in
those first Copies taken from the Original, (of what this Author moves his
doubts) which would not have been easily discovered and reformed, either by the
surviving Apostles, or by the Original Writing or Autographa of the Apostles
and Evangelists; which doubtless being of such high esteem in the Church, were
some time preserved. Now since at the first dispersing of these Copies, they
did contain the Apostles Doctrine entire, the constant agreement of all Copies
sufficiently prove the same continued still; especially considering, that the
Copies which all appear to have this agreement, were written in several Ages
long since past, and in several Countries. And that to imagine [not] left out
or foisted in, in the matters of Faith, in all Books generally and publikly and
daily read by Christians, must suppose 1. That they all every where in so many
Countries, should conspire to falsify the Faith of Jesus, which they appeared
to value above their lives, and by this Tradition would be corrupted; but yet
Scripture in all these Books could not, unless 2. They should falsify all the
ancient Copies, which yet by the very writing appear to have nothing rased out,
or foisted in. And this is a much higher certainty, than Josiah could have of
his own Copy; yea, than can be had of any passage in any Historian, ancient Law
or Record; and if this we have said, did not generally satisfy the Cavils
propounded, all History, old Laws and Records, must be rejected, because there
can be no such appearance of so great evidence, that in any sentence [not] was
not left out or foisted in. And so all matters of Fame or Tradition must be
disbelieved, till he can demonstrate, that they had not their original from the
reading some Writings, which have the same liableness to mistake with other
Writings, and that [not] has not been put in or left out in the Oral delivery.
And how much his Reader will be beholden to him for such conceits as these, we
may gather from his own words, Disc. 9.. 4. where speaking of humane
testimonies, he tells us amongst the most extravagant Opinionasters, none was
ever found so frantic, as to doubt them; and should any do so, all sober
mankind would esteem them stark mad. But as has been proved, this Author would
here lead his Reader such a way, as himself says, all sober mankind will
esteem him mad, if he follow him. If this be not enough, I shall add, that the
Primitive Christians owned such a trial of Scriptures incorruptness, as fully
sufficient for them to rely on, and to confound all who opposed it. And even
this Argument of this Author, though urged with greater confidence, was that
with which several of the Heretics, from the time of Irenaeus and Tertullian
to S. Austin, opposed the Christians; amongst which I shall now only mention
the Manichees out of S. Austin who declares, that whilst he was a Manichee,
Confess. l. 5. c. 2. he was somewhat shaken by hearing a dispute between
Helpidins and the Manichees: but the Manichees afterwad privately told him, The
N. Testament was corrupted, and there was no incorrupt exemplar produced; but
this did as little satisfy him. And after he became an opposer of the
Manichees. Contra Faustum, lib. 11. c. 1. he urges against them Scripture
testimony; to which Faustus answers, That this Scripture testimony was not
right. To which Saint Austin replies, If this answer be esteemed of any weight,
what written Authority can ever be opened? what holy Book can ever be searched?
cap. 2. he demands proof of Faustus, what Books ever read otherwise, and c. 3.
urges, All Books new and old have this testimony, all Churches read it, all
tongues consent in it, therefore put off the cloak of deceitfulness. And in
Epist. 19. he says, he read the Scripture which is placed in the most sublime
and celestial height of Authority, being certain and secure of its truth: but
(says he) the Manichees contend that many things in the Scripture are false;
yet so, that they do not ascribe falsehood to the Apostles who wrote them, but
to some which have corrupted the Books: but because they cannot prove this by
any ancient Copies, he says they are overcome, and confounded by the most
manifest truth.

But our Discourser says, It is certain there are many various readings, yea,
so many in the New Testament alone, observed by my Lord Usher, that he durst
not print them, for fear of bringing the whole Book into doubt. We acknowledge
there are several various readings; but this speaks the greater security of
this Rule, because though all these readings are preserved, yet according to
any of them, there is a consent in all the matters of Faith; unless there be
some manifest mistake in any Copy, which may easily be discerned to be the
Scribes or Printers error: nor amongst all these readings, can any point of
Christian Faith be so doubted of, that it is not capable of receiving
sufficient evidence from some Texts. And though this Author would pretend,
that from these various readings, there is an uncertainty in all things in
Scripture, which is contrary to all reason; yet others more knowing and learned
Papists, are so ingenuous as to grant what I here contend for. Bellarmine de
Verbo Dei lib. 2. c. 2. asserts, that the errors of Transcribers in the Old
Testament, are not of so great moment, that the integrity of the Holy
Scriptures should be wanting, in those things which belong to Faith and Good
Manners: for the most part (says he) the whole difference of the various
readings, is placed in some little words, which either do not at all, or do
very little alter the sense. And chapter 7. he declares, that he asserts the same
concerning the New Testament, which he there asserted concerning the Old.
Indeed before the time of Christ, there were more various readings in the Old
Testament, than there now is in the New; as may appear not only from the
various Cheri and Ketib, and the Tikkan Sopherim, and such like, which are
probably more ancient; but also because the Copies used by the Septuagint and
Samaritan, differed in many various readings from the Hebrew Copies used by the
Chaldee Paraphrast, which probably were most in use in Christ's time, and after
received by the Masoreths; and yet since they all agreed in the same points of
Doctrine; Christ and his Apostles both had recourse to them, and so persuaded
others: and we think it is safe for us to follow such examples. The Vulgar may
here consider our several English Translations, which as to expressions have in
most Verses some difference, and in some few places the one may give a sense
somewhat different from the other; yet since it is but in very few places where
they do not all agree in the sense of the place; and where they do not, yet
none of them do assert any truth of Doctrine which the others either do not
assert, or do deny; the common Christians may hence see that which may make
them rather the more secure than doubtful of these truths, because the latter
Translations, though differing in words, yet agree in all Doctrines with the
former. And if there be the same variety of readings in several Translations in
other Languages, this is no more than is in our English. But as for the
Originals, though there be several various readings, yet in comparison of our
English Translations, but one for many; and yet fewer places where the same
sense of that Text is not expressed by such readings, though in some small
difference of words; which difference of words was occasioned partly from
several of the Fathers citing the Scriptures, as is with all men frequent, not
always in the very same words, but words of the same sense; from whence many
of these various readings in the New Testament had their Original; or partly
that the Scribes, or they who copied the Scriptures, might have some mistake,
where yet the sense remained entire for the most part.

But he inquires, been some various readings formerly, in those places which
now appear in all Copies we have to agree? which various readings may possibly
have been blindly determined, and so misguide us in the main points of Faith. I
answer, That since there are very many ancient Copies, and Commentators and
Citations of Fathers, which fully accord with our present readings; and since
there are some ancient Translations, as Syriack, Latin, and others; all which
agree in the same, and since there is an accord in these Books scattered and
dispersed over the whole World: if there had been any such different readings,
they must be every where determined, before these ancient Copies, Commentaries
or Citations were written, before the ancient Translations were made, yea,
before the Copies of the Scriptures were dispersed into the several Regions of
the World: and this is to imagine that there must have been some general
alteration determined, in the great matters of Faith, whilst the hand writing
of the Apostles was preserved, yea, even in the Apostles days, which is
impossible unless the Apostles to whom Christ committed his truth, and their
Converts who were numerous, and prized this Doctrine above all the World,
should all against the clear evidence of their own knowledge, and the Original
Writings of the Apostles then amongst them, conspire to corrupt this Doctrine,
and to falsify the Records which contain it; which to assert, is not only
highly unreasonable, but exceedingly impious and blasphemous, nor would it
leave Oral Tradition safe.

How much all this speaks to common sense,

What he speaks of Bishop Usher, observing so many various readings in the New
Testament, which he durst not Print for fear of bringing the whole Book into
doubt. This relation manifests it self to be such a story, as I think neither
this Author, nor any man of reason, either Protestant or Papist, can believe,
upon serious consideration, if he withal judge Bishop Usher to have been a very
knowing man. No understanding Protestant can believe this, because he knows
that Protestants freely inquire after various readings, and never the more
doubt of Scriptures; because there appears so full a consent in all material
things. Nor can I imagine that either this Author or any understanding Papist
can believe this story; for since it appears to be much their design, to bring
the New Testament and Old likewise so far into question, that it might not be
capable of being a Rule: if they thought in truth that Archbishop Usher
observed so much of various readings, as would effectually do this, it cannot
be doubted they would soon collect and publish such various readings, or
procure some other to do it; unless they do imagine that that was observed by
Bishop Usher, which cannot be observed by any other man. Now as their not
performing this, persuades us Protestants, that the Papists themselves do not
believe this story, so it discovers to us that we have no reason at all to
believe it our selves.

Thus having discovered the Doubts moved by this Discourser not to be acute and
convictive; we conclude that this Property notwithstanding these Doubts, does
belong to Scripture, that it is defensible against the most acute Adversaries,
and there is sufficient evidence concerning it, to prevail with them.

An Answer to the fourth Discourse, showing, that the two last Properties of
the Rule of Faith, do agree to Scripture.
. 1. THese two last Properties are Certainty in it self, and ascertainableness
to us. That the latter cannot agree to Scripture, is the subject (he says) of
his foregoing Discourse, and depends upon the former, its being certain in it
self. What he urged in his foregoing Discourse, I have in mine answered, and
shall now examine what he writes against the certainty of Scripture.

. 2. To show Scripture not certain in it self, the material Characters in Books
may be burnt, torn, blotted out, or worn out, and this he calls a deep
consideration; because it would be a disorderly proceeding to lay such a weak
means, for so main an end as the salvation of mankind. These are indeed but
vain and empty words, which he calls his deep consideration. For does this
Author imagine that there is no certainty in any other Records which are
preserved, because they consist of matter capable of perishing? and where did
he learn, that nothing which is not of the most unalterable nature in the
World, must be made the means of man's salvation. Let this deep Considerer think
whether after the Promise to Abraham of the Messiah to come out of Isaac's
Seed, this Seed could not be a means for the Salvation of mankind; because
Isaac might possibly have been killed before he had any Seed, and all his
Children were mortal men; and was there not a much greater possibility then of
Isaac's death, before he had any Seed, or of all his Seed after, than there now
is of all the Copies of Scripture being destroyed? And may not the same be
urged concerning the Seed of David and Solomon? Yea, so perniciously dangerous
are the assertions of this Author, that they would tempt men to reject the
ever-blessed Jesus, as well as the Scriptures. But dare he say that the life
and Ministry of our Lord Jesus could not be a means for the salvation of
mankind, because he was in our nature liable to death, and to him who only
considers this nature, it might seem possible he might have died, before he had
declared all Gospel-Doctrine? But this empty and vain consideration of this
Author, has its foundation, either in imagining the World without a God to
order it, or at least in supposing that the means of man's salvation must have
their effect from the strength of nature, and not from God, who can use the
weak things of the World to confound the Mighty.

But the Scriptures are not so liable to be destroyed as any thing else in
nature, Josiah's time? if this was in the hands of a professed enemy to
Religion, there might be fear of the Scriptures being lost, if we had no eye to
Divine Providence. But since there are so many millions of Copies, and the
number yearly increased, and these in the hands of many thousands, who would
hazard their lives to preserve them; there will appear more reason to fear,
that all the generation of mankind now growing up, should perish and die before
they come to their full stature, and so mankind cease, for want of propagation,
than to imagine that all the Copies of Scripture should be destroyed: For as it
is certain that in every generation many thousands die in their infancy, or
childhood; so there can be no demonstration, nor rational proof that all shall
not, unless it be by considering the Providence of God: and as a Copy of
Scripture is in it self much more durable than the life of a man, as appears by
many Copies written several ages since; and these Copies are more capable of
lying undiscovered from the eye of an enemy than a man is, who must be where he
may have food to preserve him; so there is as much reason to eye or hand of
Providence in preserving Scripture, as in preserving mankind. For these
Scriptures never could be destroyed, when there were not such innumerable
Copies, as now there are. When the Jews only had these. Oracles of God, many
learned men are of opinion, that Manasseh, and some that Amon designed the
destroying all Scripture Copies, yet there was one left which was found in the
Temple, and brought to Josiah. Antiochus Epiphanes, as Josephus relates,
Antiqu. Jud. lib. 12. c. 7. made the same attempt, but could not effect it. And
after Christ, the same was endeavored by Dioclesian, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib.
7.20. but such designs prevailed not, and yet then there was not probably one
Copy of Scripture for some hundreds now.

Yea further, if the case should be such, Isaac from the dead, if he had been
slain) by extraordinary messengers to renew the Scriptures, if they were not
otherwise to be had. God has taken other care by his Providence for their
preservation; yet those ancient Fathers (as Tertullian de Habitu Muliebr. c. 3.
Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. Irenaeus advers. Haeres. lib. 3. c. 25. and S. Hierome,
etc.) who were of opinion that the Scriptures then written were lost at the
time of the Captivity, did assert them again restored by Ezra. But that
Position of the Scriptures then being lost, is exploded by the most learned and
judicious Papists, such as Baronius ad An. 180. Bellarmine and others, not only
as being an Apocryphal story, contradicted in Neh. 8.1, 2. but by Baronius in
the place cited, it is expressly declared, not possible, that since they had at
least as many Copies of Scripture as Synagogues, yet none of them should be
preserved. Much less can they now be lost, since it is not improbable that
there are now as many thousands of Copies, as were then Jewish Synagogues.
Hence we may observe that what this Author calls his deep consideration, as it
has no rational foundation, so it has not the advantage to be one of his own
Church Traditions, and shows there may be something delivered for truth which
was not so received. And of the same nature are almost all his Arguments
against Scriptures being the Rule of Faith.

. 3. He further adds, the material causes to conserve these Characters, are
liable to innumerable contingencies; but man's mind by its immateriality, is in
part freed from Physical mutability; and here we may with reason hope for an
unalterableness, and an unerrableness, if there be a due proposal, which must
necessarily effect the sense. These words are more monstrous than rational; it
is as much as in plain English to tell his Reader, that having an immaterial
soul, he can never forget any thing that he either saw or heard distinctly; and
that when he has read a Book observingly, all the words and letters may be
more exactly known from him, by the impressions upon his mind, than by viewing
the Printed or Written Copy it self. And yet all this will not serve his turn,
unless it be supposed that these immaterial souls must always continue in the
World, or that what was by them received, must thence necessarily in the same
manner be continued on others. Who sees not that this is as much against common
sense, as if he had said, That because man has an immaterial soul, he may fly
up to the Sun, and Moon, and fixed Stars at his pleasure? Was Man of the nature
of Angels, without his gross Body? its beyond the skill of this Author to
prove, that nothing could be forgotten or blotted out of his mind that is once
known, especially considering that he is a sinner, and even the Writers of his
own Church do conceive, that sinning Angels lost much knowledge by their sin.
But man is a Creature of another mold, and letters and words, and things are
preserved in his memory, by material impressions and every man knows they may
be forgiven; yea, this Author in this Book often forgets and contradicts
himself. Do not all mankind appear sufficiently convinced, that words or
characters are more surely preserved in paper, or writing than in men's
memories, in that what they would have faithfully kept, they commit to writing,
and enter it upon Record? Had the Jews been of this Authors opinion, they
would not have desired Ezra to have read the Law of Moses out of a Book, Neh.
8.1. but to have spoken it out of the impressions of his own mind: yet he would
have been a more safe deliverer of Moses, than the Church of Rome can show for
other Scripture. Yea, it is plain and self-evident, that the Church of Rome
agree with the rest of mankind, to acknowledge writing upon some material
subject, a more sure way of preservation of things than the minds of men; for
they write the Acts of their Councils, and Statutes of their Societies, and yet
these things are as much (or more) spoken of amongst them, as the Scriptures
are, and so more like to be preserved in their immaterial minds; yea, they
write or print their Creed, Prayers, Lessons, and their whole Liturgy, and have
them read in their Churches; when by this Authors Argument, the best way to
have these things preserved entire, is to have them uttered from the memories
of the Priests and others in the Church; and not to mind the Writing or
Printing at all, as not being in it self certain. The Roman Church know that
men's minds are slippery, and apt to forget something in their Liturgy, if it
were not written; and that others would take the boldness to alter it, and vary
from it, if they had no written Rule: and shall writing be the best
preservative for all other things, and not for the words of the Scriptures, and
the truths therein contained? I remember Salmeron, though a Jesuit, has among
the rest of his prolegemena, one which is Proleg. 25. Why the Scriptures were
written? and he declares (as every one who designs to speak truth would do)
that it was that thence men may most surely know truth, whereas the memories of
men are very slippery and uncertain: and S. Austin assigns a like cause of the
Original of Letters, de Doctr. Christiana, lib. 2. c. 4. Nor can I imagine for
what end the Church of Rome prints Copies of the Bible, if they did not think
that by those printed Copies, the Scriptures might be known and preserved.

And as if it was not sufficient absurdity without any color of solid reason
to contradict the experience of all civilized Nations; King of Israel to write
him a Copy of the Law in a Book, and read therein all the days of his life,
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, Deuteronomy. 17.19, 20. Yea, he commands
Moses to write for a memorial in a Book, Exodus 17.14. Yea, Isaiah is commanded,
Isai. 30.8. Write it before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it may
be for the time to come for ever and ever. And though God himself declares this
the way of keeping the memorial of things; this Author rejects this way, and
closes with the uncertain way of man's frail memory.

. 4. He tells us, there are some simple vulgar actions unmistakeable, yet there
are compound actions, as the transcribing of a whole Book, consisting of
myriads of words, single letters and stopps, and the several actions over each
of these are so short and cursory, that humane diligence cannot attend to every
of them. Yet, he grants; that this may be done with care enough, if there be
diligent Examiners. This Objection speaks against the common sense of every one
who can write; for it tells him that no man can possibly keep to the sense or
words he intends in writing a Letter, or such like, though he has a Copy
before him. For he who can write a page with due care, may by the continuance
of the same diligence, write a sheet; and if he want nothing else, but what
concerns his writing, he may with the same care write a Book. What
extraordinary art has this Discourser, that he could write his Book
intelligibly, and the Printers print it so? can none do the like? He cannot be
ignorant that these things may be done by common diligence; and all men who
understand writing acknowledge that Deeds and all Records may be exemplified,
and faithfully transcribed, if there be had due care about it. That there has
been such care about Scripture; I shall show in answer to his next Paragraph.
And I suppose he is not so self-conceited as to think, that other men may not
use as much care in writing Letters or Words, as himself does or can.

But if this little Argument of many little actions not being capable of due
attention, was considerable, Author to find a way, how the Papists may know
the definitions of the Council of Trent, especially such a way as he intimates,
p. 211. it is not hard for Protestants to find. For to run to the Printed Books
which contain the Acts and Canons of that Council, here presently appears the
multitude of little actions both in the Printing and first Copying. If he shall
tell us, they receive the Canons of that Council, or any other, not as they are
in Books, but by Oral Tradition; I shall then examine whether there be not the
same and greater difficulty about such Tradition. For it is certain, that there
are as many mistakeable little actions in speaking a word as in writing it;
every tittle requiring the pause in the voice, and every letter pronounced,
being a distinct framing of the Organs of Speech: and both experience and
reason will tell a man, that he may more frequently mistake in speaking a word,
than in more leisurely writing it by a Copy; since speech is more quick, and
admits not of so long consideration, for every little action as writing does,
and every man knows that where there are many phrases and sentences, there may
be somewhat sooner omitted in speaking where he has no outward help for his
memory, than in transcribing, where the memory is perfectly relieved by the
Copy before him. So that in the way of Oral Tradition, besides the several
little actions of the Organs of Speech, there are other little actions of the
Memory, more liable to the error, than the eye is in viewing a Copy. Hence it
will appear, that this Authors persuading men in this. 4. to account Scripture
not to be certain in it self, is built upon this foundation, That God has not
endowed man with so much wisdom and discretion, as to guide his speech, or hand
so, as to speak or write intelligibly, or according to his meaning or
intention. And this is as much as to say, That men cannot converse with one
another, and that no truth can be delivered from one to another, no nor
falsehood neither; and he who will be persuaded to this, will not be a
Protestant, nor a Papist; neither a man of any Religion, nor of any Reason.

. 5. He tells us, If it were certain that there was care taken for the faithful
transcribing the Scripture, much might be said thence for its certainty: but as
it is capable of many mistakes, so especially in the New Testament, experience
testifies there has been no such diligence, by the diverse readings of the
several Copies, and thousands of corrections of the Vulgar edition. His
Objection to disprove the use of care, especially in the New Testament, must be
first answered, and then we shall evidence that there has been abundant care.
What he speaks of the Vulgar Latin, which is the Translation in request in the
Romish Church, and made use of by many others; the thousands of corrections he
mentions, speaks that Church none of the best preservers of Records, But after
all these corrections, was there any point of Faith or Manners, wherein after
the corrections, it differed from what it was before the corrections? if it
differed in none, then such various readings do not declare the Scriptures even
in that Translation, in any thing to misguide, in discovering whatever concerns
Faith or holy life, though such various readings should remain. But if the
Vulgar edition did differ in any such matter of Faith, or holy life, this would
condemn the Roman Churches Tradition, which has professed to own and receive
what ever was in the Vulgar, both before its correction and since; and so must
differ from what it was, in that point of Faith or Manners. Touching various
readings in the Original Copies, and almost all, if not all Translations, it is
evident there is no difference in any point of Doctrine, nor considerable in
words and phrases. And though it be impossible to prove concerning every single
Copy, that it was faithfully transcribed, by giving an account of the manner
how it was done: yet there remains an abundant rational proof, that the Copies
of the Scripture, and particularly of the New Testament, have been generally
written with much fidelity; because the several Copies which may yet be seen,
written in several Countries and in diverse Ages, show such an agreement in them
all, and in the Ancients citations of them, that they speak one thing, the same
truth, and with so very little variation of any word, that to a diligent
attender, this speaks much of care, attention and diligence in transcribing. To
all this I add, that it is certain that the Ancients were very industriously
accurate in their transcribing Books, and made it a great point of conscience
to be attentive in it, even in other Books, and no doubt more especially, about
the holy Scriptures, and did to their Copies, subscribe their Names, that it
might be known by whom they were written. What exact diligence the Ancients
used in transcribing Books, may be observed from an instance, related by
Eusebius, Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. c. 20. concerning a Book of Irenaeus, at the
end of which Irenaeus wrote thus: I adjure thee who shall transcribe this Book,
by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his glorious presence when he comes to judge
the quick and the dead, that thou compare what thou shall transcribe, and amend
it diligently, according to this Copy, whence thou shall transcribe it, and
that thou shall likewise transcribe this Oath, and put it in thy Copy. And
this, he says, he thought profitable to put in his History, that in this thing
they might have example of the care and diligence of those ancient and truly
holy men. If such care was to be taken of Irenaeus's Works, surely no less of
the holy and Divine Writings.

. 6. He goes about to show, That Scripture cannot be certain as to its sense
especially, to the Vulgar, where he repeats, that Arts and Sciences are
necessary to understand the Letter; which was before said by him, and is above
answered, Disc. 3.. 7. and need not here be repeated. He further tells us, That
an acute Scholar can blunder the conceptions of the Vulgar concerning
Scripture, and give them a seeming clearer interpretation of his own. In many
points of Controversy and difficult Texts, we acknowledge a Scholar may do so;
but it is no way necessary that the Vulgar should be able to determine them,
and be firmly settled in the knowledge of them; but in matters of Faith more
plainly discovered, it is otherwise. If he thinks they may be persuaded by a
Scholar to think any other sense more clear, than that which offers it self,
and is obvious in such phrases as these; That Jesus is the Christ; that he was
born of the Virgin, and died for us, and such like; he must find men of much
lower capacities than Protestants are, and indeed such as cannot understand the
meaning of what that Scholar shall speak, (since he cannot speak plainer words)
and then I know not how they can be perverted by him: yea, such men are not so
much as capable of being instructed at all in the knowledge of Faith, or
matters of mere belief, unless this Author can discover some other way of
instruction in these things, than by plain words. But does not this cavil
strike at all ways of knowledge, and even at Tradition as much as Scripture?
For if the plain words of Scripture may be perverted by a Scholar, are not the
words delivered by Tradition capable of being in the same manner perverted? If
not, it must either be because the same words written or read, cannot have so
plain a sense, as when they are spoken without reference to any Book; or else
the Teachers of the Romish Church must be thought wiser than the Spirit of God
and the Apostles, in that they can speak the plain truths of God better, and
with less lyableness to mistake, than the Apostles wrote, who yet professed to
use plainness.

But he asks, when we see Protestants and Socinians making use, as they
conceive, of the best advantages the letter gives them, yet differ in so main
points as of the Trinity, and of Christ's Divinity; what certainty can we
promise to weaker heads? I answer, weaker heads may well enough be satisfied
with that evidence, which men of greater parts through prejudice do not
entertain. In the beginning of Christianity, the wise men of the World who
pretended to be guided by the best evidence, did not all agree in so main a
point, as which was the true Religion, whether Christianity, Judaism, or
Gentilism: will it thence follow that there was no expecting that men of
ordinary capacities should discern evidence enough to persuade them to be
Christians, and that there was no rational hopes of their conversion, though
many thousands of them believed? Or in the matter now in hand? can he imagine
that until all learned men of Protestants and Papists are agreed, in so main a
point as which is the Rule of Faith, no ordinary capacities can he satisfied
concerning this Rule upon any solid grounds? I am confident himself does not
think so, and Protestants are fully certain of the contrary. In like manner,
Protestants in general, even the Vulgar, appear fully satisfied about the
Trinity, and the Divinity of Christ, from the evidence which Scripture gives to
these great truths: yea, so plain are they in Scripture, that he must be acute
in devising ways to evade the evidence of these truths, who does not receive
them: nor can we think that the Socinians could either deny these truths, or
entertain their own way of interpretation, if it was not that these truths are
above the reason of man to comprehend; (as it is rational to imagine much is,
which concerns the Infinite Divine Being) and that they do too much magnify
reason, in not receiving any thing which reason cannot conceive how it is or
may be: and so in truth it is not their making Scripture the Rule of Faith; but
rather in these points, the setting up another Rule, and making Scripture the
thing ruled, which is the cause of their not owning these truths.

Having now answered all his Objections, and vindicated Scripture from all his
Cavils; I may conclude that THE SCRIPTURE HAS ALL THE FOREMENTIONED PROPERTIES
BELONGING TO THE RULE OF FAITH.

After this. 7. he excuses himself, as not having spoken this against
Scripture upon his own principles, but that all he has spoken (as he says,
but I have showed the contrary) follows upon the Protestants principles. This
speaks him to act a part in the disgracing Scripture, which he is ashamed to
own; and therefore he here acknowledges high excellencies in these sacred
Oracles. For if he indeed think, there can be no certainty of Scriptures being
the Word of God, and of the Canon of Scripture from the Churches delivery; and
of the uncorruptness of it as to Faith, from the agreement of ancient Copies,
then he must without dissimulation profess, that upon his own Principles all
those imperfections are attributed to Scripture: since the Papists, yea the
Popes themselves have acknowledged, that they have none other way to be assured
of these things by; and reason will evidence they can have none other, which
the Protestants cannot have as well as they. But if he thinks there be any
certainty in these proofs, he must acknowledge that Protestants who own these
proofs, have this certainty.

But he says, That Scripture is most improper for a Rule of Faith, and was
never intended for such; as may be evinced, because the Apostles and their
Successors, went not with Books in their hands, to deliver Christ's Doctrine,
but with words in their mouths; whence Primitive Antiquity learnt their Faith
before those Books were universally spread among the Vulgar, much less the
Catalogue acknowledged. What he speaks of the Apostles not having Books in
their hands, either refers to the Books of the Old Testament or of the New. As
to the Old Testament, it is certain, that both Christ and the Apostles sometimes
had them in their hands, and, which is most considerable, had them ordinarily
in their mouths, to declare from thence the Doctrine of Christ. Thus Christ
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself, Luke 24.27. And S. Paul, Acts 17.2,
3. reasoned out of the Scriptures, opening and alleging; and Apollos, Act.
18.28. convinced the Jews, showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ;
which being in the Synagogue it is not much to be questioned but they had with
them the Books of the Scripture, as was the manner of the Jews teaching, as we
read 2 Chronicles. 17.9. they taught in Judah, and had the Book of the Law of the
Lord with them. And had not Philip the Book of the Prophet which he expounded
when he converted the Eunuch? But possibly he meant they had not the Books of
the New Testament in their hands. Indeed before they were written, they could
not have them, nor could they then be a Rule. However the Apostles and
Evangelists testimony was then and now is the Rule to know what was delivered
by Christ; but their testimony by Speech was temporary, and could not remain
after their death; while this continued it was a Rule of Faith: but they also
had another way of testimony, which was by Writing, and this as it continues
with us, is to us a Rule of Faith, because their testimony; and so S. John
calls his Gospel his testimony, Joh. 21.24. and Saint Peter speaks to the same
purpose of his Epistle, 1 Pet. 5.12. What he speaks of the Apostles and their
Successors, not having their Writings in their hands after they were written,
is a gross falsehood, as will more plainly appear, from what in the end of this
Book may be observed from several Authorities of the Ancient Fathers. Yea, S.
Paul and Barnabas, with other Apostolical men, went to preach to the Gentiles,
with the Epistle of the Synod of Jerusalem in their hands, Act. 15.22. which
was the first New Testament writing; and Eusebius relates, that S. Mark carried
his written Gospel, and preached it in Egypt, Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 11. and
S. Peter himself made use of S. Paul's Writings, and commended them, 2 Pet.
3.15, 16. and so did all the Ancient Fathers of Apostolical Writings.

He is bold to say, That the Revolters from Primitive method, closed with
Scripture as the Rule. But in truth, when the World erred by vain Tradition, it
was none other than God himself who wrote the ten Commandments, and gave the
Law of Moses, and the Prophets, to guide the Israelites. And when Pharisaism,
that great Heresy, was maintained by Tradition, they who laid Scripture as the
Rule against it, were none other than Christ and his Apostles, who referred to
the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and gave forth the Scriptures of the New
Testament.

But he says, Scripture as it is made the Rule of Faith, is brought to the
vilest degree of contempt, and every upstart Heresy fathers it self upon it.
But who contemns it? not Protestants who make it their Rule, and they who do
will be highly guilty, as were the despisers of Jesus, who was also contemned
and despised of men. But is this a cause of contempt, if all Heresies pretend
to it? do they not all pretend to the right worshipping the true God, the true
following of Christ and owning Christian Religion as well as to the Scriptures?
and are these excellent things the more contemptible, because they pretend to
them? yet it is false, that all Heresies have pretended to Scripture. For as
some have denied Scripture as it is witnessed by Irenaeus and Tertullian; as
some have gone to revelation and secret ways of delivery of Doctrine, as the
same Authors show, and the History of Simon Magus, Basilides, Marcion, Manes
and others evidence: so others have pretended to the public Church-Tradition,
continued to their time. Thus did the Heresy of Artemon in Eus. Hist. Eccles.
lib. 5. c. 27. who declared, That Christ was only man, and their Ancestors
(they said) had declared this unto them, to be not only that which the Apostles
received from the Lord, but that which they generally taught, and was continued
until the times of Victor; and that Zephyrinus (who succeeded Victor at Rome,
and in whose time these Heretics lived) corrupted this teaching. It seems this
Heresy had numerous followers or Attestors, in that it is there said in
Eusebius, it might have had much probability, if it had not been contradicted
by the Scriptures, and the Writings of the Ancient Brethren. Yea, these very
Heretics did endeavor to alter and corrupt the Scriptures, so far they were
from making them a Rule.

He further says, The many Sects in England flow from this Principle of
Scripture being a Rule of Faith; and it is a wonder this does not oblige men to
renounce that Principle which is the necessary Parent of such disorders. This
has been answered, Disc. 3. n. 3, 4. so far as concerns difference of
opinions. But that all the Sects in England do arise from this opinion of the
Scriptures being the Rule of Faith, is very far from truth: for First, it is
certain that some of these Sects do not profess it to be their Rule; I suppose
he knows there are some of his persuasion, that make Tradition their Rule, and
he knows there are others who pretend to be guided by the Light within them;
and the way of redressing these Sects is by receiving this general truth.
Secondly, other Sects or Parties of men there are, who indeed profess to follow
these Scriptures as their Rule; but it is not their owning, but their not right
using them, which is the occasion of their error: it is their over rashly
entertaining their own conceptions, without sufficient and unprejudiced
inquiry, as if they were plain in Scripture, and necessary Doctrines, when
indeed they are not; and the true way for healing these distempers, is by
laying aside such rashness and prejudice, resolving to close with that only as
necessary Doctrine, which upon impartial inquiry appears plain in Scriptures,
and to use serious diligence in such inquiry, and this is to act according to
Protestant Principles, yea, according to the Doctrine of Christ, who did not
give such direction to the Sadduces, who strictly professed to own the Law, but
denied the Resurrection, that the way to be free from their error, was to
reject that Rule; but blamed them as not knowing the Scriptures, and declared
that therefore they did err: and if this was truly heeded, all disorderly Sects
would be at an end. But on the contrary, should we reject these excellent
discoveries of God, because they have been abused by the sin of man, to the
promoting many Sects, where should we leave? when Christians embraced the
Doctrine of Jesus, and what was delivered by the Apostles: many Sects hence
took occasion all to pretend to this Doctrine: must Christianity therefore be
also disclaimed? and with much greater reason must not all Controversial
Enquiries, and speculations in Theology be abandoned, because they are the
Parents of many Sects and Divisions even amongst the Papists? and must not all
reasonings and apprehensions be disclaimed, because they are the original of so
many disputes and different Sects, both in Philosophy and Divinity. This would
be the way to renounce being men, and being Christians. Thus the rejecting the
Scriptures would be taking Poison instead of Cure: yea, it would be as if the
food used amongst civilized Nations should be prohibited, and their civil
rights disclaimed, because many abuse the former by intemperance to surfeits
and Diseases; and the latter is the occasion of War, Strife and Contention; and
therefore that men should live only on Acorns, and such other Fruits of the
Field, and without any Possessions as Wild men, that they may be thereby out of
these dangers. Who sees not that temperance and a peaceable spirit would be the
best preservatives from these dangers, and would make the state of man and of
the World excellent? and though there might then remain some infirmities in the
Constitution either of the Body Natural or Politic; yet none so great as would
be occasioned by rejecting the course of a civilized life: so if the
abovementioned Protestant Principles, were put in practice, there might remain
some different apprehensions and opinions; yet none such as would be either
dangerous or disturbing: but as the persons might have Faith and Salvation; so
both Church and State might enjoy their peace and quiet.

An Answer to the fifth Discourse, inquiring into Tradition, and showing, that
none of the Properties of the Rule of Faith, agree to it.
BEfore I come to disprove what is delivered by this Author on the behalf of
his way of Tradition;

We assert the faithful delivery of Christian truths by word of mouth, to be a
very useful way to bring many to the Faith, or to establish them in it; and we
doubt not but that very great Multitudes who have not the advantage of using,
reading or hearing the Scriptures, may by this means be brought to believe.
Such was the case of some barbarous Nations in the Primitive times, and of many
Pagans in these later times. But since the ceasing of the extraordinary gifts
of revelation in the Church, the most faithful delivery of these truths is that
which is guided by the Scripture, and takes that for its Rule; and such are the
sober instructions of knowing and well grounded Protestants, and no other
delivery can be faithful, but that which is agreeable to the Scripture, and its
ruling Power: and this was the commendation Irenaeus gave to Polycarp, Eus.
Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 20. that he delivered all things consonant to
Scriptures. Yet though this way of delivery by word of mouth is very useful,
yet it was then only a sure Rule of Faith; when these truths were delivered of
them who were inspired of God, and thereby were infallible in their delivery:
and such was the delivery by the Apostles and Evangelists both in their
preaching and in their Writing. Next to the Apostles, but not equally with them
we would value the delivery of Apostolical men. But in after-ages, we deny any
certainty of infallible delivery of truths, in the way of Oral Tradition, and
acknowledge that only a certain delivery which appears such, by its accord and
agreement with the Scripture Rule.

And as to the sense of Scripture, Peter speaks of many things in S Paul's
Epistles which were hard to be understood; which if the interpretation of them
had been generally delivered, and received in the Churches in Gods name, they
could not have been. The great and necessary Doctrines were then received, and
delivered according to the true intent and meaning of Christ; and that was
agreeable to the Scriptures. Hence the delivery of any truth to all Churches in
the Apostles times, and its being received by them so far as this could be made
evident, was a very useful way to destroy Heresy; yet the Fathers who made use
of this way, did also show, that these truths were plain in Scripture. To these
Churches, so far as the Doctrine by them received can be manifested, we would
willingly appeal for a trial of Controversies, and do readily embrace such
truths, as by sure evidence appear to be the Doctrine held by those Churches.
Partly as thus delivered, and chiefly as clear in Scripture, we receive those
Articles of Faith contained in the Creed, commonly owned in the Catholic
Church: but the Creed we conceive to be delivered in a much more sure and safe
way than Oral Tradition, since the words of it, have with common consent been
agreed on, fixed and determined; the want of which advantage in the Romish
Tradition, does manifest it to be very alterable, and uncertain in other
Doctrines. But that all points of Christian Doctrine, or Apostolical
interpretations of hard Scriptures, are infallibly delivered from the Primitive
Churches, by the way of Oral and Practical Tradition, we deny. Nor can there be
more reason to persuade us, that the present delivery of the Romish Church,
does faithfully preserve such Doctrines and interpretations, than would also
persuade, that when Ezra read the Law, and caused the people to understand the
sense of it, we might certainly find the Doctrines by him taught, and the
interpretations by him given, amongst the Traditions of the Scribes and
Pharisees; as surely as we could have them from Ezra's mouth, or from them who
heard him, and were faithful relaters of his teaching.

I will only further here observe, Tradition may be considered, either as a
mere speculation and notion; and thus a man may imagine a constant delivery of
the self same things, truths and actions, by the successions of several
generations, without considering whether there really be any such delivery, or
whether it can be rationally expected: and to treat of such a Tradition as this
being a Rule of Faith, is but to discourse of aerie fancies and imaginations.
Or else Tradition may be considered as something real and in being; and thus
we may inquire, whether such a Tradition as is to be found in the Church, or in
the World, be a sure way to deliver truth infallibly to Posterity. This is that
we Protestants deny, and if this Author intend not the proof of this, he will
speak nothing to the purpose; and will only show that such Tradition as they of
Rome, or any other in the World have not, might be the Rule of Faith: and
notwithstanding all this, they will be destitute of it.

I shall now examine his Discourses of Tradition, Tradition of the Romish
Church, than can be said to prove Religion not corrupted before the Flood, or
after the Flood amongst the Gentiles; or before the Captivity, and at the time
of Christ amongst the Jews.

. 1. Tradition be the Rule of Faith, which he calls Oral and Practical, he thus
explains it: We mean a delivery down from hand to hand, (by words and a
constant course of frequent visible actions conformable to those words) of the
sense and faith of the Forefathers. Our business in this Discourse, is to
inquire whether this can be a Rule of Faith, which the Discourser affirms, and
Protestants deny.

. 2. Tradition, he observes on this manner; Children learn the names of
Persons, Rooms and things they converse with; and afterward to write, read,
and use civil carriage. And looking into the thing, they gain the notions of
several objects either by their own senses, or by the help of having them
pointed at; and this he observes, is the constant course of the World continued
every Age, yea, every Year or Month. This is Tradition in Civil matters.
Concerning this Tradition it may be observed, that about matters visible to
sense, the Objects or Things, and the names of the things must be distinctly
considered. The common notions of Objects visible, as of Heaven, Earth, Sun,
Moon, Rooms, Man, Trees, etc. are by common apprehensions even of Children
received from Senses, not by tradition of a former Generation; and those
apprehensions are preserved by the view of the visible objects. But the words,
or names, are indeed delivered in such a way of Tradition: but words thus
delivered, are not always preserved from alteration and change: yea, even at
Rome, notwithstanding this way of delivery, wherein the following Generation
have received their Language from their Fathers; yet if they who conversed
there in the Apostles times, were now alive, they would discern such alteration
of speech, and even in speaking men's names, that they would not be able to
understand their present language: and if they can show no greater security for
the delivery of their Doctrine, than of their Language; that also may be as
much changed, notwithstanding their help of Tradition. And it may be further
observed, that those Languages which in this way of Traditional Learning, are
grossly corrupted, and even lost; such as Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; yet in Books
and Writings, they are faithfully preserved: which shows, Writings more sure
keepers, or preservers of words and civil things, than this way of Tradition
is. It would be needless to show, that in Writings and civil behavior, there
is as great variation in some few successions of Generations: for this is
sufficiently known to all observing men.

. 3, 4. He applies this to Christianity; and says, So Children get by degrees
notions of God, Christ, Savior, Hell, Virtue and Vice; and are shown how to
say Grace and Prayers; afterward they become acquainted with the Ten
Commandments, Creed, Sacraments, forms of Prayer, and other practices of
Christianity; the actions and carriages of the elder guiding the younger, to
frame their lives to several virtues by the Doctrine delivered in words; as
Faith, Hope, Charity, Prayer, etc, To this I answer; That Children do indeed by
degrees learn the Notions of God, etc. But this Tradition alone is not that
which guides them here; but also the Scriptures and Ancient Writers, are of
great use, as they enable the Teachers of the foregoing Generation to guide
them more faithfully. Indeed in the way of this Tradition alone, some general
signification of words which concern matters of Faith, may probably be
delivered: as that God signifies him, whom we are to worship, reverence, serve
and obey, and such like. But more particular notions of these matters of
Religion, as they may be sometimes preserved aright; so where is no other way
of preservation, than this Tradition, they may be very corruptly and
dangerously delivered. It is certain that Noah knew the true God, and taught
his Children concerning him, and in his days, and since their Posterity
increased to great multitudes; and yet having only this way of Tradition, they
were so far corrupted in their knowledge of God, that they owned Creatures,
yea, the lowest of Creatures for God, and thereby lost the knowledge of the
true God: and yet even the Gentiles, who worshipped other things instead of
God, pretended that this they received by this way of Tradition; and this was
their great Argument, why they should not receive Christianity, because their
Ancestors had delivered to them that way of Worship they then used in
Heathenism. Clemens Alexand. in his Admonition to the Gentiles, brings them in
speaking thus, We must not reject those things which were delivered to us from
our Fathers: and almost all the Fathers who write against Gentilism,
industriously show the vanity of this their plea.

The saying of Prayers and Grace aright, Oral Tradition; it is like these
points of Faith might have been rejected or lost among them who only hold unto
the way of that Tradition. The ten Commandments are likewise a sure
preservative of that which God requires in them from man, but these are the
words of Scripture. Neither the Creed, nor the ten Commandments, concern the
Controversy of Tradition, as it is disowned by Protestants, otherwise than to
observe the way whereby the certainty of them is conveyed unto us; and thus we
do assert, that we are more certain of the Creed, by its being committed to
Writing, and comprised in a fixed form of words, and being every way agreeable
to Scripture, than any can be by way of delivery from Father to Son only by
word of mouth, in all successions of Generations: and the same certainty we
have of the ten Commandments, by their being in the Scripture Records, and
being likewise delivered in writing; which is the way which even Papists make
use of as well as others. What he adds of Sacraments and forms of Prayer, these
are like to guide men aright where the notions of Religion concerning them are
preserved entire; but if there be a corruption in Religion, these things, as
soon as others, may be depraved, as indeed they are in the Romish Church: where
though the Creed and the Commandments do deliver much truth; yet are they
somewhat perverted by Traditional Expositions, nor can they secure from the
delivery of many other corruptions.

In. 5. He desires us to consider, How the Primitive Faithful were inured to
Christianity e're the Books of Scripture were written or communicated. We know
this then was by the preaching of the Apostles among them, who had the
inspiration of God to guide them, and were unerrable deliverers; and yet even
they in this preaching made very great use of the Books of the Old Testament,
to prevail with men to receive the Doctrines of Jesus. But I shall further mind
him, that the Christians at Rome in the Primitive state of that Church, before
they had any written Scripture of the New Testament, thought it requisite, for
the inuring themselves to Christianity, to obtain some Writings Apostolical,
concerning whom Eusebius writes thus: At Rome the light of Religion did so
shine upon the minds of these hearers of Peter, that they thought it not
sufficient to content themselves with once hearing him, nor with the unwritten
Doctrine of the Divine preaching: but with all manner of persuasions, they did
earnestly desire Mark who followed Peter, that by writing he would leave them a
memorial of that Doctrine, which was then delivered to them by words: nor did
they desist until he did perform it; and this was the cause of the writing that
which is called, The Gospel according to Mark. He likewise relates; That when
the Apostle knew what was done by the revelation of the Spirit, he was pleased
with the forwardness of the men, and by his Authority confirmed the Writing,
that it might be read in the Churches. This same History is related also both
by Clemens, and by Papias: and after this, Mark preached in Egypt that same
Gospel which he had written. Thus Eusebius Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. c. 10, 11. and
to the same purpose, relating the words of Clemens, lib. 6. c. 14.

But our Discourser tells us, He dare affirm that Presbyterians and Protestants
adhere to their Faith, because their Fathers or Pastors taught them it, and not
upon the evidence of Scriptures letter to their own private judgments; because
they who are brought up under Mr. Baxter, are apt to follow him; and others Mr.
Pierce. To this I answer, That Protestants value the judgments of their
Teachers, if they think them to be learned and good men; but yet in the
Articles of Christian Faith, and the great truths of God, they do discern other
grounds, and surer to rely on, than the opinion of Teachers; and therefore
whatever Teacher should contradict such truths, they would not follow him. And
if any persons are so unstable, as in such things to be led away by the
Authority of any men, they are far from being grounded Protestants. In some
matters more difficult, or Controversial, many Protestants are not capable of
being better satisfied, than by the judgment of their Pastors, and are to be
commended for following them: yet in this case, they own not their judgment as
a Rule of their Faith; but the best help to their understanding in a case of
difficulty. But if any Protestant by misapprehension do close with such things
controversial, as necessary points of Faith, if afterward he discerns them
matters of Controversy, not clear in Scripture, or that the contrary is rather
true and grounded on Scripture, he will then submit his former apprehensions,
to the greater evidence now received. And by this means through diligent
examining, very great multitudes of Protestants, who have given up themselves
impartially to follow Scripture truth, have received some opinions different
from some particular opinions of their Parent or Teacher. And even all other
Protestants, who are not capable of making trial of the grounds of all
controverted opinions, yet unanimously will acknowledge, that the trial of any
truths by the Scripture, is much more considerable, than by any Teachers
judgment; and therefore if they were capable, they would much rather choose to
be steadfastly fixed in any truth by the former, than to be only persuaded to it
by the latter. Whence it appears, that Protestants generally own only the
Scriptures for their Rule. And were there ever any who desired to be instructed
in Philosophy, or any Science, designing therein to follow reason as their
Rule, who were not as much guided by their Teachers or Instructers, as
Protestants are by theirs? that is, to value their Authority or opinion, until
by examination of it by the Rule, they should discern it an error.

. 6. He tells us, That Objections made against a Prophetical afflatus, and
against the res traditae, or things delivered instead of Tradition it self, can
have no force against his opinion. I shall not dispute the truth of these
things, but shall so far satisfy this Author, as to assure him, my following
answer shall proceed neither of these ways.

. 7. He tells us, The first Property of the Rule of Faith, does agree to
Tradition: to wit, it is evident to all, as to its existence; because we see
and hear daily sounds and actions, about Practical Doctrines conveyed down to
us. But is this all that this Author thinks necessary to be proved? Did he not
demand much more concerning Scripture, than that the Book might be seen, and
the words heard? did he not then require proof that Scriptures are Gods word,
etc. Surely it is not only requisite, that some thing should be delivered and
received; but at least it must be necessary for every Generation to know that
all that Faith which the former received and professed, is fully delivered and
rightly received by them. For since, as himself says in this Paragraph,
Tradition is the open conveyance of Doctrines, if they be either not delivered
or not received, there is no conveyance, and so a failure of the thing it self,
which is Tradition. Now we assert, that there can be no certainty of any such
exact delivery in any one Generation since the Apostles days, and that for
these reasons. First, because many matters, especially in difficult things, may
be mistaken for want of right understanding, and then these mistakes will be
delivered. That they are mistaken by many, appears by the disagreement of great
numbers, and disputes about several Doctrines, whether they be de fide, or not;
and about the sense of Papal Decrees and Canons of Councils: whence it is
certain they do not all apprehend the truth; or at least, will not confess they
do; which will as much overthrow Tradition. Secondly, It Is possible, that
through the prevalency of corruption and sin in a. Generation of men, they may
much lose that knowledge of God which they had, even in matters of Faith, and
then cannot deliver it aright. It Is certain it was thus in the Generations
after Noah, in that great point concerning the true God and his Worship; and
there was then as much to be said from the nature of Tradition, as now among
Papists; and therefore there can be now no security to the contrary, unless the
piety of all Ages could be demonstrated; which the great complaints of the
Teachers of several Ages renders impossible. Thirdly, because through the
working of man's thoughts in apprehending, and considering, and explaining
truths, many things are concluded as consequences and explications of truths,
which were not received from the former age: thus in almost all the Books and
Discourses of the Papists, and in the Book of this Author, are many particular
assertions, considerations and speculations, which were not received from the
open Tradition of the foregoing Age; and they are here delivered, and may hence
by others be received. Fourthly, there may also be a combination (through great
viciousness, or disrelish of truth) against some particular truth, which
opposes either the outward interest, or the corrupt life. Thus God complains
of the Jews, Jer. 5.30. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear
rule by their means, and my people love to have it so. Fifthly, there may
possibly be an omission of the delivery of many things to be delivered and
true: and I dare say, it is impossible for this Author, to prove upon his
Principles, that all truths are handed down from one Generation to another,
either amongst the Learned or the Vulgar: and yet it will concern him to do it
concerning every revealed truth, since he rejects, or at least will not own the
distinction of truths into fundamental and not fundamental. All these things
considered, there can be no certainty that there is any sure Tradition.

. 8. He says, The second Property belongs to Tradition; to wit, it is
evidenceable as to its ruling power, to any inquirer. For, it is certain, if it
be followed, it can convey Christ's Doctrine down to the Worlds end, as will
appear if any consider, that if Protestants have Children, who believe and
practice as their Fathers brought them up; they will be Protestants too, and so
forward from Generation to Generation. I answer, Tradition framed according to
a notion which would free it from all the above said imperfections, would be
indeed evidenceable as to its ruling power to every capacity: but this is not
such a Tradition as can be expected to be found in the World. But if any man
consider of such a Tradition as is in the World; in case he be confident of the
true delivery of the sense of the foregoing Generation; yet it will not be
evidenceable as to its ruling Power, unless he can be satisfied, that the
foregoing Generation did certainly hold the truth, in all points. Persons who
have little knowledge, may possibly believe this, without supposing it at all
doubtful. But they who know how uncertain the way of Tradition is, and what
corruption of Doctrine was in the Jewish Church, what Prophecies of Apostasy
under the New Testament; and what great defections were reproved in many
particular Churches in the Apostles times; as the Churches of Galatia, and the
Church of Sardis, and others; will see that they can have no other certainty of
the former Generation, where their Forefathers lived, being in the right,
(unless they make use of some other trial, besides a knowledge that they
professed Christianity) than an overweening esteem of their own Relations,
which may be an affectionate, but not a rational ground of persuasion: and by
this means the persuading virtue of Tradition may be prevalent, but its ruling
Power cannot be evidenced. Indeed where there is no better help than Tradition,
it may lead to error in one place, if it lead to truth in another, and so is no
where certain; thus it did persuade the Heathen to refuse Christianity, because
their Fathers delivered other ways of Gentile Worship: which I suppose is part
of that vain conversation received by Tradition from their Fathers, mentioned
by Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1.18. Yea, God himself complains, Jer. 9.13, 14. They
have forsaken my Law, which I set before them, and have walked after the
imagination of their own heart, and after Baalim which their Fathers taught
them. Protestants acknowledge the practice or belief of Forefathers, to be a
considerable Motive to persuade, either to judge or do as they judged, and did;
until by inquiring into the Rule, it shall discover any error therein, and then
it is to be declined. Yet withal he who understands, that his Forefathers did
keep to a fixed Rule in preserved Records, has thereby the more reason to rely
on their judgment, as a strong Motive to persuade him: and this is the case of
Protestants.

. 9. He proceeds to show, That the third condition of the Rule of Faith, agrees
to Tradition; that is, it is apt to justify unreflecting persons, that they
proceed rationally while they rely on it: because it is a madness, not to
believe a multitude of knowers, in things they were taught, and practiced all
their lives. Nor can any deceit be suspected in such multitudes, who all agree
in a matter of fact, appear to speak seriously, and practice as they speak,
especially since Parents will be apt to teach their Children things good and
true.

I answer, Where there are many testifiers capable of giving testimonies
surely, Tradition, cannot testify all this, and therefore cannot be a
multitude of knowers. This way of Tradition must therefore suppose all things
right in the Roman Church, but will not prove them so. Can there be any
likelihood now, of the certainty of Oral and practical Traditions bringing down
truth, since before the Flood, where the Successions of Generations were not
many, and many of them lived together, and had an Adam cast out of Paradise, as
a visible token of Gods vengeance, against them who were negligent in Religion;
yet it is certain there was great corruption at that time? And after the Flood
they worshipped other gods, though they had the argument of the deluge, to make
them more careful, both to deliver and receive the true Religion: after Moses's
time, they had the Motive of the terrible presence upon Mount Sinai, and many
wonderful judgments; and after Ezra's time, the Argument of the Captivity, to
make them careful in Religion: and yet in all these times they miscarried.

But (he tells us) no deceit can be suspected here. Oral Tradition, will
eventually include deceiving. Is it not possible that men who profess Religion,
may so far gratify the Devil, and their own vain imaginations, as to forsake
the truth they know, in great matters of Faith, and to practice and live
contrary to it, and to promote that which they know is contrary to truth? Else
what mean such complaints as these, Jer. 11.9, 10. A conspiracy is found
amongst the men of Judah, and among the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. They are
turned back to the iniquity of their forefathers, which refused to hear my
words, and they went after other Gods to serve them. Is not a conspiring to
refuse Gods Word, and to serve other Gods, a designed rejecting the truth? Yea,
I further demand, what account can possibly be given of the high corruptions
among the Jews, all along from Moses to Christ, unless a designed rejecting the
truth? especially in such cases as these. That they who had seen Gods wonders
in Egypt, and had heard the commandments delivered on Mount Sinai, should say
to Aaron, Arise, make us Gods, Exodus 32.1. If this was not done wilfully, and
against sufficient knowledge, then we must imagine that they who did see the
Law given on Mount Sinai, yet knew not the first or second Commandment. Yea,
after many severe judgments, to show how necessary the observation of Gods
Commandments were, yet when they served Peor in the Wilderness, and joined
themselves to other Gods frequently in the times of the Judges, and of many of
the Kings of Israel; could this be for want of knowledge, when the Law of God
was among them, which would teach them otherwise? Yet if this Author shall
think it was of great ignorance: this will as much destroy his way of
Tradition, since it will then follow that there was not sufficient delivery of
truth from hand to hand, to make it knowable. And yet many of these defections
were very general in all the people and Priests: and their serving Baalim,
which their Fathers taught them, was of long continuance.

. 10. He asserts, by way of Answer to an Objection, men cannot be as much
justified for believing Scripture; because setting aside Traditions help, this
only depends on skills, judgments and fancies; and not on certain sense,
either for the meaning or letter of Scripture. Touching the letter of
Scripture, we set not aside the help of Tradition, but have a very sure way of
Traditional Record to rely on: and I have in former Discourses showed, that we
have a certain knowledge of Scripture, both as to letter and sense. Yea, the
sense of Scripture is more easily discovered in many concerning truths, than
the sense of Tradition can be; because though the words be supposed equally
intelligible, whether written or spoken; it is more evident that the words
found in Scripture, are such as contain the sense of Scripture, than that such
and such words do contain the sense of the Church Tradition: Because it is
certain that in many concerning points, there are many things delivered by
several in the Church, which yet are not by the Papists themselves owned for
Church Traditions; so that it will be hard, if not beyond the reach of the
Vulgar, to understand what words in many points he may doubt of, do truly
express the sense of the Church; unless he can hear it plainly expressed in
some approved and received Writings; such as either Scriptures, Canons of
Catholic Councils, or Liturgies or the like: the former as this Author too
much rejects; so all or almost all his Arguments will as much plead against the
other, which the Vulgar are not capable of searching. Yet that we may compare
the evidence to the common apprehensions of men given by Scripture, or by Oral
and practical Tradition; let us follow him in observing which evidence a Jury
would soonest close with. The case is by him in this. very unfaithfully
propounded; Whether they would condemn a man upon the testimony of six
Witnesses upon sight, or upon the judgment or opinion of a thousand men? for as
we have showed, it is not only skill and opinion, that Protestants do ground
upon, but delivery of Records: and therefore the case in truth should be thus
propounded; Whether if any matter of Fact be inquired of, they would be the
more swayed, by the appearance of several persons, who assert, that they have
heard many say, that they heard many others say, that they received from
others, and they from others by hearsaies, at the fortieth or fiftieth hand; or
by others, who shall produce plain Records, and those preserved safe in several
Courts, which all agree in testifying it was otherwise? Or if the Question be
about any Legacy, if the one party brings such hearsaies abovementioned, and
the other brings a Copy of the Will preserved in the Court, and evidence that
in the same manner it was enrolled in several other Courts; is it not plain the
latter will appear the better Evidence to the common sense of mankind?

But in this. 10. he further adds, The Vulgar have reason to believe, there was
such an one as King James, or Queen Elizabeth, of which they are no otherwise
ascertained but by Tradition: but if you pump their common reason, about the
Authority of the Statute Book, you shall find them at a loss. Concerning King
James, or Queen Elizabeth; they may indeed own them by the common received
Tradition, because they know this is actually delivered by those who knew it,
and that it is not capable of a mistake, nor could any interest be supposed to
devise this, nor can men's conceptions of this vary from what is intended to be
delivered: but in none of these things can men have security in the delivery of
many truths by Oral Tradition, as was observed in Answer to. 7. But to put the
case more like this, of discovering which is more justifiable, of believing
Scripture or Tradition; I demand, whether as to all considerable actions,
achievements or constitutions under these Princes, it be more rational to
rely on what appears in common fame, concluding that nothing is considerable,
which was not there preserved; or to apply our selves to some good Historians,
especially if we could be certain we could find such, as had a certain
knowledge of all such things, and had a faithful design to commit the truth and
nothing else to Writing, concerning all these things. This security we have
concerning the Scriptures; since it is certain the Apostles and Evangelists did
fully know all points of Faith, delivered to the World by Jesus Christ, and did
declare them in their Writings with like faithfulness. Concerning the Vulgars
knowledge of the Authority of the Statute Book; it is evident that if they hear
the Statute Book to be published by such a man, or the Statutes by him
collected; they can thence conclude, that as far as they can be assured, that
it was his Work, and that he was certainly able to collect these Statutes, and
did in this act according to his utmost knowledge; so far they are assured of
this Books Authority; as also as far as they are assured of the faithfulness
and ability of judgment in them who own it as such. But in all these things we
have certainty of Scripture, that it was written by the Apostles and
Evangelists, by the general Tradition of it as such by all Churches; that they
were able and faithful, and their Books faithfully written, both from our
Saviors approving them to dispense his Gospel, and his Church receiving them
as such dispensers, even in these Writings; and God himself bearing them
Witness, both with Signs and Wonders, and manifold gifts of the Holy Ghost. So
that we are as sure concerning Scripture, as a man could be of the Authority of
a Statute Book, if he knew there was a collection of our Common Law, (as was
done by Justinian's order in the Civil) made, approved, and confirmed by order
of the Supreme Power; and thereby Enacted, that this Collection should be owned
as the Statutes of England. Here it would be a madness to doubt. So that this
third Property of the Rule of Faith is agreeable to Scripture, but not to Oral
Tradition.

. 11. That it is certain in it self, because this will prove the fourth, fifth
and seventh. Now though this be not true, that what is certain in its self can
satisfy the piercing Wits, and convince obstinate Adversaries, and be
ascertainable unto us, because there may be a certainty in the thing, which is
not discerned; and it is not the being, but the evidence of certainty submitted
to, that works these effects; else could there be no dissatisfaction in any
thing, since all truth is certainly in it self truth: yet if he can prove the
certainty of Tradition, I shall over and above yield the rest. This he thus
goes about to prove. Since Faith must be certain, and must have a certain Rule,
he has (as he says) showed that Scripture is not certain, therefore Oral
Tradition is. This loose Argument deserves no better answer, than that I have
showed Scripture is certain in it self, therefore Oral Tradition is not. Yet I
must tell him, his Argument is otherwise faulty, than in supposing his having
proved Scripture not certain; for there is something besides Scripture, which
is a better guide or leader to the Faith, than the Oral Tradition, and that is
the Doctrine of the Primitive Church, as preserved in the Ancient Fathers, or
approved Writers of their time. For though they were men, and might in some
things mistake, and therefore their testimony is much inferior to Scripture;
yet since they lived in times near the Apostles, and when the vigor of
Christian piety was much continued; the Doctrines then received are more like
to be truth, than what is now owned in the Church of Rome, after many
successions of Ages, and great degeneracy of life, even in the dreggs of time.
And we have as much and more reason, to think these men, both capable of
knowing Doctrines then delivered as the Faith of Christ, and faithful in
relating them, as we can have to judge so concerning any persons now in the
Church of Rome. But that there is not an agreement in all considerable points,
in what was then delivered and owned by the Fathers, and the present Traditions
of the Romish Church, may be collected from one instance I shall hereafter
mention, Disc. 8. and so far as concerns this Author from their Rule of Faith,
which shall be discussed in the end of this Book.

. 12. He would prove the certainty of Tradition, It has for its basis, the
best nature in the Universe, man's; and that not in speculations, which may
mistake by passion; but his eyes and ears, which are necessarily subject to the
operations of nature, and this in most; many times every day; which is a much
higher certainty, than a sworn Witness has, of what he saw or heard but once.
These upon serious inquiry appear empty vain words. For does Faith consist only
in seeing and hearing? Must there not be a delivering, and receiving, which
supposes conceptions and many other acts of the mind? He who considers this
aright, will find the hasis of Tradition to be like Fame's basis; a man clad
with all his infirmities, with a memory that may let things slip, especially if
they be numerous, as revealed truths are; with an understanding that may
mistake, especially in things difficult, as many truths are; with affections
that may disrelish or slight them, if corruption prevail, as it may often do in
the members of the Church; with imaginations which may alter or add somewhat,
when they think they only explain; and yet still may they not deliver all they
know and remember. In this case he who may be certain that he has heard such
and such words delivered, may remain very uncertain, whether they be true or
not. And he who is a Witness in any Court, may be much more sure, that what he
once saw or heard, (if he perfectly remember it) was so heard or seen by him;
than any man can be of the true relation of things he has often heard spoken by
men, who took them themselves upon others relations, and they on others, and so
on. So that the great imperfection of Tradition, is chiefly as to the delivery
of it by former Ages; which this Author does not so much as touch of here, in
his proof of its certainty; and what pretensions he makes use of in after
Discourses, shall be answered in their place. But what he says, That in most,
many times every day are these impressions made upon their senses, this may be
true concerning some Christian truths: but to assert this concerning all truth,
is such an apparent falsity, as no ingenuous man could be guilty of. For it is
plain that in many things they of the Romish Church cannot agree, which is
truth; and have had in many Cases, Councils and Decrees to determine what
things are matters of Faith; and in many other things they are yet
undetermined; which could not be, if these things were daily cleared to their
senses, unless they be men of much duller sense, than the rest of mankind are.

. 13. That it is as evident, that while the next Age believes and practices, as
the former Age did; they are of the same Faith; as it is that to believe the
same, is to believe the same. But this is not at all to the purpose, concerning
Oral Tradition: only this Discourser pleases himself generally in shifting
off, or wholly omitting matters difficult, and sometimes going about to prove
what no Adversary would dissent in. But there is no certainty in the way of
Tradition, as we have above showed, that any Age does in all things believe as
the former Age held. See n. 13, 14.

. 14. Dissenters or Doubters can say nothing against the way of Tradition; not
with all the quirks ingenuously misused Logic and abused into Sophistry can
furnish them with. Indeed what he has hitherto pleaded for Tradition, has
been nothing else but disingenuously abused Logic and Sophistry; but what he
now asserts, is a bold daring to let his Reader know, that under some contrived
expressions, he will strain to vent any falsehood, though never so gross. Will
he say that nothing can be said against this Rule, when he cannot but know that
Protestants who dissent from it, do say very much against it? yea, they say so
much as they know can never be solidly answered. Yea, that we may see how
little he designs truth in his Discourse, he who here would persuade his
Reader, that nothing can be said against his way of Oral Tradition, yet Disc.
7.. 1. himself tells him of somewhat that seems mainly to prejudice it; and
spends that Discourse in Answer. Though indeed much more than that is by us
observed, against Tradition.

He concludes. 15. from his Discourse, that the four last conditions of the
Rule of Faith agree to Tradition: but since by Trial his Discourse appears very
unsound and faulty; I conclude from the detection of his falsehood, that they
are not agreeable to Tradition, and that Tradition is not the Rule of Faith.

An Answer to his sixth Discourse, showing, that he has given neither
Demonstration, nor probable Reason, to manifest Tradition indefectible a priori.
. 1, How know we that Tradition was ever held to by any? and tells us, he owes
a clearing of this to his former Discourse. But, he says, the carriage of
Protestants makes this inquiry needless: for if they had not faulted the Rule,
but only pretended, men had failed it, they might have deluded the World with
some color, that they had held to the Doctrine of Ancestors, and only deserted
us because we deserted Ancestors formerly: but if they fault the Rule, they
judge Tradition ever stood our friend, and would overthrow them, -- else they
had no more efficacious way to ruin us, than to oppose us upon those
Principles laid in the former Discourse: since the renouncers of Tradition a
little after the Primitive times (when they pretend we fell) might be easily
discovered. To answer this, its requisite first to understand the meaning. Now
his inquiry of Tradition being held to ever, I conceive, signifies thus much:
whether every Age has designed the careful receiving, holding and delivering
all things owned by the former Generation; in the same way as they were thence
delivered, and also whether they have effectually performed this? And if this
could be proved, Protestants would grant his former Discourse satisfactory, so
far as concerns Tradition being the Rule of Faith. The proof of this is highly
necessary, when he has to do with Protestants; because they therefore fault
this Rule of Tradition, because they know it such, as cannot be probably
expected to be long held to, nor can ever be demonstrated, or rationally proved
to have been thus held to at any time, unless by recourse to another Rule of
Trial. Wherefore since we know the Rule insufficient which Papists rely on; we
delude not, but with truth and evidence assure the World, that we desert them,
only because they have deserted the Doctrine of Ancestors formerly. Whether
this was by mistake or by perverseness and wilfulness, it is not necessary for
us to know or declare, since we do discover the difference of their Doctrine
from that of their Ancestors, partly by the writing of Fathers, who show what
Doctrine they received; and principally from the testimony of the Scriptures,
which assures us what was the Doctrine in the beginning preached by the
Apostles. Now when we give evidence, that they have deserted the Primitive
Doctrine; it is a very vain proposal to require of us to discover who were the
first Renouncers; for though some Protestants have done somewhat to this
purpose, and some Renouncers may be manifested; yet since neither Protestants
nor Papists, can know all particular designs or actings of men in former
Generations; and whatever may be known by History, upon the Principles of this
Discourser, must not be believed; especially since this is neither the only
way, nor the best way to show Primitive Doctrines disowned; I may well
conclude, that the proposal it self, is both needless and unreasonable. Will
this Author assert that Gentilism pretended to be held from their Fathers, was
a Tradition truly derived from Noah, unless the person or persons can be named
to him, who were the first deserters of Noah's Doctrine? or must the Traditions
of the Scribes and Pharisees be owned as the Doctrine of Moses, until the
Authors of the first corruptions of those Traditions can be found out? or
could not our Savior and his Apostles, condemn such Traditions, unless they
first declared the Authors of them? Does he think it would be reason or
madness, if a temperate man in a sick state, should say to his Physician, I am
sure I was in health, and have endeavored to keep my body in the same good
temper I was in; and therefore until I can have evidence given me, what time
and by what act my Distemper began, I will not be persuaded but that I am still
in health. Or if an house that was once firm and strong, now is cracked, or
decayed or burnt down; can this be no otherwise satisfactorily demonstrated,
than by examining when the first crack or beginning of decay was occasioned,
and by what means, and when it was set on fire, and by whom? And shall he who
sees this house ready to moulder down, or in its ashes, think it reasonable to
deny or doubt that it is either decayed or burnt, if he cannot be satisfied in
the former inquiries? I know Papists have generally more wit than to act upon
such reasonings as these, in purchasing such houses; and therefore I have the
more reason to suspect, that they do not mean honestly in urging such frivolous
things in concernments of Religion.

Yet this Discourser further deludes his Reader, Protestants did indeed grant,
that Popery as it now is, was held and practiced ever since a little after the
Apostles: whereas this Discourser cannot but know, that Protestants do
generally assert, that though some corruptions might creep into the Church,
soon after the Apostles days, yet in the chief points of Controversy between
Protestants and Papists, we do assert that for the first six hundred Years; the
genuine Writings of the Fathers do favor the Protestants assertions, and in
many things very long after, and therefore that those Popish assertions are of
later original.

. 3, That such is Gods goodness, that the Rule of Faith has that in it, which
obliges the generality not to desert it. That Tradition is actually
indefectible, he undertakes to demonstrate a priori, from proper Causes, and a
posteriori from a now-a-daies experienced effect. His grounds for the former
are these. First, the Christian Doctrine was at first unanimously settled in the
hearts of great multitudes, in several parts of the World. Secondly, this
Doctrine was by all those, believed to be the way to Heaven, and the deserting
it the way to damnation: whence the greatest hopes and fears imaginable,
engaged them to adhere to it. Thirdly, hopes and fears strongly applied, are
causes of actual will. Lastly, this was feasible, the things were knowable, and
within their power. Therefore from Age to Age a great number would continue to
hold themselves, and teach their Children, as themselves had been taught; that
is, would follow and stick to Tradition.

I now come to examine these four grounds. Cyprian erred about re-baptizing;
Justin Martyr, Papias, Irenaeus, Lactantius, and others, were in the error of
the Chiliasts; and many other erroneous opinions were in some of the
forementioned Authors, and in Clemens Alexandrinus, and much more in Tertullian
and Origin. So that though this ground (if the others all hold) may help us to
know the great points of Religion, yet it can be no security to all the truths
of God, from the multitude of Believers. The second ground is of the time
nature with the former, which concerns only the chief truths of Religion, in
the generality of Christians. For the faithful could not while free from error,
believe this which is an error, that the want of understanding any truth of
God, was the way to damnation: for S. Paul says expressly, that they must
receive the weak in the faith, and God has received him, and God is able to
make him stand, Romans 14.1, 3, 4. So that though they did know the great truths
of Christian Faith necessary to Salvation, and therefore would diligently learn
them and teach them; and though they did know that the denial or rejecting of
any truth, which they had evidence was of God, was likewise dreadfully
dangerous, which would engage them to hold fast all the truth they had
received, upon account of the highest hopes and fears fet before them; yet
would not the same inforcements lie upon them, to show the necessity, either of
their own knowing, or of their Children being instructed in all manner of
truths: since there were Mysteries and strong meat for the perfect, and milk
for the weak. Yet I also assert, that as there were many persons of eminent
knowledge in the mysteries of the Gospel, in the Apostles days, who had great
gifts of knowledge and interpretation; by the teaching of these men if it was
diligently heeded, all Divine truth might possibly be received by some others
in the next Generation, who had capacities of understanding them; but I have no
reason to judge that these were multitudes. And the love of God, and his truth,
would excite all the faithful (as they had opportunity) both to endeavor to
know all truth of God, and also firmly to receive and declare it; but this will
not free them from all ignorance, or capacity of erring.

The third ground is many ways imperfect, first, it is not enough to prove
Tradition indefectible, to know that fears and hopes when strongly applied will
have this effect; but we must know that in all Ages they were thus strongly
applied to the generality of testifiers, or to the greatest number of the
Church visible: but alas! how evident is it that in all Ages, the causes of
hope and fear, have not been so applied by very great numbers in the Church,
that they should take due care of their souls by a holy life? And since the
Devil often designs the perverting the Doctrine of Christ; as well as corrupting
the practice of Christians, and they who reject a good Conscience, are in a
ready way to make shipwreck of the Faith, what possible security can be given,
that those Motives, hopes and fears, are a firm security to preserve Doctrine?
Secondly, though it is not to be doubted, but that many pious men would be
affected with such hopes and fears, who had this Doctrine delivered to them;
yet considering that such pious men if considered as Forefathers, might have
careless and wicked Children; or as Priests and Teachers, might have careless
and irreligious Successors; there must needs appear very great danger, that in
any family or place, this Tradition will not be in every Age faithfully
continued, by the prevalency of such hopes and fears. Nor is this only a
Notion, since it is certain that a very great part of the Christian Church, did
in the Primitive times entertain the Arian Heresy, and promoted it, and taught
it to their Children. And since it is evident, that gross ignorance and
sensuality has reigned in some Ages more late, among the generality both of
Clergy and People in the Romish Church: there can be from this ground no
rational security given, that any great part of the deliverers were
conscientiously careful, to deliver faithfully, according to what they had
received, because it appears they did not act, as men prevailed upon by such
hopes and fears would do.

His last ground likewise is unsound: Tradition, all Divine truth cannot be
evidenced to be knowable; not only because (as is abovesaid) much may be
undelivered by the truly faithful, and much perversely delivered by the
corrupt, and much mistaken: but even that also which in the way of Oral
Tradition is delivered by the best deliverers, cannot in all things be clearly
discovered to be a sufficient Tradition. For first, we cannot know whether the
best deliverers now in the World in this Oral way, do deliver sufficiently that
which was by the former Generation to them declared: for this must either be in
a form of words received from the Apostles, or without such a form: if they
deliver the Apostles very words, it cannot be doubted, but then the sense
intended by the Apostles is as fully delivered as the Apostles themselves
delivered it; since the same words must needs signify the same things. But
they who reject the way of Scripture-delivery, as the Rule of Faith, pretend
not to any such form of words which should contain all truth. But a delivery
without a form of words, is only a delivery of what is conceived, judged, or
apprehended to be the sense of the former Generation; and this is a way liable
to error, because it relies on the skill of every Generation; or the way of
framing thoughts and conceptions of all these truths; and likewise upon a skill
of fully expressing such conceptions in words after they are rightly framed in
the mind; and both these parts of art must be secured in the most exact manner,
to every succession of deliverers. Now as it is not certain, that in all Ages
there has been a readiness of full expression of what they conceived to be
truth; so for certain Controversies and Disputes, they show in many things,
that men's apprehensions are not unerrable. Secondly, if it had been certain,
that some in the late past Generations, did deliver all truths fully; yet in
the way of Oral Tradition, it cannot be known evidently who they are, and which
is that true Tradition: for all men acquainted with Church History know, that
when there have been differences amongst great Doctors of the Church in their
delivery, this has sometimes occasioned the calling of Councils to determine
them, and declare which is the Doctrine to be held in the Church, as about the
Religious use of Images, in the eighth Century, and many other cases. Now
before the determination of such a Council, it is not evident which are the
true deliverers, from the way of Tradition, since both parties contend for
their own delivery; and no other Rule of Trial must be admitted according to
this Discourser, but delivery or Tradition: and upon the former considerations
it appears, that the best deliverers may be the fewest. And this may be as
uncertain after a Council, since there is nothing else to ascertain us; but the
vote of a major part, which in many Councils, has certainly been the worser
part, and maintained Heresy; and therefore so it may be in others, where there
can be no evidence given to the contrary. And by Determinations of Councils,
the lesser part and their Adherents, are determined to reject their way of
delivery, and receive the other; and by this means the lesser number, which may
be in the truth, must disclaim their own sense and judgment, to submit to the
judgment of others, which may be in the wrong, and so the true Tradition may be
lost.

Yet that it may appear more evident, how vain the pretense to demonstration in
this Discourse is, cases, which it will fit as well as Romish Tradition. It is
certain that after Moses, the true Doctrine was dispersed among the Jews, and
after Noah, who was a Preacher of righteousness amongst his Sons: they had the
greatest hopes and fears to engage them to this truth, and these are the causes
of actual will, and the truths are knowable; therefore both Gentile Tradition
from Noah, and Jewish from Moses, were indefectible, according to this
Discourser's Principles; and so the true Religion may at this time be found,
either among Gentiles or Jews. Yea, it was certain, that Gods will was declared
to Adam and Eve in Paradise, and to the Angels that fell, before their fall;
and they had the greatest hopes and fears, to persuade them to keep to this
will of God; knowing that obeying it, was their happiness, and deserting it
their ruin: these hopes and fears are the causes of actual will, and the
duties themselves both knowable and practicable, and they had no corrupt
inclinations to sway them; therefore according to this demonstrator, Adam and
Eve, and all the Angels, did continue in their obedience. The same way of
demonstration would prove that never any Heresies could either be broached, or
by many be received in the Christian Church: But in these cases, who sees not
that it will be answered, that either the truths of God declared, were not
sufficiently heeded, or else the causes of hope and fear were not sufficiently
applied, and at all times acknowledged and observed; and that in such cases
there was a corruption either in belief or in practice: but then every eye will
see, that this might as well be imagined in the Romish Church, as in any other
company of men. So that he has made it as clear, that the Romish Tradition is
indefectible, as that the Gentile and Jewish Traditions were, and are; and as
certain as it is, that there is no Devil or fallen Angel, and no fall of man,
and consequently no sin in the World, and no Heresy ever in the Christian
Church. But here it is needful to do this Author that right, as to observe his
unusual modesty, that he intitles this Discourse not a demonstration, but an
endeavoring to demonstrate.

. 6. If any shall object, Original Corruption indisposeth Parents wills; since
Christ's Doctrine was intended to be an Antidote for that Original malice; to
say it is universally applied, and preserves none good, is to question Christ's
wisdom: and many thousands, Martyrs and Confessors, did hereby overcome the
declivity of their wills. Again, nature cannot incline all to this sort of sin,
to teach their Children what they think will damn them, but most strongly
carries them to the contrary. To this I may in the first place observe, that
neglects of duty might be, if there had been no Original corruption; as was in
Adam in Paradise, and in the Angels, where was no antecedent sinful
inclination, but they were only capable of sinning. Yet I assert, there is more
danger by Original corruption, and its prevalency both as to the Will and
Understanding. Now Christ's Doctrine is indeed a poise or Antidote against this,
yet this is first, where this Doctrine is carefully entertained and retained,
but not so, that there should be no fear of its being retained in any Church.
S. Paul did not nourish needless fears for his Corinthians, who had this
Doctrine, lest their minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ: nor were they untrue complaints of his Galatians, Chap. 3.1. Who has
bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth? And we Protestants can
discern nothing to show that this Doctrine must needs be otherwise a poise in
the Romish Church, than in the Corinthian or Galatian. Secondly, where this
Doctrine is retained, it is a poise against Original corruption in a
considerable degree, yet not so as to remove all imperfections proceeding from
Original sin, which may hinder right delivery of all truth: for though in some
excellent persons there be a willingness to deliver truth; yet there may be
some mistake even in holy Martyrs and Confessors. The Church of Rome as well as
we, own Cyprian as a Saint and Martyr, and yet acknowledge him to have erred,
and most Africans then with him in delivering that they who were Baptized by
Heretics, ought to be rebaptized; so that in following good men, there may be
mistake: but they are more like to err, if they be bad, as many certainly are.
But concerning his last clauses, it is no way necessary to suppose, that to
invalidate Tradition, Parents must design to teach Children what they think
will damn them: we suppose very many may design truth and good, who yet may be
in error; yet there may be others who through prevalency of corruption in
themselves, may design to corrupt the truth, and may teach their Children so;
and all this out of that Principle that prevails with men to wicked lives,
which is not a design to damn themselves, but a design to gratify their evil
affections. S. Paul, 2. Cor. 2.17, speaks of many who corrupt the word of God;
and S. Peter foretells of others, who shall bring in damnable Heresies, and we
know the Jews did teach their Children to worship Baalim: most probably this
was not out of design to damn them: however we know no demonstrations to prove
that Romanists have higher affections to their Children naturally. than Jews
had; or that when there is danger of truth being corrupted in the Christian
Church, they of the Romish should be exempted from liableness to that danger.

. 7. If any object, the fickle nature of the will; (he answers) Good is the
object of the will. Now infinite goods and harms sufficiently proposed, are
incomparably more powerfal causes to carry the will, than temporal ones:
therefore a world of Believers cannot be willing to do that which would lose
them and their Posterities infinite goods, and bring them infinite harms. To
this I answer; That if this be spoken of the generality of professed
Christians, these words would still as much plead against Adams fall, and the
corruptions of Gentiles and Jews, as against defection in the Romish Church;
since all these had the greatest goods and harms proposed to them. But I
further answer; That a considerable number in former Ages, would endeavor to
know and deliver ttuth aright, but they still are liable to mistakes, and
others that hear them, to misunderstandings; and also it is possible, that the
subtilty of some Deceivers may take place, and be received sooner than their
delivery of truth, by which means those truths may many of them be lost or
perverted; and even in these last Ages I doubt not but even in the Roman
Church, there are many who would desire good, and love truth (and therefore as
they have discerned it, many have forsaken the Romish way; but they who most
desire to find it, can in the way of Tradition, see no more than is there to be
seen: and if others by subtilty corrupt some of that; it is not in the power of
these honest meaning persons, to hinder the prevalency of such corruptions, if
they be promoted by a more potent party and interest.

. 8. more considerable than of Spiritual, he indeavoureth to show the excellent
proposal of the truths of God, and thereby evidenceth they may be applied. This
does not much concern Protestants. we acknowledge that there is nothing wanting
as to the proposal of Gods truth, but yet there was in many, neglect of
receiving what was sufficiently propounded; whence followed all the
abovementioned miscarriages. And even God himself propounded his truths as he
thought most meet; that is, he proposed such as were not so necessary for all
to know, more mysteriously, whence many might be ignorant of them, or
misapprehend: but other necessary truths he propounded with abundant evidence
and plainness. But in the present way of Tradition, what this Author observes,
to make the proposal evident, is very imperfect; for though they have obvious
Metaphors, daily Practices, Language and Actions, Sacraments and Ceremonies:
yet these things may themselves partake of corruptions, and then may help to
clear what is propounded, that somewhat may be understood; but not withal to
secure that this is certainly from God, and therefore is Divine truth: Nor do
most of these things reach all truth to be delivered, nor secure from all
misapprehension, so far as they are intended to signify truth, in such matters
as are more difficult and mysterious.

An Answer to his seventh Discourse, concerning Heresy.
. 1. That that which seems only and mainly to prejudice his Argument is, that
there have been Heretics, or deserters of Tradition: but he says, it
suffices that the Causes to preserve Faith entire, are as efficacious as those
laid for the Propagation of mankind, the only subject of Faith, and more
particulars fail in propagating their kind, than their Faith. In answer to
this, I first observe, that though it much destroys the grounds laid by this
Author, to observe that there have been Heresies, and those much spread in the
Church; yet this is not the only prejudice against his Argument: for if we had
never heard of, or could make no proof of any Heresies in the Christian Church;
yet from considering the very nature of Oral Tradition, as has been showed in
the former Discourse, and from observing what great defects were in it, both
amongst Gentiles and Jews, it is sufficiently manifest, that it is not
indefectible, and has not the certainty requisite to the Rule of Faith; by
which means, if Heresies had not been, they might begin. But I further
undertake to manifest, that because it is certain, that Heresies have spread in
the Church, from this consideration it is evidenceable, that Oral Tradition is
so defectible, as that it cannot be a sure Rule of Faith. His paralleling
Tradition with the propagation of mankind, is a mere piece of sophistry. For if
he indeed assert, that the causes to preserve Faith entire in the way of
Tradition, are as sufficient, as those to propagate mankind in the entire
nature of man, he must then either acknowledge that there have been often
Societies of persons of different natures both in themselves, and from mankind,
who are brought up amongst men, and call themselves men, and propagate in their
kind, and cannot by the eye be distinguished from men, and are capable of
deceiving great multitudes by persuading them that they are the true men, and
that others are not; or else he must deny that ever any such Heretics have
been in the Church, who have declared themselves, and have been owned by many
others, to be the true Christians, and holders of the truth. The case of
Tradition and Propagation are wonderfully different also, in that he who has
the nature of man in him by Propagation, cannot alter this nature, and make
himself of another nature at his own pleasure; whereas it is very possible for
such as have embraced the true Christian Doctrine, to forsake it, and fall
aside into Heresies, as has been often evidenced in the World: and also in that
those particular persons in mankind, who do not propagate their kind, are not
capable at their pleasure, of propagating any thing different from man: but in
the way of Christian Faith, they who do not propagate the true Faith, may, and
many of them do propagate error, and that so subtly, that very many are often
deluded by it. Yea, this Discourser himself. 2. acknowledges, that he knows
the multitudes of Heretics which have from time to time risen, makes this his
Position seem incredible; and therefore I infer, that unless his Reader can be
assured that this Position is more true than it seems to be, he must from his
own words, conclude it really incredible.

. 2. He comes to consider how an Heresy is bred, The Church is to be
considered as a Commonwealth under Discipline, having Officers to take care
that all Motives be actually applied; and because it is impossible the
perfection of Discipline should extend it self to every particular; some by
pride, ambition, lust, and itching desire of followers, may propose new tenets,
which by their plausibleness and licentiousness, if Governors be not watchful,
may suit with the humor of diverse, and draw them into the same faction. Thus a
body is made inconsiderable in respect of the whole; The Church stands upon the
uninterrupted succession of her Doctrine. They cry the Church has erred in
Faith, and disgrace Tradition. A new Rule is sought for either by private
inspiration or waxen natured words. They study wordish Learning and Criticisms,
and whilst the Traditionary Christian has the appellation of Catholic, they
must be content with other names, as Lutherans, Zuinglians, Protestants, etc.
He who observes the former part of this Paragraph, will find it to be an
acknowledging all his former Discourse ineffectual: for if the formerly
mentioned Motives may want application, if Discipline be neglected, and false
tenets may be taking, if Governors be not vigilant; than all the pretended
security of truth being preserved in the way of Oral Tradition, must depend
upon the supposed goodness, and care of such persons, as are to administer the
Discipline of the Church: and since there have been many bad Councils, it is
certain there have been bad and careless Church Governors, and there cannot
any security be given, that these Governors might not sometimes cherish the
false Doctrines, and oppose the true: and thereby the more effectually destroy
the way of Oral Tradition. But though there may be defection from truth; this
Discourser here seems to venture, to find a way how the deliverers of Tradition
may be known. I will now examine all his Characters above recited.

First, Dan and Bethel, they were a greater number than those who remained to
Worship at Jerusalem. In Elijah's time it was in Israel, but a small number in
comparison of the whole that did not bow their knees to Baal. In the time when
Christ was first manifested in the flesh; the Dissenters, from the Scribes and
Pharisees, in their pernicious Doctrines, were not the greater number: and when
Arianism most prevailed, the greater part of the Christian Church did
acknowledge and own it for truth: so that if the greater number have often
embraced false Doctrine in points of Faith, there can be no evidence from such
numbers, which is the true Doctrine. Secondly, Nor can the Professors of the
true Doctrine be known, by standing upon an uninterrupted succession of
Doctrine publicly attested, (if by this he understands, as he must, the Oral,
and not the Scriptural way of attesting; though even in the latter, some may
stand upon having what they have not, and so likewise in the former) for by
this Rule the Scribes and Phasees, and Talmudists, who stand upon a constant
succession of their Doctrine from Moses and Ezra, must be acknowledged to hold
truth, where they differ from, and contradict the Apostles and Christians: nor
can there be any reason, why standing upon Tradition from Christ, should be a
security for truth, when standing upon Tradition from Moses, who was a faithful
deliverer, was no security: yea, by this Rule, as has been before observed,
Paganism would be defended for a true Religion, and the Jews worshipping of
Baalim, and in the Christian state the Heresy of Artemon, denying the Divinity
of Christ: since all these pretended a right to the most public and open way
of Oral Tradition. Thirdly, Nor are they to be accounted for Heretics, who
make use of Criticisms; for though nothing more than common reason and
capacity, is necessary to understand the main Doctrines of Christian Faith; yet
if all the users of Critical Learning in matters of Religion or points of
Faith, were to be condemned for Heretics; then not only Learned Protestants,
but all the most eminent writers among the Papists, must be accounted
Heretics; yea, and even all the Fathers, who have left any Books to us of
considerable bigness, must be taken into the number. Yea, the blessed Apostle
S. Paul made use of Critical observation against the leven of the false
Apostles, in the Churches of Galatia, Gal. 3.16. To Abraham and his Seed were
the promises made, he says not unto Seeds, as of many; but as of one; And to
thy Seed, that is Christ. Yet I suppose this Discourser will not dare to say,
that S. Paul was in the error or Heresy, because he made use of Criticisms;
and his opposers in the truth, who pleaded a successively delivered Doctrine
amongst the Jews.

Fourthly, Catholics: for first, though the name of a Catholic be deservedly
honored by Christians, and the persons who truly answer that name, yet it was
not the name, whereby the Apostles did first call them, who held the true
Christian Faith, but they were called Christians: yea, some both of the
Ancients and of the Learned Moderns, assert, that this name of Catholic, was
not at all in use in the Apostles days: however that which then was not the
chief name, commonly applied to them who hold the truth, can by no show of
reason be proved to be now the Character, to know which hold the true Faith.
Secondly, is it necessary they must be called Catholics by all men, or only by
themselves, and men of their own way? if it be sufficient, that they of their
own way call them Catholics; then even the Arians must be acknowledged to have
held the truth, who published their Confession in the presence of Constantius
under the name of the Catholic Faith, as is asserted by Athanasius, De Synodis
Arim. and Seleucia, and by this Rule Papists indeed will come in: but if this
was enough, who sees not that it would be in the power of any party of men; to
evidence to the world, that their Heresies are truths; by their declaring
themselves by the name of Catholics? But if it be necessary, that they must be
generally called Catholics by them who differ from them, then it would
likewise follow, that it is in the power of the Adversaries of the truth, to
take away from the holders of truth, that certain Character, whereby they may
be known to hold truth, if they refuse to call these holders of truth by the
name of Catholic; and it will likewise follow, that their holding of truth
must be judged of by the opinions or words of opposers, and not from their own
Doctrines and Positions. And yet by this Rule the Papists must not be owned for
holders of the truth: for Protestants do not generally give them the name of
Catholics, nor acknowledge them to be truly such; but to be Schismatics. We
indeed often call them by the name of Roman Catholics or Pseudocatholicks; and
when ever any Protestants call them Catholics, they mean those who call
themselves so, and would be so owned; in the same manner as our Savior called
the Scribes and Pharisees Builders, saying he was the stone, which the builders
refused. Thirdly, Nor is it possible, there should be any such latent virtue in
the name Catholic, to show who hold the truth, more than was in the Old
Testament, in being called the Children of the Prophets, and the Covenant which
God made with Abraham, the followers of Moses, and the Keepers of the Law:
which were terms applied to the unbelieving Jews, in and after the times of
Christ.

Fifthly, Nor is it the mark of an Heretic, Catholic; for if to be called so
by their opposers, would prove them Heretics; then when ever the truth has
any foul mouthed Adversary, who would nickname its Professors, the truth it
self must be owned for an Heresy; but must the true holders of Christianity be
called Heretics, because the Jews called them Nazarens, Edomites, Epicureans,
and the like; The Montanists, as we may learn from Tertullian, called the true
Christians Psychicos, or carnal ones; the Arians called them who held the Faith
of Nice, Homoousiasts, Athanas. Dial. de Trin. and Julian, by a Law commanded
Christians to be called Galilaeans, Naz. Orat. 3. cont. Julian. But if he mean
that they who call themselves by other names, are Heretics; this is as vain a
way of Trial as the former: for though he intends it against Protestants who
own that name of Catholic, and account themselves such; it will conclude for
Heretics all who own themselves Papists, Jesuits, Romanists, Dominicans,
Jansenists, Molinists, and such like, as much as Protestants.

. 3. After a while the pretended Rule of Scriptures Letters self-sufficiency is
thrown by as useless. Children are taught that they are to believe their
Pastors and Fathers, and to guide themselves by their sense in reading
Scripture; which is the very way Catholics ever took. If any follow their own
judgment, and differ from the Reformers, these if they have power will oblige
them to act, (which if conscientiously is) to hold as they do; else they will
punish and persecute them; which shows that it is not the letter of Gods word,
but these men's interpretations, which is thought fit to guide to Faith, whence,
he says, follow self-contradictions. But is this the farther description of an
Heretic, to reject the pretended Rule of Scripture, when most Heretics never
pretended it to be a Rule; some went in this Discoursers way of Tradition, as
was showed Disc. 4. n. 15, and shall be further showed in answer to his
Authorities. Almost all, if not all Heretics in the first Ages of the Church,
rejected Scripture. Eusebius Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. c. 28. notes, that Cerinthus a
notorius Heretic, was an enemy to the Scriptures of God. Origin in the end of
lib. 5. contra Cells. observes that the Ebionites of both sorts, rejected the
Epistles of S. Paul, and Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. 3. c. 27. says, they esteemed none
of the Gospels; but that which was called the Gospel according to the Hebrews,
they received. Yea, it was the Charge which the Catholic Christians laid
against the Heretics, condemned by the four first General Councils, that they
would not hearken to the Scriptures, nor reverence them, as shall in due place
appear. This S. Austin often condemns in the Manichees, and charge some
Donatists, co^^r. Fulgentium Donatist. with burning the Gospels as things to be
rased out, and Athanasius Epist. ad Orthodox. testifies that the Arians did
burn the Books of the holy Scripture, which they found in the Church. But
however he has a design in this 3.. to show that the followers of Heretics
(under which name he chiefly intends Protestants) do in practice disown the
Scripture rule as insufficient, and close with, and build upon the way of
Tradition; whence he would make evident that by the common acknowledgement of
all men, no other way of receiving the Doctrine of Faith can be owned but this
only.

I shall here show in what he criminates Protestants to be false; Protestants,
to the things here charged on them, and the self-contradictions pretended, (for
though he talks of Heresy in this Discourse, it is easy to observe his only
aim is not at Heretics, but at Protestants, that is, at truly Catholic
Christians) I shall observe, that what he has declared in this Paragraph, is a
very effectual way to show Oral Tradition no Rule of Faith, nor so much as a
probable way to discern truth: for if they who desert Tradition or Doctrines
delivered by it, may require their Children to guide themselves by their sense:
if this be possible, as indeed it is, and this Discourser here asserts as much:
it can never be demonstrated that this has not been the practice of the
present Romish Church, and that many things now delivered as truths in their
way of Tradition; were not Heresies or errors, broached by some men's fancies in
a former Generation, who required their Children to follow their sense. Yea,
besides this, if it be the general way of Heresy, (as this Author here
asserts) to promote their Heretical tenets in the way of Oral Tradition, it
will be beyond the skill of this Author, (unless he shall retract this
description of Heresy) to give the least assurance to any reasonable men, that
the Roman Church, which goes on in the way of Oral Tradition, is not upon this
account of Tradition, to be much suspected of holding Heresies. Yea, it will
hence also the more effectually follow, that it is impossible that Heretics
should be discerned from the holders of the true Faith, if there were no other
Rule to discover this, but Oral Tradition; since this Discourser asserts, that
this very Rule, Heretics generally close with, in the propagation of Heresy,
at a distance from its first original. Yea, and it will tend much to the
justifying of the followers of Protestants, if it shall appear, that they go
not in the way of Tradition, which this Author has assured us, is the
constant way the followers of all Heretics run into. See both his. 3. and. 5.

I answer now to this 3.. that Protestants do not at all throw aside the
Scripture Letters Self-sufficiency as a Rule. Discourser cannot be ignorant,
that while we own Scripture a Rule of Faith, we acknowledge the necessary and
principal Doctrines thereof, to be so clear and intelligible in Scripture, that
they may without actual error be comprised in some form of sound words; such as
are Creeds, Confessions of Faith, Articles, Catechisms, or the like: and we do
acknowledge and assert these truths, even so many as are necessary to the
Salvation of all the adult in the Church, to be infallibly evident to the
judgments and understandings of men, from the fullness and plainness of their
proposal in Scripture. Protestants will require Children to receive such things
as these, as certain truths, from the Pastors or Parents, not because they are
from their Fathers or Teachers, but because they are things certainly by them
discerned to be in Scripture: and till these Children are able to search and
discern the same themselves, their Parents or Teachers knowledge is a very
considerable Motive to them to own such truths as clear in Scripture. And this
is a knowledge as certain, as they are capable of, until they come themselves
to peruse and understand the Scripture; yea, it is certain enough to them to
command their assent, as certain as other things are, which credible persons
attest upon their eyesight. For in what I plainly discern, I as surely know
that I read such a Position in a Book, as that I hear or see other things in
converse in the world. Now since what is thus delivered by Protestants to their
Children, is so delivered, because it appears to be the Scripture-Doctrine;
this is an establishing and holding to, not a rejecting and throwing by the
Scripture as a Rule. But while we own Scripture as a Rule, there is no more
reason why Protestants should tolerate men to contradict what is plainly and
evidently deducible from Scripture, under pretense of holding to it as a Rule;
than there is that in a case of Rebellion, one who is to endeavor to suppress
the rebellion, should be suffered to assault the King, when he plainly appears
to be the King, under pretense that he took him to be a Rebel. Yet as to
matters not fully clear in Scripture, Protestants do allow differences of
Opinion, if managed peaceably; and that it may appear that we are not violent
prosecutors of our own apprehensions, only because they are so: the Laws of
England condemn nothing for Heresy, but that which was so declared, by one of
the four first General Councils.

But what he intimates of obliging to act, that is, (if with good conscience)
to hold as themselves do; makes me think he designs chiefly to reflect upon
prudential constitutions, such as are amongst us, the Oaths of Obedience and
Supremacy, and matters of Liturgy and Conformity. But in none of these things
do Protestants desert this Principle of Scripture being the Rule of Faith. For
Protestants who hold this assertion, never intended to exclude the use of
prudential Rules and Constitutions, for the advantage both of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Societies; but such Constitutions they neither own nor press as
matters of Faith, nor as Gods Commands in themselves necessary to salvation. In
this case, if Protestant Rulers oblige to nothing as prudential, orderly, and
decent, but what they are well satisfied that it is lawful according to Gods
word, and agreeable thereunto, and for other ends expedient, and not needlessly
burdensome, (which appears the common case of all Protestant Churches) they no
way swerve from Scripture-Rule. Yea, if here any Protestant Rulers should err,
and urge as lawful, decent and prudential, what is indeed sinful and evil; in
this case they sin, and practically swerve from the true Rule, as men do in all
acts of sin and mistakes of judgment; but they do in no wise intentionally
disown this Rule of Scripture; since they hold fast this as a firm Principle,
that if any thing which they require to be practiced as lawful, can be fully
manifested to be against Scripture, they will rather reject that Constitution,
than oppose the Scripture, and will acknowledge that their Subjects ought to
obey the Scripture rather than such commands.

But he tells us, Dissenters (from Protestants) do guide themselves, to their
best capacity by the Scriptures Letter, which is the Rule their persecutors
(Protestants) who punish them (for not obeying) taught them, and made use of
themselves when they brake from the (Romish) Church. I answer, 1. It is much to
be feared, that many who dissent from the Protestant Churches, in these matters
prudential, do not act according to their best capacities; but some from
passion and self-will, some from the applause of a party; others from pride,
and a sinful resolution not to disown what they once unadvisedly and
erroneously took up. 2. Yet I doubt not, but very many who dissent from the
prudential Rules of the Protestant Churches, or particularly of the Church of
England, do act according to the best light they have of Scripture truth; yet
have they not the same reasons and grounds to justify them, that Protestants
have to justify themselves in departing from Popery; for we rejected Popery,
not only because we could not discern whether it was lawful or not by the
Scripture-Rule; but because in matters plain in Scripture, we did clearly
discern it sinful by clear Scripture-evidence, which plain evidence Dissenters
from the Church of England cannot have; nor can they pretend it, unless it be
rashly under passion, or preconceived prejudice. But for those who act
according to the best light they have from Scripture, which will suppose them
willing to be better informed, we Protestants no way dislike, but highly
approve of their Rule, and of them for designing to follow it, so far as we can
discern such persons. And as the Protestant Doctrine asserts, that all things
necessary to salvation, are plain in Scripture; so we doubt not but these
persons, and all other, who according to their best capacities close with the
Faith there delivered, and practice the duties there required, are in the way
to salvation, nor can they err in matters fundamental. But still they may err
in some other matters, and particularly about the lawfulness of some things
prudential; nor did Protestants ever assert, that they who designed to follow
Scripture to the best of their light, could in nothing be subject to error,
where they have not a discovery of clear evidence, which in all things all
inquirers may possibly not attain. Yet I must further declare, that if this
design, of following Scripture according to men's best capacity were more
followed, and all passions, prejudices, and unchristian suspicions laid aside
amongst all Dissenters, the number of them who dissent from the Protestant
Churches, upon the best light of Scripture they have, would in a short time be
reduced to a very few. 3. Where in any case, such persons as these are
punished, it is not for designing to follow Scripture, but for not obeying some
prudential lawful commands, in a case where their mistake is the cause of their
not obeying; not is it any more a condemning their design to follow Scripture,
than in Civil Laws and Constitutions, when any one is impleaded in a Court,
because he for want of good Counsel, acts what he by mistake thinks to be
according to Law; but is cast as not having acted according to the Law, the
Judge should be thought to punish this man unjustly, because he designed
obedience to the Law; yea, to punish him for designing this obedience to the
Law. Some such inconveniences as these, are like to be in Civil things, while
men are liable to mistakes, and something is capable of being mistaken: but
these things concern not at all the Rule of Faith, or the rejecting the
Scripture from being the Rule of Faith.

From what has been said, Protestants, from the following self-contradictions,
he charge upon Heretics. The first of which is to reform upon pretense of
Scriptures Letter being the Rule; and afterward in practice to desert that
Rule, in their carriage toward others. This Rule Protestants desert not, since
they propound nothing to be assented to by any as a matter of Faith, but what
they judge certainly evident in Scripture; nor require they any thing to be
practiced as orderly, but what they discern or judge not contrary to Scripture.
2. Nor do we disallow to others the grounds our selves proceed upon: for we
allow to all, and commend in all, their practice upon clear and well grounded
Scripture-evidence, but we neither allow our selves, nor others, to practice
upon ungrounded pretenses of Scripture being on our side. The Third pretended
contradiction is, To pretend first the Scriptures Letter clear of it self,
without needing the Church to interpret it, and afterward to judge the
followers of it to their best power to go wrong; that is, to confess it
obscure, and to need their new Church's interpretation. But Protestants do
assert, that in all necessary Doctrines the evidence of Scripture is so clear,
that it needs no interpretation; nor can they be denied, but by preferring
interest, passion, or some other sond conceptions above evidence; and this is
to forsake Scripture: but in many other things they who do not discern the
evidence of Scripture, may err, though they follow it to their best power; but
notwithstanding this, Scripture is sufficiently clear in the evidence it gives
of all Divine revealed truth, to them who do discern its evidence; though men
be confessed to be men; and many of them not capable of full understanding many
truths. His Fourth contradiction charged on Heretics, but designed for
Protestants, is, that they persecute others, for taking that way, which they
held (at least pretended) meritorious in themselves: in which charge, as the
thing intended is palpably false concerning Protestants, so the language he
uses agrees not to them. The Fifth pretended contradiction is, to oblige
others to relinquish the sole guidance of Scriptures Letter, and to rule
themselves by their Tradition; and at the same time against Catholics, to
impugn Tradition as unfit to sense it, and abet only the self-sufficiency of
Scriptures Letter. The former clause here charged on Protestants, is no way
their practice; for though in matters prudential, they require inferiors to be
ruled by the commands of their Superiors; which both Scripture and the
Government of all Societies in the World require; yet in matters of Faith, they
require that men receive them only from Scripture as the Rule of Faith, or the
main ground of belief. Nor are any Protestants in any case commanded to
relinquish Scripture as a Rule of Faith, and to rule themselves by Tradition,
more than if in a Corporation, a member who cannot read, has his duty read to
him by another out of the Charter, or told him in words, with great care
collected out of the Charter, to express its sense; this should be called a
commanding this man as a member of this Society to relinquish the sole guidance
of the Charter as his Rule, and to be ruled by others Tradition, when he
follows the Charter by the best evidence he has concerning it, and relies not
on a delivery of continued hearsaies, report, and fame, which is a way suitable
to the Romish Oral Tradition. As to the latter part of this pretended
Contradiction, which concerns the impugning Tradition as unfit to sense
Scripture; if this be understood of the present way of Romish Oral Tradition,
this indeed we do so impugn. But if this be understood of the Ancient and
Primitive Tradition: Protestants do acknowledge this so far as it can be
manifested to be general, to be very fit to sense such Scriptures as are
otherwise difficult, and obscure; and so far as we have any intimations of such
Traditions, by the Ancient Fathers, we own them useful.

The last pretended contradiction is, impute that carriage as a fault to our
(Romish) Church, which themselves practice; and which is most material, our
Church punishes none but those who desert our Rule, but they punish for too
close following their Rule. All the clauses of this charge, are guilty of
deserting the Rule of Truth. For Protestants who fault this Traditionary way,
do not practice this Tradition, as has been above showed: nor do Protestants
punish any for following Scripture too close, as has been evidenced. The
middle clause is likewise untrue: for if he mean, that the Romish Church never
punishes any, who pretend to hold to the Tradition they received, according to
the best of their knowledge; how came it to pass that Victor excommunicated all
the Asian Churches, for not keeping Easter the same day with the Roman Church;
though these Asian Churches pleaded a certain Tradition, not only from their
famous Bishops, but from Philip the Deacon, and his Daughters, which were
Prophetesses, and from S. John the Apostle and Evangelist? Eus. Hist. Eccl. 5.
c. 24. Yea, how came Mr. White to be censured at Rome, who thought he defended
the Rule of Tradition? yea, how came Monsieur Arnold to be so troubled by the
Jesuits in France, even for the using those words which he received from S.
Austin, a famous and approved Father? But if he only mean that the Church of
Rome punishes none, but such as swerve some way from the Traditions she
delivers, this, if true in it self, is nothing that can truly be called most
material; it being neither pertinent to his charge against Protestants; nor
considerable in it self, since it only speaks the Church of Rome commendable,
in not punishing those, who believe every thing it says, and practice every
thing it commands: and was there ever any Society in the World, that in this
thing was not as commendable as the Church of Rome? But when he here tells us,
their Church punishes none but those, who desert the Rule she recommends,
surely he much forgot himself. 5. where speaking of Heretics, he says that
the deserters of the natural way of Tradition, have been but few, and the
Descendents of these Revolters followed Tradition: for either he must say, that
their Church punishes no Descendents of Revolters, as he calls them; that is,
allows all Heresies in any but the first Authors of them; or else must
acknowledge that it punishes them whom himself accounts (and there, as he
thinks, proves that they are) not deserters of Tradition.

. 4. He asks, What can follow hence, but that Subjects, whom common sense
cannot but make exceeding sensible of such unreasonable carriage, in
persecuting them purely for following Gods word, which themselves had taught
them, they ought in conscience to follow; should strive to wreak their malice
against their Persecutors, and to involve whole Nations in War, and Blood: but
he after adds, he intends not a justification of those revolting Sects. But it
cannot be that common sense, nor any rational evidence, should teach Subjects
under Protestant Princes, that they are persecuted purely for following Gods
Word; since there is no such thing in truth, they can no otherwise think it is
so, but by evident mistakes, or by such deluding persuasions, as this Author
would deceive them with. And indeed, such pernicious incentives as these of
this Discourser, may possibly if they meet with fiery and malicious spirits,
inflame them into a Rebellion, and withal show what Principles may be instilled
by pretenders to Tradition. But such is the peaceableness of this Principle of
making Scripture our Rule, that if any Christians should live under such a
Power, as this Author speaks of, should be a self-condemning tyranny over men's
consciences; if in this case Subjects make Scripture their Rule, they must live
in patience, meekness, peace, humility and subjection to the Higher Powers: and
it must be from pride, wrath, passion, malice, and refusing to be subject, (all
which are directly contrary to the Scriptures) that all Rebellion against
Government must proceed. Whence amongst the Primitive Christians, where the
Laws of their Persecutors commanded them the worship of a Deity, and yet
punished them for worshipping the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
Christ his Son, with the holy Spirit, which is the only God, and the Christians
knew there was none else: and punished them for not worshipping as Gods, them
whom they knew were no gods; yet in this case, the Christian Principles which
the Scripture delivers, kept them in all loyal subjection to their Governors.
If this Principle of making Scripture every where our Rule, both as to Faith
and Life be prevalent, as it will guide us aright into the truth, so it will
end all quarrels, silence all animosities and contentions, and would reduce the
world to such a perfect state of quiet, peace, friendship and love, as never
yet flourished upon the face of the Earth.

. 5. He tells us, to conclude the deserters of the way of Tradition, to be very
few; (to which he has received our answer,. 3.) and the Cause laid to preserve
Traditionary Christians is far more steady, than that laid to preserve mankind.
I have answered his comparison of Tradition and Propagation,. 1. But if he will
be so confident as to tell his Reader, that the way of Tradition, is as surely
supported as the Propagation of mankind; I would only advise him to be so
ingenuous, as to speak plainly out his meaning; and say, that as in mankind,
the causes for keeping entire the nature of man are such, that no company in
the World ever pretended themselves to be of the nature of man, who really were
not; so the way to preserve Tradition is such, that no Society of men ever did
pretend to have received and held this truth, when indeed they had it not: and
if he would thus do, he might amuse his Reader, but would never deceive him;
having before told him that there have been many Heretics in the World, and
that even amongst these, the way of continuing Heresy, is the propagating of
it by the way of Tradition.

An Answer to his eighth Discourse, showing, that uninterruptedness of
Tradition, is not proved a posteriori.
. 1. HE declares, That he will try to conclude the indeficiency of Tradition,
from such an effect as can only spring from Traditions indeficiency of its
Cause.. 2. he says, this seems needless against Protestants, who yield the
points of Faith we agree in, to have come down by this way of Tradition. He
presses therefore from Protestants, a candid Answer to these Queries. 1. Was
not the Trinity, Incarnation, and all other Points in which we agree, held in
all Ages since Christ by Gods Church? 2. Whether, seeing those points were held
ever of Faith, Fathers did not actually teach Children so, or the former Age
the latter? if so, they came down by Tradition. 3. By what virtue did Tradition
perform this? and whether the same virtue was not as powerful to bring down
other things, had any such been. 4. Is there not a necessary connection between
such a constant cause, and its formal effect? so that if its formal effect be
those Points received as delivered ever, the proper Cause must be an
ever-delivery. But because he fears, the Protestant will fly off here, he will
follow his designed method. Sure he rather supposed the Protestant could easily
baffle these fancies, than that he would fly from such shadows.

To the 1. Qu. I answer, Gods Church, that number of Christians, who have
entirely and constantly held all the Principles of Christian Religion, they
must needs have held these great truths likewise. But many have pretended to be
Gods Church, who held them not. Nor has this belief been always preserved in
the Churches who once embraced it: since the Eastern Churches, who before
received the true Doctrine of Christ, were drawn aside by the Arian infection,
and denied those points: which shows Tradition not certainly enough to preserve
these points, in any particular Church.

To the 2. Qu. I answer, Fathers did teach their Children these Doctrines, yet
were they not only nor chiefly continued by the way of Oral Tradition. For the
Primitive Christians made Scripture their Rule, as shall be after showed, from
their Writings; and Fathers taught Children chiefly then, by what they read and
received by the writings of the Scriptures. And the Children of these Parents
had not only their Parents teaching, but they had also the Scriptures read
among them, and perused by them, and by this means in the Primitive times were
these Doctrines continued. That the Apostolical Doctrine was continued in the
Church, chiefly from the Scriptures, Irenaeus testifies, even of those
Primitive times. Adversus Haeres. lib. 4. c. 63. The Doctrine of the Apostles
is the true knowledge, which is come even unto us, being kept without fiction
by the most full handling of the Scriptures. That Christians then received
their instruction in the Church, chiefly from Scriptures, he likewise shows,
lib. 5. c. 20. where he exhorts to fly from the Opinion of the Heretics, and
fly unto the Church, and be brought up in its bosom, and be nourished by the
Lord's Scriptures. For (says he) the Paradise of the Church is planted in this
World: therefore the Spirit of God says, Ye shall eat food of every tree of
the Paradise; that is, eat ye of every Scripture of the Lord. For very many
more testimonies, and those very clear, I refer to what shall be purposely
discoursed in answer to his consent of Authority. Yea, such was the esteem of
the use of Scripture, that in the Primitive times, before their Children were
taught matters of human literature, they were instructed in the holy
Scriptures. Thus was Origin brought up; Eus. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. c. 3. and
Eusebius Emissenus, according to the common custom of their Country in like
manner first learned the Scriptures; Sozom. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 5.

To his 3. Qu. Were it certain that these truths had been preserved by the way
of Oral Tradition only, Tradition, depending upon this supposal, that in such a
Society, it has always been rightly delivered, and rightly received; which is
a contingency; and notwithstanding the virtue of Tradition might have been
otherwise, as appeared in the Eastern Churches under Arianism: Yea, the reason
why these Doctrines are preserved entire among the Romanists, is probably this,
that as they have been and are delivered by them from the Scriptures, they are
also delivered in certain forms of words; and in those Creeds which were
received from those Ancient Churches and Councils, who were not erroneous, but
agreed to the Scripture. Now whereas their Tradition directs to receive what
has been delivered, and the things delivered have been some by Councils truly
Catholic, and other things by erroneous Councils; it may well be that
Tradition may in some things deliver rightly; and yet either omit the delivery
of other things, or deliver them amiss. And if there had been nothing more, to
have preserved these Doctrines in the Western Church, but what was in the
necessary virtue of Tradition, the Romish Church (not here to mention any thing
of Arian Popes) might have lost these points as well as the Eastern long since
did, where Tradition lost this virtue of preserving them.

Now that it may appear how vainly this Discourser would conclude the certainty
of Tradition, Queries; I shall mention some parallel Cases, to which the
substance of what is here questioned, may be applied. As, 1. Concerning
Gentilism. To follow this Author, I would ask, was not the Belief of a God,
and what things we agree in, constantly preserved by Tradition among them? now
by what virtue did Tradition perform this? may we not by the same virtue of
Tradition, receive what they delivered concerning the way of Gods Worship? and
would not this Tradition as well have continued all other things, if any such
had been delivered? Thus it would plead for Gentilism. 2. How would this plead
for Judaism. Did not Tradition amongst them continue till Christ's time, the
Doctrine of Circumcision, of the Sabbath, of Sacrifices, and of a Messiah? and
must they not needs be in the right, in all other matters of delivery, though
they were condemned by Christ and his Apostles. 3. See how these Queries would
plead against all possibility of forgetfulness. When I have read a Book over,
and am certain I rightly remember some clauses in it, may I thence conclude,
that by the same virtue of memory, I remember these, I should have remembered
all other clauses, if there had been any? and therefore certainly there was no
more in the Book than I can remember. Or if I should conclude, that because I
am certain, that I remember some passages which happened when I was a Child;
therefore by the same virtue that these things were delivered to my memory, I
also remember aright all things then done: who would not see that this is a
mere vain piece of Sophistry, since some things may be more fully understood
than others, and more heedfully observed, the impression upon many occasions
more deeply imprinted, and the remembrance of them more frequently repeated?
whence some things may be remembered, and others not; and the same causes may
be assigned in matters of Religion.

To his 4. Qu. I answer,

. 3. He lays down this effect, The present persuasion of Catholics, that
their Faith has descended from Christ and his Apostles uninterruptedly; which
must for its Cause, have Traditions Ever-Indeficiency.. 4. To prove this, he
lays his first Principle, That Age which holds Faith so delivered, cannot
change, nor know any change of it; because no man, much less a whole Age, can
hold contrary to knowledge, nor here change without knowledge. To this I
answer, That supposing the abovementioned persuasion, this may rise from other
causes, besides Traditions indeficiency: Yea, this his first Principle to prove
the contrary is very weak. For, first, it is very easy to conceive, that
mistaken Explications of Points of Faith may be held by a present Generation as
having been matters of Faith, ever delivered, and yet may be really different
from the things delivered, and so include a change. This is the more apt to
take place, if such explicated points seem plausibly declared, and are either
abetted by men of great fame, or serve an interest: and this is as possible as
it is for men to be deceived in their conceptions about things not in express
terms delivered: since it is certain that many points now owned as matters of
Faith in the Romish Church, were not expressly and in such terms delivered of
old: yea, this Author acknowledges as much, p. 206, 207. Many such explicated
points have in Councils been declared to be de fide, though not only against
the minds of many who before asserted the contrary, but of others who in the
said Councils opposed it. Secondly, to deliver a Doctrine as from Christ, where
they change or know some change of it, is much more probable in the Roman
Church, than in others; if any ignorance possess the Leaders, or any interest
and private designs take place upon some few of them. For since the Tradition
which particular persons have received, must submit to the determination of a
Council^, or else must they be anathematized, how easy is it for some point de
fide, to be innovated; if the Bishop of Rome, and some few other men of note
and fame, through mistaken zeal, or out of design, should endeavor the having
such a Point declared as a matter of Faith, when he can send what Bishops he
please, or create new ones, and many others may for want of circumspection,
comply in order to peace, as some well disposed Bishops did unadvisedly with
some of the Arian devices. And in this case, though there may be some
withstanders, yet may they not be numerous, and therefore must sit still being
overpowerred, and will think they ought in the end to consent, if they have
received this Principle, which many Papists embrace. That the determinations of
such a Council, are to determine their private judgments, what is the Doctrine
of the Church.

. 5. His second Principle is, No Age could innovate any thing, and deliver that
thing as received by constant succession. For the end of delivering it as so
received, must be to make the following Generation believe it. Now if a whole
Age should conspire to tell such a lie, yet it is impossible it should be
believed, since they cannot blot out all Monuments which might undeceive; and
therefore the following Generation cannot believe, unless they will believe
what they know to be otherwise. This Second Principle is unsound, upon the same
grounds with the other. For as has been now showed, there may happen such an
innovation, by the mistake or non-attendance of a considerable number,
especially in Councils, who sometimes are too readily guided by some few
eminent leading men, who may act either out of mistake, or some of them out of
design; and by these men, if in an allowed and confirmed Council, both the
present and future Generation must be determined. But what he speaks of a
future Generation easily discovering the innovation, makes me think he forgets
himself. For how should the following Generation of Catholics consistently
with this Authors Principles, discover it? By former Monuments? But he in this
Book declares, that they must not give heed to any former private men's
Writings, against the delivered Doctrine of the Church publicly attested. And
if any public Writing, though it be their own approved Canons, seem contrary;
they must find such interpretation as will agree with this declared Doctrine,
and stick to it, though it be wrested; so that whatsoever can be showed from
History or Ancient Doctors, (as this Author declares in his Corollaries) is to
such Papists of no account against present Tradition. See Coroll. 14.16, 17.
Yea, if you shall produce a great number of opposers, as may in many cases
easily be done, he will hold to the greater number in his present Council. If
you produce him a former Council against any now received Doctrine, he must not
rationally judge of the Tradition, but from the present Tradition, condemn
that, if it cannot be otherwise interpreted, as Heretical. If you produce the
Eastern or Grecian, or other Churches, as delivering otherwise; if this cannot
by other means be evaded, they must not be acknowledged by Romanists for true
Deliverers. But if we can produce an approved General Council; have we not now
such sufficient Monuments to discover thereby what was the Doctrine of the
Church: such Councils our Discourser calls the greatest Authority in the
Catholic Church, p. 129. Yet if the Council was approved, and by the Roman
Church acknowledged both for Catholic and General, still they have a device to
reject what ever dislikes them in such a Council, by saying, that it is ex
part approbatum, and ex part reprobatum; or, part of it rejected, and part of
it received: by this device they reject part of the Second General Council at
Constantinople, and the Twenty eighth Canon of the Fourth General Council at
Chalcedon, which declares, that their Fathers gave Privileges to the Sea of
old Rome, because that was the Imperial City; and therefore upon the same
consideration, they gave the same Privileges to the Sea of Constantinople. And
thus they have rejected others of old; as also part of the Council of
Constance, and the Council of Basil more lately, concerning the Authority and
Power of the General Councils over the Bishop of Rome. Thus does Binius and
other Papists. So that no way remains for a Papist thus principled, to detect
this Innovation where he has contrary evidence: much less in many cases, where
the matter now determined, has not been so distinctly of old treated of: so
that the Roman Church may innovate, and yet expect to be believed that the
Doctrine was ever delivered. Provided, they take care not so palpably to
contradict their own public and former delivery, in such a way as no possible
interpretation can make things consist one with the other. If they do take this
care, there is room enough left, for many innovations in Doctrine, in points
not clearly enough determined formerly, in the public Monuments of that
Church; and in those also by misinterpretations. But though Papists
consistently with their Principles, can make no discovery of Innovations, but
must either make use of strained interpretations of former Writers, or else
must condemn those Writers; yet Protestants can, and do make this discovery.
And blessed be God that they of the Romish Church, have not so blotted out the
Writings of the Ancient Fathers, (though they have showed some good will
thereto) nor have they been able so to correct the Letter of the Scripture,
according to their own sense, (as this Author thinks convenient Cor. 29.) but
that we are able from them to discover the Error and Apostasy of the present
Church of Rome: of which in the close of this Discourse, I will give him one
instance.

. 6. From these Principles he concludes, That since nothing new could be owned,
as not new in any Generation (by the first), nor a foregoing Age make it
received as not new by Posterity by the second; therefore since we hold it
descended uninterruptedly, it did descend as such. To this I answer; That if
the former Principles had been both true, as neither of them are; yet would not
this conclusion have followed from them, because it supposes besides these
Principles, many other things to be true, which are either very improbable or
certainly false. First, it supposes that all points held as matters of Faith,
have in all Ages since Christ, been delivered in such terms, as ever
delivered-points of Faith, whereby they have been known distinctly from
disputable opinions: if this had been so, the many Controversies, whether such
and such things were de fide, show the maintainers of them on the one side, not
capable of understanding plain words. Secondly, it supposes that nothing can
be received as ever delivered, by a following Generation, which was not
delivered as ever received in a former Generation, unless they declare
something not to be new, which they know is new. For why may not that which is
propounded as a probable opinion in one Generation, be thought to be delivered
as a truth in the next Generation, and in some following Generations (who
cannot give an Historical account, how far in every Age, every Position was
received) it may be owned as a point of Faith; by which means also
Constitutions of expediency, may be owned as Doctrines necessary. In which case
they now only hold as a matter of Faith, what the former Generation held as a
truth, and so they hold no new thing differing in the substance from the
former, nor design they any thing new in the Mode of holding it. Thirdly, This
supposes that every Generation from the time of the Apostles, have been of the
opinion this Author pretends to, to design to hold all, and nothing but what
the immediately foregoing Generation held, which is a point can never be
proved. For this would be indeed to assert, that never any persons studied to
understand any point more clearly than it was comprised in the words they
received from their Fathers; or else that when they had so studied, they never
declared their conceptions, or opinions in such points; or if they did declare
them, yet no number of men would ever entertain them. And this is as much as to
say, that the Church never had any Doctors studied in the points of Faith; or
at least, that such studies never were honored in the Church, and the fruits
of them received and applauded by it; which if it would not cast a great
indignity upon the Church, yet it is apparently contrary to the truth.
Fourthly, It supposes, but proves not, that all points of Faith have come down
by the way of Tradition, and none of them failed of being delivered. For if any
one of these be false, as doubtless they are, his demonstration falls with them.

But that we may further see the virtue of this demonstration; Jew, or a Pagan,
as a Papist. The Jewish Doctrine held forth by their Talmud, as also the former
Doctrines of the Scribes and Pharisees, were believed by that people to be
delivered ever from Moses, and Ezra; here is an effect like this, of the
Papists persuasion; therefore in no Age could it be changed, but was ever
delivered, and therefore true; if the Romish Tradition be upon these grounds
sufficiently proved indefectible. Amongst the Gentiles, the Opinions of
Jupiter, Juno, Mars, etc. being gods, was believed to have been ever delivered
to them from some Divine Revelation of its Original, for else they could never
have believed them to have been gods. Now since it is certain the Gentiles
received this by Tradition from their Fathers, and the first Generations of
mankind after Noah, were undoubtedly instructed in the truth concerning God, of
which Noah was a Preacher of long continuance amongst them: since according to
this Discourser, no Age could deceive them in delivering what it knew false, or
in delivering for certain, what it knew was not certain: Yea, since the
Tradition of Gentile Polytheism was more general, than the Popish Tradition;
that is, it was received and delivered amongst more Nations, and contradicted
by fewer persons, than the Romish Doctrines were, and therefore if Tradition be
demonstrated to be indefectible by this Argument for the Papists, it must be
also for the Gentiles. Yet this belief amongst the Gentiles of Polytheism,
necessarily supposed a failing of Tradition in this great point, that there is
one only God, So far is it from proving that their Tradition could not fail.

I shall now in the close of this Discourse, as I promised n. 8. give an
instance of a Point, in which there is an Innovation in the present Oral and
Practical Tradition of the Roman Church, which is, in denying the Cup in the
Eucharist to the Communicants.

The present Tradition and practice of the Church of Rome is, that the Laity
and the Clergy, who do not consecrate, do receive only in one species, to wit,
that of Bread; and this they declare to be lawful, (and the contrary not to be
necessary, or commanded of God) and to be ordered upon just causes, to be a
true receiving the Sacrament, and to be the way whereby they may receive whole
Christ: and they condemn, yea, and Anathematize any who shall speak the
contrary, as may be seen, Council. Constanc. Ses. 13. and Conc. Trid. Ses. 5.
Now both those Councils do acknowledge, that Christ did institute, and the
ancient Church administered, this Sacrament under both kinds; and therefore by
their own acknowledgement, they keep not in practice to what was delivered. But
the Question is, Whether their present practice and Doctrinal delivery opposes
any former delivery of Doctrine.

Now that I may lay a good foundatipn, Romanist will reject, to know what was
once the received and delivered Doctrine in the Church of Rome, I shall apply
my self not to any private Father, though approved, which possibly he will
except against, as not a sufficient testifier of Tradition: but to such a
constitution of the Bishop of Rome, as is still acknowledged, to have been an
approved Canon, and therefore the Doctrine of the Roman Church, which is this
of Gelasius the First: We have found that some having received only a portion
of the holy Body, do abstain from the Cup of the consecrated Blood, who
(because I know not by what superstition they are taught to be bound up) must
without doubt, either receive the whole Sacrament, or be kept back from the
whole; because the division of one and the same Mystery, cannot come without
great Sacrilege. This is delivered for an approved Canon by all Papists. Ivo
placed it in the beginning of his Decretum. Gratian inserted it, De
Consecratione Did. 2. c. comperimus. It is owned by Bellarmine de Eucharistia,
lib. 4. c. 26. by Baronius ad Ann. 496. n. 20. and Binnius in Vit. Gelasii. Nor
is it denied by any that I know. And whereas the present Tradition asserts that
it is not necessary the Laity and Clergy, not Consecrating, should receive in
both kinds; this old Tradition says plainly, that they who receive not both
kinds, must receive neither, it being one and the same Mystery or Sacrament.
And though there are some Causes now declared just and rational, to order that,
the Communion shall be only in one kind, and the Council of Constance (ubi
supra) condemn those who call this practice Sacrilegious: yet it is possible
the same reasons might move some in Gelasius his time, to receive only in that
one kind; but what ever the reason was, he declared it could never be approved,
and its Principle was Superstition, and in practice there could never be a
division in this one and the same Sacrament, without great Sacrilege.

Now though these words are very plain, Papists make use of, to pervert the
sense of them, which I shall discover to be vain and frivolous answers, and so
vindicate this testimony. The first answer is, that this Canon refers to the
Priests not the Laity. This is the interpretation in the Rubric of Gratian,
and is mentioned as probable by Bellarmine. But, 1. These words of the Canon
are generally spoken by Gelasius, so as to include the Laity, and with no
color of reason can they be restrained to the Clergy; and speaking of them
whom he would have driven back, or kept back from the Sacraments, and of them
who are taught; the ordinary receivers are plainly included, if not chiefly
intended: and finding fault with this, that some abstained, reason will evince
that all are faulted who did so abstain. 2. The restraining this to the Clergy,
is contrary to the History and general practice of those times: it being
certain and confessed, that even in the Western Church, not only till that
time, but for some hundreds of years after, this Sacrament was administered to
all in both kinds. In this case, to conclude, that when some were found to
abstain from one kind, they must be supposed to be of the Clergy, would be a
vain surmise. 3. This answer accords not with the Doctrine of those ancient
times, which owned the Laity, to have the same right, to receive in both kinds
with the Clergy. Thus Chrysostom, who was owned as Saint and Father at Rome.
Hom. 18. in 2. Ep. Corinth. There is, says he, something wherein there is no
difference betwixt the Priests and the People, to wit, as to the receiving the
dreadful Mysteries, for we have all alike right to partake of them. Not as it
was under the Old Testament, the Priest did eat some things, and the people
other things; and it was not lawful for the people to partake of those things,
of which the Priest did partake. But it is not so now. The same Body is
appointed for all, and the same Cup. So far S. Chrysostom. 4. Though this
interpretation restraining it to the Clergy, contrary to Reason, History, and
the Doctrine of that time, should be allowed; yet would not this be enough to
reconcile it with the present Tradition, which delivers that the Clergy also,
if they do not consecrate, must not receive in both kinds. 5. This first answer
is acknowledged frivolous, from some of the grounds abovementioned, and
rejected by many of the more learned Papists: and Baronius, ad annum 496. n.
20. calls it frigidam solutionem, a cold or dull solution; but pretends to give
a better, which now follows.

The other Answer necessary to be examined is, Manichees; and that it was only
their receiving in one kind, which Gelasius condemns as Sacrilege, of whom it
is thus written in Leo his fourth Sermon for Lent. When they dare to be present
at our Mysteries, to conceal their Infidelity, they so order themselves at the
Communion of the Sacraments, that sometimes they receive the Body of Christ
with their unworthy mouth, that they may the more safely be concealed; but they
altogether decline to drink of the Blood of our Redemption, which we therefore
certify your holiness, that this sort of men may be known of us by these
tokens; and that when their Sacrilegious dissembling is discovered, they being
marked and detected, may be driven by the Priestly Authority, from the Saints
society. That to these, the words of Gelasius refer, is the answer of Baronius,
ad an. 496. n. 21. Binnius in Vit. Gelasii, and this also is approved by
Bellarmine.

But 1. Leo did discern this to be the practice of some Manichees fifty years
before Gelasius his time, this is no evidence that they were such of whom
Gelasius writes; had he intended the Manichees, there can no reason be
imagined, why he as well as Leo, should not mention them; but since he
expressed this in a more general way, that some were found, there is no reason
to restrain this to the Manichees. 2. That expression that he knew not by what
superstition they were bound up, cannot fitly be applied to the Manichees. For
it was a matter not unknown, but well known, why the Manichees refused the Cup.
Saint Austin about an hundred years before Gelasius, sets down the reason of
that, Lib. 16. adversus Faust. c. 3. They refused Wine and other things, (he
says) not out of any strictness to subdue the body, but as being unclean, and
called them filth, and the gall of the people of darkness. And lib. 20. c. 13.
he says, the Manichees account it Sacrilege to taste Wine; they own their God
in the Grape, but not in the Cup; as if the treading or pressing did offend
them. So that it was known why the Manichees refused Wine upon all occasions.
Yea, the very word of superstition, suits not the Manichees refusal, who were
acted by gross Heresy, and amongst other things, they hereby maintained the
distinction of things clean and unclean in their own nature, whereas
superstition rather intimates a design of reverence and veneration of the
Sacrament, but misplaced and not well guided.

3. Nor can those words, either let them receive the whole Sacrament, or be
kept back from the whole, be applicable to the Manichees. For if we consider
the nature of Manicheism, how great an Heresy it was, that S. Austin in
several places observes, That they denied worship to the God of the Old
Testament, they blasphemed the Prophets, they denied Christ to be born of the
Virgin, they did worship the Sun, and own him to be God, and many other gross
things they held, as the good and evil first Cause, the denial of the
Resurrection, and the like: that concerning such Heretics, Gelasius, and the
Roman Canons should appoint, that they might be admitted to the partaking of
the whole Sacrament, no man who knows the discipline of those times can admit.
For no crime was owned greater than Heresy, and that the Heresy of
Manicheism, was in the days of Gelasius greatly abhorred by the Christians,
may appear, in that after the death of Zeno the Emperor, when Ariadne had
declared Anastasius the Successor, Euphemius the Patriarch of Constantinople
refused to consent, because he was a Manichee, unless he should first under his
handwriting confirm the Faith of Chalcedon, as is related by Theodorus,
Lector. Collect. lib. 2. and not long after he shows how the Christians
detested this Manichean Emperor, because an Heretic: which was in the very
days of this Gelasius. Further, when it is considered, that this Gelasius the
first, Causa. 24. Qu. 1. Acacius non est, declares, that whoever falls into any
Heresy once condemned, involves himself in that same condemnation. It is not
imaginable, that he would allow the Eucharist to be given to a Manichee, whom
he must own as a condemned Heretic. Nor could a Manichee be otherwise owned by
Gelasius, when in his time they stood condemned, not only by the Civil Laws of
Valentinian, Gratian, Theodosius and Honorius, but also by a Roman Council in
the days of Pope Leo the Great, in which, as appears from Leo Sermon. 5. de
Jejuniis decim. men's. they determined that the Christians should wholly expel
these accursed and contagious men from their friendship. At which time Leo
would not receive them who returned from Manicheism, until they had first
condemned the Manichees by open profession in the Church, and by their
subscriptions, and at length had time injoined them for their penance; as is
observed by Baronius ad Ann. 444. n. 5. And can it then be imagined, that when
Gelasius had found such out, he would give them liberty to be received to the
Eucharist forthwith? especially if it be observed, that in another Canon of
this same Gelasius, Causa 24. Qu. 2. c. nec quisque, He declares, That they
might not partake of the purity of the Lords Table with any Heretic, which
Table (says he) our Ancestors did always abundantly keep severed from all
Heretical pollution. Yea, further, can it be thought any way probable, that
when Leo in the abovementioned words, declares the Manichees to be in
infidelity, to receive the Body of Christ with their unworthy mouth, and
sacrilegiously to dissemble in taking that, and therefore to be rejected as
contagious and accursed, from all society of Christians, yet Gelasius should
judge these infidels, thus sacrilegiously dissembling and unworthy, yea,
accursed, and condemned by former Councils, fit for the highest Communion of
Christians, and allow them to receive the holy Eucharist. Strangely wide must
they needs be, who would expound Gelasius by those words of Leo.

4. Gelasius writes, had been Manichees, this would indeed have showed the
persons in Gelasius his time, who received only in one kind, to be in many
things blameable, more than the Papists at this day; as dissimulation,
infidelity, and the like; which were the faults by Leo, charged on the
Manichees, but not by Gelasius charged on them he writes of: but still in that
fault for which Gelasius condemns them he writes against, the Papists at this
day are altogether guilty of it, that is, in dividing the Sacrament, or not
receiving both Bread and Wine, which he says cannot be without great
Sacrilege.

Nor can any here make a third reply, only in one kind, because the known
practice and Canons of the Roman Church, required administration in both kinds:
But since it has in after times declared this practice mutable, and ordered
the Communion to be given only in one kind, it is not now sacrilegious. For
this answer will not agree with the intent of these words, and the Doctrine
formerly received in the Roman Church. The reason why Gelasius declared it
great sacrilege, to take this Sacrament in one kind alone, is intimated
sufficiently in this Canon not to refer to the Churches Constitution, but the
Sacraments Institution, in that he calls both species or kinds one and the same
Mystery: and says this one and the same Mystery cannot be divided, without
grand sacrilege; which is to referr us to the nature of the thing it self, and
its Institution, as being not mutable. Yea further, the ancient Tradition of
the Roman Church held as a Point of Doctrine, that the Elements in the
Eucharist ought to be administered, according to what Christ instituted; that
is, the Bread and Wine to be given to the Laity distinctly and separately,
because Christ gave them so; then cannot this third Reply reconcile the present
Doctrine of the Roman Church, with what was formerly delivered. To show this, I
could produce many testimonies; but shall only instance in Julius a Roman
Bishop in a Canonical Epistle to the Bishops of Egypt, recorded also in Gratian
de Consecrat. Did. 2. Cum omne. Where he declares, that he had heard of some,
who contrary to the Divine Orders and Apostolical Institutions, consecrated
Milk instead of Wine, others who deliver to the people the Eucharist dipped.
For it is read in the truth of the Gospel, Jesus took Bread, and the Cup, and
having blessed it, gave it to his Disciples. But for that they gave the
Eucharist dipped to the people, they have received no testimony produced out of
the Gospel, in which he commends to us his body and his blood; for the
commendation is rehearsed separately of the Bread, and separately of the Cup.
In which words he makes Christ's Institution a Rule, by which he condemns other
practices different from it; and from this Institution he requires, that both
the Bread and the Cup be separately given; and this even with reference to the
Laity, or as he speaks to the people to whom it was delivered: and by this Rule
he condemned the giving the Bread dipped in Wine, whereas both should be given
asunder: so does Gelasius by the same, condemn the receiving only in one kind,
when it should be received in both. All this considered, the former Tradition
of the Roman Church, may from this instance, appear to condemn the late
Tradition as sacrilegious; and therefore I may conclude, that the same
Tradition has not been always kept to, as may appear by preserved Monuments,
out of which instances may be easily multiplied.

An Answer to his ninth Discourse, showing, that the way of Oral Tradition in
the Church, has not so much strength as other matters of Humane Authority.
. 1. But (says he) some may say all this is nature; if the Objector means,
reason wrought upon by Motives laid by Gods special goodness to bring man to
bliss; I wonder what else is supernaturality. But this point is out of my road
otherwise, than to show how Christian Tradition is strengthened above the
greatest humane testimony whatever, by those Motives which we rightly call
assistances of the Holy Ghost. Not to examine his Notion of supernaturality,
and the assistances of the Holy Ghost, because they concern not the Discourse
in hand; I shall only tell him what Protestants or any other men, who are true
to reason, would say to this Discourse; and that is, that what he has said
hitherto, is of so low natural evidence, and so far from reason, that in this
way the Christian can have no more evidence of the truth of Christian Religion,
than an Heathen may have of the truth of Paganism: nor is there any such
certainty in Tradition, concerning the main Body of Christ's Doctrine, as is
comparable to many other matters of humane testimony.

. 2, 3. He observes the Mahometans Tradition, for Mahomets existence, will
convey the truth thereof to the Worlds end if followed; and Protestants
acknowledge, it has had the force hitherto to be followed; And the Tradition
in the Church for the main Body of Christ's Doctrine, far exceeds that of the
Turks for Mahomets existence; because supposing the quality of the testifiers
equal, much greater multitudes in diverse Countries, were testifiers of Christ's
Doctrine, being converted by powerful Miracles, than the few witnesses of
Mahomets existence: it is easier for those few Syrians or Arabians, to conspire
to a lie, than for these Christians: nor can Christians be so easily mistaken
concerning Christian Doctrine. In answer to this, I in the first place grant,
That there is an Historical Traditionary certainty amongst the Turks,
concerning the existence of Mahomet; and it is very reasonable, that rather
more should be allowed to the Tradition of Christians, than of Mahometans. But
that it may truly appear how far Tradition may be relied on, for the conveyance
of truth, we must distinctly consider the matters delivered. Of which some
things there are, which are not probably capable of mistake, nor liable to be
perverted, and to receive a mixture of much falsehood: and have this advantage,
that the delivery of them from one to another, does still continue: and no
interest persuades the generality of men to deny, or endeavor the concealing
of them. Now all these properties agree to the assertion of Mahomets existence
amongst the Turks, to the delivery of the Being of a God among the Gentiles, to
Moses being the great Prophet among the Jews, and to Jesus being the Christ,
and I may add S Peter, and S. Paul, etc. being his Apostles among the
Christians; thus the fame of a good or true Writer may be continued amongst
Historians; and in these things and many other such like; I will grant it is
not only possible, but probable that Tradition may convey a certainty. But
there are other things liable to mistake, whence in many matters of common
fame, sufficiently known to the first Relater, by the misapprehension of them
who hear the relation, the ordinary report is oft-times false; or else, 2. They
are subject to be perverted, or are concealed, and not delivered; which has
been the case of many great and famous actions in the world, which are now
buried in oblivion, or upon misinformation condemned; but would have been
honorably esteemed, if they had been truly known. And here the Tradition of
the Turks, concerning the precepts of Mahomet, which were liable to mistake,
would probably have been lost, if they had not been preserved in a written
Alcoran. And the Traditional evidence of this very Alcoran containing his
Doctrine, is much inferior to the Tradition of Christians, for the Scriptures
containing the Doctrine of Christ: for even from the beginning of the reception
of the Turkish Alcoran, their Tradition has not procured it so full
approbation, but that the Persians who profess themselves Mahometans, deliver
another Alcoran, different from that of the Turks; which they declare to
contain the true precepts of Mahomet: whereas Primitive Christians have as with
one mouth all acknowledged, that the Scriptures of the Prophets, Apostles and
Evangelists, contain the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, written by Divine
inspiration.

Now to apply all this to the Doctrine of Christ. Mahomets existence is; which
is evidenced by the many mistakes in all Ages, and disputes amongst true
Catholic Christians as well as Papists, about Doctrines of Religion. 2. The
Doctrine of Christ is likewise liable to be perverted; thus as in the time of
the Old Testament, the precepts of God were much corrupted by the Scribes and
Pharisees, who made void the Commandments of God by their Traditions; so under
the New Testament, have many Heretics grossly perverted this truth, and many
extravagant Opinionists, have strangely blended it with their own
misconceptions; whence many errors are gone forth into the world. 3. Nor can it
be proved that in the way of Oral Tradition, considered without Scripture, all
things delivered by Christ, are continued in the Church: for since in the
multitude of Christ's words, not written by the Apostles or Evangelists, the
Romish Church cannot say, that her Tradition has preserved any, how can the
certainty of this Tradition be reasonably imagined so great, as to secure a
preservation of every Doctrine? Now let us again observe, that all these
Considerations have the greater advantage against the certainty of Tradition,
by considering with them the many successions of Generations; for matters of
Faith if but once a little mistaken in one Generation, since they must with
these mistakes be delivered to the next Generation, they may then be more
mistaken; and so by degrees very considerable mistakes, and great corruptions
may come in in points of Faith: and as to omission of delivery of some truth,
if it be continued in several Generations, yet if it be not impossible, that
any one Generation as to any truth, should neglect the delivery; it will in so
many successions, be very probable that some one has failed. But in the way of
Scripture evidence, the words are the same which were then delivered, and the
same words are no more capable of mistakes and corruptions in Doctrine, than
they were at the first, nor are they less delivered to us now, than they then
were. I may now infer from what is abovesaid, that the belief of Mahomets
existence may be continued by Tradition, and yet it may not preserve the whole
Body of Christ's Doctrine.

. 4. humane authority or testimony is such, that none are so mad as to doubt
them; but he that considers, Joh. 3.16. 1 Cor. 3.9. Mat. 6.26. will be
convinced, that the ways of Providence to bring about man's salvation, are so
much above all others, that others in comparison, scarce deserve the name of a
Providence. We own Christianity much more certain than other Histories and
things: but that the preserving its certainty depends much more on Scripture
than on Tradition, is evident partly from reason; because in a set form of
written words, a change cannot be so easily made without plain discovery, as it
may be where there is no such set form of words; and partly from considering
matters of fact, whereby it may appear that Heretics and opposers of the
truth, have more corrupted and spread corruptions of Christian Doctrine by
their false delivery, than ever they could corrupt and spread any corruptions
of the Scripture-writing.

. 5, 6. It is natural for every man to speak truth, unless some design hinder;
but true Christian hearts are much more fixed to Veracity.. 7. Original
corruption leads men to violate Veracity, by an undue love of Creatures; but
Christianity working an overpowering love of Spiritual good, leaves man's
disposition to truth free.. 8. The hopes and fears of Christianity as much
exceed others, as eternity does a moment, and are so held by all: yet other
Motives bring down matters of fact truly; as the Reigns of Kings, Wars,
Eclipses, etc. but that Christian Motives are more prevalent than all others,
appears by considering the Martyrs and Persecutions. In answer to this, I first
observe, that what he has here laid down as a high security to the Churches
Tradition, makes nothing at all so much as seemingly, for the securing all, or
any of its members from mistakes, and misapprehensions; nor for the preserving
the weak from being deluded by others subtilty. All it seems to plead against,
is, intentional deceiving, without which there may be much error. But yet even
this design of deceiving, may with many in the Church much prevail,
notwithstanding all endeavored to the contrary by this Discourser. Where
Christianity takes full possession in the power of it, it will engage such men
to truth, and the love of Heavenly good, and the minding of Spiritual hopes and
fears: but how many are there who profess Christianity, who often speak falsehood,
and are tempted to sin by undue love of Creatures, and do not guide their
lives, according to the hopes and fears Religion sets before them? Therefore
these things cannot assure us of preserving men from perverting truth, or
neglect of delivering it, much less from ignorance and mistake. And as in other
matters of History, many things are delivered amiss in the common fame, but
best in the allowed Records, so it is also in Christianity.

. 9. The Ceremonies or Oaths tendered to Officers in a Commonwealth, to engage
them to be true to their Trust, have no proportion with the Sacraments of the
Church, applied to Christians, that they may not prevaricate from the Faith of
Christ. These are indeed exceeding high obligations which lie upon Christians:
But besides that it is no ways credible, that all Christians judged themselves
hereby obliged, to deliver in the way of Oral Tradition all matters of Faith,
directly as they received them by the same Tradition: I say besides this, its
certain it obliges men as much to the purity of the Christian life, as to hold
fast the verity of the Christian Doctrine: wherefore when it is certain that
with many it does not work its effect in the former, it may be much feared to
want its effect in the latter, especially since there have been many Heretics.

. 10. They who do not to others, what they would have done to themselves, this
is because they are swayed by some temporal good; but this cannot be in the
Church, supposing sanctity in it, because in virtue and glory, we have not the
less, when others have the more, but rather we have the more also: so that here
Fathers must do the greatest hurt to their Children, without the least good to
themselves, if they should deceive them. But alas! Is this Discourser such a
stranger to the world, that when he has proved, as it is easy to do, that it
is highly irrational for any man to choose any sin, he would thence conclude for
certain, that there are no such sinners in the world? How evident is it, that
there has been so much want of Sanctity, that many either to please their own
fancies, or to promote their own interests, have depraved the true Religion, or
corrupted the Christian Doctrine? But in these cases, as in all acts of sin,
men do not aim at the evil and hurt that follows, but at the seeming good and
delight.

. 11. Christian Doctrine has the advantage of the greatest universality,
wisdom and goodness of the recommenders.. 12. Nature will teach all a care of
their off spring, but Christianity more, and chiefly in matters of endless
misery and happiness.. 13. Consider credit; he who will lie perniciously and to
friends, how ill is this esteemed? Chiefly if this be against the highest
Motives, and with the greatest confidence and Oaths. This is of all other cases
most disgraceful, in matters which concern Christ's Doctrine, chiefly if in a
Pastor against his particular Oath, to preach Christ's Doctrine truly. Nor can
the world of Forefathers all conspire to this villainy. Yet it is certain,
notwithstanding the recommendations of the Christian Doctrine, it may be both
mistaken and depraved. Nor does love of offspring take place actually against
all setting examples of sin, nor against ignorance and mistakes; nor in Jews
and Heretics, did it take place against corrupting worship. Nor have all men
been so tender of their credit. Many Heretics have been self-condemned. There
were who said of Christ, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours.
Simon knew and was Baptized into the Christian Doctrine, and yet thoughts of
credit did not keep him from perverting it. Yea, men gain credit at least with
a party, by their erring explications, if they be plausible, and take with the
multitude; and then alone can they become Traditions. However, some there are
who value not esteem either with men or with God, who knowing the judgment of
God, that they which do such things are worthy of death, not only do them, but
take pleasure in them that do them. And if by such weak considerations as these
above mentioned (though the truth of the contrary is generally known in the
world) this Author would conclude, that Pastors can never deliver amiss; and
therefore whatever any Histories say to the contrary, there never were
erroneous Bishops in the Eastern or Western Churches, or any places whatever; I
doubt he would be put to wonderful puzzles to reconcile the present Doctrines
in all Churches. Yet if Protestants may not as men of reason judge that Pastors
have erred, because all Histories and the present differences in Religion
manifest it: they will still as Christians believe that S. Peter's Spirit was
more infallible than this Discoursers, who has assured us, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. That
there shall be false Teachers, who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies,
and many shall follow their pernicious ways.

. 14. every virtue and Science, would contribute to Traditions certainty, which
would require, he says, a large Volume to show. But that we may judge what
this large Volume would be, he gives us a taste wherein is nothing else but
empty and frothy words. Arithmetic lends her numbering and multiplying faculty
to scan the vast number of testifiers; Geometry her proportion to show the
infinite strength of certainty in Tradition, etc. But if such words as these
were considerable, this Discourser may receive a return more truly. Arithmetic
cannot number and determine the many possible, and probable ways of erring in
Tradition; Geometrical proportions cannot discover how manifold and great
defects appear, in the receiving the Body of Christ's Doctrine by Tradition,
more than in the acknowledgement of Mahomets existence; nor how great a
proportion of men there are in the Church, who have delivered their own
opinions and speculations, to one who only testifies what he received; Logic
will discover the Sophistry in the pretended Arguments for Tradition; Nature
will evidence the great possibility of man's mistake or neglect in the way of
Tradition; Morality will show the great corruption of man, whereby he is liable
every where to err and miscarry; Historical prudence will show the failing of
Tradition both in Jews and Gentiles, and many Christian Nations, overspread
with known and confessed errors, and will thence conclude, that it is possible
for any Nation or particular Church by Oral Tradition, to neglect the faithful
preserving truth: Political Principles will evidence according to the practice
of all Civil Policies, that writing is a more exact way to convey down Laws and
Rules of Order, than Tradition is; Metaphysics with its speculations, will
evidence the very notion of Oral Tradition of the whole Body of Christ's
Doctrine to this Age, to be an aerie vanity; Divinity will discover much of the
great wisdom and goodness of God in giving us the Scriptures, rather than in
leaving us to the uncertain and dangerous way of Tradition; Controversy will
evidence the uncertainty of almost every thing in Faith, if it had no other
Basis than mere Oral Tradition, without any written support. So that after all
the survey of his several Discourses, where nothing is solidly spoken for
Tradition, I may well conclude, that this way of Tradition is defectible.

ANSWER TO HIS COROLLARIES.
AFter these several Discourses, he deduceth forty one Corollaries built upon
them; all which must needs fall with the ruin of their foundation. Yet that
they may not pass without due Censure, I shall briefly deduce other opposite
Corollaries, and for the most part directly contrary to them, from our
Discourse.

Corol. 1. They may of right pretend to Faith, who hold not to Tradition, since
they have a sufficient Rule of Scripture, and Motives enough to believe ( Disc.
2.3, 4.) But they have no sure-footing in the Faith, who depend only on this
Oral Tradition; since it is both a fallible and actually a false guide ( Disc.
5.6, 8.).

Cor. 2. They may pretend to be a Church, and a true Church, who own not Oral
Tradition: because they may be a number of Faithful, ( Cor. 1.) but whoever
follows any way of such Tradition, cannot manifest themselves to be a Church,
unless by recourse to some other Rule or way of evidence, Disc. 5. because they
may in this way err from the Faith, and so not be faithful.

Cor. 3. They may be members of a Church, who are not followers of Tradition;
because by ordinary and sure means they may have Faith.

Cor. 4. They who renounce Tradition for their guide, and close with Scripture,
are not cut off from the Faith thereby; because they embrace hereby the most
sure Rule of Faith.

Cor. 5. The followers of such Ancestors, who so renounced Tradition, have the
same security, that they may have Faith, by relying on the Scripture as a Rule.

Cor. 6. The followers of them who renounce Oral Tradition, may rightly claim
to be a part of Christian Tradition, or deliverers of the Faith: because they
receive the Scripture Doctrine in written Records, and so deliver it to others,
Disc. 2. -- So did the Apostles deliver Doctrines to the Jews from the Old
Testament.

Cor. 7. They who pretend to reform what is delivered as matters of Faith, in
any Church guided by Oral Tradition, may hold the true Christian Faith, because
such Churches may err in the Faith, as did the Jewish. But then such Reformers
must come to what appears by Records to be the Faith at first delivered.

Cor. 8. The followers of this way of Tradition, cannot evidence who are truly
faithful, and of the Church; because their Tradition is no sure Rule ( Disc.
5.6, 8.) And if any should hold the Faith entire after successions of
Tradition, this is by chance, and not demonstrative in the way of Tradition.

Cor. 9. The disowners of Tradition who hold to Scripture, can give certain
account who are to be held as truly faithful; because they have a sure Rule to
try this by, which is the Scripture.

Cor. 10. Such who hold not this Tradition, can rationally punish them who
revolt from their Faith: because they can by Scripture Rule sufficiently
evidence the certainty of their Faith, and the guilt of such revolters. Disc. 7.

Cor. 11. That company of men hang together like the Body of a Christian
Church, who close with the Scripture, and adhere not to Tradition: because they
hold Christ's Doctrine, delivered to them by the Apostles and Evangelists
Writings, whence the Roman Church is highly Schismatical, for disowning all
others, and accounting it self the Universal Church.

Cor. 12. Tradition may be argued against out of the letter of Scripture:
because while Oral Tradition is uncertain, Scripture is preserved certain, by
the delivery of Records, which is a more sure and excellent way of delivery of
Christ's Doctrine.

Cor. 13. The Authority of some Churches may in reason be opposed against
Tradition; viz. The Authority of the Ancient Church, against the present Oral
Tradition: because since Tradition is defectible, the Doctrine of the Ancient
Church, might both differ from the present Church, and is most like to be in
the truth. What he pretends of Tradition being Antecedent to the Church, and
including the living voice of the whole Church essential, concerning present
Tradition is a vain surmise; for how can the present Tradition, of which we
dispute, be antecedent to the Church sixteen hundred Years since established?
and since it is defectible ( Disc. 6.8.) how can it include the voice of that
Church?

Cor. 14. Fathers or Councils, may rationally be alleged, against present
Tradition; for if they be Fathers or Councils, now owned as Catholic by the
holders of Tradition, they will show the inconsistency of Tradition with it
self. If they have formerly been owned as Catholic, they will show the change
of Doctrine in the way of Tradition.

Cor. 15. Disowners of Tradition in right of reason must be allowed to argue
against Tradition out of Scriptures, Fathers and Councils: for this is no
matter of courtesy, nor any argument only ad hominem, but ad rem, since they
have a certainty of these things from Traditional Records, Disc. 2, 3, 4. How
little the testimony of Tertullian is to his purpose; see in the next
Discourse, in inquiry into Tertullians opinion of the Rule of Faith.

Cor. 16. The Authority of History, or Testimonial Writing, may be alleged
against Tradition: because matters of fact past, and the former state of
things, may run contrary to present Tradition: And the credibility of the
Historian may be evident by his impartial writings, agreement with other
Writers, by the testimony of other faithful Writers, or the present Tradition
concerning him; or if in Church History, by his having been formerly received
as a Catholic Writer.

Cor. 17. Other Tradition may in right of reason be alleged against Romish
Oral Tradition: for though the sure Christian Tradition, be the most firm of
any; yet since the Traditional Records of Ancient Churches, Disc. 5. n. 20. and
the delivery of truth in Scripture, Disc. 5. n. 18. are much surer than Oral
Tradition, and the different delivery in other Churches, may be as sure as in
the Roman, they may be alleged against it.

Cor. 18. Arguments from Reason may be urged against Oral Tradition; for since
this Tradition is weak and fallible, it may be disproved by reasons which are
strong and solid.

Cor. 19. Instances may be argued from against Traditions certainty: for since
Tradition is defectible, instances may have that Historical certainty which
Tradition has not; and may in the allowance of the Author, be delivered by
Tradition, and so show its inconsistency.

Cor. 20. The denying Oral Tradition does not dispose to Fanatickness; because
Protestants deny it not by recourse to a Light within, but to a Rule without,
and rational evidence.

Cor. 21. Fanatic Principles may be confuted without the help of Romish Oral
Tradition, but not by it in a rational way, for such confutation is by evidence
of the (...) the contrary. Now we can evidence the (...), and its being
contrary to Fanatic (...) they cannot evidence the certainty of (...).

Cor. 22. We may argue against Tradition, without questioning the constancy of
any species in nature, or of mans-nature. Because it is not founded upon man's
nature; but upon a supposal of his actions free from possible ignorance,
mistake, corruption, forgetfulness, speculations and working fancies about
notions received. For by any of these, which ordinarily attend man, may
Traditions certainty be destroyed.

Cor. 23. There is great possibility of various rational ways of arguing
against Oral Tradition: by Scripture, Councils, Fathers, History, Reason,
Instances, etc.

Cor. 24. Oral and practical Tradition, is no first Principle by way of
Authority for matters of fact; but Scripture-Tradition, or other sure
Traditional Records, is such a Principle: because Scripture and such Records
are certain, Disc. 4. and Tradition is not.

Cor. 25. Nor is this Tradition self evident in matter of fact long since past;
because it is fallible and defectible.

Cor. 26. The certainty of Tradition being disproved, that Church which relies
on it, cannot thereby be certain, that it holds Christ's Doctrine, because this
Tradition may err in this Doctrine.

Cor. 27. Traditions certainty being disproved, general or Provincial Councils,
or Societies, cannot be infallible by proceeding upon it; because it may both
mislead and be mistaken.

Cor. 28. The Roman See with its head, cannot be infallible by Traditional
certainty; because Tradition is fallible. Nor has the Church of Rome any
particular advantages, to render it hereby more infallible than any other. When
he here says, That the joint endeavors, Preaching, Miracles and Martyrdom of
the two chief Apostles at Rome, were more vigorous causes to imprint Christ's
Doctrine, than were found any where else: He sure forgot Jerusalem, where were
the joint endeavors, Preaching and Miracles of Christ Jesus himself, and all
his Apostles; the Passion of Jesus, and Martyrdom of other chief Apostles, and
Prophets; and yet in that Church, were professed by the Bishops, both Arianism,
and Pelagianism; and therefore Rome cannot be proved free from false Doctrine,
by such Arguments. Nor will its constant visible profession make more for
Romish Oral Tradition, than for Jewish or Gentile Tradition.

Cor. 29. If this Tradition were established, and put in practice according to
this Discoursers mind; the Romish Church could not be secure, that they have
any Copy of Scripture truly significative of Christ's sense. Because if, as this
Author here talks, They should correct Scriptures Letter, by the sense of men's
hearts, it would be wonderfully depraved, because in this sense Tradition may
and does err. But we know Sixtus and Clemens went not this way in correcting
the vulgar Latin; And themselves declare, that ancient Copies and Writings were
their Rule for correction. And by these means, Protestants have a Copy
preserved significative of Christ's sense, by the several deliveries of
Scripture Copies, in several Ages and Churches.

Cor. 30. Tradition disproved, Scripture can no ways be infallibly
interpreted, by this Oral Tradition, because it is fallible and false: But
Protestants in all things necessary can infallibly understand the sense of
Scripture, since such things are delivered in clear and plain words.

Cor. 31. Tradition being disproved, the Church which relies on it, may receive
as held ever, what was not so held ever.

Cor. 32. Whence also errors opposing Faith may be received by the followers of
Tradition as Faith; because they may err in the Faith.

Cor. 33. Notwithstanding Tradition, Erroneous opinions may generally, and with
public Authority spread themselves in the Church; because this defectible
Tradition may deliver errors, by the viciousness of some, and the liableness to
error in others.

Cor. 34. By the same reason may errors gain sure footing and abide in the
Church, in the way of Tradition; because as many Opinators who deliver their
conceptions of truth, may both mistake themselves, and be mistaken by others,
for testifiers of the sense of the former Generation; and as many corrupters of
truth may be mistaken by others for deliverers of truth, as was the case in the
prevalency of the Arian and other spreading Heresies: so may the determination
of a confirmed Council, where error has taken place, give it sure footing
among them who stand engaged to own that Council which is the case of Papists.

Cor. 35. The ignorance or corruption of the Church Governors and the better
part being overpowered, may hinder many corrupt opinions, from being ever
declared against the way of Oral Tradition; and cause many true opinions to be
so declared against, that without rejecting the way of such Oral Tradition,
they can never be received. Because Tradition when once it errs, can never
return without denying it self.

Cor. 36. By the same reason, Erroneous Opinions may constantly abide in the
Traditionary Church. What he here says, That following evil practices, will
necessarily show them opposite to Faith, is his erroneous opinion; because
practices though bad, if grounded on opinions held for truth, are judged lawful
by such holders; nor can they be convinced of such practices being evil, till
first they be persuaded that such opinions were evil. Such was the case of the
Gentiles gross Idolatry, the Pharisaical breaking Gods Commands, as in Corban,
etc. and Papists worshipping Images, and Saints, etc.

Cor. 37. Erroneous opinions and practices, may fully prevail in the judgments
and practices of the most faithful, who follow the way of Oral Tradition.
Because since their Rule may fail them, they may do their best to follow this,
and yet may their judgments and practices both miscarry.

Cor. 38. Erroneous opinions may be charged upon that Church, which follows
Oral Tradition, because they may follow from that Churches Rule necessarily;
since Tradition is a false guide; and they may be generally owned by that
Church, in its public profession, and the determination of its Councils.

Cor. 39. Therefore it is no weakness to object against such a Church, such
opinions and practices.

Cor. 40. Oral Tradition can be no first principle in Controversial Divinity:
for since it could be no otherwise a principle, than by declaring what God
said, and it may err and fail in that; it is therefore no principle in Divinity.

Cor. 41. If as this Author here reasonably concludes, Christ's promise to his
Church, can bear no part in the Rule of Faith; nor be any first Principle to
manifest the certainty of the Churches Tradition; then have great and many
followers of the Romish Tradition, hitherto erred, in that this promise has
been held and delivered by them for such a Principle.

An Inquiry after, and Examination of, the consent of Authority to the
foregoing Discourse.
AT last this Discourser proceeds to Authorities and testimonies, both of
Scripture, Councils, and Fathers; which is an inquiry of very great use in this
matter. For since Protestants own Scripture as an unerrable guide, if it
pronounce Tradition to be the Rule of Faith, then will we acknowledge it to be
such: and its reasonable to expect from Papists who own the Scripture to
contain Divine truth, and with the Council of Trent own no Tradition with
greater reverence, than the Scriptures, that if Scriptures declare themselves
to be the Rule of Faith, then this may be generally received. Concerning
Councils and Fathers, if these could be generally produced from the Apostles
times, Protestants will grant, That what is so declared to be the Rule of
Faith, is certainly such. But if only some Councils and Fathers, in some after
Ages be produced, if such plead for Tradition, Protestants own it not a
demonstration; because they know they might be in some error. Yet concerning
the known Councils and Fathers of the Ancient Church, we are so confident, that
they were not mistaken concerning the Rule of Faith, that we will acknowledge
that to be the true Rule of Faith, which was by them declared to be such. But
if generally the Doctrine of the Ancients be on our side, then Oral Tradition
will further evidently appear to be no Rule of Faith; yea, not only to be
fallible, but false and self-inconsistent, if that which is now delivered
concerning it, be contradicted by the consent of the Ancient Church.

SECT. I.
An Inquiry what is declared the Rule of Faith by the Scriptures.
HE first goes about to prove by Scripture, That the Rule of Faith, is
self-evident, from Isai. 35.8. This shall be to you a direct way, so that fools
cannot err in it. Which words as cited by this Author, show only the knowledge
of God under the Gospel, to be so clear and evident, that they who will seek
after him and live to him, though of low capacities, may understand so much as
is requisite for their right walking; which Protestants assert also, and own
this evidence to be in Scripture.

But that Tradition may be proved this Rule of Faith by Scripture, he alleges
Isai. 59.21. This is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit which is
in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart from thy
mouth, and from the mouth of thy seed, and from the mouth of thy seeds seed,
from henceforth for ever.

But, 1. to have Gods Word and Spirit in their mouth, proves their delivery not
a Rule of Faith, or unerring: then must the speeches of every private Christian
who shall be saved, be a Rule of Faith; because the Scriptures assure us, That
every one who shall be saved, has both the Spirit of Christ and his word in
their mouth, see Romans 8.9. Romans 10.9, 10. Mat. 10.32. 2. Though all who are
born of God shall have his word in their mouth, this will not secure us, that
what is by any Society of men declared as truth upon Tradition, is Gods Word;
no more than what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 37.30. The mouth of the righteous
speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgement] would assure, that the
Doctrines owned by the way of Tradition among the Jews, were always the true
Doctrines: since it might well be, that those Jews were not such righteous men,
as it may also be that the generality of some visible Church are not Gods seed.
3. Gods Word may be in the mouth, where the holy Scriptures are the Rule. We
read, Josh. 1.8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but
thou shall meditate therein day and night. Where it is evident, that when
Joshua was to keep the Law in his mouth, he had the Book of the Law for his
Rule, and had his acquaintance with the Law by meditating in it. God says Mal.
2.6. (concerning Levi) The Law of truth was in his mouth, and Verse. 7. they
shall seek the Law at his mouth; and when they did thus in Ezra's time, he read
the Law out of the Book of Moses, and that Book did Hilkiah send to Josiah.
While S. Paul professed his Faith with his mouth, he declared, that he believed
all things written in the Law and the Prophets When we read Deuteronomy. 31.21, 22.
This Song shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their Seed, verse. 22.
Moses therefore wrote this Song the same day, and taught it the Children of
Israel. Is it not evident, that it was from the writing of Moses, that this
Song was in their mouth? and that writing by which they were taught, surely was
their Rule to know this Song by.

Next to this he urges as pithy and home, Jer. 31.33. I will give my Law in
their bowels, and in their hearts will I write it; and notes, that S. Paul
contradistinguisheth the Law of Grace, from Moses 's Law, in that the latter
was written in Tables of Stone, and the former in fleshly tables of men's
hearts. But, 1. What proof is here of Tradition being the Rule of Faith? Had
the Scripture said that under the Gospel, Christians should receive the Law of
God no otherwise, than from one another hearts, it might have seemed to serve
his purpose. S. Austin de Spiritu and litera, c. 21. having mentioned the place
forecited of Jeremy, and that of S. Paul to which this Discourser refers,
inquires what are the Laws of God written by God himself in their hearts, but
the very presence of the holy Spirit, who is the finger of God, by whom being
present, Charity which is the fullness of the Law, and the end of the
Commandment is poured forth in our hearts? Now if God causes his commands to
be inwardly embraced by a Spirit of love and piety, this is far from conveying
to them a Spirit of infallibility. 2. Nor does S. Paul contradistinguish the
Law of Moses, and the Gospel in those words, but he contradistinguisheth the
way of Gods inward writing in the heart, from the way of his outward writing in
those tables. For even the Law of Moses was also written in the hearts of them
who feared God, as the Laws of Christ were more eminently in the hearts of
Christians. Hence such expressions as these, Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid
in my heart, that I might not sin against thee. Psalm. 37.31. The Law of his God
is in his heart, none of his steps shall slide. Yea, Moses tells the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 30.11. This Commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden
from thee, neither is it far of, v. 14. but the word is nigh thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. Yet though Gods Law before the
coming of Christ was in the hearts of his people, yet was the Book of the Law
then their Rule, as now is the Old and New Testament. 3. If that place of S.
Paul be considered, 2 Cor. 3.3. it will evidence that what the Holy Ghost going
along with his Ministry, had written in the fleshly tables of their hearts, was
enough to commend his Apostleship, which is the scope and design of that place;
but it no ways signifies that these Corinthians even at this time, were not
capable of erring in any Doctrine of the Faith, for he declares to them in this
same Epistle, chap. 11.3. that he fears lest as Satan beguiled Eve, so their
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 4. And if we
could have been assured (as we cannot) that the delivery of truth in the Church
of Corinth, was a Rule of Faith, this would plead much for the Tradition of the
Greek Church, rather than of the Roman, which agrees not with it, and so would
destroy Romish Tradition.

But as this Discoursers citations of Scripture Authority are very impertinent,
Rule of Faith. To the which purpose, besides many other places, observed in the
foregoing part of this answer, let these be considered, S. Luke 1.4, 5. It
seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the
very first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, that thou
may know the certainty of those things, wherein thou have been instructed.
Now that is a Rule of Faith, which is the best way to ascertain us of Faith;
and from these words it is evident, that even in the times of the Apostles and
Evangelists, the common delivery by word of mouth, which Theophilus had heard
of, concerning matter of Christian Religion, was not so certain as the
Evangelical writing; and therefore this Gospel was written, that Theophilus
might know the certainty of those things. S. John would not have written his
Gospel to this end, that we might believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of
God, Joh. 20.31. if he did not think this writing should direct and rule our
Faith. S. Paul would not have told his Philippians, Phil. 3.1. To write the
same things for you is safe, unless notwithstanding the force of delivery by
word of mouth, they stood in need of this advantage of the Apostles writing for
their safety and establishment; nor yet would this be safe for them, unless
this writing was sufficient to effect this establishment, which could not be,
unless it was a Rule of Faith.

Yea that the writing of Scripture was the way, Peter declares, 2 Pet. 1.12. I
will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though
you know them, v. 15. I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease,
to have these things always in remembrance. And (...) which the Apostle uses,
signifies to make a short comprisal of things, for the help of memory. Now if
this was the design of S. Peter's Epistle, it will necessarily follow, that the
preserving Christian Doctrine in memory, is best secured by the Written Word of
God, otherwise possibly they could not have been able to have these things in
remembrance. And lest, if this Apostle had said no more of this subject, any
might have objected, that he endeavored they might be able to have these
things in remembrance by Tradition, he himself directly shows, that this is the
advantage of his writing, and the end of both his Epistles, 2 Pet. 3.1. This
second Epistle, beloved, I write unto you, in both which, I stir up your pure
minds, by way of remembrance. So that notwithstanding the force of delivery by
word of mouth, he thought writing necessary to keep these things in their
remembrance. And Jesus himself said to the Jews, If you believe not Moses
writings, how shall you believe my words? John 5.47.

SECT. II.
What the Synod of Lateran, owned for the Rule of Faith.
NExt his search after Scriptures, Councils, which he asserts to own Oral
Tradition for the Rule of their Faith. I might here mind him, that others of
his Church have delivered, that Councils owned Scripture as their Rule. Nicol.
de Cusa, a Cardinal of the Roman Church, lib. 2. de Concordant. Cath c. 6.
says, That the manner of the General Councils, was to have the holy Gospels
placed in the middle, where they were assembled. And a little after he adds,
Matters of Faith were first treated of. -- The Synod decreed according to the
testimonies of the Scriptures.

But to examine his Testimonies. Synod of Lateran, which was no ancient Synod,
being above six hundred and forty years after Christ. They say, We all confirm
unanimously and consonantly ( consonanter not consequently) with one heart and
mouth, the Tenets and Sayings of the holy Fathers, adding nothing to those
things which were delivered by them; and we believe so as the Fathers have
believed, we preach so as they have taught. These words are delivered indeed by
that Synod, but if that Synod be enquired into, this will make little for Oral
Tradition.

This Synod of Lateran was held under Pope Martin, Monothelites; in which were
read the Testimonies of several Fathers, S. Ambrose, Austin, Basil, Cyrill,
Hippolytus, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Justine, Athanasius, Hilary, Nyssen,
Nazianzen, Leo and others, with reference to whose words, the Synod added, We
all confirm, etc. Where it is observable, they proceeded upon the written
Testimonies read out of the Fathers, to determine what was the Doctrine of the
Fathers; and this is no way of Oral Tradition, nor any thing rejected, but
highly approved by Protestants. Yea, here the Bishop of Rome and his Roman
Council, own that as Catholic Doctrine, which was delivered in the Writings of
the Fathers, and eminent Writers in other Churches, which is not this
Discoursers way. And it is further observable, that these sayings of the
Fathers no way appear to be the Rule of their Faith, but are owned by them as
Truths, unto which they all agree: whence these words Dogmata patrum omnes
firmamus, we all confirm their Doctrines, cannot signify, that they make these
their Rule; but that they consent with them in the things alleged, and confirm
their saying to be truth. And this Protestants will do, as well as the Synod of
Lateran.

But that we may enquire what appears to have been the Rule of this Synod,
Monothelites, who denied two wills in Christ, refer to any Oral Tradition, but
very many to several grounds of Scripture. For instance, Leo Bishop of Rome is
by Pope Martin produced in the opening that Synod, that Christ said, According
to the form of God, I and my Father are one; but according to the form of a
servant, I came not to do my own will, but his who sent me; where he plainly
manifests two wills. Again, from Leo, He who was incarnate for us by his
uncreated will, and operation of his Divinity, of his will wrought Miracles,
whence he testifies, saying, As the Father raises the dead, and quickens them,
so the Son quickneth whom he will: by his created will and operation, he who is
God above nature, as man, willingly underwent hunger, thirst, reproach, sorrow
and fear, and this again the Evangelist testifies, saying, he went into an
house, and would have none know, but could not lie hid: and again, They went
through Galilee, and he would not that any should know; And again, he would go
into Galilee; also they gave him Wine mingled with Gall, and when he had tasted
thereof, he would not drink So S. Austin, Ambrose, Cyril, etc. in their
testimonies read in this Council, to prove the humane will of Christ, urge
farther, If it be possible, let this cup pass from me; nevertheless not as I
will, but as thou will: My soul is sorrowful to death: Now is my soul troubled.
And Deus-dedit Bishop of Sardinia, declared in this Council, that the testimony
of Cyrill of urging those Texts, was for the perfect refuting those Heretics.
S. Austin is likewise produced thus glossing concerning Christ's Humane Nature,
If we say he was not sorry, when the Gospel says, My soul is exceeding
sorrowful; if we say he did not eat, when the Gospel says he did eat; the worm
of rottenness creeps in, and there will be nothing left sound, then his body
was not real, nor his flesh real; but what ever was written of him, brethren,
is accomplished, and is true: So far S. Austin there cited and approved. So
that we see they grounded all along upon the Scriptures, and the necessary
consequence of his having two wills, from his having two Natures. And when in
this Council was read the Type of Paul Bishop of Constantinople, wherein he
prohibited all disputes, about Christ's having or not having two wills, the
Council liked his intention to have all contention cease; but declared their
dislike of his dealing alike with the truth and the error; yet they determined,
that if he could have, and had showed by the approbation of Scripture, that
both were equally subject to reproof or praise, his Type had been well. All
this considered, there is no more in the words cited by this Discourser, to
prove they made Oral Tradition their Rule, than when the Church of England
declares her consent with any Confessions of others, or any Doctrines of the
Fathers, and shall say, We agree to all there spoken; it could be thence
concluded, that the Church of England has Oral Tradition for her Rule of Faith.

SECT. III.
Of the Council of Sardica, and what it owned as the Rule of Faith.
NExt he produces the Council of Sardica, which is the only Council by him
produced, within the first six hundred years after Christ. Out of the Synodical
Epistle of that Council, sent to all Bishops, he cites these words, We have
received this Doctrine, we have been taught so, we hold this Catholic
Tradition, Faith and Confession. Let us consider the place cited more largely.
This Council declared, that the Heretics contended, that there were different
and separate Hypostases (by which word that Council tells us, those Heretics
meant Substances) of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost. But we have
received and been taught this, and have this Catholic Tradition, Faith and
Confession, that there is one Hypostasis or Substance of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost. But 1. How did these Fathers receive this? They presently add, That
the Father cannot be named or be without the Son, is the testimony of the Son
himself, saying, I am in the Father, and the Father in me; and again, I and my
Father are one. 2. This Council of Sardica was held not long after the first
Council of Nice, and received this faith from it; and in this Council of
Sardica, the Catholic Bishops did establish the determination of faith, in the
Council of Nice, Socr. lib. 2. c. 20. And after the end of this Council, Hosius
and Protogenes, the leading men in the Council, wrote to Julius Bishop of Rome,
testifying, that all things in the Council of Nice, were to be accounted
ratified by them, which they explained as they saw need. Sozom. 3.11. Wherefore
that which was the Rule of Faith, in that first and famous Council of Nice, is
likewise owned to be the sufficient Rule by the Council of Sardica, especially
if this was any way declared by that Nicene Council: in the same manner, as if
now any English Convocation, should by public writing declare their
establishing and receiving the Doctrine of the Thirty Nine Articles, it must
needs be concluded, that they own that to be the Rule of Faith, which is there
declared to be such. Concerning the first Council of Nice, I shall discourse
after enquiry into the second Nicene Council, which he next applies himself to
in his Discourse.

SECT. IV.
What was owned as the Rule of Faith, by the second Council of Nice.
THe last Council he produces, second Council of Nice; whose Authority if it
was indeed on his side, yet would it no way tend to determine this
Controversy; and he cannot but know, that Protestants have no great esteem for
that Council, having these several things rationally to object against it. 1.
That it was a Council above eight hundred years after Christ, not only
celebrated in that time, when the purity of Primitive Doctrine was much
declined; but even the matters therein declared concerning the worship of
Images, were innovations, and not agreeable to the more ancient Church. 2. That
this Council cannot in reason be pretended, to declare the general Tradition of
the Church Catholic; when it is certain, that immediately before it, a Council
of 330 Bishops at Constantinople, defined the contrary; and the like was
presently after it done by a German Council. 3. They delivered that as the
sense of the Church Catholic, which was not such, nor will the present Roman
Church acknowledge it to be such, in Act 5. of that Council, when the Book of
John of Thessalonica was read, wherein it was asserted, That the sense of the
Catholic Church was, that Angels and Souls of men, were not wholly
incorporeal, but had Bodies, and therefore were imitabiles pictura, as Binius
has it, representable by Pictures; Tharasius and the Synod approved of it. Yet
here Carranza in his Collection of the Councils, adds a Note, that this is not
yet determined by the Church; and observes, that many of the Fathers asserted
the Angels to be wholly incorporeal, whom the first Synod of Lateran seems to
follow. Pamelius puts it among the Paradoxes of Tertullian, ( Parad. 7.) which
S. Austin condemned, to assert the Souls of men to have any effigies and
color: and both Pamelius upon Tertul. and Baron. ad an. 173. n. 31. derive the
original of this Opinion from the Montanists. 4. It is evidenceable by many
instances, that they satisfied themselves with very weak proof, both from
Scriptures, and from the Fathers, as has been by several Protestant Writers
showed.

Yet as bad as this Council was, which was bad enough; I assert, That it was
not of this Discoursers judgment, that Oral Tradition is the Rule of Faith. In
order to the evidencing of which, I shall first examine his citations.

His first citation is out of Act. 2. We imbued with the precepts of the
Fathers, have so confessed, and do confess. Which words I suppose he took out
of Carranza, where they are curtly delivered: for sure had he read them, as
they are at large in the Council, he would never have been so mistaken, as to
have applied them to Oral Tradition. The words more at large, are thus spoken
by Tharasius, Patriarch of Constantinople, and approved by the Synod. Adrian
Primate of old Rome, seems to me to have written clearly and truly, both to our
Emperors, and to us, and has declared the ancient Tradition of the Church to
be right. Wherefore we also searching by the Scriptures, by inquiring, arguing,
and demonstrating, and also being imbued with the precepts of the Fathers, have
so confessed, and do confess, and will confess, and do confirm the force of the
Letters read. So that whatever is here spoken concerning a Rule of Faith, must
be this; that that which upon inquiry may be made appear by Arguments and
Demonstrations, to be the Doctrine of the Scripture, and accords with the
ancient Fathers, is delivered to us by the Rule of Faith. And is this the
Doctrine delivered by this Discourser, or by Protestants?

Yet further, these words of Tharasius, Adrian then read; we may observe how
those Letters also as they were recorded by that Council, agree with the
Protestant Doctrine. Now Adrian in that Epistle to Constantine, and Irene,
which Tharasius refers to, exhorts them to acquiesce in the Tradition of the
Orthodox Faith, in the Church of Blessed Peter and Paul, the chief of the
Apostles, and to embrace it, as it has been done by other Emperors, honoring
their Vicar with all their heart. For, these chief of the Apostles, who did
begin the Catholic Orthodox Faith, did command their Faith to be preserved by
writing, as by Laws enacted, even to all them who should succeed them in their
Seats, and so (says he) our Church does keep it. Yea, as to the Question in
hand then about Images, Adrian there urges Arguments from Scripture, with such
expressions as this, As the holy Scripture has it, so let us have it: and
after his arguments from Scripture adds, wherefore it is not to be doubted; and
then endeavors to show the consent of Fathers. Whence it is evident, Adrian
urged the Emperors to close with the delivery of the Church of Rome, because
then that Church did keep to the written Laws of the Apostles, and by this
means preserved their Faith: and Scripture he follows, to put things out of
doubt; this was then, as appears, the Doctrine of the Church of Rome; and if
that be it which will please this Discourser, let him take it, and follow it.

In Act. 3. Council, this Discourser cites these words, We receive and venerate
the Apostolical Traditions of the Church. But is this enough for this Authors
purpose? 1. Is every thing that is received and venerated, made a Rule of
Faith? 2. Must these Apostolical Traditions needs be Oral Tradition? Or did the
Apostles deliver nothing in Writing? These words are in an Epistle of Theodore
of Jerusalem, to that Council, which was by it approved: but in that Epistle,
as throughout this Council they pretended to the Scriptures and Doctrine of the
Fathers, cited from their Writings, to ascertain them of the Doctrine of the
Apostles, as to the then disputed point concerning Images. Yea, that we may
know what in that Epistle was meant by Apostolical Tradition, it is more plain
in the end of that Epistle in these words; Whereas therefore it is sufficiently
plain, that the Scripture receives them, wherefore it is lawful. Whence,
though this Council was erroneous in the decision of the Controversy then in
the World, for ought has been yet produced, it does not appear to have been in
the same error with this Discourser, concerning the Rule of Faith.

His next testimony from this Council is, Act. 7. We walking in the Kings
Highway, and insisting upon the Doctrine of our holy and Divine Fathers, and
observing the Tradition of the Catholic Church, in which the holy Spirit
dwells, do define. But what if the Doctrine of the Fathers, and Tradition of
the Church meant by them, was not Oral, but written? As for the Fathers
testimonies its plain, they were not received by Oral Tradition, but were such
as were found in their Writings, and were thence cited both in the Letter of
Adrian in the second action of that Council, and in the testimonies produced,
Act. 4. As for Tradition it is observable, that in the definition of this
Council, in which are the forecited words, they declare, that they receive the
Churches Traditions, whether in Custom or in Writing; but then they declare
things so received by them to agree to the Gospel; and all such customs of the
Church if truly such, will Protestants as heartily receive as this Council.
These things they might observe, though they did not make them a Rule of Faith.
And that the Tradition they relied on as the ground of their Faith, was chiefly
the holy Scriptures, may appear probably, because in the beginning of the
fourth Action, where they produce the grounds of their Tradition, they first
urge several Scriptures, Exodus 25. Numb. 7. Ezekiel. 41. Heb. 9. and others; and
after them the Fathers Writings: but it appears more certainly in the seventh
Action, where is their Synodical Epistle to Constantine, and Irene, in which
they urge many Scriptures, to prove the truth of what this Council defined, and
then say, These (to wit Scriptures) being so confessedly, and without all
doubt, we believe, these things to be acceptable and pleasing to God. Whence it
appears, that the Rule by which they did without all doubting believe, was the
holy Scriptures; and what else is a Rule of Faith? So that they principally
relied on the Scriptures, and in consent with them, on the written Doctrine of
the ancient Fathers, and the customs of the Catholic Church. And this is that
Protestants will not disclaim, but allow as a Rule, though they will keep
better to it, than this seventh General Council (as it is called) did.

Lastly, first Action of this Council, he cites these words, which were spoken
by Basilius of Ancyra, as part of a recantation of his former opinions, and
seem to be allowed by that Council: They who contemn the Writings of the holy
Fathers, and the Tradition of the Catholic Church, and bring for their excuse,
and inculcate the words of Arius, Nestorius, Eutyches, and Dioscorus; saying,
unless we were sufficiently instructed out of the Old and New Testament, we
would follow the Doctrines of the Fathers, and of the six holy Synods, and the
Traditions of the Catholic Church, let him be accursed. And so will
Protestants say, They who contemn the preaching of the holy Fathers, and the
Tradition of the Catholic Church against Arius, and those other Heretics,
(which preaching and Tradition did declare it self grounded, and was truly
grounded upon Scripture; embracing and venting the words of these Heretics,
which we know were against Scripture, though these persons pretend Scripture to
be on their side, which we know is not;) let him be accursed. Nor from these
words will it follow, as he would have it, that it was ever the pretense of
most execrable Heretics, to decline Tradition, and pretend sufficient light
from Scripture; the contrary to this, has been by me showed, and will be
further manifested. These words do not speak it the constant practice of
Heretics to pretend to Scripture; but only speak of some certain Heretics,
whose time is defined to be betwixt the sixth and seventh General Councils: for
if they had not lived after the sixth Council, they could not have declared,
why they did not follow the six General Councils; and if they had not lived
before the seventh General Council, their words could not have been there
produced. But such words as these of those Heretics, which decline the true
Tradition of the Church founded in Scripture, and satisfy themselves with
empty pretenses of Scripture, Protestants will condemn. Yet lest the gloss upon
these words should not seem a sufficient answer; without further proof of what
is there intimated, I shall undertake to evidence, that the Doctrine of the
Fathers, and Tradition of the ancient Church against those Heretics, was such
as was grounded upon Scripture, as their Rule of Faith; and that those
Heretics assertions were therefore rejected, because they were contrary to
these Scriptures: Which I shall do in examining what were the grounds of Faith,
upon which the Catholic Fathers proceeded, at the time of the four first
General Councils; in which were these Heretics condemned, as also Macedonius
in the second Council.

SECT. V.
What were the grounds of the Catholic Faith asserted against Arianism, in and
at the time of the first Nicene Council?
ARius being a Presbyter of Alexandria, Alexander, Bishop of that place, and
deposed from his Office by an Alexandrian Council, Socr. Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c.
6. upon which Alexander writes an Epistle to all his fellow Ministers, wherein
as he lays down many Scriptures, which he declares to be full against the
assertion of Arius; so he there declares, that the Arians when they had once
determined to fight against Christ, would not hear the words of our Lord. And
he there likewise shows, that whereas he had oftentimes overthrown them in
unfolding the Divine Scriptures, they as Chamaelions changed themselves.

The same Alexander of Alexandria, Alexander of Constantinople, declares, that
the Arians assertion did tend to destroy the holy Scriptures, and that in the
Scriptures they pretended to urge, they did offer violence to the holy
Scriptures. He likewise there urges the Scriptures against them, with such
expressions as these, John is sufficient to instruct, Paul does declare
manifestly. But to leave this particular Bishop, and come to the General
Council.

When this famous Council of Nice was gathered together, Constantine tells
them, Theodor. Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 7. that they had the Doctrine of the holy
Spirit in writing: for (says he) the Evangelical and Apostolical Books, and
the Oracles of the ancient Prophets, do evidently instruct us, what we ought to
think of Divine things; wherefore rejecting all contentious strife, let us
receive a solution of such things as are questioned, from the Divinely inspired
speeches.

As this Council of Nice was put forth by Pisanus, Vatican Exemplar, it is
observable, that they often urge the same Scriptures which Alexander did urge
against Arius: and in the third Book of that Council, The Bishops said by
Eusebius, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God. That [was] rejects [was not] and [God] takes away [that he was
not God]: believe the things that are written, neither think nor inquire after
things that are not written. So that Council.

After the decision of this Council, Socr. lib. 1. c. 5. shows, that Eusebius
writing of the Nicene Confession, says, The form of Execration which is set
after the Creed, we thought fit to be received, because it prohibits the using
of words not written, from whence almost all the confusion and disorder of the
Churches do arise. Wherefore when no Scripture of Divine inspiration, uses
these words [concerning the Son] that he was of things that were not, and that
it was once when he was not, it is no way fit to speak or teach such things.

That this Council made Scripture their Rule of decision, words of Constantine,
in his Epistle to the Church of Alexandria, recorded, Socr. lib. 1. c. 6. where
he declared, That the Council had diligently examined all things; and writing
of the Arians, he adds, some blasphemed, speaking and professing to believe
things contrary to the Divinely inspired Scriptures and the Faith. And
Athanasius ad Epictetum speaks, how powerful the Faith of Nice might be
expected to be against Heresies, which was professed according to the holy
Scriptures. I shall hereafter observe somewhat more out of Athanasius, which
will further declare, that at the time of this Nicene Council (of which he was
a Member) Scripture was the Rule made use of against the Arians.

SECT. VI.
What was received as the Rule of Faith, at the time of the second General
Council at Constantinople?
THis Council not being called against Arius, Nestorius, Dioscorus, or
Eutyches, which are mentioned by this Discourser; but against Macedonius, who
denied the Divinity of the holy Spirit, and other Heretics; I shall but
briefly observe, That Evagrius, Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 4. declares, the design
of that Council to be to make manifest by Scripture-testimonies what they
conceived about the Holy Ghost, against them who adventured to reject his
Lordship. And if the testimony of Evagrius being a private Historian, be not
sufficient, this very same thing was before him attested and declared,
concerning this second General Council, in the definition of the General
Council of Chalcedon, Act. 5.

And in the seventh Canon of this second Council, We receive them as Greeks,
and the first day we make them Christians, and the second Catechumens, -- and
so we Catechize them, and make them continue a long time in the Church, and
hear the holy Scriptures, and then we Baptize them. Does it not hence appear,
that this Council owned the Scriptures as the way to the true Faith, and
establishment in it, in that they would not receive Heretics until they had
been long hearers of it?

But I will not here neglect to mention, Pope Damasus gathers a Council at
Rome, hearing of that at Constantinople, where they declare, That after all the
Prophetical, Apostolical and Evangelical Scriptures, by which the Catholic
Church by the grace of God is founded; the Church of Rome is by some Synodical
Decrees, above other Churches; And Christ himself said, Thou art Peter. Is not
this testimony to be seen in their own Collectors of the Councils, plain enough
to show what was in those days owned by the Church of Rome, as the main ground
and foundation of Faith?

SECT. VII.
What was owned as the Rule of Faith, at the time of the third General Council
at Ephesus?
THis Council was gathered against Nestorius, Coelestine was Bishop of Rome,
whose place was here supplied by Cyril of Alexandria. That the Nestorians then
did not pretend to Scripture for their Rule, is probable in that Socr. lib. 7.
c. 32. relates that they endeavored to falsify the Copies of the Scriptures;
as likewise in that an Epistle of the Nestorians to the people of
Constantinople, begins thus: The Law is not delivered in writing, but is placed
in the minds of the Pastors; which Epistle is extant in the Acts of the
Ephesine Council, Tom. 3. c. 7. And in the Epistle of Cyril to Comanus, and
Pontamion, Act. Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 2. c. 18. Cyril relates, that when the
Metropolitans and Bishops had disputed with Nestorius, and had clearly showed
out of the Divine Scripture, that he was God, whom the Virgin bare according to
the flesh, and therefore evidently concluded him to err: he was full of anger,
and exclaimed in his manner wretchedly against the truth. So that it seems the
Metropolitans and Bishops, who opposed Nestorius, made Scripture their Rule, as
the Protestants do; but the Nestorians then were not for these written words as
their Rule, but for what is written in men's hearts, in which the Nestorian
assertion may claim some kindred with our Discourser.

To observe further what Rule of Faith was made use of against Nestorius, Cyril
of Alexandria, who as he was the chief opposer of Nestorius; so was he highly
approved of by this Council of Ephesus, for his appearing against Nestorius,
and also by Coelestine Bishop of Rome, as appears in his Letters directed to
him, Tom. 1. Conc. Ephesians. c. 16. Cyril concerning the right Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ, to the Empresses, Eudocia and Pulcheria, shows, that his Book may
be of use to reduce some from error, and by various Arguments, and
demonstrations of the Divine Scriptures, to strengthen them in the Faith, who
are nourished in the Doctrine of truth: and in that whole Book propounds
Doctrines from the several Books of the New Testament, against the Doctrine of
Nestorius. And I suppose it will be granted, that that which in such a case of
Heresy arising, would stablish in the Faith, and reduce to the Faith, must be
established upon, and have evidence from the Rule of Faith. In another Treatise
of his to the same Empresses, of the same subject, he tells them, The
Scriptures are the Fountains which God spoke of by his Prophet Isaiah, saying,
Draw the waters out of the wells of salvation. Wholesome Fountains we call the
Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists: and a little after, The speeches of the
Holy Fathers, and their Sanctions wisely stir us up, that we should observe
diligently what is most agreeing to the holy Scriptures, and should with a
quick sense contemplate the truth, hidden in the Divine letters.

The same Cyril in an Epistle to the Clergy and people of Constantinople,
Nestorius would have returned from his perverse opinions, and would with
reverence embrace the Faith delivered by the holy Apostles, and Evangelical
Writers, as also by the whole holy Scripture, and sealed, that it might receive
no damage by the voices and oracles of the holy Prophets. Is not this to make
Scripture a Rule of Faith.

I might add much more from Cyril; Coelestine, who wrote to the Ephesine
Council, and approved it, will further show the Rule of Faith, at that time
owned by the Roman Church. Therefore I shall here only subjoin one testimony of
the whole Council of Ephesus, in their Epistle to Coelestine Bishop of Rome,
Tom. 4. Conc. Ephesians. c. 17. wherein they related, That the Letter of Cyril to
Nestorius had been read in the Council, which the holy Synod did approve by its
judgment, because it was in the whole agreeable to the Divine Scriptures and
the Exposition of Faith, which the holy Fathers put forth, in the great Synod
of Nice. We here meet with their being guided by Scripture, and the former
decisions founded upon it, but the Rule of Oral Tradition, or any other
unwritten Rule, was to this Age a perfect stranger.

SECT. VIII.
What was owned as the Rule of Faith, at the time of the fourth General Council
at Chalcedon?
HAving sufficiently evidenced the Rule of Faith, first General Council against
Arius, who denied the Eternal Divinity of the Son of God; and of the second
against Macedonius, who denied the Lordship of the holy Spirit; and of the
third against Nestorius, who divided Christ into two Persons: I now shall
briefly inquire what was owned as this Rule, at the time of the fourth General
Council against Eutyches, who denied that Christ had two natures; wherein
Dioscorus was also condemned. Now Eutyches was opposed by many Catholic
Bishops, and more especially was opposed and condemned by Pope Leo. But the
Rule by which these Bishops, as well as this General Council did condemn him,
was the holy Scriptures. Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople, in an Epistle of
his extant amongst Leo's Epistles, Ep. 6. says, There were some who knew not
the Divine readings, dispraise the Fathers, and desert the holy Scripture to
their own perdition; such an one (says he) was Eutyches amongst us. Amongst
the Epistles of Leo, Ep. 53. is extant an Epistle of Eusebius Bishop of
Millain, and the Council assembled with him, wherein that Synod declares their
assent to the Faith, contained in Leo's Epistle sent to the East, because the
brightness of light and splendour of truth did shine in it, by the assertions of
the Prophets, Evangelical Authorities, and the testimonies of Apostolical
Doctrine.

Leo, Chalcedon was called, in which the errors of Eutyches were more fully
censured) in his tenth Epistle writing of the Eutychians, says, That they fall
into this folly, because when they are hindered by any obscurity in attaining
the knowledge of the truth, they have not recourse to the Prophetical voices,
the Apostolical Letters, and Evangelical Authorities, but to themselves. And a
little after of Eutyches, he speaks thus, That he knew not what he ought to
think of the incarnation of the word of God; nor was he willing to gain the
light of understanding, to labor in the holy Scriptures. And in the same
Epistle cites, and urges many Scriptures against Eutyches, with such
expressions as these, He might have subjected himself to the Evangelical
Doctrine, in Matthew speaking; He might have desired instruction from the
Apostolical Preaching, reading in the Epistle to the Romans, chapter 1. He might
have brought holy diligence to the Prophetical pages, and have found the
promise of God to Abraham, etc. with other Scriptures in the like manner
produced. These testimonies of Leo, evidence, that he owned the holy Scriptures
to be the best way to come to Faith, and be stablished in it, and is not this
to be a Rule of Faith? Yea, he further observes, that the neglect of them were
the cause of swerving from the Faith.

To come to the Council of Chalcedon it self. second Action, this tenth Epistle
of Leo was read, and they declared, they all believed according to that
Epistle. At the same time was read the Epistle of Cyril to Nestorius, which as
it was read in, and approved by the third General Council, Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 2.
chapter 3. So being in Chalcedon read, they declared, They all believed as Cyril
did; in which Epistle he shows, that we must not divide Christ into two Sons,
nor make an union of Persons; for the Scripture says, The Word was made Flesh:
which is nothing else but he did partake of our flesh and blood, and made our
Body his, and became Man of a Woman. Wherein he plainly enough makes use of the
holy Scriptures to decide the Controversy concerning that point of Faith, or
rather, to confirm that matter of Faith against its opposers.

SECT. IX.
Of the Rule of Faith, acknowledged by the Fathers, and first of Coelestine.
AS it was easy to show the general consent of the ancient Fathers, to the
Protestant Doctrine in this particular; Discourser pretends to be on his side;
and to avoid over great prolixity, I will confine my self to them only. His
first citation is from Coelestine, in his Epistle to the Ephesine Council;
where his words somewhat mis cited by the Discourser, are to this purpose: We
must by all means endeavor, that we may retain the Doctrines of Faith
delivered to us, and hitherto preserved by the Apostolical Doctrine. But what
is here for Oral Tradition? Does Coelestine tell us that that was the way of
delivering and preserving truth till his time? No such matter; yea, in the
beginning of this Epistle he says, That is certain which is delivered in the
Evangelical Letters. But that we may better understand Coelestine, whose Letter
to the Council of Ephesus, was written against Nestorius; consider first his
Letter to Cyril, who confuted Nestorius; in which are these words: This truly
is the great triumph of our Faith, that thou have so strongly proved our
assertions, and so mightily vanquished those that are contrary, by the
testimony of Divine Scriptures. Yea in his Epistle to Nestorius, he calls that
Heresy of Nestorius a perfidious novelty, which endeavors to pull asunder
those things which the holy Scripture conjoins. And in another Epistle to the
Clergy and people of Constantinople, he has these words of Nestorius: He
fights against the Apostles, and explodes the Prophets, and despises the words
of Christ himself, speaking of himself: of what Religion, or of what Law does
he profess himself a Bishop, who does so foully abuse both the Old and the New
Testament. And in the end of that Epistle, thus directs those
Constantinopolitans; You having the Apostolical words before your eyes, be
perfect in the same sense, and the same meaning. These words of Coelestine seem
plainly to show, that in the Romish Church, Scripture was then the way whereby
to try Doctrines. But if this be not the sense of these words of this Roman
Bishop, which seem so plain; I may well conclude, that the words by which the
Roman Church of old delivered truth, were not generally intelligible, and so
their Tradition must be uncertain.

SECT. X.
What was the Rule of Faith, owned by Irenaeus?
THe next Father he cites is Irenaeus, Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 4. (though the
naming the Book was omitted by him) he would prove that the Apostles gave
charge to the Bishops to observe Tradition, and that it is a sufficient Rule of
Faith, without Scripture: in which he abuses Irenaeus. From Irenaeus lib. 1.
c. 3. he to the same end cites this as his testimony, Though there be diverse
tongues in the world, yet the virtue of Tradition is one and the same, the
preaching of the Church is true and firm, in which one and the same way of
salvation is shown over the whole world. Of which words, only the first clause
is in the place cited in Irenaeus; but these words, The preaching of the Church
is true and firm, etc. though glossed upon by this Discourser as considerable,
are not to be there found in Irenaeus; and if they were, they would not serve
his purpose, as may by and by appear. And from Irenaeus, lib. 3. c. 3. (though
he mis-cites it, lib. 1. c. 3.) he cites words, p. 138. to prove that the
Doctrine of the present Church is the Doctrine of the Apostles.

Now that I may give a true account of the meaning of the words cited, and also
of the judgment of Irenaeus; Irenaeus himself, what kind of Heretics those in
the Primitive times were, who occasioned these words, and how he confutes them,
and next which was his own judgment of the Rule of Faith. Concerning the
former, Irenaeus lib. 3. c. 2. tells us, That those Heretics, when they were
convinced out of the Scriptures, were turned into the accusing of the
Scriptures themselves, that they were not right, nor of authority; that they
were variously spoken, and that the truth could not be found out of them, by
those who have not Tradition: and that the truth was given in a living voice,
which was the wisdom in a Mystery, which every one of these Heretics pleaded
themselves had in Valentinus, or Marcion, Cerinthus or Basilides. And when they
were challenged to hold to the Tradition of the Apostles, and their Successors
in the Church; they said they were wiser than the Apostles, and so would
neither hold to Scripture nor Tradition: since they are slippery as Serpents,
endeavoring every way to evade (he says) they must be every way resisted.

After this c. 3. he contends with them concerning Tradition, Churches
Tradition is much more considerable than these Heretics; and has the words
which our Discourser cites, p. 138. All they who will hear truth may discern in
the Church, the Tradition of the Apostles manifest in the whole world; after
which he adds, We can mention the Bishops which were by the Apostles instituted
in the Churches, and were their Successors; and if they had known any Mysteries
to teach them, who are perfect, they would not have concealed them from them.
Further to manifest what was this Tradition, he refers to Clemens his Epistle,
saying, from thence they who will, may know the Apostolical Tradition of the
Church, That there is one God, etc. Then that Polycarp who conversed with the
Apostles, whom Irenaeus had seen, was a more faithful testifier than
Valentinus, or Marcion; and he declared the same Doctrine, and from his Epistle
to the Philippians, they who will, may learn the preaching of truth; and that
John who lived to the time of Trajan, was a true witness of the Apostles
Tradition.

Cap. 4. He observes, That the Church are the depository of truth, and if any
have any dispute of any question, ought they not to have recourse to the
ancient Churches in which the Apostles conversed, and from them to receive what
is certain concerning the present question. And then he adds, which our
Discourser also cites, p. 131. But what if the Apostles had not left us the
Scriptures, ought we not to follow the order of Tradition, which they delivered
to those to whom they committed the Churches? To which Ordination, assent many
Nations of those Barbarians, who believe in Christ, having salvation written in
their hearts by the Spirit, without Paper and Ink, and diligently keeping the
ancient Tradition, believing in one God, etc. And after says, They who believe
this Faith without letters, are Barbarians as to our speech. Cap. 5. He says,
Tradition being thus in the Church, let us come to that proof which is from
Scripture; and so spends several Chapters in showing the Doctrine of Christ and
the Apostles out of Scriptures.

From what has been observed, it is evident, Irenaeus dealt with, were in some
thing of the Spirit of this Discourser, that is, only for their own Tradition,
and would neither be tried by Scriptures, nor any other Tradition, but what was
amongst themselves: as our Discourser will disown trial by Scriptures, and by
what was delivered in the Fathers Writings or Councils, Cor. 14. and from all
other Churches but the Roman Church, Cor. 13, 17. 2. That the reason why he so
much insisted upon Tradition, was because these Heretics, as they denied
Scripture, so they pretended to the best Tradition: which way of his arguing
speaks not Tradition the Rule of Faith, but of considerable use in this case;
even as if we should dispute with a Pagan who owns not Christian Revelation,
concerning the truth of Christian Religion; the using rational Arguments
against him, will show that we count them very useful in this case, but will
not conclude that we own reason and not revelation, for a Rule of Faith: so if
a Christian shall urge the Doctrine of the Old Testament, as sufficient and
certain against the Jew, it would be a vain consequence to infer, that he
makes this only, and not the New Testament-Revelation, the Rule of his
Christian Faith. 3. That Irenaeus did not think the urging the present
Tradition of the Church, sufficient against those Heretics, but thought it
necessary to have recourse to the ancient Churches Tradition; and this Doctrine
of the ancient Church, he evidenceth sufficiently from the writings, as also
from the verbal testimonies, of them who were famous in the ancient Church: and
Protestants are as ready as any to appeal to the ancient Church, and had we
such a man as Polycarp, who conversed with S. John, we would receive his
testimony as far as Irenaeus did. But having only ancient Writings, which
Irenaeus thought sufficient, in the case of Tradition, we readily appeal to
them. 4. That when Irenaeus says the Apostles Tradition is manifest in the
whole World, lib. 3. c. 3. or lib. 1. c. 3. though there be diverse tongues in
the World, yet the virtue of Tradition is one and the same. That is the Church
in the whole World believes and delivers the same Faith: He speaks this against
those Heretics, about those great Articles of Faith. That there is one God,
and one Jesus Christ, etc. as himself expresses, lib. 1. c. 2. and lib. 3. c.
3. for even in the time of Irenaeus, there was not in all the World an
agreement in all Doctrines; since Victor Bishop of Rome, and Irenaeus did not
agree in this, whether it was Lawful to Excommunicate the Asian Churches for
their different observation of Easter, Eus. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 6. Now is
this any consequence, That Doctrine which teaches one God, etc. against those
Heretics, was generally continued in the Church till Irenaeus his time; which
was not two hundred years after Christ; therefore all Doctrine must certainly
be preserved without corruption in the Churches Delivery above sixteen hundred
Years after Christ? though we certainly know that besides Protestants, other
Churches do not now deliver the same things. 5. When he said, Ought we not to
have followed Tradition, if the Apostles had not left us the Scriptures? He
says not, we ought to do so now they have left them; but rather in these words
intimates the contrary.

But now more directly to see his opinion of the Rule of Faith, lib. 3. c. 1.
The Gospel they then preached, they after delivered to us by the Will of God in
the Scriptures, to be the foundation and pillar of our Faith. And then showing
how the Evangelists have delivered to us by Writing, says, If any man assent
not to them, he despises even Christ the Lord and the Father, and is condemned
of himself, and resists his own salvation. Lib. 2. c. 46. Wherefore since the
holy Scriptures, both Prophetical and Evangelical, clearly and without
ambiguity, and as they may of all be heard, declare, etc. they appear very dull
who blind their eyes at such a clear discovery, and will not see the light of
preaching. C. 41. Having therefore the truth it self for our Rule, and the
testimony of God being openly manifest, we ought not to reject the firm and
clear knowledge of God. If we cannot find the solution of all things in
Scripture, we must believe God in these things, knowing that the Scriptures are
perfect, being spoken by the word of God, and his Spirit. Lib. 4. c. 66. Read
more diligently the Gospel, which is given us by the Apostles, and read more
diligently the Prophets, and you shall find every action, and every Doctrine,
and every passion of our Lord, set forth in them Lib. 3. c. 11. The Gospel is
the pillar and firmament of the Church, and the Spirit of life: wherefore it is
consequent, that it has four pillars -- he has given us a fourfold Gospel,
which is contained in one Spirit. If then according to Irenaeus, men may
believe by the Scripture, and that is the pillar and foundation of Faith, and
they that seek, may find all Doctrine in it, which is there clear and manifest,
is not this enough to show, he makes it a Rule of Faith? If not, we have
observed him calling it by the name of a Rule also, and declaring, that none
but the Barbarous Nations did then receive the Faith in an unwritten way.

SECT. XI.
What was owned by Origin as the Rule of Faith?
ANd first in his Books (...), who profess themselves to believe in Christ,
differ in so great things, as concerning God, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Holy Ghost: by which words he manifestly refers to such Heretics, as Irenaeus
before him treated of. Such were Montanists, Valentinians, Marcionists, etc. he
begins to lay a Rule he will proceed by, in the words referred to by this
Author, Let the Ecclesiastical Preaching delivered from the Apostles, by order
of succession, and remaining in the Church to this time be preserved: that only
truth is to be believed, which in nothing differs from the Ecclesiastical
Tradition. This is his Rule he will proceed by in these Books, by which in
opposition to those Heretics, he means the Churches delivery of truth, which
was chiefly contained in the Scriptures; as I shall evidence, first because he
uses promiscuously the phrases of Ecclesiastical Preaching and Scripture
frequently in this Prooem, and excepts against the Book called The Doctrine of
Peter, as being no part of it; and in the end of the same Prooem declares, that
therefore he who would treat of these things, to know what is truth in every
one of them, must effect it, by taking such assertions as he finds in the
Holy Scriptures, or such as are consequent from them. Where in the end of the
same Prooem, he declares in other words, the Rule laid down not many Periods
before in the beginning of it; which is quite opposite to the design of Oral
Tradition. I shall yet further confirm this by two other passages out of those
Books (...): The one lib. 1. c. 3. where when he had declared, that some of the
Greeks and Barbarians owned the Son of God, he adds, We according to the faith
of his Doctrine, which we have for certain divinely inspired, do believe, that
it is no other ways possible, to expound the more eminent and more divine
account of the Son of God, and to bring this to the knowledge of men, but only
by that Scripture which was inspired by the Holy Ghost; that is, by the
Evangelical and Apostolical, as also that of the Law and the Prophets. Now it
is not conceivable, that he who believed, that without the Scriptures there
could be no eminent Christian knowledge of Christ, should lay any other Rule of
Faith, or exclude Scripture, from being that Rule. The other passage is lib. 4.
c. 1. It is not enough, he says, for them who discourse of such and so great
things, to commit the matter to humane senses, and the common understanding;
but we must take for the proof of the things we speak, the testimonies also of
the Divine Scriptures; which testimonies, that they may afford us certain and
undoubted faith, either in such things as are to be spoken by us, or in those
that are already spoken, it seems necessary to show that they are the Divine
Scriptures inspired by the Spirit of God: which he there undertakes to prove.
What can be spoken more fully to make Scripture both the only Rule, and a
certain and undoubted Rule of Faith? And if yet nothing will satisfy but the
word Rule, we shall find that also toward the end of his fourth Book
immediately before his Anacephalaeosis; where he says, our understanding is to
be kept to the Rule of the Divine Letters.

Though enough has been already observed to show the great mistake of this
Citation from Origin, Ecclesiastica Traditio and Ecclesiastica Praedicatio, do
both of them amongst the Fathers often signify the delivery in the Church by the
holy Scriptures. But to avoid multiplying instances, concerning Ecclesiastical
Tradition, I shall refer to what shall be spoken concerning Clemens
Alexandrinus, whose Scholar Origin was, and to what is hereafter cited from
Athanasius against Samosatenus, concerning the phrase of Ecclesiastical
preaching; we may observe a like phrase in Austin de Vnitate Ecclesiae, c. 16.
Let them show their Church if they can, in the prescript of the Law, in the
predictions of the Prophets, in the Songs of the Psalms, in the words of the
Pastor himself, in the preachings and labors of the Evangelists; that is, in
all the Canonical Authorities of the holy Books. Somewhat alike expression is
above cited from Irenaeus, lib. 2. c. 46. and from Leo Ep. 10. in Sect. 8. n. 2.

His other testimony from Origin is at the end of his 29 Hom. in Matt. We ought
not to believe otherwise than as the Churches of God have delivered us by
Succession. Tradition, and that Scriptural against the Heretics. To understand
Origin herein it is not amiss to observe, a little before these words he
expounds, the abomination of desolation, to be a word which stands in the place
of the holy Scriptures, and persuades to depart from the Creator, who is the
only and true God, and to believe another God we know not whom, above him to
whom none is like. In which words, he evidently refers to the ancient
Heretics; and in the beginning of his 30. Hom. names Basilides, Marcion,
Valentinus and Apelles, to whom he referred; every one of which as the
Church History informs us, brought in another God from the true. Concerning
these Heresies, Hom. 29. at the end he exhorts, that though they should pretend
some Scriptures, they should not believe them, but keep to the Churches
Tradition. Why they are not to be believed in pretending to some places of
Scripture, he shows, Because the light of truth does not appear from any
place of Scripture, but from all Scripture, that is of the Law, Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles. That the Churches Tradition he recommends, is that
only which is grounded upon, and according to Scripture is evident, in that a
little before he says; The abomination of desolation, does always superadd
something to what is in the Scriptures: and the shortning those days, he
expounds, that the good God will cut off all those additaments to Scripture by
whom he pleases.

Origin here all along agrees with the Protestants Rule, Oral Tradition, nor
with any thing else that differs from Scripture, or adds to it, but he accounts
all such, as the abomination of desolation. It were easy to observe many other
testimonies from Origin, which I omit, as supposing I have from these two
places chosen by this Author, showed enough that Origin owned the Rule of
Scripture. Protestants as well as Origin, would not have men be deluded by the
subtilty of any Heretics, who pretend to urge Scripture; and yet they no more
thereby disown its being a Rule of Doctrine, than our Savior did disown it as
a Rule of Life, when he would not be tempted by the Devils citing the words of
Scripture, to act against its commands.

SECT. XII.
What was the Rule of Faith owned by Tertullian?
THree Discourses of Tertullian are referred to by this Discourser. de
Praescriptione adversus Haereticos, cited Corol. 15. where he will not allow
Heretics to argue out of Scripture. The design of this Treatise of Tertullian,
is to evidence that the Doctrine professed in the Church of Christ, was the
true Christian Doctrine, against such Heretics (which were of the same mold
with them Irenaeus and Origin opposed) who either would not admit the
Scriptures, cap. 17. or else changed the very proprieties of the words, not
allowing their known significations, but imagining in them strange things,
which no way appear; which was the way of the Valentinians, c. 38. And these
Heretics were not satisfied with what was delivered by Christ and his
Apostles, but produced other things, c. 8. Against these, he pleads
prescription as to the true Christian Doctrine, as being from the Apostles, and
having Communion with them. He shows, there is no disputing with such Heretics
from Scripture, since they will not stand to it, c. 17, 18. And since these
Heretics did not own the only God, and Jesus Christ, and the holy Spirit, c.
7. and 13, 14. He urges, That they were not to be allowed to argue from the
Scriptures against the Church, since they were not Christians, and owned them
not, c. 15, 16, 17. And therefore it must first be inquired from whom the
Scriptures were, and by whom, and to whom, and when delivered: all which would
show, that they were for them who followed Christ and his Apostles, in the
Doctrine by them publicly delivered, which these Heretics pretended not to do
Hence it appears, that what Tertullian here writes, is no way against the
Doctrine of Protestants; but in such a case as this was, they would themselves
assert the same.

Now though it is impossible the Scriptures should be either a directing Rule,
or a convincing, to those persons who reject them, yet in this Treatise
Tertullian owns them as such to Christians who receive them, and withal asserts
them as necessary to the Faith, as may appear from these particulars, c. 22. He
declares, That they who receive not that Scripture, the Acts of the Apostles,
cannot acknowledge that the Holy Ghost was sent to the Disciples; nor can they
prove how, when, and by what means the Body of Christ's Church was instituted.
c. 33. He prescribes against the Heretics from the Apostles Writings, c. 36.
He has these words; Run through the Churches of the Apostles, amongst which
their very Authentic Letters are recited, sounding the voice, and representing
the face of every one of them. What else is this but to equal the delivery by
the Scriptures, with that which was from the mouths of all the Apostles? In the
same Chapter he says, John the Apostle puts together the Law and the Prophets,
with the Evangelical and Apostolical Letters, and thence tenders this Faith to
us to drink in. To add but one place more, c. 38. He says, of the Heretics,
As the corruption of the Doctrine could never succeed without the corruption of
the instruments; so we could not have the integrity of Doctrine, without the
integrity of those things by which the Doctrine is delivered: then he adds,
What the Scriptures are, we are; we are from them from their beginning; and
then shows, that the Church does keep them perfect, which the Heretics do not.

Next he cites Tertullian de carne Christi; c. 2. He supposes, That upon this
account Marcion did blot out so many original instruments (that is, Scriptures)
least the flesh of Christ should be proved. By what Authority? (says
Tertullian) I pray, if thou be a Prophet, foretell something; if an Apostle,
preach it openly; if an Apostolical man, agree with the Apostles, (and then
follow the words cited by this Author) If thou be only a Christian, believe
what is delivered. Where it is manifest, these words referr not to recommend to
us Oral Tradition, but the Canon of Scripture. Soon after he tells Marcion,
that he is not a Christian, but once was, and now has rescinded what he then
believed (where follow the next words referred to by this Author.) By
rescinding what thou have believed, thou provest that before thou did rescind
it, that was otherwise, which thou did believe otherwise. So it was
delivered; moreover, what was delivered, that was true as delivered by those
whom it belonged to deliver, etc. which words are of the same nature with the
former, and further condemn his rescinding, or cutting off from the Scriptures,
those things which he once believed, and were faithfully delivered: for
rescindere is not here to renounce, as this Discourser translates it, but to
cut off or mutilate (which indeed proves, that it was otherwise before) and
this is the same in sense, with what he calls his rejecting some Scriptures, c.
3. his blotting out, chapter 4. his taking them away, c. 5. and the same with what
in this 2. chapter he a little before called his blotting out the instruments (of
Scripture) where having propounded the question, by what Authority he did it;
and continuing his Discourse on the same subject, after these words of
rescinding, he gives this answer; Thou have done it by no right at all. Yet
further, that in this Discourse, de Carne Christi, he intended the Scripture
for his Rule of Faith, may be proved from chapter 6 where speaking of the Body
which Angels appear in; Whence it is, says he, nothing is manifest concerning
it; because the Scripture does not declare it, c. 15. He urges against
Valentinus seven Texts of Scripture, all which declare Christ to be Man; and
says, these only ought to suffice for prescription, to testify his humane
flesh, and not spiritual, etc. c. 22. when he had used many other Scriptures,
he says, The Apostle determines all this Controversy, when he declares him
to be Abraham's Seed; and then cites Gal. 3. adding, We who read and believe
these things, what kind of flesh, may we, or ought we to acknowledge in Christ?
surely none other than Abraham had.

In the last place, Discourser cites two passages of Tertullian against
Marcion, to prove that the present Church contains in it the true Doctrine of
Christ. Now if it did so in Tertullian's time it is no way consequent that any
particular Church must do so now, unless it be by delivery of the same
Scriptures. The first place he cites, but names not the Book, is, lib. 4. cont.
Marc. l. 5. where Tertullian's design is, to declare the Ecclesiastical
Tradition in the Scriptures, to be preferred before what Marcion tenders, as
his emending the Gospel, and so confirms the Protestant Doctrine. For having
observed that Marcion rejects the other Evangelists, and corrupts Luke, He
says in the end of the fourth chapter From the times of Tiberius, to Antonine, we
meet with Marcion, as the first and only emender of the Gospel. And he observes
his emending confirms ours, whilst he emends that which he found first, (then
follow the words cited by this Author) In short, If it be manifest, that is
the more true, which was the former; and that was the former which is from the
beginning; that from the beginning which is from the Apostles: in like manner
that will manifestly appear to be delivered from the Apostles, which is
accounted Sacred in the Churches of the Apostles. In which words, Tertullian
designs to establish the Scripture-writings against the Heretical corruption.
Whence it follows, Let us see what Milk the Corinthians drew from Paul; to what
Rule the Galatians were corrected; What the Philippians, Thessalonians and
Ephesians, read, etc. so that Tertullian sends to the Scriptures, which may be
read.

Another testimony he ventures at, lib. 1. cont. Marc. and says it is more
express: but indeed makes nothing at all for Oral Tradition. For this first
Book being written to prove one only God, against Marcion, who in a Treatise
called his Antitheses, endeavored to show, that there was not the same God in
the Old Testament, and in the New: He observes, c. 20. that some said that
Marcion did not innovate the Rule, but set it right when it was corrupted, c.
21. He shows, the Apostles never delivered any such thing as this, but fully
asserted one and the same God. Nor was there ever any question about this in
their days: for as there were questions about things offered to Idols, about
Marriage and Divorce, about veiling Women, and the hope of the Resurrection,
(in which he plainly refers to the Apostles writings): so he says, if there
had been any Question about this matter, it would have been found as a most
principal thing in the Apostle (that is the Apostles writings) and then adds
the words cited by this Discourser: And no other is to be acknowledged the
Tradition of the Apostles, than that which is this day published in their
Churches. In which words, as Irenaeus, and Tertullian elsewhere did against
Heretical inventions in general, so he here establishes the Churches Tradition
against Marcions innovation: or he establishes the Doctrine of Christ, as his
Church received it, which principally included the Scriptures. And that
Tertullian, chiefly designed against Marcion, to establish the Scriptural
Tradition, may appear sufficiently from what has been above observed.

To see yet more of Tertullians mind in this case, Hermogenes, who asserted
matter coeternal with God. Advers. Hermog. c. 22. I adore the fullness of
Scripture which manifests to me both the maker and his works. But whether all
things be made out of a subject matter I never yet read; Let Hermogenes his
shop show it written: If it be not written, let him fear that woe, that is
denounced against them who add or take away. What can be more full to show the
Scripture to be a Rule of Faith, than to declare that nothing may safely be
received but from it, and that it is full and complete?

SECT. XIII.
What Clemens Alexandrinus held as the Rule of Faith.
FRom this Father he only cites one place, Clemens himself, but has in
practice discovered what certainty there is in his Oral way, or taking things
upon hearsay. For showing which nothing more is needful, than the setting down
the words of Clemens more largely. Strom. lib. 7. He says, In those who are
endued with knowledge, the holy Scriptures have conceived; but the Heretics
who have not learned them, have rejected them as if they did not conceive: some
indeed follow the truths saying, and others wrest the Scriptures to their own
lusts: but if they had a Judgment of true and false, they would have been
persuaded by the Divine Scriptures. (Then follow the words cited) If therefore
any one, of a man becomes a Beast, like those enchanted by Circe: so he has
lost his being a man of God, and one remaining faithful to the Lord, who kicks
against Ecclesiastical Tradition, and leaps into the opinions of humane
Heresies. (Then his next words are) but he who returning out of error obeys the
Scriptures, and commits his life to the truth; of a man in a manner becomes as
God. We have the Lord the original of this Doctrine, both by the Prophets, and
by the Gospel, and by the Apostles. He who is to be believed of himself, is
worthy of all belief, (when he speaks) in the Lords voice, and the Scriptures.
Doubtless the Scriptures we use as our Criterion, to find out things. And then
he shows, That we are not satisfied with what men say, but inquire and believe
what God says, which is the only demonstration; according to which Science,
they who have tasted only of the Scriptures are faithful. What can be more
plain than that Clemens his design here, is not to guide men to the Oral way,
this Discourser talks of; but as Origin and Tertullulian do, so also Clemens,
against the way of the ancient Heretics, who were opposers of the Scripture,
commends the Churches Tradition, which was in the Scripture. Much more might
be observed to this purpose, from this 7. Strom. of Clemens, and several other
places, but that I think the very place this Author blindfoldly chose, is
sufficient against him.

SECT. XIV.
What was owned as the Rule of Faith by Athanasius.
OUr Discourser wishes Protestants would seriously weigh the Sayings of this
Father, Rule of Faith, which Athanasius made use of; which we know was not Oral
Tradition, but Scripture. The first testimony he produces from Athanasius, is
in his Epistle de Synodis Arim. and Seleuc. where speaking of the Arians who
were not satisfied in the Council of Nice, but sought after some other
Synodical determination, where they might have the Faith; and therefore
procured another Council to be called; he says, Now they have declared
themselves to be unbelievers, in seeking that which they have not: (which are
part of the words cited by this Discourser: his following words, I think,
cannot be found either in that Book, or elsewhere in Athanasius, which are) All
therefore that are seekers of Faith are unbelievers. They only to whom Faith
comes down from their Ancestors, that is, from Christ by Fathers, do not seek,
and therefore they only have Faith; if thou come to Faith by seeking, thou
wast before an Unbeliever. Thus far this Discourser I think frames Athanasius.
Against the Arians in this Epistle Athanasius further says; If they had
believed, they would not have sought it as if they had it not, and if you have
wrote these things as now beginning to believe, you are not Clergymen, but
begin to be Catechumens. Which words he writes upon occasion, that the Arians
Confession began not, So believes the Catholic Church; but the Catholic Faith
was in the presence of Constantius, put forth such a day, as Athanasius there
declares. But that we may understand Athanasius his mind, where they who are
Believers must have Faith, and not elsewhere seek it: (which also is the way he
must understand it to come from Ancestors, if any such words be any where in
Athanasius) in this very Epistle he declares it thus. It is a vain thing that
they running about, pretend to desire Synods for the Faith; for the holy
Scripture is more sufficient than all Synods. And if for this there should be
need of a Synod, there are the Acts of the Holy Fathers, they who came together
in Nice, wrote so well, that whoever faithfully read their Writings, may by
them be remembered of that Religion toward Christ, which is declared in the
holy Scriptures. So that these words of Athanasius as they design not the
promoting Oral Tradition, so they do advance Scripture.

The next testimony cited, Athan. de Incarn. against Paulus Samosatenus, where
he concerning this Subject of the Incarnation of the Word, shows, That such
great things, and difficult to be apprehended, cannot be attained to, but by
Faith. And they who have weak knowledge, if they here reject not curious
questions, and keep to the Faith, ruin themselves. Wherefore (says he)
blessed Paul says, Great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the
flesh, etc. A little after he says, To make an exact search, is that few can
do, but to hold fast the Faith belongs to all who are persuaded by God. Then
follow the words cited: He that searches after that which is above his reach,
is in danger, but he who abides in the things delivered, is out of danger.
Wherefore we persuade you, as also we persuade our selves, to keep the Faith
delivered, and avoid profane words of novelty, (thus far this Discourser
cites, but then follows) and to fear an inquisitive search into so great
Mysteries, but to confess, that God was manifest in the flesh, according to the
Apostles Tradition. By this view of the whole sense of Athanasius, it is
evident, he designs to put them off from curious questions, about these high
Mysteries, to rely on the written Scripture- Tradition, which in these words
he refers to. And in the same Treatise he urges other Scriptures to confirm
this point, using these words concerning Scripture-testimony: it speaks
evidently, it teaches us as manifestly.

The last testimony he cites from Athanasius, Epictetus; where inveighing
against him who wrote, that Christ's Body was consubstantial to his Divinity; he
indeed says, That things that are so manifestly evil, it is not fit to lay
them further open, or spend more time about them, lest thereby contentious men
should judge them doubtful. (Then follow the words by this Author referred to)
it is sufficient to answer to such things, and say, that these things are not
of the Catholic Church, nor did our Fathers so think. But his next words are,
But lest our silence should make them shameless, it is requisite to speak
something from the holy Scriptures. And after many arguments from Scriptures,
says, Wherefore let them confess that they have erred, being persuaded by the
holy Scriptures. So that we see he no way rejects the Scriptures from being his
Rule, though he said as Protestants also will, that some Heresies may be so
absurd, that it is enough against them, to show them contrary to all anciently
received Doctrine, and the Catholic Church: and yet even in these he referred
to Scripture, as the best means of conviction.

Though the judgment of Athanasius be already sufficiently manifest, I shall
briefly refer to two other testimonies. One is a fragment of his 39. Epistle,
where when he had reckoned the Books of Scripture, he says, These are the
wells of Salvation, in these only is the Doctrine of Godliness declared; Let no
man add any thing to these, nor take any thing from them. Another testimony is
observable amongst his various Treatises, against diverse Heresies; he has one
(which concerns this Discourser: and if as some think it be Theodoret's
Treatise, it will still be of use to us) against them, Who say men should not
search out of Scriptures, but be satisfied with their own Faith. Where very
much to our purpose, I only mention one short expression. Would thou that I
should reject the Scriptures, where then shall I have knowledge? Would thou
that I should forsake knowledge, where then should I have Faith? But I suppose
I need add no more to evidence that Athanasius made Scripture the Rule of Faith.

SECT. XV.
What was owned as the Rule of Faith, by S. Basil?
OUr Discourser likewise pretends to have S. Basil on his side, Eunomius; where
when Eunomius requires them who hear or read him, not to attribute any thing to
the greater party, or the multitude, or the dignity of persons; S. Basil
answers in the words this Author refers to: Shall we being persuaded by thee,
judge the Tradition which in all Ages past has prevailed under so many holy
men, more dishonorable than your impious conceits. But is this to make
Tradition a Rule of Faith? When I say, that I will account more honorably of
S. Basil's Judgment, than of this Discoursers fond conceits; do I by this make
S. Basil the Rule of Faith? And why may not S. Basil prefer other Catholic
Teachers before Eunomius, and yet not make them a Rule of Faith? Yea, it is
evident from the very place, he designs not here to speak of the Rule of Faith,
but to speak against the arrogance of Eunomius; yet in this Book, he urges
many things from the Scriptures, with such Prefaces to them as these: We will
demonstrate from the Scripture. We are taught of the Scripture. How accurately
and evidently they testify. And these things seem to make Scripture a Rule of
Faith.

His other testimony is from S. Basil against the Sabellions, Arians, and
Anomaeans; where observing, that those Heretics delighted in some Sophistical
niceties, and did not entertain the plain delivery in the Scriptures, which was
confirmed by the Fathers, he exhorts in these words; Lest thou should
separate the Spirit from the Father and the Son, (then follow the words cited
by this Discourser) Let Tradition deterr thee, the Lord taught so, the Apostles
preached so, the Fathers conserved it, the Martyrs confirmed it: let it suffice
thee to speak as thou art taught. And then he adds, Away with these pieces of
Sophistry, either the Spirit is unbegotten, or begotten; if he be unbegotten,
he is the Father; if he be begotten, he is the Son; if neither, he is then a
Creature. Now that in this place, he chiefly intends the confirmation of the
Tradition in Scripture, and the Councils decisions agreeable to this holy
Scripture, is evident from the design of his whole Book, wherein he proves the
truth by Scripture, and thus declares his own sense, not long before concerning
the holy Spirit. We exhort you, that you would not seek to hear of us any time
that which is pleasing to your selves, but that which is well pleasing to the
Lord, and agreeable to the Scriptures, and not contrary to the Fathers. These
words plead for the Rule of Scriptures, not against them.

But that more clearly we may understand the opinion of S. Basil concerning the
Rule of Faith; Faith, Tom. 2. where he declares, That he would keep himself to
what he had received from the Scriptures of Divine inspiration. And a little
after says, It is a manifest falling off from the Faith, and evidence of
Pride, either to reject any thing of those things that are written, or to bring
in any thing of those things that are not written: when our Lord Jesus Christ
himself says, My Sheep will hear my voice. What words could be more full to
show what he owned for the Rule of Faith?

SECT. XVI.
What was by S. Austin accounted the Rule of Faith?
THis Discourser tells us, Austin. I confess, I wonder how he adventured to
produce him, when it is so manifestly apparent, that he very frequently and
exceeding fully declared his opinion, for the Scripture being the Rule of
Faith. 1. He cites S. Austin, contra Epist. Manich. quam vocant Fundamenti, in
which he brings in the Manichee, c. 14. saying, That he does not promise any
perfect Science; but such things are showed to him, and that they to whom they
are told, ought to believe him in those things which they know not. To which he
answers, If I must believe things unknown, (then follow the words this Author
refers to) Why should I not rather believe those things that are now celebrated
by the consent of learned and unlearned, and are confirmed amongst all people,
by most grave Authority? Here he prefers the consent and fame of the Church,
before that of the Manichee: but this is far from making it a Rule of Faith,
but only makes it the more considerable motive: and yet in those things
wherein learned and unlearned consent; Scripture may be their Rule to believe
them. And S. Austin declares, Ep. 3. that there are obvious things in
Scripture, which it speaks to the heart both of the learned and unlearned.

What he next adds as spoken in the same Book by S Austin, The Authority of the
Catholic Church, is of force to cause Faith and assurance; which (Authority)
from the best established seats of the Apostles, even to this very day is
strengthened by the series of Bishops succeeding them, and by the assertion of
so many Nations. These words I find not in that Treatise. He indeed there
says, c. 5. That he had not believed the Gospel, if the Authority of the
Catholic Church had not moved him: whence it may be inferred, that he makes
the Authority of the Catholic Church, sufficient to cause Faith as a Motive to
it: and indeed, this is all can be inferred from these words here cited. And
yet it is observable, that the Authority of the Catholic Church, which was so
great a Motive to S. Austin, did not confine it self to the present Church, but
included the Primitive Church, whence, c. 3. he calls it an Authority begun by
Miracles, nourished by hope, increased by Charity, and confirmed by Antiquity.

His last testimony from S. Austin is, I think, Ep. 58. which is not S.
Austins) The faithful do possess perseveringly a Rule of Faith, common to
little and great in the Church. But why may not this be the Scripture? can it
not be common to little and great, according to S. Austin's language? Who tells
us Ep. 3. By the Scriptures bad understandings are corrected, little ones are
nourished, and great ones are delighted.

That S. Austin makes the Scripture a Rule of Faith, Ep. 157. Where the thing
by nature obscure is above our capacity, and the Divine Scriptures does not
plainly afford its assistance, here humane conjecture rashly presumes to
determine any thing. And if we would have the word [Rule] he says, De bono
Viduitatis: Wherefore should I teach thee any thing more than what we read in
the Apostle; for the holy Scripture fixes the Rule of our Doctrine, lest we
should attempt to know more than we ought to know. De Civ. Dei, lib. 13. c. 18.
The City of God believes the holy Scriptures both Old and New, which we call
Canonical, from thence Faith it self is conceived, out of which the just man
lives. I will yet add only one testimony more, De literis Petiliani, Lib. 3.
c. 6. If any one, I will not say, if we, no way to be compared to him, who
said, Though we; but as in the following words he added, If an Angel from
Heaven should preach unto you, either concerning Christ, or his Church, or any
other thing which belongs to our Faith or Life; besides what you have received
in the Legal and Evangelical Scriptures, let him be accursed. But enough now of
this famous Father.

SECT. XVII.
What Petrus Chrysologus owned as the Rule of Faith?
THe last Father referred to by our Discourser, Petrus Chrysologus, from whom
he only cites one testimony, Sermon. 85. where speaking of Festivals, from those
words in S. John 7. At the midst of the Feast, Jesus went up into the Temple,
he says, A Christian mind knows not how (in desperationem deducere, a harsh
phrase, which this Discourser seems to read disputationem, and so translates to
bring into dispute, but I rather think it should be despicationem) to bring
into contempt those things which are strengthened by the Tradition of the
Fathers, and by time it self. But however we read it, this being spoken of
Festivals, speaks nothing concerning the delivery of Doctrines.

But I will see if I can meet with something, Rule of Faith. In his 99. Sermon.
of the Parable of the Leaven: The Woman who took the Leaven, is the Church; the
Leaven is the Mystery of Heavenly Doctrine; the three measures in which its
said she hid the Leaven, are the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospels, where the
Divine sense is hid and covered by the mystical word, that it is not hid from
the Believer, but is hid from the unbeliever. Sermon. 112. upon Romans 5.
Concerning Original sin, he says, This day the Apostles speech did fully give
in it self with apparent light, to the sense of them who heard it, nor did it
leave any thing doubtful to Catholic minds. Sermon. 18. upon 1 Cor. 15. He
says, Lest any one should dare to doubt of the Resurrection of the Dead, we
have caused this day to be read to you the large Lesson of blessed Paul,
asserting it by his authority, and by examples, to which our Sermon can find
nothing that it can add. Now that where all matters of Divine Faith are
contained, and which gives clear light concerning matters of Faith, yea so
fully, that nothing can be added, and removes all doubts concerning matters of
Faith, (all which he asserts concerning Scriptures) must needs be a Rule of
Faith.

I have now done with the Fathers, and discovered that all those he chose to be
of his side, have disowned his opinion, and fixed upon that Scriptural Rule of
Faith, which Protestants own.

SECT. XVIII.
Answering the remainder of his Discourse.
BUT because. 15. Fathers, for Scripture against Tradition, lose their edge: I
will examine them.

His first Note is, That in almost all his citations of Councils, and Fathers,
they speak directly against Heretics; which puts them to declare what fixed
them Catholics. Now from this first Note, since I have showed, that in all
such places they own Scripture for the Rule of Faith, the citations to that
purpose, are the more firm for Scripture.

His second Note is to consider, Whether when Fathers speak highly of
Scripture, as that it contains all Faith, etc. whether they speak of Scripture
sensed, or as yet to be sensed? Truly if he be a man of reason, he will easily
see that, when the Fathers urge Scriptures as manifestly declaring the truth,
against their opposers, who as yet disown the sense, or to Doubters who do not
yet own it fully; they must needs mean the Scriptures, without any sense
imposed upon them otherwise, than as the words will of themselves discover the
sense of him who wrote them. For this would be a weak way to dispute from
Scriptures, (as the Fathers generally did with them who owned them) if they
should say, we will evidence it from Scriptures, but you must then first
suppose them to mean as we mean. By this means the Scripture can give no
evidence or light to any truth in question, which is contrary to the whole
current of our citations, from the Fathers.

The third Note is, That it is frequent with the Fathers, to force Heretics to
accept the sense of Scripture, from those who gave them the Letter of
Scripture, and frequent to sense the Letter (even when dark) by Tradition, but
never to bend Tradition to the outward show of the Letter. As to the first
clause of urging upon Heretics, the sense which they own from whom they
received the Letter: The Fathers never urged this but in some special case:
when Heretics, such as Valentinian, and some others, who could scarce be
called receivers of the Scripture-Letter, disowned the known and common
significations of words in Scriptures, and introduced wonderful strange ones.
Here to preserve the Faithful, confirm the Doubtful, and reduce the wandering,
they urged the Churches Authority, or Ecclesiastical Tradition of Doctrines,
and common delivery of significations of words, as more considerable than such
sensibly monstrous innovations: yet this was in things where, to men
unprejudiced, and willing to receive truth, they would appear plainly from the
very words of Scripture. And this is consistent (if there were the like cause)
with the Principles of Protestants, as with any others. In other cases the
Fathers urged against the Heretics evident arguments from the light of
Scripture-Letter. Nor did they sense Scripture by Tradition in hard Texts of
Scripture, otherwise than Protestants will do; that is where any assertion is
known to be a point of Faith, and surely grounded upon Scripture, neither they
nor we will so interpret any dark Scripture, as to oppose such a point of
Faith: and in many other things will allow Tradition its degree of authority.
But that they never bent Tradition to Scriptures Letter, is very untrue. When
any truly Catholic Doctrine held by the Church, was questioned or impugned,
was not Tradition bent to Scriptures Letter, when they applied themselves to
it, to declare and manifest such Doctrine? Which was the general practice of
the Ancients, as has been showed. But would they ever so bend Tradition to
Scripture, as to close with Scripture in rejecting Tradition? If that which is
delivered by Catholic Bishops be a Tradition, S. Austin de Vnitate Eccles. c.
10. says, We must not consent with Catholic Bishops, if they think any thing
against the Scriptures of God. But did ever any of the Ancient Fathers say,
that we must not agree with Scripture, if it speaks against what the Bishops,
who are called Catholic, do deliver?

His last Note is a very vain and empty one: That they cannot hold Scripture
thus interpretable, the Rule of Faith; because most Heretics against whom they
wrote, held it theirs, and therefore could not be Heretics, since they held
the Rule. But first, those Heretics who pretended to own Scripture (who were
not the most) did not perfectly hold the same Rule, with Catholics who held to
Scripture as their Rule. The Catholics Rule is Scripture, as the words will
naturally hold forth the true and genuine sense: but the Rule of Heretics who
pretended to Scripture, is Scripture, as the words are wilfully perverted,
contrary to their natural and plain sense and meaning. But again, why may not
they be Heretics, who profess to hold the Rule of Faith, if they take no heed
to be guided by that Rule, and reject Doctrines declared by it? cannot reason
be a Rule in Philosophy, because two parties both pretend to reason?

I have now dismissed his testimonies. That the Council of Trent, and the
present Church of Rome, own this way of Oral and Practical Tradition. Now
though I could show that in the present Church of Rome, where this Author
pretends so great a clearness of Tradition, they are not yet agreed upon the
first principle of Traditionary Doctrine. Yet since I have enough showed the
dissent of this his opinion from the truth, and the Ancient Church; and
therefore if they all were of this Authors opinion, it will neither make any
thing for their own Doctrine, nor against the Protestants: I will for my part
let him enjoy the fruit of his labors in this particular, fearing most that
Papists will endeavor in this point to deal with Protestants, as we above
observed, that the Arians did with the ancient Catholics; that is, like
Chamaelions, change their shape, and when they were confuted in one way, they
opposed the truth in another.

(...).

SERMONS PREACHED UPON Several Occasions.
BY WILLIAM FALKNER, D.D.
A SERMON Preached at Lyn-St. Margaret's, at the Bishop's VISITATION, October.
15. 1677.
2 COR. 5.18. -- And has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation.


THAT the Christian Religion is of mighty Efficacy for the reforming the World,
is not only evinced from the Nature of the Doctrine it self, but from that
visible Difference which appeared between the Lives of the true Primitive
Christians, and other Men; insomuch that Eusebius tells us, Hist. Eccles. l. 2.
c. 13. gr.
that Christianity became greatly famed every where, (...), by the Purity of
Life in them who embraced it. But as no sick Man can rationally expect any
Relief against his Distemper, by the Directions of the best Physicians, unless
he will observe them: So it is not to be wondered, if many who own the Name of
Christianity, without sincere submission thereto, have Lives unsuitable to this
Profession. Hence some of them practice open Viciousness, Looseness and
Debauchery; and others embrace Pride, Uncharitableness, and Disobedience, all
which are diametrically opposite to the Spirit of Christ. Hence also many who
pretend an high respect to the Holy Jesus, do slight his peculiar Institution^
undervaluing the Use even of that Prayer which our Lord composed and enjoined;
the Communion of that Catholic Church, which he founded and built upon a Rock;
the Attendance upon that Holy Sacrament which he appointed the Night he was
betrayed; and the Reverence for that Ministry, which he has established in his
Church, and the Benefit of which these Words in part declare, in that God has
given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation.

In which Words I shall consider,

I. The Nature and Excellency of this Ministry in general, without respect to
the distinction of its Offices; it is the Ministry of Reconciliation. II. The
Persons to whom this Ministry is committed; that is, to Us. III. The Divine
Authority by which it is founded.
I. The Nature and Excellency of this Ministry. And because it is an holy
Function committed to some particular Persons by God himself, the main Business
thereof cannot consist in speaking or doing such Things as may be said or done
by other Men, but in the discharge of a special Office. And an Office, tho it
requires Abilities in them who undertake it, yet is chiefly conveyed by
Commission and Authority. It is possible that Corah, or some other of his
Company, might be as well acquainted with the Rites of Sacrificing, and the way
of ordering the Incense, as Aaron and his Sons were; but if they, not being
called of God thereto, will invade the Priesthood, they must bear their Sin.

Wherefore I design to discourse here of the chief and proper Charge and
Business of the Gospel Ministry, which must include the Dignity thereof. And
here I shall show,

1. What is contained in it, in four Heads. 2. What must be rejected from it.
1. As God's Officers, they are to prepare Persons for receiving the Blessings
of the Gospel. And because the Wrath of God will come on the Children of
Disobedience, and the way to be happy is by the Faith of Christ, and becoming
holy and good; the Officers of the Christian Church, by a peculiar Authority,
are publicly to declare the Doctrines of Faith, and the great Certainty and
Evidence thereof, to make Men well-grounded Christians, and the Directions and
Rules of holy Life, together with the great Motives which tend to persuade the
practice of them. They are called (...), Teachers; and the Instruction of the
(...) appears as anciently as from Justin Martyr, to be one part of their
public Performances in the Church: Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
And the Practice hereof is commended in the Scriptures, and the ancient
Writers, as early as Ignatius, exhorting (...), Ignat. Epist. ad Polycarp.
to exhort and persuade all Men for their Salvation.

And these Instructions are to be accounted of greater moment, because
delivered by those to whom God has granted his Commission; as the declaring
the Law, or giving a Charge by a Judge, or particular Officer, is more than the
Discourse of a private Person. The Flock of Christ ought to have such a respect
to the Shepherds he has appointed, as to think it their Duty to be taught and
guided by them: Since our Savior declared not only concerning his Apostles,
but even of the Seventy, Mat. 10.40.
He who hears you, hears me; and more generally with a Note of Remark
concerning all those who are sent by him, Luke 16.16. Joh. 13.20.
that he who receives them, receives him.

To this Head also belongs another part of Ministerial Power, in preparing
Men for God's Blessing, which was more remarkably exercised under the vigor of
Primitive Discipline, in enjoining particular Rules for, and examining the
Probation-State of the Catechumeni, who from Paganism embraced Christianity,
and of them who for their Offenses came under the then severe Discipline of
Penitents. This Authority the Apostle made use of in this Epistle concerning
the Incestuous Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2.6, 7.
declaring his Grief and Punishment to have been sufficient; and this was,
Baron. an. 57.1. and 58.36. Illyr. Praefat. ad Ep. Pauli.
as both Baronius and Illyricus think, in the next Year after the Sentence of
his Excommunication was inflicted.

And besides the present Interest of Ministerial Power, with respect to Rules
of open Discipline, it is of great use for them who have exposed their Souls to
great Dangers; and also for disquieted Minds, in such Cases as press their
Consciences, to take the particular Counsel of their Guides, whom God has
appointed to watch for their Souls. Heb. 13.17.
Which might be a great Help to secure some from their growing Perplexities,
and others from running on in Viciousness, or turning aside unto Delusions.

2. This Function contains an Authority from God to receive Persons under the
Terms of Reconciliation, and to bless them in God's Name. As they are Stewards
of the Mysteries of God, they have a peculiar Right to dispense to his People
his holy Sacraments, as signal Pledges of his Grace and Favor. Hereupon they
who receive Baptism at their hands, being duly qualified for it, receive
thereby Remission of Sins, become Members of Christ, and Heirs of Salvation.
And as St. Paul was directed to be baptized, and wash away his Sins; so the
Christian Church has generally acknowledged Baptism to be, Acts 22.16. Clem.
Alex. Paed. l. 1. c. 6.
as Clemens Alexandrinus expresses it, (...), the Laver to make us clean from
our Sins. And the ordinary dispensing Baptism, is a proper Act of the
Ministerial Power, both in that Christ gave commission to his Apostles to
baptize, and especially because this is a particular Exercise of the Keys, in
receiving Members into the Church of Christ; and is also the dispensing the
Symbol of Remission of Sins, which is included under that Commission of Christ,
Whose soever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them. John. 20.23.

In the Holy Communion also the pious and penitent Christian receives at the
hands of him who by his Office dispenses it, the Mystical Body and Blood of
Christ, and a Testimony of God's Favor and Blessing. And because this
Sacrament is the Application of Christ's Sacrifice offered for the Remission of
Sins, a devout, humble and penitent Person does hereby receive Pardon; to which
purpose St. Ambrose, Qui manducaverit hoc corpus, De Sacrament. l. 4. c. 5, 6.
fiet ei remissio peccatorum. And again, Debeo illum (Sanguinem) semper
accipere, ut semper mihi peceata dimittantur: Which Words speak the receiving
the Body and Blood of Christ in this Sacrament to include Remission of Sins.
And the dispensing and consecrating this holy Sacrament, must needs be proper
to the special Officers of the Christian Church, since no Man, without God's
particular Authority, can dispense and consecrate the Pledges of his Grace, and
of Remission of Sins, as tendered from him.

The pronouncing Absolution by them to whom the Gospel gives this Authority,
does also from God tender and apply Remission of Sins to the Pious and
Contrite, by virtue of our Savior's Words, Whose Sins ye remit, they are
remitted; but by no means to the Disobedient and Neglectful. The Augustine
Confession declares Absolution to be highly esteemed, quia est Vox Dei, and
mandato Dei pronunciatur; Conf. August. cap. de Confess.
as being the Voice of God, and pronounced by his Command.

In like manner the giving a Benediction or Blessing by them, whether generally
in the Public Service, or more particularly in some special Offices, is an
Application of the Blessing of God, by his Authority, unto the pious Christian,
Numb. 6.27.
but not to the Wicked and Evildoers. Even in Aaron's blessing the People, God
declared that he himself would bless them: And the whole intention of the
Gospel is a Dispensation of God's Blessing, which comes upon them who serve
him. The Blessed Jesus was sent to Bless, in turning Men from their Iniquities;
to such he begins his Sermon in the Mount with Blessing, Mat. 5.3.4. Luke
24.50, 51
and this also was the last action he performed immediately upon his Ascension
into Heaven. Most of the Apostolical Epistles both begin and end with
Benedictions, which persons partake of according to their pious qualifications:
For when not only the Apostles, but also the Seventy were commanded to
pronounce Peace to the House or Place where they came, Mat. 10.12, 13 Luke
10.5.6.
((...) or Peace, being, according to the usual Jewish Phrase, a comprehension
of all Blessing) our Savior tells them, that if the Son of Peace be there,
their Peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall turn to them again.

The ancient Church to this end used particular Benedictions in Confirmation,
Ordination, receiving Penitents, Matrimony, and to dying Persons; but all these
the Corruption of Times has transformed into reputed proper Sacraments: And
those Blessings in Confirmation and Ordination are most Solemn, the former of
which was granted even by S. Hierome, Hier. adv. Luc.
according to the custom of the Church all over the World, to be performed by
the Bishop only. And in our Administration thereof, the serious renewing the
Baptismal Covenant (which is a necessary duty of Christian Profession) is a
good disposition for receiving the Blessing of God; and on this account
Confirmation is not to be slighted, or wilfully neglected by those who have a
high esteem for the Blessing of God.

3. They who receive this Ministry, are to guide the Church and Christian
Society, that its Members may please God, not forfeit his Favor, or provoke
his Displeasure. The most things contained under this head will respect those
Ministers of the Church, who are the chief Governors thereof; and the things
established by their consent and agreement.

The Church of God is a most excellent Society, and his Ministers are (...),
those who are to have the care and ordering of this Family of God; Titus 1.7.
and such public Worship as is ordered according to the Will of God being
acceptable to him, it belongs to them to take care of the performance thereof;
and also of establishing Order and Decency; and the framing and executing such
Rules and Canons for Government and Discipline as are meet: And though the
external Sanction of these things is well ordered by the Secular power; yet the
directive part, and the spiritual Authority belongs to the Guides of the
Church, who by the Gospel are appointed therein Rulers and Presidents: Hence
Inferiors are required to obey them that are over them, and submit themselves;
and Titus was sent to Crete, to order the things that were wanting; (...) 1
These. 5.12. (...). 1 Timothy 5, 17. (...) Heb. 13.7, 17.24. Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 3.5.
1 Pet. 5.2.
and Bishops in general stand charged by S. Paul and St. Peter, to take care of
the Church of God. And as that is a requisite to Order and due Reverence in
Religious Worship; to them also belongs the setting apart, and consecrating
Places, for the public Service of God.

But because there can be no security for Order, where every Officer may act
independently at his own Pleasure; therefore they have Authority to order
Uniformity, which is in it self desirable, and ought to be observed, not only
with respect to the secular Sanction; but together therewith, in compliance
also with the Ecclesiastical Authority invested in Synods, which has in all
Ages from the Apostles, been honored in the Christian Church; of which the
observation of the Canons of the several Councels and Codes, is an experimental
Evidence. And as the mutual Consent of Pastors in Synods is according to
natural Prudence, directly pursues the great ends of Peace and Unity, and by
their agreement adds Weight to their Authority; so this Case is eminently
included in that Promise of our Savior, Where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. Mat. 18.20. Act. 16.4, 5.
Act. 21.18, 24, 26. Act. 8.14.
And St. Paul himself yielded manifest Obedience both to the Decrees of the
Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15. And to that other Council, Act. 21. And so did
S. Peter and S. John to another Council.

And since Christians being established in the Truth, is of great use both to
their own and the Churches Peace; in order hereunto the Pastors of the Church
in Councils have power to abandon Heretical and dangerous Doctrines, and to
require submission to the Truth they declare. This was done in the Synod of the
Apostles, against the necessity of Circumcision; and in the four first general
Councils, concerning the Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Person of the
Mediator. And such Decisions concerning matters of Doctrine, when managed
aright, have been deservedly reverenced in the Church; since one end of God's
appointing these Officers is, that we should be no more Children, tossed to and
fro with every wind of Doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14.
And upon this account a particular Honor is due to the established Doctrine
of our Church, which has a high agreement with the Rule of Scripture, and the
Catholic and Primitive Church.

Besides these things, all particular Officers of the Church in their charge,
are to watch over those committed to them, as much as in them lies, with
special regard to the Sick, and to those also who need to be Catechized in the
Principles of Religion, John 21.15.
(it being our Savior's first charge to S. Peter to feed his Lambs,) with
earnest Prayer for the Grace and Blessing of God upon them all.

4. The Ministry of Reconciliation includes an Authority of rebuking and
admonishng Offenders, of casting them out of the Church, and of restoring them
again upon Repentance. This has been the ordinarily received sense of those
great words of our Savior, Mat. 18.18.
Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye
shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. There is indeed a late
Objection made, that these words speak not of binding and loosing Persons, but
Things; and that it is usual with the Jewish Writers to express the binding and
loosing of Things, not of Persons; meaning thereby the declaring or judging
such things prohibited or allowed. But besides what may be otherwise said, I
think it sufficient at present to observe, that the admitting this notion may
well enough consist with the true sense of these words; which if interpreted by
it, will import: 1. That the power of binding and loosing has a considerable
respect to such things, as the Cases, Offenses, and Penitent Performances of
persons; and sutably our Savior after his Resurrection gave his Apostles the
authority of remitting and retaining Sins, which phrase also immediately
respects not Persons but Things; but yet binding in this sense must include
an authoritative declaring the Practices of Men to be so far Evil, as to
deprive the offending Persons of their Christian Privileges. 2. These words
will also imply that the Officers of the Church are entrusted to bind and
continue, or to loose and discharge the observation of Penitential Rules; and
accordingly the Apostle says, to whom you forgive any thing, I forgive it also
in the Person of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.10.

And even this severe part of Ecclesiastical Power, is for Edification, not
Destruction, both to the whole Church, and to the Offender, that through
Repentance his Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord; and so is properly
included under the Ministry of Reconciliation. The general result of all I have
said, is, That the Office of the Ministry is of very high and great importance;
and such persons who have a low esteem thereof, if they have any reverence for
their Savior, let them seriously consider, whether he who is Truth and
Goodness, can be thought to use such high expressions in this case, as to
declare his giving them the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and that what they
bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and such like; to impose upon the World
which he came, to guide and save, and upon his Church which he so dearly loves,
with empty sounds of great things, which signify little or nothing.

What a mighty sense had the Primitive Christians of this power of the Keys,
when the Penitent Offenders under censure undertook, according to some Canons,
the strict observation of Penance, Conc. Ancyr. c. 16. Elib. c. 2, 7, 47, 63.
Valent. cap. 3.
sometimes for 20 or 30 years, and even to the end of their Life, that they
might obtain Absolution, and the Peace of the Church, and its Communion: And
under this severe Discipline, as Tertullian describes it by the name of their
Exomologesis, de Poenit. c. 9.
they did ly in Sackcloth and Ashes; they never used such Clothes or Diet as
might appear pleasant; they frequently exercised themselves in Fasting, Prayers
and Tears, crying to God day and night; and among other things, they made
humble Supplication, even upon their Knees, unto the Members of the Church, and
fell down prostrate before its Officers; it being their custom, Presbyteris
advolvi, and charis Dei adgeniculari. And all this was done in the greatest
degree, while the Church was under persecution from the Civil Power.

But that which they apprehended, and which I doubt not to be true, Exam. Conc.
Trid. de Poeni.
is, that, as Chemnitius expresses it, Christus est qui per ministerium
absolvit, and peccata remittit; it is Christ who gives Absolution by his
Ministry, viz. where they proceed according to his Will. And, as under the Law,
he who trespassed, beside the amendment of his fault, and restitution, either
in things Sacred or Civil, was to have recourse to the Trepass Offering, for
obtaining the Mercy of God; even so under the Gospel, he who performs the other
conditions of Christianity, ought, where it may be had, to apply himself also
to the Ministerial power of remitting Sin; and the receiving this Testimony,
together with that of a good Conscience, upon a Christian Penitent Deportment,
is, next to the great Absolution by Christ, the greatest encouragement for
Peace and Comfort.

Only I must here add, which I desire may be particularly observed, that the
principal way of ministerial dispensing Remission of Sins, and other Blessings
of the Gospel, to them who fall not under gross enormities, and the censures of
the Church (though performed also in its degree in Doctrine, and other
Benedictions and Absolutions) is chiefly done by Administering the Holy
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper to persons duly qualified. And it
is one of the miscarriages of the Roman Church, that they take too little
notice of this advantage in receiving the Holy Eucharist, and do inordinately
advance their Sacrament of Penance so far into its place, as to be esteemed the
only Sacrament after Baptism, wherein may be obtained remission of Sins.

Wherefore I conceive, that as that Man who being converted to Christianity,
does profess the Doctrine, and embrace the practice thereof in other things,
but wholly omitteth Christian Baptism, does thereby deprive himself of the
ordinary visible Testimony of God's favor, and runs himself upon the needless
hazard, of hoping to find acceptance by extraordinary Grace, in the neglect of
the ordinary means thereof: even so is it with those adult persons, who being
otherwise piously disposed, do ordinarily neglect the attendance upon the
Lord's Supper, which is particularly appointed of God, to be a means of
conveying and applying the benefits of Christ's Holy Sacrifice, for remission
of Sins, and other blessings of the Covenant, to them who are worthy and meet
to receive the same. And if this, which to me seems a great Truth, was duly
heeded, the frequent attendance upon the Holy Communion, and other Services of
God, would be, as it was in the Primitive Times, generally looked on as a Duty
of very great importance, in Persons adult, and resolving upon a true Christian
course of life.

Having asserted the nature and excellency of the Ministerial Power; it will be
necessary also to disclaim and reject from it these two things.

1. That the Ministry of Reconciliation is not appointed to offer in the Mass a
Propitiatory Sacrifice to God for the Quick and the Dead; and herewith must be
rejected also the Power of effecting Transubstantiation. St. Chrysostom truly
asserteth, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. 2.5.
That it is not the same thing which is done by Christ, ( i. e. in reconciling
us by his Sacrifice,) and by his Ministry. But the Priestly Authority,
according to the Romish Ordination, Pontif. Romans
is chiefly placed in this proper Power of Sacrificing, their Form being,
Accipe potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo, etc. And all the Orders of their
Ministry have some proper thing appointed for them, which relates to this
Sacrifice of the Mass. That is properly Ordo, Th. Mor. l. 5. Tr. 9. c. 1.
says F. Layman, where there is gradus potestatis ad peragendum Missae
Sacrificium, or a degree of Power to perform something about the Sacrifice of
the Mass. Much to the same purpose is in many other Writers, and even in the
Roman Catechism ad Parcchos, in which, as also in the Council of Trent it self,
Cat. ad Par. de Ord. Sacr. Council. Trid. Sess. 23. cap. 2.
their Priesthood is reckoned as the highest of their seven Orders, partly upon
this account, and partly because this Notion serves further to advance the
Dignity and Eminency of the Pope. But there is no such Sacrifice of the Mass in
the Religion of our Savior. Indeed here it must be granted and asserted, that
the Elements for the Communion were usually offered to God to be set apart for
a sacred Use; and that all Christian Worship being in a large sense the
offering spiritual Sacrifices to God, so is especially the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, because therein is eminently a Commemoration of the only
Sacrifice of Christ, with a peculiar Address unto God thereby, and it, and the
Benefits thereof, are mystically represented and exhibited therein. And in this
sense it is ordinarily called a Sacrifice, and a commemorating Sacrifice, in
ancient Writers and Liturgies.

But the Romish Church not satisfied herewith, in the Trent-Assembly thundreth
an Anathema against them who deny their Mass to be verum and proprium
Sacrificium, Council. Trid. Seff. 22. Can. 1, 3.
a true and proper Sacrifice, and to be a Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Quick
and the Dead, for Sins, Punishments, etc. And they assert, that the Elements
being properly transubstantiated, Christ does in this sense yield himself to be
sacrificed, per Sacerdotes sub signis immolandum; Ibid. cap. 1, 2.
and that this is as completely a Sacrifice for Sin, as that he himself once
offered, and the very same, sola offerendi ratione diversa. And Bellarmine
dares to say of this Sacrifice of the Mass, Bellarm. in Expos. Doctr. Christ.
de Poenitent.
Mundum Deo reconciliat, it reconciles the World to God.

But this their Sacrifice is contrary to the Doctrine of the Scripture, and
derogatory to the Honor of Christ's Oblation, in that it was the Excellency of
his Sacrifice, above the Aaronical Ones, that there is no place for the daily
Offering and Repetition thereof, Heb. 7.27. Chap. 10.10, 11, 12, 14.18. Chap.
9.25, 26, 28.
since by one Offering once made, he has perfectly accomplished the End of
Sacrificing, as the Apostle largely asserteth, nor can he die any more.

And their Transubstantiation, on which this is founded, carries so plain
Contradictions to the Evidence of Sense, the Principles of Reason, and the
plain Assertions of Scripture, and is attended with such numerous and palpable
Absurdities, that the general Belief of such a thing by those of the Romish
Communion, may be placed among the chief Miracles really wrought in that Church.

And the Sacrifice of Christ was on this account expiatory, in that by the
Satisfaction he made to his Father, he so far appeased his Wrath, and procured
his Favor toward Man, as to obtain the Terms, Grace, and Blessings of the New
Covenant. Wherefore if the very same Sacrifice be really offered in every Mass,
it must be to the same end, and then not only the Redemption of Man must be
there made, but the original Sanction of the Gospel Covenant must be then, and
not before established.

Besides this, as the High Priest, who offered the Expiatory Sacrifice under
the Law, must enter with the Blood thereof into the Holy of Holies: So the
Apostle acquaints us, that Christ, who is an High Priest, and an High Priest
after the Order of Melchisedec, offering himself as an Expiation for Sin, must
by his Blood-enter into the holy Place not made with hands, even into Heaven it
self. Wherefore no Man can undertake properly to offer this Sacrifice, but such
an High Priest, who with the Blood thereof does enter into Heaven it self, Heb.
9.11, 12, 23, 24
and not still abide upon Earth.

2. We must reject all Power of reconciling any adult Persons unto God, who do
not perform the other Conditions of the Gospel Covenant. If Simon Magus receive
Baptism in Hypocrisy, he does not receive Remission of Sins, but is in the Bond
of Iniquity; and the Devil may enter into him who takes the holy Communion
unworthily, as he entered into Judas. He that comes to receive Reconciliation
without pious care of serious Repentance, is as the Man under the Law, who came
to be purified, but brings an unclean thing with him before the Lord, which is
a kind of bidding Defiance to the Holiness of God, and the Purity of his
Worship.

Now the Church of England declares in her Liturgy, that Christ has left a
Power to his Church to absolve all Sinners who truly repent, and believe in
him: And that he is the merciful Receiver of all true penitent Sinners, and
most willing to pardon us, if we come unto him with faithful Repentance, if we
will submit our selves to him, and from henceforth walk in his Ways; with much
more to that purpose.

But in the Romish Church, where they make such a distinction between
Contrition and Attrition, as that the latter is an imperfect Grief, which does
not include the Love of God above all, nor does always take in with it a
Detestation of Sin, as the former does; their Doctors, out of a strange
Looseness of Principles, assert, the Duty of Contrition very rarely to oblige
any Man. And even the Council of Trent favors that Position, Sess. 14. cap.
4.
That Attrition, with the Sacrament of Penance and Absolution, is sufficient to
please God; concerning which the Generality of their Authors speak much more
plain, and many of them urge the Authority of this Council.

This is called by Valentia, receptissimum Axioma, a most received Maxim; and
tho there are some Doctors, Greg. de Val. Tom. 4. Disp. 7. Qu. 8. Punct. 3.
who require Contrition as needful with that Sacrament, he says, this is
Sententia vix tolerabilis, an Assertion that may hardly be tolerated.
Filiucius, who was Professor in the Jesuits College at Rome, and the Pope's
Penitentiary, asserteth, Filiuc. Tr. 6. c. 8. n. 197.
Ex vi justitiae ad Deum, etc. That upon account of doing what in Justice we
owe to God, he that has Attrition with the Sacrament, is not bound in Duty to
be contrite, no, not in the hour of Death. Indeed he there says, that upon
account of Charity to God or themselves, Men may be bound to be contrite, viz.
if they would secure themselves, tho they should miss the Sacrament of Penance,
or would do more for God than he requires. Filiuc. Tr. 7. c. 6. n. 14. M.
Canus de Poenit. Relect. 4.
But in another place he tells us, That enough is done to satisfy the Duty of
Repentance, by Attrition with the Sacrament. And Canus asserteth, Deus nihil
amplius exigit: God requires no more, than either Contrition without the
Sacrament, or Attrition with the Sacrament. To the same purpose also speaks
Becanus; and Greg. de Valentia denies it to be needful with the Sacrament,
Becan. Schol. Th. part. 3. c. 35. qu. 6.
to have any such Disposition which is putata Contritio, or which they suppose
to be Contrition.

But is this a Doctrine suitable to the Purity of God, and the holy Jesus, that
Men may all their Lifetime be so like to Devils, as not to have any single Act
of Hatred against Sin, or of Love of God above all things, and yet by a few
Words of the Priest, as strange a thing as the Power of Transubstantiating, be
transformed into Saints, but without any real Holiness at all? Is this a
Representation of Religion like that made in the Scripture, The Doctrine
according to Godliness, which requires the doing the Will of our Father which
is in Heaven, and declares, that without Holiness no Man shall see God? Or is
this like the Primitive Spirit of Christianity, where serious diligence in the
Exercises of Contrition and Piety, was thought requisite for receiving
Absolution?

Shall these Men be accounted the Patrons of Good Works, who against the
Doctrine of St. James assert, that Men may be saved without Works, or any holy
Action? and who run up to the highest and most absurd Positions of
Solifidianism, even the Belief of the Non-necessity of holy Actions and
Dispositions? They have found a way, if it be a safe one, how Works of
Iniquity, tho they stand condemned by our Savior, may have an entrance into
Heaven without true Conversion. But such will find, that, De Poen. c. 5.
as Tertullian spoke in a like Case, Salva venia in Gehennam detrudentur;
notwithstanding their Pardon, they will be cast down to Hell: For if we say we
have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth.
These Doctrines of Rome are fit for the Synagogue of Satan, but no such unclean
thing may enter into the Congregation of the Lord. But whomsoever they follow,
let us follow St. Peter, to be diligent, that we may be found of him in Peace,
without spot, and blameless.

I now come to discourse of the Persons to whom this Ministration is committed,
which I shall speak to in a fourfold Consideration.

1. To us, the Officers of the Gospel Dispensation, not to the false Apostles,
nor yet to the Jewish Priesthood. The Ministry of the New Testament excels
that of the Old, even as the New Covenant, and the Grace of the Gospel goes
beyond the Law, as the Apostle discourses largely, in the third Chapter of
this second Epistle to the Corinthians. The Legal Dispensation in general was a
Dispensation of Condemnation, which pronounced a Curse upon Offenders, but gave
not Power and Grace to perform Obedience; and the external Observations therein
enjoined were a heavy Yoke: And that Acceptance which holy Men had with God
under the Law, was not from the particular Jewish Covenant, as such, but
chiefly from the Terms of Grace declared to Abraham, who is called the Father
of the Circumcision, to them who are not of the Circumcision only, but who walk
in the Steps of the Faith of Abraham. Romans 4.11.


Indeed they had then Sacrifices for Sin, and a Way of Atonement; but these
things, as they were strictly legal, did only tend to obtain the Favor of God,
that the Offenders should not be cut off, or be exposed to Temporal Judgments:
But it was not possible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should purge away
Sins, the Guilt of which their repeated Oblations did declare to continue. And
the Reverence to God, and Obedience, was in these Observations chiefly valuable.

But these Sacrifices, as they fell under a more large Consideration, were also
Evidences of the Mercy of God in receiving Sinners, and were Testimonies of
God's particular Favor, in being willing to bless that People, if they would
hear his Voice, and obey him; and did also adumbrate the Grace of the New
Testament, Romans 3.21.
which the Apostle tells us was witnessed by the Law and the Prophets.

But the Gospel-Ministration declares Christ by his Mediation to have actually
obtained and effected a complete Way of Reconciliation, and confirmed that
Covenant which is established upon better Promises, and is properly and
eminently the Ministration of Righteousness, proposing most excellent
Blessings, with a sure and plain way to obtain them, and affording such
Assistances as are needful. And this Gospel-Reconciliation is so committed to
the Ministry, that they ministerially dispense the Blessings thereof, by
declaring its Doctrine, by Benedictions and Absolutions, and by dispensing the
Sacramental Symbols of Divine Grace.

2. To us, with primary respect to St. Paul, who wrote this Epistle, and the
other Apostles. They were in a peculiar manner entrusted with the Ministry of
Reconciliation, for they were the chief Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection, and
the principal Testifiers of the Christian Faith, and received their Doctrine
and Office immediately from Christ. They were the Foundations, next to Christ
himself, of the Christian Church, and the infallible Guides thereof, and were
furnished with singular Assistances, and the Power of the Holy Ghost. And the
Extent of their Authority was in some parts thereof unconfined and unlimited;
even St. Paul says, he received Grace and Apostleship for Obedience to the
Faith, Romans 1.5.
among all Nations, including Rome also, diverse Years after St. Peter was said
to be Bishop there.

The Apostles were the highest Officers of the Christian Church, 1 Cor. 12.28.
Ephesians. 4.11.
under Christ himself; and the Scriptures tell us, God set therein first
Apostles, and therefore none above them. Indeed St. Peter, whom we highly
honor as an eminent Apostle, had a kind of Primacy of Order yielded to him,
but with no design to depress the other Apostles, above whom he had no
distinction of Office. The Power of binding and loosing promised to St. Peter,
Mat. 16.19. was on like manner given to them all, Mat. 18.18. And that ample
Commission, John 20.21, 23. As my Father sent me, so send I you: Whose soever
Sins ye remit, etc. does give them all an equal Authority. And tho St. Paul was
last called, we read that St. Peter gave to him the right hand of Fellowship;
Gal. 2.9. 2. Cor. 11.5. Chap. 12.11.
and in two several places of this second Epistle to the Corinthians, the
Holy Ghost tells us he was in nothing behind the very chiefest Apostles. And
tho there are many Privileges and Prerogatives reckoned up to St. Peter, in
which Subject many Romish Writers are very diligent; the Prerogatives of St.
Paul, upon due consideration, will either equal them, or not be much inferior
to them. It was St. Paul, not St. Peter, who was taken up into the third
Heaven, who saw our Savior after his Ascension into Glory, who labored more
abundantly than they all, who was miraculously called, and was in a peculiar
manner the Apostle of the Gentiles, and who wrote a much greater part of the
New Testament than any other of the Apostles did.

And for that late Notion, That the Power of the Keys was given only to St.
Peter, in that he was appointed by Christ, singly to declare the Gospel first
to the Gentiles: both this confined sense of the Power of the Keys, and of its
being peculiar to S. Peter, is against the sense of Antiquity; and also that
which is particularly insisted on is a mistake. For though God by a Vision
directed St. Peter to open the Door to the Gentiles; yet all the Apostles had
before that time the Commission which he first made use of, to go and teach all
Nations, Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.16.
and Preach the Gospel to every Creature: So that this was not a singular
Authority committed to St. Peter; but he was first made choice of to have a
right understanding of the extent of his Commission. And it is not to be
doubted, but that Authority which did belong to all the Apostles, of leading
Men to the Church, receiving them into it, governing them in it, and excluding
them from it, does contain the chief part of the power of the Keys.

3. To us, not only to the Apostles, but even to other Officers of the Church,
as Bishops and Priests or Presbyters, is given this Ministry of Reconciliation:
for if we consider the nature of this Office, the Ministry of Reconciliation,
or which is all one, the Ministry of the Gospel must not cease, till the end of
it in the Salvation of Men be accomplished. And our Savior both promises his
Presence and Authority to be with his Ministry unto the end of the World; and
establishes them in his Church till we all come in the Unity of the Faith,
Mat. 28.20. Ephesians. 4.14.
and Knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect Man.

And we may further observe, That in writing this second Epistle to the
Corinthians; it is manifest from the Inscription thereof, that Timothy therein
joined with S. Paul. Now, though he was no Apostle, nor a Companion of St. Paul
till after the Council of Jerusalem, as appears from the History of the Acts;
yet he here, as well as St. Paul, has a share in the Ministry of
Reconciliation.

That Timothy was the first Bishop of Ephesus, is generally declared by the
Ancient Writers. Eusebius attesteth it; Eus. Hist. l. 3. c. 4.
and besides others, this was expressed by Leontius in the great Council of
Chalcedon; Conc. Chalc. Action. 11.
there being then preserved an exact Record and Catalogue of the Bishops of
that Church. And though Learned Men herein disagree, and there is manifest
difficulty in fixing the Chronology; it is greatly probable, from comparing the
Epistles to Timothy with the History of the Acts, that he was not yet made
Bishop of Ephesus, when this Epistle to the Corinthians was written: And this
might then give some fair probability from the instance of Timothy, that that
Order of Priest or Presbyter, as distinct from a Bishop, was of an Apostolical,
and therefore a Divine Original. But because several difficulties, too large to
be here discussed, must be obviated for the clearing this particular; I shall
rather fix upon another Consideration, which may be sufficient to persuade the
same.

It is very evident from the History of the Acts, and some expressions in the
Epistles; that for several years after the famous Church of Ephesus was founded
by St. Paul, Timothy the first Bishop there, was usually with St. Paul in his
Journeys, or by his Command in other places. Now it may be acknowledged, that
the chief Government and power of Censure in several Churches, was for some
time reserved in the hands of the Apostles themselves, though at a distance, as
is evident from the Epistles to the Corinthians, it was concerning the Church
of Corinth. But he who shall think that in all this time they had no
Church Officer fixed amongst them in that great Church of Ephesus, to
administer the Holy Communion, and celebrate other needful Ministerial
Performances, must account the Apostles to have had no great care of the
Churches they planted, nor the Churches to have had any great zeal for the
Religion they embraced, which no Man can judge, who has any knowledge of the
Spirit of that Primitive Christianity. But if they had in the Church of
Ephesus, other fixed Officers distinct from the Bishop, to celebrate the Holy
Communion, and other necessary acts of ordinary Ministration, then must the
Order of Presbyters be of as early original in the Church, as the History of
the Acts; and then the ordaining Elders in every Church, must take in those who
are distinctly called Priests or Presbyters.

To this I add, that the Office of Presbyter includes an Authority to tender
in God's Name remission of Sins, and as from him to exhibit to his Church the
Sacramental Symbols of his Grace; and upon that account no such Office could
ever have its Original from any lower than Apostolical and Divine Authority.

4. To us, in different Ranks and Orders in the Church, not in a parity and
equality. Here is S. Paul an Apostle, and Timothy in an Order inferior to him.
When Christ was upon Earth, he appointed the Apostles, and the Seventy; and
when he Ascended, he gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and Teachers. And though most of these were Officers by an
extraordinary Commission, which are ceased; yet when Timothy was fixed at
Ephesus, where there then were Presbyters, as I have showed, the chief power of
Government, and the care of Ordination was entrusted in his hands singly, as is
manifest, and has been often observed from the Epistles to Timothy. The like
appears concerning Titus; as also that the chief care of the Churches of Asia,
was in the hands of the Angels of those Churches.

If we consult the Ancient state of the Church, this chief Government in a
single Person or Bishop, in those ancient times, took place as far as
Christianity it self reached. Besides what may be said from particular Writers,
1 Can. Ap. 2. Can. Nic. 19.
the first General Council of Nice, and the more ancient Code called the Canons
of the Apostles, do both of them not only frequently mention, as distinct
Offices, the Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon; but also express this distinction
between Bishop, and Presbyter. 1. 2 Can. Ap. 1. Can: Nic. 4. 3 Can. Ap. 15, 31,
32, 38. Conc. Nic. c. ^.
That the peculiar power of Ordaining does reside in the Bishop. 2. That he
receives his Episcopal Office by a special Ordination thereto. 3. That he has
a particular power of governing and censuring the Laiety, and other Clergy. And
he who shall consider that many things in the Scripture may receive
considerable Light, from understanding the custom of the Jews, and even of the
Gentiles, must needs acknowledge that an account of the practice and customs of
the Christian Church, may lead us to the true sense of those expressions of
Scripture which have relation thereto; especially, since no Man without this
help can give a satisfactory account of the distinct work and business of those
ordinary Church Officers, which are particularly mentioned in Scripture:
Wherefore I doubt not but according to the Scripture, and the Universal
practice of the ancient Church throughout the World; the power of the Keys, and
of remitting and retaining Sins, which takes in the whole Office of the
Ministry, is in some eminent parts of it wholly reserved to Bishops, while
other parts thereof are dispensed by Priests, and some by Deacons; Ignat. ad
Smyr. Tert. de Bapt. c. 17.
yet so, that these ever acted with submission to the Bishop, as is asserted by
Ignatius and Tertullian.

I shall only here further observe, that in the very beginning of Christianity,
the distinction of the Officers of the Christian Church was owned and
acknowledged to be correspondent and parallel to the distinction of the
Officers of the Jewish Temple-Service, the observing of which seems of
considerable moment in this case. Even St. Hierome declares, That what place
Aaron, Hieron. ad Evagr. Epiph. Haer. 29. and 78. Hieronym. de scrip. Eccles.
in Jacobo. Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 23 gr.
his Sons and the Levites had in the Temple, the same have the Bishops, Priests
and Deacons in the Church. It is related concerning St. James, the first Bishop
of Jerusalem, by Epiphanius out of Clemens, that he did wear the (...), (which
is in the Septuagint, the Plate upon the high Priest's Mitre, on which was
engraven, Holiness to the Lord,) and he, as also S. Hierome, and Eusebius from
Egesippus, relate, that to him only it was lawful to enter into the Holy of
Holies. (...)
Now all these Christian ^^^iters, with others who use somewhat like
expressions, as ^^^crates concerning St. John, must never be thought to
^^^^pire together to impose Fables upon the after-Ages. (...) ^ould they be so
much wanting in the knowledge of Christianity, as to imagine that these great
Officers of the Christian Church, were Jewish High Priests, and ministered in
their Temple-Service; but the sense of these expressions, though they may seem
at first view obscure, is, that S. James was acknowledged to have a like
eminency of Office above others in the Christian Church of Jerusalem, as the
Jewish High Priest had above other Priests in the Jewish Church. Naz. Or. 5.
And Nazianzen expresses his being ordained Bishop by these and other like
words: says he, Thou anointedst me an High Priest, and broughtst me to the
Altar of the Spiritual Burnt-Offering, sacrificedst the Calf of Initiation, and
made me view the Holy of Holies. Which words evidence, that the Christian
Bishop, by an Allegorical Allusion, was described by words primarily relating
to the Jewish High Priest, because of a Parallel eminency in each of them.

Now this Observation shows the distinction of these Officers of the Christian
Church, Eusebius. HIst. l. 2. c. 1. Hieron. de script. Eccles.
from the very beginning thereof, St. James being ordained Bishop of Jerusalem
very soon after our Savior's Ascension. And this will further evidence, that
as the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and the Jewish Writers frequently
mention the Officers of the Temple-Service, only by the names of Priests and
Levites, including therein the High Priest, whose Office was distinct from the
other Priests; so it is no prejudice to the like distinction of Offices under
the New Testament, that in the Scriptures and some other ancient Writers, the
Officers above Deacons are sometimes expressed by the name of Bishops, sometime
of Elders, Priests or Presbyters; whilst yet we have very plain Testimony of
the singular eminency of one, who has since been peculiarly called the Bishop.

I come now to the last thing to be discoursed of, the Divine Authority by
which this Ministry is established. God in Christ has given to us the Ministry
of Reconciliation; and this speaks three things.

1. The true Original of this Function. God the Father gave the Ministry of
Reconciliation; our Lord sent his Apostles, as his Father sent him; and the
Holy Ghost made the Elders of Ephesus to be Overseers of the Flock. And here
not only St. Paul, who was called immediately, but Timothy also (even as those
other Elders of Ephesus,) being called by Men, whom God made chief Officers in
his Church, received this Ministry by Divine Authority; and therefore the
Administrations thereof are performed in the Name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost.

This therefore is such a Sanction, as every Person upon Earth ought to
reverence; and whosoever either despise or oppose this Ministry, had need
seriously and timely to consider whose Authority they undertake to affront.
When our Savior appointed the Twelve Apostles, and afterward the Seventy,
Mat. 10.15. Luke 10, 12.
he bids them both to shake off the Dust of their Feet against that City that
should not receive them; and tells them it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in
that day, than for that City; and declares further even to the Seventy, who
were then of the lowest rank of them whom he sent: Luke 10.16.
he that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me.

But for all those who are employed about God's Work, and are warranted by his
Authority; if they be faithful in his Service, 1 Pet. 5.4.
they shall be here under his Care, and hereafter partakers of his Reward. St.
Peter acquaints us, that when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they shall
receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away; Rev. l. 16, 20. chapter 2. l.
and St. John assures us, That our Lord himself holds the seven Stars, or the
Angels of the seven Churches in his right hand.

2. This speaks also the Excellency of this Ministry. As it is from God, it is
properly and eminently a Gift of God, even a Gift of that high Nature, that
when Christ in his glorious Exaltation received Gifts for Men, he then gave
some Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.1^.
and as Head of his Church, established this fixed Ministry. And if we consider
it as it respects Men, the most excellent Designs are thereby pursued, to wit,
the promoting among Men the Glory of God, and the Kingdom and Government of
Jesus Christ; and the conducting Men into the Ways of God, and thereby unto
Peace and Reconciliation with him, and to everlasting Happiness. Hereupon they
who serve God in this Office, 1 Cor. 3.9. 2 Cor. 6.1.
are owned to be (...), Fellow-workers with God himself, as under God, carrying
on the great Design of God and his Goodness in the World. And this speaks it an
Institution of great Value, Worth, and Honor.

And as I above noted this Ministry to excel the Jewish Priesthood, which yet
was very excellent; so St. Chrysostom observes, That God has given this high
Honor thereto, Chrysostom. de Sacerdot. l. 3. c. 5.
which he has not given to the holy Angels and Archangels themselves, to be
Ministers of Reconciliation, and to dispense in his Name the Pledges of his
Grace and Favor unto the Members of his Church.

3. This shows that no Man may take this Honor unto himself, but he that
enters into any Order of this Ministry, must do it in that way which God
appoints. The Apostles were constituted and commissionated immediately by
Christ himself; and as he committed the general Care of his Church to them, he
therewith endued them with a Power to ordain others, which is a chief part of
that Care, and of great concernment for the present and future Good of the
Church.

The Assistants of the Apostles, and the first Bishops and other Officers of
the several Churches, were ordained by some one or more of the Apostles, or of
those Apostolical Men who received Ordination from them. The ancient
Testimonies of the Fathers assure us, Tert. de Praesc. c. 32. Iren l. 3. c. 3.
Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 35. gr. Acts 6.3, 6. Acts 14.23. Eus. Hist. l. 3. c.
23. gr.
that Clemens was ordained by St. Peter, and Polycarp by St. John. The
Scriptures acquaint us, that the seven Deacons were constituted by the twelve
Apostles; and where Paul and Barnabas came, they ordained Elders in every
Church. And Eusebius declares, as a Matter of certain Truth, that St. John in
his old Age, in some places made Bishops, and in others planted whole Churches.

After the Apostles had committed particular Churches to the Care of their
Bishops or Metropolitans, they also entrusted the Power of Ordination
peculiarly in their hands, which indeed is included in committing to them the
chief Care of the Church. Titus 1.5. 1 Timothy 3. 1-14, 15.
To this purpose Titus was appointed to ordain Elders in every City of Crete;
and Timothy directed how he ought to behave himself in the Church of God,
concerning the Ordination of its Officers. And from these Principles, the Truth
of what Clemens Romanus declares may be easily inferred, Epist. ad Cor. p. 57.
That the Apostles ordered that when those chief Officers of the Church, whom
they had appointed, should die, (...), others in their places should succeed
them in the same Office and Ministration, and therefore with a Power of
Ordination.

And the universal Consent of genuine Antiquity, shows the ancient Church to
have received and followed that Platform and Model which was framed by the
Apostles, for Episcopal Eminency in Government, and Power in Ordination. To
this purpose both Tertullian and Irenaeus urge this, Tert. de Praesc. c. 32.
Iren. adv. Haer. l. 3. c. 3.
as a convictive Argument against the later Brood of Heresies, That the
Catholic Church could produce such a Catalogue of their Bishops, and the
Succession of them, which would manifest that the first of them who was fixed
in their several Churches, was there placed by the Apostles themselves, or by
Apostolical Men their Assistants. And the Succession in diverse chief Churches
is still preserved in ancient Writers, and Ecclesiastical Historians. And that
the Power of Ordination especially was peculiar to the Bishop, besides the
Testimony of ancient Canons, and Practice, is acknowledged even by St. Hierom.
Hieron. ad Evagr. ^
And the placing of this Power in a single Person was of great necessity and
usefulness, for preserving the Churches Peace and Unity.

From hence I conclude, that Episcopal Ordination was, according to the
Constitution of the Apostles, and constant Practice of the Ancient Church, the
only regular way of entering into this Office and Ministry of Reconciliation:
and he that knows how easy a thing it is to raise plausible Objections almost
against any thing, will not be much moved by such as some produce in this case,
against so plain Evidence and general Testimony.

Indeed there have been some, and but some Protestant Foreign Churches, (not
the Bohemian, as some English Writers have unfaithfully misrepresented it, nor
those of Sueden, and the Danish Dominions, nor diverse others in Germany,) who
have been without this Episcopal Ordination; and it must be said, that in this
particular, which is a matter of moment, they are defective in that Primitive
Apostolical Order which we observe. But in the first fixing these Churches, and
their Ministry, all things seem not to have been done as they would have
chosen, but as their present Circumstances would give them leave, while they
wanted that Privilege which our Reformation enjoyed, the Consent of the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Governors. For besides the Expressions of particular
Writers, the French Protestants, in their General Confession, Confess. Gallic.
c. 31.
concerning the Entrance into the Ministry, pleaded a Necessity in their
Reformation, of having some things done extra ordinem, out of the regular Way,
with respect to the making up the Ruins and Decays of the Church.

Yea, those Churches themselves, and the most worthy Men among them, are no
Opposers, but Approvers of this Government and Order, as has been sufficiently
showed concerning many principal Persons among them. And even in the Synod of
Dort, when those sent from England asserted Episcopacy as Apostolical, there
was not (as they declared in their joint Attestation) any one Person in that
Synod, who spoke a Word against it; yea, as Bishop Hall acquaints us, the
President of the Synod said, Domine, Divine Right of Episcopacy, part 1. c. 4.
non licet nobis esse tam faelices: We may not be such happy Men.

Now I conceive, it becomes private Persons not to be over forward in judging
other Churches, but to express as much Charity toward them as the case will
bear; but to show no such respect to any, as to neglect a due Reverence to
whatsoever is of God. Wherefore I shall only note three things in general.

1. That it is indeed a Truth, that some positive Precepts may in extraordinary
cases be dispensed with by the Goodness of God, who will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice. This was that which warranted David's Men in eating the Shewbread.
In this case Circumcision was forborne in the Wilderness; and the Jewish
Casuists thought that Precept not to oblige, Hor. Hebr. in 1 Cor. 7.19.
when the circumcising an Infant was inevitably like to procure his Death. The
sacrificing in another place than that which God had singly appointed, was
practiced by Samuel, as well as others, after the Destruction of Shiloh, and
before the Building of the Temple; and by Elijah, under the general Defection
of Israel. The celebrating Baptism by Persons unordained, was allowed in the
ancient Church, Hieron. adv. Lucif.
si necessitas cogit, as St. Hierom phraseth it. And the Command that all the
Males of Israel should three times in the Year appear before the Lord, does yet
by the Letter of the Scripture give allowance to him who was in a Journey, and
by the reasonable Interpretation of the Jewish Writers, 1 Samuel 1.21. V. Seld.
de Syn. l. 1. c. 7. p. 186, 187.
the same Liberty was to be extended to those in Childhood and Infancy, (as
Samuel was) and to those in Sickness, Old Age, and such like.

2. Yet it becomes all good Men, who are to obey God, and reverence his
Institutions, not to be forward in judging themselves disobliged, by the
appearance of such Cases as they account extraordinary, from Obedience to any
of his Rules of Order. When Saul thought he had a Case of Necessity to warrant
his Sacrificing, yet God was highly displeased therewith, and deprived him of
his Kingdom: Nor might Vzzah touch the shaking Ark.

3. In ordinary cases, he who willingly breaks positive Rules established by
God's Authority, is guilty of heinous moral Evil, in disobedience to God's
Commands, contempt of his Government, and despising the Blessings which he
tenders by those Institutions.

Wherefore since Episcopal Ordination has been of so general Practice, from
the Apostles, in the Church of God, and is regularly established and continued
in this Kingdom, no Man in this Church, with respect to Order, Unity, and
Apostolical Institution, can reasonably expect that God will ever own him as
his Officer in the Ministry of Reconciliation, unless he be admitted thereto by
such Ordination. And private Christians, both out of Duty to God, and out of
respect to their own Safety, may not so esteem of any who oppose themselves
against this Order, because of the Danger under the New Testament, of perishing
in the gainsaying of Core.

And let every Person, whosoever he be, be wary how upon any pretense
whatsoever he undertakes to execute any proper part of the Power of the Keys,
unless he be set apart thereunto by regular Ordination.

And now I shall conclude my Discourse with three Inferences.

First; This gives us an account whence all that Opposition and Difficulty does
arise, which the Ministration of the Gospel, and the faithful Servants of God
therein do meet with. The Devil will use his utmost Power, by all his Methods,
to hinder so good a Work as this Ministration is intended for. Hence the Holy
Jesus, and most of his Apostles, met with opposition even unto Death. And as
all the Persecutions of the Christian Church had an especial eye upon the
Clergy, so that violent one under Dioclesian, Eus. Hist. l. 3. c. 12.
for the first Year, fingled them only out to be the Subjects of his Fury.
These are the ordinary Mark, against whom all the Churches Enemies shoot their
poisoned Arrows, envenomed from the Malignity of the Old Serpent.

And when the Evil One cannot proceed by open Violence, he often makes use of
Instruments to fix slanderous Censures and Calumnies upon the Officers of
Christ, to render their Ministration the less prosperous and successful in the
World: Insomuch that their Devoutness in Religion is by some upbraided with
Ceremoniousness; and their conscientious Observance of due Order, and
Averseness to Faction, is branded with the odious Term of Popery; and their
embracing the necessary Reformation of the Church, is by others stigmatized
with the infamous Names of Heresy and Schism. Thus our Savior was called
Beelzebub, himself accused of Blasphemy, and his Doctrine of Heresy.

Besides these things, the vicious and scandalous Practices of too many who
profess the Truth, the various Schisms, and other manifold Corruptions in the
Doctrine and Practice of Religion; and I wish I might not add the undue
Proceedings of some Patrons in conferring Ecclesiastical Preferments, are all
of them dangerous Methods, made use of by the Evil One, to hinder the attaining
the great Ends of this Ministration.

Secondly; I now address my self to you, my Reverend Brethren. It is a weighty
Charge, a Business of great Importance, that we are called unto; and as we are
Stewards of the Living God, it is required of us that we be found faithful. And
for the putting us in mind of that serious Care and Diligence which we are to
use in our Ministry, I know not how to speak otherwise so well, as by
recommending the serious and frequent considering that useful Exhortation in
the Book of Ordination.

And let us particularly look well to our own Paths; for tho the Excellency of
God's Ordinances does not depend upon the Instruments, yet if a Blemish appears
in any of our Lives, it becomes a great Prejudice to the Designs we should
carry on among Men, and will open the Mouths of our Enemies; and if there be a
Judas among the Apostles, the Devil is ready to make a special use of him to
his purposes. But let us observe that Rule, which but a few Verses after my
Text, the Apostle tells us was the Practice of himself, and other Officers of
the Christian Church, Giving no Offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not
blamed, but in all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God. 2 Cor.
6.3, 4.

Thirdly; Let every one in their places lay to their helping-Hand, to promote
the Success of this Ministry upon themselves and others. Wherefore let every
Man who lives under the Dispensation of the Gospel, reject all Wickedness of
Life, and exercise himself unto Godliness; and so he will certainly advantage
himself, and probably others by his good Example.

And let all those who have the management of the Authority of the Church in
their hands, indifferently check the Neglect and Contempt of the Public
Service of God, and all other Viciousness and Evil which comes within the
Limits of their Authority, and countenance and encourage all real Virtue,
Goodness, Holiness, and Religion.

And those Parish-Officers, who stand charged upon their Oaths to give an
account of Offenses, which is noted by our 26th Canon, to be the chief Means
whereby public Offenses may be reformed and punished, and whose Miscarriage is
there severely censured; let not them sinfully neglect their Oath and their
Duty, the right Discharge of which may tend to the Glory of God, the
flourishing of the Church and Religion, and the bringing Men into the Ways of
Happiness.

And because the Apostle proposes that humbling Question concerning the
Ministerial Charge, Who is sufficient for these Things? Let us earnestly
implore the Help and Grace of God to assist us, and succeed our Ministrations
to the great Good of Men. And let every devout Christian join his fervent and
frequent Prayer to this end and purpose, That he who has committed to us this
Ministration, would bring all those who partake thereof, unto true Holiness of
Life here, and eternal Happiness hereafter, through the Merits of Jesus Christ
our Lord: To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Glory for
evermore. Amen.

A SERMON Preached at NORWICH, March 2. 1678.
JOEL 2.12. Therefore also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your
heart.


IN the foregoing part of this Prophecy there is a dismal appearance of things
concerning Judah, a heavy threatening of sad Calamities therein, both by Famine
and Sword, in the first Chapter and former part of the second. The dreadfulness
hereof is represented according to an usual Prophetic Style, as if God was
making the whole Fabric of his Creation to totter; v. 10. The Earth shall
quake before them, and the Heavens shall tremble, the Sun and Moon shall be
dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their shining. And this great Calamity was
like to be the more sad, because of the terror of God's Vengeance going along
with it, v. 11. The Day of the Lord is great and very terrible, and who can
abide it?

In such a case as this, these words (which our Church directs to be read at
the beginning of Lent, which is now near, and which are of excellent use at all
times,) are the beginning of the Prophetical Direction for their help and
recovery from this sad Condition; and such a Remedy as recovereth one gasping
for Life, is worth the valuing. Now here upon the first mention of returning to
God, are some overtures of hope, v. 13. He is gracious and merciful. v. 14. Who
knows if he will return and repent? And after the continuance of solemn and
serious Devotion, required in the following Verses, we have a plain and clear
promise of help, v. 18. Then will the Lord he jealous for his Land, and pity
his People. So excellent and efficacious a prescription is true Repentance and
returning to God, that upon this the Scene of affairs is presently changed. And
whereas all that part of this Prophecy which goes before this Text, contained
doleful and heavy Judgments: From this Verse forward there are great Blessings
and Comforts promised to Judah, and Judgments denounced against her Enemies,
even unto the end of this whole Prophecy. Thus hereby the dark Night ends in
the appearance of a bright Day; and the stormy Tempest is blown over, and
behold a Calm.

In these words we have,

1. The Authority by which they are commanded, Therefore also now says the
Lord. So that we have here a Divine Law and Precept, even with respect to these
foregoing Circumstances, which had a terrible Aspect: But how sad soever they
were, God himself directs to a way of help. There is no state, how perplexed
and uncomfortable soever in this World, but which is intended of God to deter
Men from Sin. Even in the severest threatenings of God's Wrath and Anger there
is, as Cl. Alexandrinus expresses it, (...), a kindness and love to Men, by
such Threatenings to reclaim them from their Sin, and reduce them from the Paths
of Ruin. And this Phrase, therefore also now says the Lord, does also give
notice of somewhat remarkable which follows, which requires our special
attention and diligent observation.

2. The chief thing here expressed, is, the Precept or useful Direction it
self; Turn ye even unto me with all your heart. This I shall insist upon, and
thence shall undertake to show,

That Pious and Penitent behavior toward God, and hearty turning to him, is
always useful, and is the best way for remedy under the greatest difficulties.
And of this I shall discourse (as the nature of the subject requires,) with
the greatest plainness and evidence that I can. The Duty here enjoined, is of
great concernment and usefulness: To a Man's self, a quickened and renewed
exercise of his Duty brings inward Peace, intitles him to the Blessing and
Favor of God, and the Rewards of his Kingdom. The state of the World, and of
the Church is such, That many Men know not whither to look or turn; and then
the most useful and necessary undertaking is, to direct their eyes to God, and
turn unto him. Other acts of prudent care are in their places needful also; but
there is no true Prudence in the neglect of this which is of greatest moment:
The Prodigal Son in his straits could take no wiser course than to bethink
himself, and return to his Father; and thereby he takes the best care of his
Duty and his Welfare both together. And this true penitent application to God,
is the sure and only way to obtain his favor. Zech. 1.3. Turn ye unto me,
says the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hosts.

In speaking to this Duty, I shall enquire into these two things.

I. What Encouragements have we for obtaining good fr om God by our hearty
turning to him?

II. What is it to turn to God with all our heart; or what must be done by us
for the right performing this Duty?

Qu. 1. What Encouragements have we that we may receive good from God by hearty
turning to him? This enquiry is suitable to the design and occasion of my Text,
these words being proposed as a way for receiving help and good. This also is
of great use with respect to the Duty it self; since Men are not forward to
undertake things which they think will be to no purpose, and will tend to no
advantage. And this also is needful with respect to the general state of
Religion; since he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Wherefore I shall here consider the
more general encouragement we have to turn to God, from the nature of God
himself; and then the particular encouragements from the state and nature of
Christianity.

Among the various Encouragements from the Nature and Being of God, I shall
only mention two things.

1. God's Supreme Government and Authority. Upon this account his favor is
highly valuable, because he disposes of all the great Affairs and Concerns of
Men. For he orders the final Judgment which concerns the eternal state of Men;
and this will proceed according to the Rules of Righteousness and the
New Covenant, and according to the Sentence which will then be pronounced, must
every Man's endless Condition be. But with respect to that Day, those who are
hard and impenitent do treasure up Wrath against the day of Wrath; but those
who turn unto God, shall inherit Life: And God so disposes of all private and
public Affairs in this World, that thereupon it is of great concernment to
have him well-pleased with us. And if a gracious Prince standing by his
faithful Subject, or a righteous Judge taking in with an honest and just Cause,
be the Advantage of those who are concerned therein; much more is the Kindness
and Care of God greatly valuable: For no Evil befalls any without his hand, nor
are there any public Calamities but such as are his Judgments. He can, and often
does defeat the Counsels of Men, and discover their secret Contrivances; and he
governs them and their Actions, and the Events thereof. Herein we have hitherto
had cause to admire the Goodness and Wisdom of God, and his Counsel shall stand.

2. The Goodness and Purity of his Nature. This shows his great readiness to
express his Favor to them who heartily turn to him. The Order and Beauty of
the Creation, and the constant and abundant Supplies of Providence, are
Evidences of God's great Bounty, and Readiness to communicate of his Goodness
to his Creatures. The Light of this World is not so diffusive of it self, as
the Goodness of God is, since from him, as the Father of Lights, comes every
good Gift. But that Purity (which the Perfection of the Divine Being does
assure us to be in God, and which even our own Consciences must also
acknowledge) speaks Goodness and Piety to be acceptable to God, and the Persons
who are exercised therein to be peculiarly the Objects of his Favor. And as he
is a Governor, Obedience and Reverence must be both due to him, and pleasing
in his sight. And indeed no good Man is so highly pleased with Goodness and
Seriousness, as the holy God is; and there is nothing in his whole Creation
that he esteems so much. He has said, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my
Footstool; but to this Man will I look, that is poor, and of a contrite Spirit.
Isa. 66.1, 2. Now upon this consideration of the Divine Goodness, the Ninevites
proceeded in their Repentance; and tho that was undertaken upon uncertain
hopes, yet with good success. But we have plain Promises and Directions to our
Duty, and as plain Promises annexed thereunto, such as Ezekiel. 18.20. I will judge
you, O House of Israel, every one according to his Ways, says the Lord God.
'Repent, and turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity shall
not be your Ruin.

I come now to consider some peculiar Encouragements from Christianity, and
shall here mention three.

1. From the coming of the Son of God into the World. He came to be a Mediator,
and a Sacrifice, and to assure us, that God is ready to be reconciled to all
them that turn to him, and entertain the Terms of his Covenant. And therefore
those who are truly penitent, shall by virtue of the Death and Sacrifice of
Christ, and the Reconciliation he has thereby made, obtain the Favor of God.
This was so much designed by our Savior, that Repentance was one of the first
things he preached, Mat. 4.17. Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent. And
among the last Things which he committed to his Apostles before his Ascension,
this was one, That Repentance, and Remission of Sins, should be preached in his
Name among all Nations. Luke 24.47. And is it not our great Comfort, that the
Encouragements to true Repentance are assured by the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and by the Death of Christ, and that they are confirmed by both the Sacraments
of the New Testament? If God had not been willing to receive humble Penitents,
and to give them his Blessings, would he have sent his Son, and have given so
great a Blessing to the World, as to put us upon returning to him? And if
Christ came to call Sinners to Repentance, will he not own and receive them who
obey his Call? It is true indeed, that the Proposals of the Gospel do chiefly
relate to God's bestowing spiritual and eternal Blessings (and our Care should
be especially about these things) but even temporal Blessings are not excluded
from the Promises of God.

2. From the Glory of Christ's Exaltation. He who upon Earth proposed the Grace
and Doctrine of Repentance, has now in Heaven all Authority and Power to
dispense the Blessings he promised to them who obey him. And he is faithful and
true to perform his Word. Would you obtain Remission of Sin, and the Favor of
God? He, as our High Priest, is our Intercessor, effectually to procure this
Blessing from God for them who heartily turn to him. And as our King, he is
himself empowered to dispense this Favor of God; For God has exalted him to
be a Prince and a Savior, to give Forgiveness of Sins. Acts 5.31. And he who
took so much pains to seek after the straying Sheep, will no doubt embrace them
who by his care do return. If you seek for the Welfare and Preservation of the
Church of God, and its being defended against its Enemies; as humble pious
Christians are the Heirs of Promise, these Blessings are the Benefits contained
in the Covenant and Promise of God. And withal, there are special
Encouragements from our Savior's Exaltation, for our expecting to receive
these Mercies: For our Savior being exalted at God's right hand, is now made
an Head over all things to the Church; and this includes both his near Relation
which he bears to it, and that also he takes upon himself a very particular
Care of it. And his Exaltation is so fatal to his and his Churches Enemies,
that he must reign till all his Enemies be made his Footstool. Hereupon he
tells Saul, going to Damascus, that it was hard for him to kick against the
Pricks. His Enemies must fall before his Power, but he will effect what he
undertakes to uphold.

3. From the more particular Consideration of the State of the Gospel Church.
The Christian Church is made up of returning Penitents, but these are owned of
God as his Children and Heirs, and they shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom
of their Father. And such is God's Care of this Society of his Church, that if
it walk in his Way, it shall be supported by him, tho Earth and Hell should
contrive against it. Yet no particular Branch or Part of the Christian Church
has any security of its standing, or any assurance from God that it shall be
preserved, but upon the Conditions of its holding the Faith, and practicing
Piety and Obedience, or hearty Repentance. And indeed it can have none, because
there can be no particular Promise from God against the Nature and Terms of the
New Covenant, which enjoins Faith and Obedience as necessary Conditions of
Acceptance with God.

The Romish Church pretends that she can never fall, but must always continue,
because of that Promise of our Savior, Mat. 16.18. On this Rock I will build
my Church. But to this all I shall say at this time, is, That these Words do no
way particularly refer to the Roman Church, as it would arrogate to it self.
And our Lord has plainly declared to us, that no Church or Persons whatsoever
can be represented by a House built upon a Rock, which will stand
notwithstanding all Oppositions, but those who hear and obey his Doctrine,
which the Church of Rome does not. But all who neglect this Faith and Practice,
are as those who build on the Sand; their House will fall, and great will be
the Fall thereof. Mat. 7.24, 25, 26, 27. And that there was no particular
Privilege of this Nature ever intended to be granted to the Church of Rome, is
further manifest from that Epistle St. Paul wrote to the Romans: For with some
particular respect to that Church, he lets them know, If God spared not the
natural Branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee; and if thou continue
not in his Goodness, thou also shall be cut off; Romans 11.21, 22. But all
particular Churches whatsoever, who heartily obey the Doctrine of the Gospel,
are secured of God's especial Care and Preservation from those Words of our
Savior, John 15.2. Every Branch in me that bears Fruit, my Father purges
it, that it may bring forth more Fruit. The fruitful part of his Vineyard will
not want his Care.

And it is our great Comfort, that God's Catholic Church stands by his
Foundation upon a Rock, so that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it,
or no kind of Destruction shall be able to overcome it. So that whatever
Enemies it has in the World, they, like the proud and mighty Waves, if they
dash themselves against the Rock, will be broken in pieces; but the Rock it
self, and that which is built upon it, as an impregnable Fortress, stands
firm. For the Comfort of the Primitive Christians, the Book of the Revelations
gave them assurance, that God would take care that his Church should not be
overwhelmed by the Persecutions it endured, but should prevail under them. And
if it had not been from the Support of the Power of God, the Christian Church
in its weakest Estate could never have stood against the Wisdom and Power of
the World, which was then engaged against it; but God then did, and yet will
uphold his Church even to the end. And with a particular eye to God's especial
Care hereof in these latter Times, we read, that when the Thousand Years were
ended, and the Nations, and Gog and Magog compassed the Camp of the Saints, and
the beloved City, then Fire came from God out of Heaven, and devoured them,
Rev. 20.8, 9. And those Interpreters, who would understand these Phrases of the
Camp of the Saints, and the Beloved City, concerning any particular City or
Place upon Earth, seem not herein to observe the Nature of the Prophetic
Style, which will direct us to understand it of the more eminent and chief part
of the Christian Church.

Wherefore we have great grounds for expecting Good from God, if we mind our
Duty to him. Now upon this Encouragement, let us in the Fear of God undertake
this Duty, that we may be instrumental to the procuring Good to the Church of
God, and that we our selves may be Partakers of eternal Happiness. This is the
way to have God to be our Friend; and no other Peace in the World can be
concluded and secured upon those advantageous Terms, as our having Peace with
God may be. And therefore I shall now come to the second thing I proposed to
discourse of, what we are here commanded to do.

Quest. 2. What is it to turn to God with all our Heart?

Answ. This is one and the same thing with Repentance. The Septuagint express
this Phrase of Turning in the Text by (...), or being converted to God. And
this supposes or includes,

1. A serious Consideration and minding of our Rule, together with the Motives
that should put us upon a Practice answerable thereto. This Rule is the Word of
God, or the Holy Scripture, as superadded to the natural Light of Reason and
Conscience. Upon due pondering of this, Josiah's Heart was tender, and he
humbled himself, and undertook a Reformation.

2. Self-reflection and Examination of our Minds, Ways, and Actions by this
Rule, with this steadfast purpose, that nothing may be entertained or allowed in
us, which is not agreeable thereunto.

3. An humble and serious Sorrow for past Miscarriages, with hearty and
unfeigned Confession of Sin, and earnest Supplication to God for the obtaining
Mercy.

4. A resolved undertaking to forsake all Evil in Heart and Life, and to do our
Duty.

These things are so plain in the Nature of them, and so evidently necessary in
their general Consideration, that they need not either further Explication or
Proof. The Practice and Exercise of Repentance, and turning to God, takes in
all these; but both the Phrase of Turning, and the chief Design of Repentance
has principal respect to the last of them, it being all one to turn to God,
and to return to, and carefully set upon our Duty. And therefore I shall now
insist on this; and that we may practice these things to good effect, I shall
urge some particular Instances, which are of great use to be performed in our
minding this Duty.

1. In avoiding Schisms and Divisions, and practicing Unity and Peace.

2. In the forsaking Debauchery and Profaneness, and the embracing Seriousness
and Sobriety.

3. In rejecting all Irreligion, and Neglect of the Worship of God, and
engaging our selves in true Piety and hearty Devotion.

1. In the avoiding Schisms and Divisions, and practicing Unity and Peace. How
many and frequent are the Precepts for Peace and Unity delivered in the
Doctrine of our Savior? and how earnestly is this urged and inculcated? If
there be any Consolation in Christ, etc. (says the Apostle, Phil. 2.1, 2.)
Fulfill ye my Joy, being of one accord, and of one mind. And if we view and
consider the Business of our Religion, as it was delivered by our Savior and
his Apostles, this will be found to be one of its great and weighty Precepts.
And shall we then be forward to contend about other lesser things, to the
neglect of this? As the Scribes and Pharisees would tithe Mint, Anise, and
Cummin, but neglected the weighty Things of God's Law. St. Paul tells us, The
Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the
Holy Ghost: For he that in these Things serves Christ, is acceptable to God,
and approved of Men. Romans 14.17, 18. In which Words it is very plainly
asserted, that whilst some other Things which Men may contend about, are of
less moment, these Things here mentioned are of great concernment to Religion
it self, and the being esteemed of God and good Men. And as Peace is one of
these great Duties here urged, so that the Apostle had a very particular Eye
thereupon, may be concluded from the Words immediately following, v. 19. Let us
therefore follow after the Things which make for Peace. And the Neglect of this
Duty is very hurtful and pernicious to the Christian Church: For as in the
Body, when it is rent and torn, and the Members disjointed, there must be from
this very Cause great Disorders, Weakness, and Feebleness; so is it also in the
Church of God. Yea, these Things are to be accounted of dangerous Consequence,
for the undermining or shaking the Kingdom of Christ, since our Lord himself
has told us, that a Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to Desolation.
And shall any good Man be pleased to join with the Enemy in his Designs against
the welfare, stability and safety of the Church of Christ?

Now, besides many other Arguments which might be insisted on, to dissuade from
Schisms and Divisions, there are two things I shall recommend to you, as being
well worthy your serious consideration.

First, making Divisions in the Church, either includes a total want, or at
least a defect in a great degree of the true Spirit of Christianity: This must
needs be so, because the observing Peace and Unity are so great a part and duty
of our Religion. If we reflect on our Baptism, we are baptized into one Body,
and therefore are to observe Unity. And when S. Paul urges the Ephesians to
take care of that great Duty, of walking worthy of that Vocation wherewith they
were called, Ephesians. 4.1. To that end he most particularly and largely insists on
their keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, v. 3, etc. And from
this very Reason he concluded the Corinthians to be carnal, because of the
envying, strife, and divisions that were among them, 1 Cor. 3.3. And wherever
the Peace and Unity of the Church is broken from those corrupt Principles of
Pride, Self-will, and the carelessness of obeying God's Commandments, this
speaks such an unchristian temper as will exclude such Persons from the Kingdom
of God. And therefore those very phrases the Apostle makes use of to express
the Discords and Rents in the Church of Corinth, (...), and (...), are all of
them enumerated in his Epistle to the Galatians, (tho there they be rendered by
other English Words, Gal. 5.20.) among those Works of the Flesh, concerning
which we are told with earnestness of expression, that they that do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

And I think it considerable to be further observed, that even in such Persons
who are of a better Spirit, and who in the main, close with the other Duties
and Rules of Christianity, their miscarriage in this particular, in not holding
the Peace and Unity of the Church, will lessen and abate the degrees of that
future Glorious Reward which they would otherwise receive: And this I think is
sufficiently declared by St. Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians;
when he had rebuked the Corinthians for their Divisions, one being of Paul, and
another of Apollo, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. he still keeping his Eye upon, and
having an aim at these Divisions, as appears from that third, and the former
part of the fourth Chapter, tells them concerning them who hold to that only
foundation which the Apostles laid, If any shall build thereupon that which
will not abide the Trial; if his work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; but
he himself shall be saved, yet so as by Fire. v. 15. That is, if any such
person shall be engaged in Divisions in the Church, or in any other
unwarrantable Action or Doctrine, it shall go the worse with him, and be
hereafter to his loss; and though he escape Misery and obtain Life, it shall be
with the greater hazard, danger, and difficulty. And therefore he who would
seek his own greatest Good, must carefully avoid this miscarriage.

Secondly; Consider how extremely opposite, and contrary divisions in the
Church are to Christ himself. He is one Lord and Head, he has by one Spirit
and in one Baptism established his Church to be one Body in one and the same
Faith and Doctrine, and upon the same Hope of their Calling; and under the same
Only God and Father of all. And all these things S. Paul urges, as containing
in them special Obligations for Christian Unity, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. And besides
all the Precepts of his Doctrine, let us seriously observe how much our dying
Savior did earnestly and again, desire and pray that all his Disciples might
be one, John 17.11, 21, 23. And this he twice expresses in his Prayer to be
desired to this end, that the World might believe that thou have sent me. Now
if it would be an unworthy thing for any person against all reason and duty to
oppose the Dying Request of the best Friend he ever had in the World; it must
needs be unaccountable to act against that which was even at the point of
Death, so affectionately and importunately desired by our Lord and Savior. Was
this aimed at by our Lord as an useful means to bring over the World to believe
in him? and will any who have any Honor for Christ or Love for Men be so
uncharitable as to be engaged in any such Works as tend to keep off Men from
Christianity; and from obtaining Salvation by Jesus Christ. But this is
sufficiently intimated by our Savior to be the sad effect of the Divisions in
his Church. To all this I shall further add that it is related by Crusius (
Turcograec. lib. 3. part 1. p. 234.) that it is the daily Prayer of the Turks,
that Christians may not be at Unity. And they who are of the Church of Rome
express their delight and satisfaction in our Disagreements. Baronius ( Annal.
Eccles. An. 344. n. 9.) makes use of this as a considerable Argument against
the truth of the Protestant Doctrine: and Salmeron ( Tom. 9. Tr. 16. n. 1.)
declares that this is that which gives them expectations of prevailing against
us. And now shall any who own themselves the true followers of Christ, so
undertake to contradict the dying Request of their Savior, as in the mean time
to choose that which complieth with, and gratifieth the Desires both of the
professed Enemies of his Religion, and of those also who strangely corrupt and
pervert his Doctrine and Gospel?

But after all this, or whatsoever else may be spoken to this purpose, there
are two sorts of Men who I doubt are not like to be persuaded.

1. I fear there are some fierce Men, who are so far from having hearts
inclined to do this Duty, that they have not Patience to hear it, but rather to
turn angry, and to cry out, as the Lawyer did to our Savior, Thus saying, thou
reproachest us also. But it will become them, and others too, to bethink
themselves of the sad danger of all those persons who will not hearken, but
stop their Ears to such plain Duties as those of Peace and Unity are. But these
Truths must be spoken, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.

2. And others there are who will acknowledge in general the Truth of all I have
said of the great Sin and Evil of Schisms and Divisions. And though they be
engaged in the dividing Parties, will plead their own Innocence, and charge the
fault of these Divisions wholly upon the order and constitution of our Church,
and not upon themselves. Now here much might be said to show that the Worship
and Service of God in our Church is agreeable to the true Christian Rule; and
that on the other hand there are many things unaccountable, yea, and unlawful,
which are embraced without scruple by Dissenters, and contended for by the
dividing Parties. But this would be too long for me to insist upon in my
present Discourse. Wherefore, instead thereof, I shall mention a sensible and
ocular Demonstration, that it is not the Constitution of our Church, but the
ill temper of dividing Spirits, that is the true cause of our Divisions; And
that is this, That when this Constitution was thrown aside between thirty and
forty years since, the Rents and Divisions of the Church were not by this means
removed, but to the grief of good Men they were greatly increased thereby; and
the Spirits of many Men in this particular have been the worse ever since.

Let all of us therefore take heed to our selves, that we keep in the paths of
Peace and Unity; and let us mourn and pray for others who neglect them.

II. A second thing to be done in our turning to God, is the forsaking all
Viciousness and Debauchery, and becoming Serious and Sober. Vice defiles and
debaseth the nature of Man. It is so much against Reason and Conscience, and is
so far condemned by the common sense of Mankind, that it generally passes for
a disparagement in the World. And Viciousness is so much against the interest
of Men, and the good of the World, that thereupon it is prohibited and punished
by the Laws even of Barbarous Nations. This is the great Folly of Evil Men,
whilst hereby under the appearances of trifling Pleasures, great Cheats are
imposed upon Men, who should be wiser than to be thus decoyed into Temporal
Evils and Eternal Miseries. Now in turning to God, there must be a breaking off
from Sin by Repentance; or a Care to depart from Evil, and to do Good. Nor is
it enough that there be a mere restraint upon outward Actions of Evil; but
there must be also an hearty Resolution and inward Hatred against Sin, and a
sincere Love of what is Good: And that this may be effectual, it must be set
upon timely and presently; as a Wise Man will use his utmost diligence to put a
stop to a dangerous Disease before it be too late, and it become incurable. To
this purpose let these three things be considered.

First, Consider how all Vice and Wickedness of Life is contrary to the nature
of God; Such is the Purity of the Divine Being, that Sin is more opposite and
hateful unto God, than to the most Virtuous Man that lives in the World. God is
Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; and it is as possible for the black
Darkness to stand before the brightness of the Sun's Light, as for the workers
of Iniquity to be approved by the Holy God: The singular purity of his Laws,
and the exceeding dreadfulness of his Threats against Wickedness, are intended
to deter Men from the commission thereof. And if we take notice of the
instances and examples of God's displeasure against Sin, these are very
numerous. It was Disobedience that turned Adam out of Paradise; Debauchery and
Wickedness was that which unpeopled the old World, and caused them to be
destroyed by a Deluge; and Sodom and Gomorrah to be consumed by Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven. By the like sinful practices, the Jews who were God's
peculiar People, and to whom he was as an Husband, were divorced from him; and
diverse Calamities have been brought down upon other Persons and Nations. And
yet all these things come far short of what will be manifested at the great
Day, when the terrible Sentence of Eternal Perdition will be pronounced against
all Evildoers, who shall perish with everlasting Destruction from the Presence
of the Lord.

Secondly; Consider how much wicked works are peculiarly opposite to
Christianity. Sin is of the nature of the Devil; he is the Spirit that works
in the Children of Disobedience; but the Son of God was manifested that he
might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. The Life of Christ was such,
that thereby he left us an example that we should follow his Steps who did no
Sin; and his Doctrine teaches us, that we should deny Ungodliness and Worldly
Lusts. Even our Baptism is an undertaking to Renounce the Devil, and become
dead unto Sin. And it is more unaccountable for Debauchery to be in a
Christian, than for the brutish nature to inhabit the Soul and Body of a Man;
because this not only opposes our Profession of Christianity, but the designs
of our Redeemer also. His coming into the World, and his Death and Passion was,
that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a People
zealous of good Works. But that the Works of Darkness should be embraced by the
Children of Light; that they should yield up themselves to the Evil one, who
have plentiful Aids and Assistances of Divine Grace to withstand and overcome
him, is a thing altogether inexcusable.

Thirdly; Consider, that Viciousness is the more intolerable, when God's hand
appears to be lifted up. Corrections and Judgments are some of the last and
most powerful means which God makes use of for Man's amendment. By these
Pharaoh was brought to Submission, and Ahab to Humiliation: And it has been
observed, that the Israelites after the Seventy years Captivity in Babylon,
were never prone to follow after other Gods, as they had frequently done
before, notwithstanding their Instructions from the Prophets for toward a
Thousand years; and it is then expected that when God's Judgments are in the
Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness; for there must be
great obstinacy and hardness, where the fears or strokes of the hand of God
make no Impression. Now we have heard of the Calamities of Neighbor Countries,
and God has exercised us with severe Chastisements not many years since; his
hand is now stretched out: if we heartily turn to him, we have reason to hope
it will be for our help; but if not, we have cause to fear it will be to our
hurt.

III. The third and last thing I shall mention to be done in hearty turning to
God, is, To reject all Irreligion and neglect of the Worship of God, and to be
exercised in the Religious Service of God, with true Piety and hearty Devotion.
Wherefore,

1. Let no neglect of Religion have any place amongst us, or let all
miscarriages herein be carefully amended. The Worship of God, and the
Institutions of our Blessed Savior are by too many disregarded. But yet the
Love and Fear of God, the serving him, and walking in all good Conscience
before him, is greatly needful to be undertaken with serious Diligence. This is
a very great Duty of Man; for if a Child be obliged to give Honor and
Reverence to his Father, or a Servant to his Master, or a Subject to his
Prince, much more must Man stand engaged to worship and serve his Creator. The
Precepts in the Holy Scripture to this purpose, are so plain and frequent, that
no Man who reads the Scriptures can be ignorant of them; and they who never
read them, do acknowledge this Duty by the evidence of the light of Nature it
self. Our owning Christianity is not only a Name or Profession, but is an
undertaking to mind that Piety which is suitable to Religion. In this
Profession St. Paul declares his own great care to have been to worship the God
of his Fathers after the way which the Jews called Heresy, that is, according
to the true Rules and Doctrine of Christianity. And the whole multitude of the
Christian Church is represented by St. John, as standing before the Throne, and
crying with a loud voice, Salvation be to God and to the Lamb (Rev. 7.9, 10.)
and therefore they are not worthy to be accounted any part of the Christian
Church, who neglect the Worship of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This also is our interest and benefit. For the most noble and excellent
employment of Man is in those things which relate to God and Goodness, when
otherwise in the neglect of this, he is taken up either about empty Vanities,
mean Earth, or sordid Filth. But the Service of God is both his Honor and his
Advantage, and the Promises which are made to Religious Piety are great and
sure; but because they are proposed under the terms of a Covenant, there can be
no security of enjoying the present Blessings of God, and no possibility of
attaining endless Felicity without these Holy Exercises.

2. Let the exercise of Religion be performed with hearty and serious Devotion,
even with Fasting, and solemn Humiliation and Prayer; these are Duties directed
by the Prophet Joel in the latter part of this Verse of my Text, to express our
hearty turning unto God: And the Church does particularly at this time call
upon us to mind these Holy Exercises; they are Duties useful at all times, and
are excellent qualifications to dispose us aright for the obtaining the Pardon
of our own Sins, as they include the practice of Humility, Piety, Faith and
Repentance. Amongst the Jews, the solemn day of Atonement and Remission was a
day of devout Fasting and Afflicting their Souls. And after S. Paul had been
stricken down to the Ground as he went toward Damascus, after he had Fasted
three days and Prayed, Ananias was then sent to him by our Savior, that he
might arise and be Baptized, and wash away his Sins, Acts 9.9, 11, 17, 18. chapter
22.16.

At this time the methods of God's Providence do eminently require our more
than ordinary diligence in these Duties for the averting his Judgments, and the
preserving us and our Posterity from Ruin and Misery. Let those who have been
Vicious and Disobedient, engage herein with Reformation and Amendment of Life.
And let the most Pious Men also undertake it with the greatest seriousness,
even in them it is an exercise of Repentance, as indeed the whole practice of
Christianity is; for the Christian Life is a turning to God, from whom sinful
Man had estranged himself; and the whole thereof is described by Repenting, and
turning to God, and doing works meet for Repentance; and the Repentance
undertaken therein, is not only in some short transitory acts, but it takes in
the whole course of a Christian Progress. These devout Performances of the best
Men are of great use for obtaining public Blessings from God. And it cannot be
supposed that the Religious Addresses of Moses or Josiah, who were Men of great
Piety, should be less acceptable to God, or less effectual for the good of Man,
than the Repentance of Ahab or Manasseh, or of the Ninevites.

But let these things be done with true uprightness and sincerity of Heart, and
then our Blessed Savior has assured them who so fast and pray in secret, that
their Heavenly Father will reward them openly. But withal, that these Duties
may be pleasing to God, it is necessary that they be accompanied with those
other things which I have before pressed. Fasting and Prayer, in the neglect of
Peace and Unity, and of Holiness and Piety, is as the sacrificing an unclean
thing, far from being approved of God; and this is the account the Prophet
Isaiah gives, why God would not accept these very performances of the Jews,
Behold (says he) ye fast for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the Fist of
wickedness.

Wherefore now let us take the advice in the Text, and resolve on the pious
practice thereof, especially in these particulars I have insisted on. For the
further enforcing of which, I shall in concluding observe three things.

First, That it was God's own direction in these words of Joel. This was indeed
immediately given to the Jews, but the Apostle tells us, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever
things were written afore-time, were written for our Learning, that we through
Patience and Comfort of the Scripture might have hope. That which God thinks
fit to advise us, it is our Wisdom to practice. For when the Policy of Wise Men
may be outwitted, and all sinful contrivances will increase danger, the Counsel
of God that will stand; and, as Wisdom speaks, ( Prove. 1.33.) Whosoever hearkneth
to me shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet from the fear of Evil.

Secondly; Reflect again on the case in which this was directed. Besides the
terribleness of the Armies which were to come against them in the former Verses
of this second Chapter of Joel, God lets them know that he himself was like to
be on their Enemies side against them, v. 11. The Lord shall utter his Voice
before his Army. The Prophet Joel was sent to make Proclamation of God's
Controversy with them; but though this was declared by a Message from God, it
was not so absolutely determined, but that there was still an Help and Remedy
reserved, if they would make use thereof, by turning to God with all their
heart. In like manner, when Jonas was sent to Nineveh to declare that within
forty days it should be destroyed, upon its Repentance it was spared. And the
Prophet Jeremy assures us, that at what instant God shall speak concerning a
Nation, or concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, to pull down, and to destroy; if
that Nation turn from their Evil, he will repent of the Evil that he thought to
do unto them. No case is so bad, but if this course be made use of, it will
appear hopeful.

Thirdly; Consider the greatness of the effect. I observed before, that in this
Prophecy from this Text forward, are contained Promises of Deliverance. The
effect was also answerable to these Promises. Indeed the precise time of Joel's
Prophecy is not certain: It is thought both by the Jewish writers, and by
Ancient Fathers, that his time was contemporary with that of Hosea; and this
Prophecy in all probability must be dated before the latter part, if not before
the beginning of Hezekiah's Reign: and accordingly Grotius seems very
reasonably to understand the beginning of this Chapter to refer to
Sennacherib's Army which invaded Judah; this Army here mentioned was indeed
called the Northern Army, Joel 2.20. but this expression might well enough
agree to the Assyrian Army; as may appear from Zeph. 2.3. He will stretch out
his hand against the North, and destroy Assyria. Now at this time the Sins of
Judah were great and many, especially under Ahaz, their Condition was low and
despised, and their Enemy was potent, proud and insolent; yet upon the Pious
Reformation of Judah under Hezekiah, and their earnest Religious Addresses to
God, their Enemies proud Designs were wholly blasted, and themselves ruined;
and the blessing of God came down upon Judah and Jerusalem.

And God grant that we may take that course, that we may enjoy the Blessing of
God, and have it ever continued to these Churches and Realms, even until the
coming again of our Blessed Savior: to whom with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor, and Glory, and Praise, now and evermore. Amen.

A SERMON Preached on
S. Mat. 5.20. For I say unto you, That except your Righteousness shall exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.


RELIGION and Righteousness is so suitable to, and perfective of the Nature of
Man, that it has been thereupon recommended by the wisest Men, and greatest
Philosophers. It is of such concernment for humane Society, that all Lawgivers
and Governors have thought it necessary to prohibit and restrain the Violation
thereof. And it carries so much of the Image of God in it, that all his
Revelations to the Patriarchs and Prophets, and especially that by the Holy
Jesus to the Christian Church, do greatly insist upon it.

When the Gentile World went greatly astray by their abominable Idolatries, and
their gross Impurities, even in their pretendedly Religious Rites, the Doctrine
of the Gospel appears to turn them from the Power of Satan unto God. When the
Jews had been under a lower Dispensation, our Lord gives his Disciples more
excellent Rules, and enlarges the Precepts of the Moral Law, as was truly
asserted by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, St. Augustine, and
other ancient Writers. And why should it be thought strange, that Lawgiver
should add to the Precepts already given, and extend them further, who
established many new Duties, such as to believe the peculiar Doctrines of the
Christian Faith, to perform many religious Services in his Name, and with an
eye to him; to attend on the Gospel-Sacraments; to reverence the Christian
Ministry, and the Power of the Keys; and to own and embrace Communion with the
diffusive Catholic Church in all Nations? He laid new Obligations upon his
Disciples concerning Divorce, and the changing the Zeal of Elias into Christian
Meekness. And it is but reasonable to expect, that under the Instructions and
Motives of Christianity, there should be required greater Measures of the Love
of God and Goodness. But when the Jewish Church had in their Principles and
Practices grossly degenerated from the great Design of the Law, and many
Corruptions were introduced, our Lord protests against them, and gives his
Disciples this Admonition, That their Righteousness must exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees.

The Pharisees were the strictest Sect of the Jews at that time, the Scribes
were their chief Teachers and Guides; their Righteousness here intended, was
what was according to the Rules and Doctrines they delivered and received:
Against that Leaven of Doctrine our Lord warned his Disciples. Mat. 16.12.


The out-doing and exceeding this Righteousness is so necessary, that it is
enjoined under this severe Sanction, That otherwise we can in no case enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven is a Phrase peculiar to St.
Matthew, among all the Penmen of the Scripture, but has been observed not to
be unusual in the Talmud, Hor. Hebr. in Mat. 3.3.
and other Jewish Writers. It sometimes expresses in this Evangelist the
Kingdom of Christ in his Church on Earth; but in this place and others, the
Kingdom of Glory and eternal Happiness. But if any should think these Words
directly to assert, that none whose Righteousness exceeds not that of the
Pharisees, and their Teachers the Scribes, can be true Members of the Christian
Church, and Christ's Kingdom upon Earth, he must consequently acknowledge that
they cannot be Heirs of Heaven.

Yet these Pharisees were not so wholly irreligious, but that they attended the
Temple and Synagogues, made many Prayers, seemed to have a great Veneration for
the Law, and a Zeal for the Honor of the God of Israel. They were not so
grossly dissolute and debauched, as to give themselves up to Uncleanness,
Intemperance, and all Unmercifulness; but they condemned Adultery, fasted, and
gave Alms. Wherefore it may be needful to enquire,

I. What were the Miscarriages in their Righteousness, and wherein must we
exceed them, if ever we attain to Happiness? II. How stands the Case of those
Societies who chiefly pretend to Christianity, as to their exceeding or not
exceeding the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees? III. What is the
Result of these Enquiries?
I. Touching their Miscarriages and Defects.

1. They placed much Righteousness in their being a peculiar Party, and
maintaining a kind of Separation. They were a particular Sect, having and
needlessly affecting singular Practices and Opinions, different from the other
Jews, and such as were not enjoined in the Law of Moses. The Name Pharisee is
from (...) to separate and divide; and themselves were distinguished into seven
sorts, as the Jewish Writers tell us.

They did not indeed withdraw themselves from the Synagogue, or Temple
Publick-Worship, since, as Josephus says, Antiq. Jud. l. 18. c. 2.
(...), whatsoever referred to God, both Prayer, and other parts of Worship,
were much ordered by their Model. But concerning the Synagogue-Worship, there
is probable Evidence, that the several chief Sects among the Jews, and
therefore the Pharisees as one of them, had their distinct Assemblies. And it
is certain, the Pharisees did reject the best of Men from their
Synagogue-Communion, merely for doing their necessary Duty, in professing, upon
the fullest Divine Testimony, that Jesus was the Christ, and becoming his
Followers. And in the Temple-Worship, the Pharisees were guilty of a kind of
Separation, under an appearance of Communion: For since the daily Sacrifice in
the Temple was a Burnt-Offering, and therefore appointed for Expiation and
Atonement, Number. 28.3.
the Devotions of them who attended at the Temple at the Hours of Prayer and
Sacrifice ought to be conformable thereunto; but the Pharisees Prayer there, as
our Savior describes it, had nothing in it of humble Supplication for God's
Mercy and Favor, but he thanks God he was not as other Men. And this Spirit of
Division was so much the worse in them, because it was founded in an high
Conceit, and great Confidence of their own Righteousness, though they had
little reason for it, and in a contempt of others.

But now such a proud Temper is inconsistent with Christianity, which makes
Humility a necessary Qualification for the obtaining everlasting Life.

And Divisions and Separations are so unaccountable for the Members of the same
Body the Church to be engaged in, that the Doctrine of Christ gives us frequent
Precepts, earnest Exhortations, and pressing Arguments to Peace and Unity, and
plainly expresses the great Danger of Misery in the neglect thereof. When
(...) and (...), or Contests, fierce Heats and Divisions are reckoned among
those Works of the Flesh which exclude from the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. can any
think the great Discords in the Church unconcerned herein, when the Concord of
Christians is here chiefly enjoined, and the Neglect thereof is every way
exceeding hurtful, and when all these very Expressions are used by St. Paul to
set forth the Divisions of the Church of Corinth? 1 Cor. 3.3. And therefore
wherever Rents or Schisms in the Church are Works of the Flesh, as they must
be when they are the Product of Pride, Self-will, or voluntary Disobedience to,
or Neglect of the Precepts of Peace and Unity, they are destructive.

The Ancient Church charged an high Guilt upon these Practices. Cypr. ep. 76.^
St. Cyprian accounts Schism greatly to deprive Men of the Hope of
Christianity. And St. Austin maintains against the Donatists, that their
Separation was as great a Sin as that of the Traditores, who gave up the
Scriptures into the hands of their Persecutors, with which Crime the Donatists
falsely charged one of the Ordainers of Caecilianus, and pretended this as a
ground of their Separation.

2. Their Righteousness did much consist in such a Zeal as was disorderly,
fierce, furious, and censorious. They were diligent in compassing Sea and Land
to make Proselites, but it was that they might be their Followers and Admirers.
Their professing a great Respect to the Prophets, and their Pretense of
Traditions, was chiefly to gain Credit to their own Dictates. Their Zeal was a
violent espousing the Interest of their own Errors, and was not so much for
God, and his Law, as for themselves, and their own Party; like that of the
Donatists, Annal. Eccles. an. 306. n. 42.
mentioned by Baronius, who could with more patience hear Men speak lightly of
Christ, than of Donatu^.

And they were so censorious, that they not only despised the Publicans, but
esteemed the People as not knowing the Law, to be cursed; and condemned the
most holy Jesus for a Blasphemer, an Enemy to Caesar, and one who cast out
Devils by the Prince of Devils. Their violent Fierceness was evident by their
bloody Cruelties under the Government of Alexandria, and at other times, Jos.
Antiq. l. 13. c. 2^^.
and especially in their being much concerned in prosecuting our Lord to the
Death, and treating him with so many Indignities, and his Apostles after him
with various Methods of Hatred and Cruelty, and particularly murdering James
the Just, the first Bishop of Jerusalem.

But in the Religion of our Savior, the contrary Temper of pursuing true and
sincere Piety, Faith, and the Fear and Love of God, and of Mercifulness,
Meekness and Charity, is made indispensably necessary to our eternal Happiness.
And to this end we are commanded to learn of Christ to be meek and lowly, Mat.
11.29.
that we may find Rest unto our Souls. But if St. James and St. John be for
calling for Fire from Heaven, this is declared to be greatly opposite to the
Spirit of the Gospel: For tho it allows and establishes just Rules of
Government, and the Use of the Power of the Sword therein, yet it condemns all
Cruelty and Fury. And if St. Peter in his Zeal will unwarrantably draw his
Sword, he must receive a severe Check from our Lord and Master.

3. They miscarried also by their unduly affecting the Vogue and Applause of
Men in their Religious Performances. To this purpose they made broad their
Philacteries, Exodus 13.2, 5. Deuteronomy. 6.4. and Chapter 11, 13, 14, 15.
that they might seem to Men to give great respect to those Precepts of the Law
inscribed in them, concerning the worshipping, acknowledging, and obeying God.
And for a pretense of extraordinary Sanctity, they made use of long Prayers,
and put up their Devotions even in the Corners of the Streets. And their
Fasting, Praying, and giving Alms, was done that they might be seen of Men,
while it might well have become such Actions to have been managed by a better
Principle.

By this means they gained a great Interest among the People, but made use of
it to very ill purposes, even to the opposing the Doctrine of our Savior. And
Josephus tells us, Antiq. Jud. l. 13. c. 18.
they could (...), by their Credit bring the People to be ill-affected either
to the King or the High Priest. But our Savior pronounces frequent Woes
against them for their Hypocrisy, and lets them know that all this while they
are out of God's Favor, and that what is highly esteemed among Men is an
Abomination in the sight of God. Luke 16.15.


Now both Reason and Religion will recommend a good Name as useful and
desirable, so far as it can be gained in doing our Duty, and practicing
Sincerity. But if the World be so degenerate, that the faithful and upright Man
must needs meet with Censures and Revilings here, as Christ himself and his
Apostles did, so must all his Disciples, take up the Cross, and bear the
Reproach. In this case the Blessed Jesus declared, Luke 6.26.
Woe be to you, when all Men shall speak well of you. And whereas the Scribes
and Pharisees are said to do all their Works to be seen of Men, Mat. 23.5. St.
Hierom there affirms, that he who in this is like to them, Hieronym. in Mat. 23.
Scriba and Pharisaeus est, is in the same condition with the Scribes and
Pharisees. When St. Peter, against the Rule of his Duty, would withdraw from
the Gentiles, to ingratiate himself with the Jews, St. Paul thought it
necessary to reprove him sharply, as not walking uprightly, and according to
the Truth of the Gospel. Indeed the inordinate Pursuit of Vainglory, and the
valuing the Esteem or Favor of any Men above the discharge of a good
Conscience, is so opposite to true Religion, to a lively Sense of God, and
Faith in him, that in this respect our Savior said, How can ye believe, which
receive Honor one of another?

4. Their Righteousness superstitiously laid a great stress on little outside
Things, and such as were no parts of real Religion. They were strict in washing
those hands which remained polluted by evil Works, and in washing Pots and
Tables, as if these and such other Things were of doctrinal necessity. They
were careful to tithe Mint and Anise, and appeared hugely scrupulous about the
Obligation of their unlawful Vow of Corban, but with respect to that Vow could
without regret dispense with the neglect of honoring superior Relations,
against the fifth Commandment. They received the Traditions of their Scribes
with a great and inordinate Veneration, even above the Law it self; and of
these unwritten Traditions they had a great Number, as the Scripture
intimates, and Josephus expressly testifies. Ant. l. 13. c. 18
And out of a pretext of Purity they rejected all Converse with Publicans, tho
such as were justified rather than themselves.

But true Christian Righteousness must consist in minding and chiefly valuing
the great Duties of true Piety and Holiness. And by our Savior's Doctrine, a
Woe is denounced against the Pharisees little Strictnesses, while they neglected
the weighty things of the Law. And their observing and urging those things as
greatly necessary, which indeed were not truly good, were so far from pleasing
God, that our Lord declared, That in vain they worshipped him, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men; Mat. 15.9.
therein applying to them those Words of the Prophet Esaias, according to the
Version of the Septuagint. Isa. 29.13.


5. They were haughty and imperious, but not submissive to Rulers and
Governors. They were forward to bind heavy Burdens on the Shoulders of others,
but were not themselves willing to stoop to the Duties of Obedience and
Subjection. They were so little Friends to Caesar, that by them the Question
was propounded, Mat. 22.15, 17.
Whether it was lawful to give Tribute to Caesar, or no? and were so averse to
Authority, that as Josephus relates, they did (...), make War, and otherwise
were injurious toward, and spoke evil of their Governors. And they were
frequently turbulent and tumultuous.

But by the Evangelical Doctrine, only the Humble and Lowly can enter into
Heaven. The Son of God himself so far promoted Submission to all in Authority,
that he was obedient to his Parents, was himself baptized of John. And the New
Testament earnestly enjoins upon us Obedience to them who have the Rule over
us, and denounces Damnation to those who resist the higher Powers.

6. And lastly; They left themselves and their Followers at a licentious
Liberty in many weighty Matters of Doctrine and Practice. They could suffer
their Hands to be Polluted by devouring Widows Houses, and their Tables by
Extortion and Excess. They made void the Commands of God by their Traditions,
and were such Casuists, as to allow Swearing by Heaven and Earth, and to
account such Oaths, as those by the Temple and the Altar, to leave no
Obligation; when Swearing by the Gold of the Temple, or the Gift upon the
Altar, did oblige. And it is manifest from this fifth chapter of St. Matthew,
that according to their strictest Rules, they gave allowance to inward Wrath,
and Hatred, and Lust, if it did not break forth in open Murder, or Adultery,
as was noted by Tertullian, Tert. de Idolat. c. 2.
who also observes how strictly extensive our Savior's Doctrine is, even
against the unchaste Eye and inward Wrath, or in the phrase of St. John, That he
that hates his Brother is a Murderer.

But the excellent Christian Rules of Life, which command the inward Man, and
far outdo the loose Principles of the Pharisees, are many of them proposed by
the Blessed Jesus in this and the following Chapters, and are included under
that Sanction at the close of this Sermon on the Mount, that he that hears
these words of his, and does them not, is likened to him who builds his House
on the Sand, which ends in a dreadful fall. And Virtuous Practices are so far
from pleading any allowance from Christianity, that, Whosoever breaks the least
Commandment, and teaches Men so, shall be called least, or not be accounted
of, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

These things I have discoursed of, are sufficient to show the gross
miscarriages of the Pharisaical Righteousness, in opposing the necessary Duties
of Unity, Meekness, Sincerity, true Religious Piety, Obedience, and Universal
Holiness; and therefore this could be no safe way to the Kingdom of Heaven.

I now come to the second Enquiry; How stands the case of those Societies, who
lay the chief claims to Christianity, as to their exceeding, or not exceeding
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, in these particulars?

And here I shall not ransack the remote and distant parts of the World, but
take notice only of those with which we are concerned; as, the Church of
England, the present Roman Church, and the Dissenting Parties among us. Nor
shall I strain resemblances to make the Cases appear Parallel, but shall take
notice of things as they really are, to observe how far there is a likeness to,
or compliance with the Spirit of Pharisaism. And here I profess, that I
seriously wish well to all Men of what Party soever; and therefore whatever I
shall say that speaks the error or danger of any of them, is not out of design
to cast reproach upon them, but out of this true Charitable End, to warn others
to take heed thereof; and I should be glad if it might make any of them
consider of the error of their way.

1. Concerning Separation and Division. This was esteemed by the ancient Church
as an heinous Crime. St. Chrysostom equals it with Heresy, Chr. in Ephesians. Cyp. de
Unit. Eccl.
and St. Cyprian makes it a greater offense than that of the Lapsi.

The Church of England is clear herein; it owns and professes the Catholic
and Apostolic Faith and Doctrine, and none other, and appoints a way of
Worship agreeable thereto, and so gives no cause to warrant any Separation from
her. Our Case with respect to the Romish Church, is in part like that of the
Apostles, with regard to the Scribes and Pharisees, whilst they professed the
true Christian Doctrine, and worshipped God after the way which was unjustly
called Heresy; Joh. 12.42.
the Pharisees sentenced such to be put out of the Synagogue: And the Talmud of
the Venice Edition has been observed to affirm, That Jesus himself was
Excommunicated with the Shammatha, or great Excommunication: And because we (as
we ought) reject the evil and corrupt Romish Doctrines and Practices, they
censure us as Heretics, and let fly their Anathema's in various Canons of
Trent, and yearly denounce their Excommunications in the Bull in Coena Domini.
And besides this, we cannot join in the main part of the Romish Worship,
without embracing their Superstitious and Idolatrous Practices: Nor have they
any Right of Jurisdiction over us. And all this acquits us from the Crime of
Schism in our Reformation.

But they at Rome, though they keep to their public Worship as the Pharisees
did, are yet grossly guilty of Schism, by unjustly rejecting all other
Christian Churches, who make use of their own just Rights; and are not more
ready to submit to St. Peter's pretended Successor, and his Impostures, than to
the Precepts and Doctrines of his and our Lord and Master. And herein they pass
Sentence, as the Pharisee did against the Publican, upon them who are better
than themselves.

Other Parties at home, practice Divisions in an higher degree than the
Pharisees did, openly separating themselves from the public Assemblies of our
Christian Worship.

2. Concerning fierceness and furiousness of Zeal. Our Church entertains no
Bloody nor Uncharitable Doctrines or Tenants; its Rules concerning Government,
contain as much mildness as can consist with Peace and Order; and its Practice
rather more, by reason of the distemper and disorder of the minds of Men.

But such is the Romish fierceness, that in the highest violation of Charity,
they exclude other Churches from Salvation. And their furious Zeal appears by
Fire and Faggot, by bloody Inquisitions, Massacres, and Rebellions; by Horrid
Treasons and cruel Conspiracies; of which the World has had, and we have
abundant Evidence. These things are so unlike Christianity, and Jesus the
Savior, that they betray themselves to be from the Abaddon and (...). When
Espencoeus, a learned Doctor of Paris, Esp. in 1. T^ Digr. l. 2.
had observed how the ancient Canons obliged all the Clergy against engaging in
War and Blood; he acknowledges, and smartly taxes the contrary practice of
the late Romish Church and her Bishops, as herein degenerating from the Spirit
of Christianity, veteris Gentilismi ritu, with a greater suitableness to the
temper of Pagans.

And in other Dissenting Parties, it is too manifest how prone their forward
and leading Men are to censorious Uncharitableness, and rash Judging; and how
ready they have been, unjustly to take up the Sword, and pursue the Interest of
their Party with War and Blood; with such circumstances as I forbear to mention.

And the consideration of this temper may give us some account of the great
eagerness, and restless earnestness of these erring Parties, in propagating
their particular Interests.

3. Concerning the aiming to gain the applause and favor of Men in the neglect
of Duty. Our Church, in its Rules of Doctrine, lays the same stress upon all
Duties to God or Man, that the Gospel of our Savior does; without yielding to
the Humors of the Profane, the Debauched, or the Turbulent and Unruly.

The Romanists suit themselves to all Dispositions; they have severe Rules in
some of their Regular Societies, for the more Serious; but they take great care
to gratify Wicked and Debauched Persons also, with as much Liberty as they can
well desire. Their Casuists generally declare, That an act of Attrition, or
such Sorrow for Sin as is not accompanied with hatred against it, or the true
Love of God, is at last sufficient, with Absolution, to remove the guilt of
Sin, and secure them from Eternal Death. But if temporal Punishment remains for
them, this can only bring them to Purgatory; and here they may have
considerable help from Indulgences, and the Treasury of the Church, which are
dispensed for Ave-Maries and other Prayers, visiting certain places, having
Masses said for their Souls, and by other works, without their becoming really
holy and good. And besides this, their feigned Miracles and Revelations, their
pretended power of Transubstantiating, of dispensing the Treasury of Merits in
the Church, and of justifying them who are not contrite, by Absolution, seem
methods contrived to gain admiration from the People.

And other Sects make their Interests, and seek Reputation by popular Arts; and
often by promoting or conniving at Uncharitableness, Men's high Conceits of
themselves, and a Temper averse from Unity and Obedience; which are things of a
very evil Nature: And some of their chief Teachers acknowledge, that in some
things they act against their own Judgments in compliance with their People.

4. Concerning Superstitious urging those things as parts of Religion which are
not such. Our Church owneth no necessary Article of Faith, but what is in our
Creed, nor any Doctrines of Christianity, but what are deducible from the Holy
Scriptures. Our Constitutions for Decency, and Rules of Order are established
only as such; and are withal innocent, useful, few, and agreeing to Primitive
Christianity.

But at Rome, a great part of their Religion, as they make it, consists in
acknowledging many things to be de Fide; which are neither contained in the
Scriptures, agreeing with them, nor acknowledged in the ancient Church; in
entertaining various false Doctrines and pretended Traditions with equal
reverence to the Holy Scriptures; and in using diverse Rites as operative of
Divine Aid and Grace, which God never appointed to that end.

Our other dividing Parties are too nigh the Pharisaical Doctrine concerning
the Obligation of their voluntary Vow against their Duty to Superiors. And
many of them lay a Doctrinal Necessity, either upon disowning Episcopal
Authority, which has so great a Testimony of Apostolical Appointment: Or, in
being against Forms of Prayer, at least such, wherein the People vocally join;
or, in condemning as sinful, innocent Appointments, decent Ceremonies, and
suitable Gestures. And those who own not these Positions, nor condemn our
Worship as sinful, and yet divide from us; must assert other Positions for
Doctrines, which are equally erroneous and dangerous: For, if their Principles
be agreeable to their Practice, they must assert, that Men may break the
Churches Peace, and expose it to the greatest hazards, gratify its Enemies, and
disobey Authority, which are great Sins, to maintain an opposition to those
things which themselves dare not charge with any Sin. But this is to aver such
Doctrine to be from God, which is contrary to his Religion, his Nature and his
Will, and are but the Precepts of Men; and it is to strain at a Gnat, but
swallow a Camel.

Now, if to counterfeit the Seal, or Coin, or falsely to pretend to the
Authority of an Earthly Prince, be greatly culpable; can it be otherwise to
stamp a Divine Impression on things which God disowns.

5. Concerning Obedience and Submission to Superiors; this Duty is regularly
enjoined in our Church, both with respect to Private Relations, Spiritual
Guides, and Civil Rulers.

In the Romish Church there is strict Obedience required in their several
Orders, to the Superiors thereof; in the Laiety to the Clergy; and in all, to
the Pope: But this is so irregular, that thereby the natural Honor to Parents
is much discharged; and St. Peter's Precept of Honoring the King, is, under
the name of his Vicar, changed into such Positions, as when occasion serves,
may encourage the Deposing and Murdering him.

And among other Dissenters, their Divisions, as they are circumstantiated, are
ipso facto such visible Testimonies of their want of Submission to their
Ecclesiastical and Civil Governors, that nothing need be added. And it is
known there were some of these Parties, whose Principles allowed them to take
Arms against their King; and who exposed his Royal Person to Violence and Death.

6. Concerning a loose and licentious Life. Our Church requires a Sincere, Holy
Exercise, and presses all the Precepts of our Savior, and the Motives and
Arguments of the Gospel; and enjoineth the careful observation of our Baptismal
Vow.

But in the Romish Church, he that considers the immoral looseness of the
Jesuits and other Casuists, may wonder that such things should be owned by Men
of any Religion, much more of them who profess the Christian Religion. For
instance; By our Savior's Doctrine, to love God with all the heart, is the
great and first Commandment. But Azorius asserts, Azor. Tom. 1. l. 9. c. 4.
That it is hard to fix any time, when this Precept of Loving God does oblige
to any exercise thereof, with respect to it self, but only when it is necessary
to Repentance. And he roundly says, We are not obliged to any exercise of Love
to God, when we attain to the use of Reason, nor at the receiving any
Sacrament, not at Confession, nor at the approach of Death. Filiuc. Tr. 22. c.
9.
Filiucius thinks this Opinion probable (and therefore safe by their Doctrine
of Probability) but prefers another Opinion, which is but little better; That
we are bound to act Love to God at the time of Death, and in some other
extraordinary cases if they happen; and that ordinarily Men ought to exercise
an act of Love to God, at least once in five years. But I am amazed to think
how sparing such Men were of inward Religious Devotion, and what Strangers to
it!

And for the practice of Repentance, which is another great Duty of our
Religion. Though Contrition, which includes an hating and forsaking Sin, and
turning to God, be acknowledged of good use by them; yet Filiucius says, Fill.
Tr. 6 c 8. n. 196, 197, and 208.
Men are not obliged to acts of Contrition every year, but once in five or
seven years; and that if they die without them, they may be saved. But Layman
declares, Laym. l. 5. Tr. 6. c. 2. n. 6.
That the Precept and Duty of Repentance is satisfied by coming once in a year
with Attrition to Confession, and the Sacrament of Penance, and by doing the
same at the time of Death. But is not this a Religion set up to undermine the
Holy Gospel of our Savior, and to entitle those workers of Iniquity to Heaven,
whom his Doctrine will condemn to Hell?

And our other Parties give too much allowance to some particular miscarriages
which I have before mentioned. And many of them lay not that stress they ought,
on a Holy Life in general (which is included under Conversion and Repentance)
in that they do not account it a necessary condition or previous qualification
for the obtaining the Favor of God, and the Pardon of Sin, or, which is all
one, for Justification.

Having now gone through these Heads of Discourse, I shall further here observe
three things.

First, That the Romanists are not only thus far guilty of equal, but are
chargeable with much greater miscarriages than those of the Scribes and
Pharisees. I might have run on the Parallel farther: as when the one devoured
Widows Houses, under a pretense of long Prayers; the other carry on the like
designs of Covetousness and Extortion, by their Indulgences and Masses for the
Dead.

But the Pharisees were not so degenerate, as to offer their Prayers or
Sacrifices to Saints, or even to Angels (though the Law was given by their
Ministration,) but to such the Romish Church directs a great part of her
Religious Worship. They gave not Divine Honor, either to the Temple, which was
the place of God's Presence, or to any Sacrifice, as the Papists do to the
Host. They worshipped not the Invisible God under the debasing representation
of an Image, as the Samaritans did, and the Romanists do. And when God
appointed a continual Burnt-Offering, with a Meat Offering and Drink Offering,
they did not make so bold as to alter his Institutions, and withdraw one part
thereof, as they at Rome have done concerning the distribution of the
Eucharistical Cup. And when the Pharisees had only so much Pride, as vainly to
account themselves righteous, and far better than others; they did not, as the
Romanists do, pretend to such Supererogation, and so great a stock of Merits,
as to be able thereby to supply the defects of others. But if they at Rome had
what they pretend, it had need be a vast Treasury of good Works, to make amends
for the notorious bad ones, which are the result of the Positions allowed and
maintained in that Church. The Pharisees claimed a great Authority to be
Masters of the Faith of others; but it does not appear that they founded this
in so high and unreasonable a claim to Infallibility, as they at Rome do; the
holding of which engages them to continue in all their other Errors. Nor were
they so deeply uncharitable, as utterly to exclude the Essens, and all other
Sects from the favor of God, as the Romanists deal with all other Churches;
nor did they debar the people from reading the Scriptures.

Secondly; I observe that other Dividing Parties, though they are very
different among themselves, and are not all to be alike esteemed of; yet either
all, or most of them, have some miscarriages not received by the Scribes and
Pharisees: for instance, the Pharisees did not slight or neglect the Sacraments
of the Old Testament, either Circumcision, or the Passover; as too many now do,
one or both the Sacraments of the New. They never gave way that the
Temple-Sacrifices, and other such like Services of God, should be performed by
any other, but only those Priests whom God had appointed for that purpose; when
many in our days can admit and allow the performance of Christian Ministrations
by those who have no Regular, Authoritative and Justifiable Ordination: And
such things, however some esteem of them, are of the greater moment, because
they violate the peculiar Institutions of our Lord, and the ordinary way that
he has appointed for the conveying and applying the Grace of the Gospel, and
the benefits of his Death and Passion.

Thirdly; I observe also, that it must be acknowledged there were other great
Crimes of the Scribes and Pharisees, which are not chargeable on any of those
Parties, of whom I have discoursed: Such were their professed disowning our
Savior and his Doctrine, their actual contriving his Death, and their
obstinacy under those various mighty Miracles which were frequently wrought
before their Eyes. But as the former Transgressions which I mentioned, have
been particularly proved destructive, so I think them to be especially intended
in this severe censure of our Savior, of the insufficiency of their
Righteousness. For these words were uttered soon after he began to teach; and
before the Scribes and Pharisees had declared their greatest enmity to his
Person, their obstinacy under his Miracles, or their contrivement of his Death;
and therefore they must have respect to their Righteousness, according to that
time when these words were spoken. And the scope of his Discourse shows him to
condemn, as greatly defective, such Rules of Doctrine and Practice, as they
then directed and proposed.

I now come in the third place, as my Conclusion, to note the result of these
Enquiries in two particulars.

First; This should warn those of the Romish, and other opposite Persuasions,
to consider seriously of their own Danger, and of what may conduce to their
Safety. If they think themselves sufficiently secure, so did also the Scribes
and Pharisees, of whom our Savior judged otherwise. And I could heartily wish,
that all persons of their several Divisions were really free from all things
sinful and dangerous.

I think my self obliged to express as much Charity to others, as can be
consistent with Truth and a sober Judgment. And therefore I freely acknowledge
that the several Parties who divide from our Church, are not all equally
chargeable with many things I have insisted on; and I verily hope, that in all
these various divisions there may be several particular persons led aside by
mere mistake and misapprehension, and whose uprightness of intention may be a
preservative to them from much of that evil they might otherwise be engaged in.
And though all Sin is every where prejudicial, I hope also that those
miscarriages which such persons are brought into, by their undiscerned Errors,
will not exclude them from the Mercy of God; and many of their Practices may be
better than their Principles.

But whilst any of us may express our Charity toward them, and hope the best,
it becomes them to have that care of themselves, as to fear the worst: For
Charity does not make the Condition of other Men safe unto whom it is extended,
but this must be determined by the Judgment of God. Those Persons, whose Minds
or Practices are really worse than other Men hope them to be, are in never the
better State for such charitable Hopes. And whosoever are engaged in any of
those Evils which were included in Pharisaism, and condemned in Christianity,
had need carefully to reflect on themselves, and heartily and timely to amend.

But if any should be offended at a Discourse that represents to them the
Danger of their Practices, and should be more ready to censure it as
uncharitable, than to weigh and consider it; they may know, that as this speaks
a very bad Temper of Mind prevailing in them, so the letting Men alone in their
sinful Actions, is so far from being any part of that Charity which our Savior
practiced or enjoined, that it is more agreeable with the Temper of the Evil
One, who is willing that they who do amiss should continue in their Evil, be
flattered therein, and not so consider thereof as to forsake it.

Secondly; Let all who are of our Church, and whoever embrace the true
Catholic Communion, be careful and serious in practicing Holiness and
Righteousness. Our Doctrine and Profession condemns and disowneth all unsound
Principles and corrupt Practices. And as the more devout Jews daily blessed
God, that they were born Jews, and not of (...) the Gentiles; so have we great
reason to praise God, that we live in this excellent Church, and are thereby
free from various Snares, to which many others are exposed.

But if amongst us, Debauchery, Profaneness, or Irreligion, prevail upon any
Persons whomsoever, such Wickedness of Life will exclude Persons of the purest
Profession and Belief from ever entering into Heaven. St. Austin sometimes warns
against this, Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 20. c. 9. and de fid. and oper.
as a considerable Defect in the Pharisees Righteousness, that while they sat
in Moses's Chair, our Lord tells us, they say, but do not. If ever we will be
happy, our Practice must answer our Profession; the Doctrine of Christianity is
a Doctrine according to Godliness, and must be improved to that End. An
Heretical or Schismatical Life, as some ancient Writers call that vicious
Conversation which separates the Man from the Ways of God and Religion, is the
more unaccountable and inexcusable, when it contradicts and crosses the most
Catholic Profession, and the best Rules of Duty clearly proposed. Wherefore
let us be careful, that as the Righteousness required in the Doctrine of our
Church, in conformity to the Gospel of our Savior, does greatly exceed that of
the Scribes and Pharisees; so may that of our Lives also, in conformity to that
Doctrine: Which God of his Mercy grant, through the Merits of our holy and
blessed Savior, To whom, etc.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Ric. Chiswell.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.
Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2 Vol. Dr. Cary's Chronological
Account of Ancient Time. Sir Tho. Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. B.
Wilkin's real Character, or Philosophical Language. Hooker's Ecclesiastical
Polity. Guillim's Display of Heraldry, with large Additions. Dr. Burnet's
History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2 Vol. -- Account of
the Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire Thynn. Burlace's
History of the Irish Rebellion. Herodoti Historia, Gr. Lat. cum varils Lect.
Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, with his Life. Fowlis's History of Romish Conspir.
Treas. and Usurpat. Dalton's Office of Sheriffs, with Additions. -- Office of a
Justice of Peace, with Additions. Lord Cook's Reports, in English. Edmunds on
Caesar's Commentaries. Sir John Davis's Reports. Judge Yelverton's Reports. The
Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments, and Resolutions of
the Judges; with other Observations thereupon, by Will. Cawley, Esquire; Josephus
Antiquities and Wars of the Jews, with Figures.
QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English. Bishop Nicholson on the Church
Catechism. History of the late Wars of New England. D. Outram de Sacrificiis.
Bishop Taylor's Disswasive from Popery. Parkeri Disputationes de Deo. The
Magistrates Authority asserted, in a Sermon, By James Paston. Dr. Jane's Fast
Sermon before the Commons. 1679. Mr. John James' Visitation Sermon, April 9.
1671. Mr. John Cave's Fast Sermon on 30 of Jan. 1679. -- Assize Sermon at
Leicester, July 31. 1679. Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authority of
the Law of Nature and the Christian Religion. Mr. William's Sermon before the
Lord Mayor, 1679. -- History of the Powder Treason, with a vindication of the
proceedings relating thereunto. Speculum Baxteriunum, or Baxter against Baxter.
Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections. Bibliotheca Norfolciana, sive
Catalogus Lib. Manuscript. and impress: in omni Art and Lingua, quos Hen. Dux
Norfolciae Regiae Societati Londinensi pro scientiae naturali promovenda
donavit.
OCTAVO.
BIshop Wilkin's Natural Religion. Dr. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and
Revenues of the Clergy. Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the
House of Peers, in the Case of Skinner. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers
in Case of Appeals. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in Case of
Impositions. -- Letters about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases. Dr. Grew's
Idea of Philological History, on Roots. Spaniard's Conspiracy against the State
of Venice. Dr. Brown's Religio Medici: with Digby's Observations. Dr. Sympson's
Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of the Original of
Hot Springs and other Fountains. -- Hydrological Essays, with an Account of the
Alum Works at Whitby, and some Observations about the Jaundice. Organon
Salutis: or an Instrument to cleanse the Stomach. With diverse new Experiments
of the Virtue of Tobacco and Coffee: with a Preface of Sir Henry Blunt. Dr.
Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three parts. Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of
Peace and Holiness. Dr. Sanway's Unreasonableness of the Romanists. Record, of
Urines. The Trials of the Regicides, in 1660. Certain genuine Remains of the
Lord Bacon, in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural, etc. with a large account of
all his Works, by Dr. Tho. Tennison. Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation
of the Church of England. Sir John Munson's Discourse of Supreme Power and
Common Right. Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on select Texts. Mr. Seller's
Remarks, relating to the State of the Church in the three first Centuries. The
Country-man's Physician. Dr. Burnet's account of the Life and Death of the Earl
of Rochester. -- Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England. --
History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices
and Church Lands. Markham's Perfect Horseman. Dr. Sherlock's Practical
Discourse of Religious Assemblies. -- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's
Unreasonableness of Separation. -- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr.
Stillingfleet, in Answer to Mr. Baxter and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion.
The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of York. Sir Rob.
Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings. Mr. John Cave's Gospel to the
Romans. Lawrence's Interest of Ireland in its Trade and Wealth stated.
DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic. Grotius de Veritate Religionis Christiana. Bishop
Hacket's Christian Consolations. An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason,
Written by M. Clifford, Esquire;
VICESIMO QVARTO.
VAlentine 's Devotions. Pharmacopoeia Collegii Londinensis reformata.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
AN Historical Relation of the Island of Ceylon in the East Indies, Together
with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author and diverse other
Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's miraculous Escape:
Illustrated with Fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By
Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20 years. Folio. Mr. Camfield's two
Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation. Octavo. Bishop Wilkin's Fifteen Sermons,
never before Extant. Mr. John Cave's two Sermons of the Duty and Benefit of
Submission to the Will of God in Afflictions. Quarto. Dr. Crawford's serious
Expostulation with the Whigs in Scotland. 4o. A Letter giving a Relation of the
present state of the Difference between the French King and the Court of Rome;
to which is added, The Pope's Brief to the Assembly of the Clergy, and their
Protestation. Published by Dr. Burnet. Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or
Military Essays of the ancient Grecian, Roman and Modern Art of War. Folio. Mr.
Tanner's Primordia: Or, The Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described. Octavo. A Letter writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of
France to the Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion; together
with the Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into
English, and examined by Dr. Gilb. Burnet. Octavo. Dr. Cave's Dissertation
concerning the Government of the ancient Church by Bishops, Metropolitans and
Patriarchs: more particularly concerning the ancient Power and Jurisdiction of
the Bishops of Rome, and the Encroachments of that upon other Sees, especially
Constantinople. Octavo. Dr. John Lightfoot's Works in English, in two Volumes.
Folio. Mr. Selden's Janus Anglorum Englished, with Notes: To which is added his
Epinomis, concerning the ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom, never
before Extant. Also two other Treatises written by the same Author: One of the
Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Testaments; the other of the
Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods: Now the first time
published. Folio. Jus Regium, or the Foundations of Monarchy in general; and
more especially of the Monarchy of Scotland; maintained against Buchanan,
Napthali, Dolman, Milton, etc. By Sir George Mackenzie, His Majesty's Advocate
in Scotland. Octavo. Several Discourses, viz. Of Purity and Charity. Of
Repentance. Of seeking first the Kingdom of God. By Hezekiah Burton, D.D.
Published by John Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. Octavo.
FINIS.

