THREE PROCLAMATIONS BY HIS Excellency the Lord General Fairfax; THE FIRST
Commanding the Civil Deportment of the Soldiery. THE SECOND That no Soldier
shall depart from his Quarters without Leave. THE THIRD That all ill-affected
Persons, that have engaged for the King, in the first or latter War, and are
now residing in or about London, shall depart the said City, and Suburbs, and
all places Ten Miles distant from thence, within twenty four hours next after
Publicacation hereof.


LONDON, Printed for John Partridge, and George Whittington. 1648.

By His EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Fairfax.
THese are to require all Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot who shall
Quarter in and about the City of LONDON, and Suburbs thereof, That they behave
and dem^^ne themselves civily and peaceably toward all sorts of people, not
giving any just cause of offense, or provocation by language, or otherwise,
upon pain of such severe punishment as to a Court Martial shall be thought
meet, and not do any unlawful violence to the person or goods of any, either in
their Quarters, or elsewhere, upon pain of death: And for the more due
execution hereof all Commanders and Officers are hereby required not to be
absent from their several and distinct charges without leave first had in
writing from their Superiors, upon pain of such punishment as the party injured
shall sustain, and such further censure as to Justice shall be thought fit.

Given under my hand and seal, December. the first, 1648. T. Fairfax.

To be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, or beat of Drum, at the head of the
Regiments.
By His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax.
WHereas it is informed, That many Soldiers and others of the Army going
without leave of their Officers from the places where they are Quartered, do
straggle about the City of London and Suburbs, contrary to Orders in that
behalf given; I do hereby require and command all such Soldiers and others of
the Army, forthwith upon publication hereof to repair to their several Quarters
upon pain of being strictly proceeded against according to the said Orders and
the General Articles of War. And whereas it is informed, That diverse loose
persons going about the City under the name, and in the Garb of Soldiers, have
been very abusive in language, and otherwise, to the injury of some
Inhabitants, and just offense of others; I do hereby desire, That if any such
shall be hereafter found going about without order, or Officers to govern them,
whether they be indeed soldiers or no, and committing any such abuses, they may
be apprehended by the next Constables, and sent to White Hall, there to be
delivered as prisoners to the Marshal General, together with what Information
and evidence there is against them for such miscarriage, and there shall be a
present proceeding against them by a Council of War, to the due punishment of
those that shall be found to have offended, and to the just satisfaction of the
persons injured: And if any Soldiers going about with their officers shall be
so abusive, in case their officers shall not restrain them, such officer, being
complained of, shall himself be punished, and give satisfaction to the party
injured.

Given under my hand and seal, December. 4. 1648. T. FAIRFAX.

To be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet.
BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Fairfax.
FOrasmuch as diverse ill-affected Persons have of late made their Resort to the
City of LONDON, the Suburbs, and places adjoining, with Design (as there is
cause to believe upon Grounds more then probable) to imbroil this Kingdom in
further Troubles: And whereas by Ordinance, or Order of Parliament, such Resort
has been prohibited, and the departure of such Persons enjoined; These are
therefore to require all Persons, who have engaged for the King in the first or
later War, or have adhered unto, or assisted him or his Party therein, and are
now, residing in LONDON, or within Ten Miles distance there from. That within
twenty four hours, after Publication hereof, They depart from the said City and
Suburbs, and all places within Ten Miles distance thereof, and not to return
for the space of one Month next ensuing the publication hereof, if the Head
Quarter shall continue here so long: And who ever shall be found and taken,
contrary hereunto, they shall be dealt withal as Prisoners of War; Except such
of them as have perfected their Compositions, and not engaged again in the
latter War.

Given under Hand and Seal the fourth of December. 1648. T. FAIRFAX.

To be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet.
FINIS.

