A Fuller RELATION FROM BRIDGEWATER Since the last Fight: Wherein is declared
the fierce and terrible storming of the Town, by firing it in three several
places, and the necessity thereof:

Sent to the Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire Speaker to the House of COMMONS.

By a worthy Gentleman in Sir THO: FAIRFAX his Army.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 26. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
I Writ to you formerly, of the late Battle with Goring, and of the taking of
Langport and Borough, two Garrisons of the enemy; since which time, the Army
has blocked up Bridgewater, in nature of a Siege, and yet have refreshed
themselves, being necessitated to lie still (if no Enemy had been near) till
our money came up, which arrived here on Wednesday; and the Army Horse and Foot
being Mustered were paid on Friday and Saturday, the rest this day. But Action
being most proper for this Army, in order to settling the peace of this Kingdom;
the General in pursuance of his first opinion moved again to storm the Town
(for that he was certainly informed they had Victuals, and would be a work of
time to gain it) It was unanimously (at last) agreed unto, that is, to storm
it, this morning about two of the clock. Yesterday being the Lords day, Master
Peter's in the forenoon, and Master B^lls in the afternoon applied themselves to
the encouragement of the Soldiers on any design they went about, to look upon
Christ in all their actions, and to be valiant in his Cause; and about seven at
night our Foot being drawn out, and those that commanded the Storm, and
Forlorn, Master Peter's (in the field) gave them an exhortation to do their
duties, and God enabled them accordingly: For this morning July 21. about two a
a clock, the Generals Regiment began the Storm, being seconded by others, and
gave not over till they were a top of the Works with their Colors, and gained
the pieces that played upon them, and let down the Bridge: whereupon Captain
Reynolds a valiant young Gentleman, entered with a Forlorn-Hope of horse,
scoured the Streets, and beat them out of the hither Town into the further (our
Pikes standing bravely to the horse) This possessed the enemy with that fear,
being much perplexed at our taking the hither Town, and 500. prisoners that
were part of those that maintained the hither Works: That the Enemy for the
most part quitted the Line on the other side, where we were in hope the other
part with Colonel Massy had Stormed the Town, and entered; but they only gave
an hot Alarm while we stormed (it seems being not then ready for it (though
the time agreed on) wanting some necessaries) so we lost the carrying the whole
Town this time: The prisoners being brought to the Church above 500. in all
with Officers; two Lieutenant Colonells, they assured they wanted not
Ammunition, nor Victuals, only meat for horses and Cattle; we lost not twenty
men in the Storm, though in man's Judgment, such was the fierceness of it,
for an hour, one would not think less then a thousand could be slain; It was
dark, and it so pleased God that they shot over for the most part. There was
not one Officer of ^te slain, though many in person led on their men, and did
gallantly, as Lieutenant Collonell Iackson, Lieutenant Colonel to the
General, and Colonel Hewson of Colonel Pickerings Regiment. The Enemy being
still hardened in heart, was so far from yielding, that with Grenades and
other things, they fired that part of the town we were in, and hardly left 3.
houses standing, this much enraged our men to see their villainy, and the
General not a little troubled to see a town destroyed, summoned it once more,
sending his Trumpet about 5. in the evening, they within were so peremptory,
that they would not so much as offer to come to a treaty, whereupon the
General commanded the town to be stormed on Colonel Massies side, to morrow
morning.

July 22. Tuesday, at the dawning of the day the General (as the night before)
in person gave order for the forces on this side to give a fierce alarm with
great and small shot, while they on the other side fell on, which on our side
was done with great resolution, and but that the tide was up, we might alone
have gained the Town. They on the other side, again failing to fall on, only
giving an Alarm. God by his providence so ordering it that something was
wanting, and I hope in the Lord it was for the best, and for the preservation
of many a man's life. For this day, the hot Alarm working nothing upon them,
which indeed was almost a second storm, the General was enraged against them,
and least the innocent should suffer among the nocent, sent a Trumpet to the
Governor to let all women and children come out of the Town, by 4. a clock
this afternoon. And accordingly, the Lady Governesse, (one too guilty of the
misery of that place) the Lady Hamley, Mistress Mar, and diverse others came
out, this being done, our great Gunnes and Morter-peeces with fireballs, hot
Irons, etc. played against the town, and instantly fired it in 3. places, the
wind being great increased the fire, and all on a flame on a sudden, such a
terror it wrought upon them, that Tom Elliot came running out to the General
for a parley. The General answered him, the Governor refused it the last
night, and now that he had brought this misery on himself, the General would
not admit of a Treaty, yet if he would submit to mercy he should have it, in
the mean time till he returned a speedy and positive answer, if any Soldier in
the Town offered to take off a slate on the house, or quench the fire, our
soldiers eryed the cessation should be void, and we would take all advantages,
this so amazed them that instantly they came out and cried mercy for the Lords
sake, so it was agreed on, and quarter they have for their lives, and have
liberty to save the town; but as those lately come out say, the townsmen do
not so fast quench the fire, as the soldiers within in despite of this Army,
set it on fire in fresh places. I heard Sir John Hele, Master Speak and other
of the Commissiners say, there are about 40 p^ece of Ordnance, 40 hundred
weight of Match, powder proportionable, victuals for 2000. soldiers for 4.
months; 500. we took the other day, above 1000. yet within; Commanders,
Reformadoes, Gentlemen, and fat Priests, its conceived above 200. Treasure in
Plate, Jewels, etc. said to be worth 100000.l. but all will be consumed with
fire, we doubt: The works of the town are as strong, as any in England, the
moat deep, yet our foot waded through, all the bridges failing but one, and
so got over: It was about 30. foot wide, the Bearer see the storm, and the
Town on fire, be pleased to move for his pains.

July 22. twelve at night.
Iulii 25. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Letter concerning
the taking of Bridgewater be forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


