A NEW PROCLAMATION: OR A WARNING PIECE AGAINST ALL Blasphemers, Ranters,
Quakers, and Shakers; both Men and Women: Who go up and down teaching, That
embracing ungodliness, and worldly lusts, they should live unsoberly,
unrighteously, ungodly.

PSALM. 50.19. Thou give thy Mouth to evil, and thy Tongue frames deceit.

LONDON, Printed for M. S. and are to be sold at the Blue Bible in Green
Arbor, 1653.

A Word to the RANTERS, who go up and down teaching men and women, that
embracing ungodliness, and worldly lusts, they should live unsoberly,
unrighteously, ungodly in this present World.
O Land! how does thy Church to ruin run,
By Schisms broken, and by Sects undone!
O how they swarm! no age could ever tell
A brood too monstrous for their parallel.
Freedom of conscience! rid us from this thrall
Of spirit, and the yoke Episcopal;
This once was all the cry, and this we see
As quickly turned to fleshly liberty.
Each now will please himself, and things devise
Right in his own, wrong in his Makers eyes.
Things it is a shame to speak, things that do call
For ruin, or repentance generaell:
If we our sins like Sodom do declare,
Without repentance let us expect their fare.
Speak out ye Jews, what loss your land befell
By suffering of one cursed Jezabel,
By winking at, if nor approving much
Her wicked waits; we have an hundred such,
Who act her sins, and to increase the tale
Have furn^sh'd out and rigged a thousand sail
Of new, unheard of sins, that near before
Durst venture landing on our British shore:
Oh, that a man unto himself dare's tie
The title of eternal Majesty,
And say he is God! this I a sin may call
The Devil never was chargeable withal.
Oh, that a worm, a man should dare to advance
Himself above a heavenly ordinance!
What? equal with thy Maker? none but he
Can claim such Independent liberty;
The Devil himself dares not, but stoops and stands,
Rises, and goes as Heavens King commands.
Oh, that a man should offer to cast off
That yoke that Christ calls easy, make a scoff
At Gospel precepts, and put on the face
To make a sing-song at the means of grace!
Were such conditions to the Devils sent,
Would they reject them? sure they would repent.
Oh, that a man should curse, swear, whore, and cry,
It Is a delight to Heavens Majesty!
The Devil durst never declaim on such a theme,
To prove it pure religion to blaspheme.
Oh, that a man ii sin should take his swing,
And mock at judgment, say there is no such thing!
The Devil dares not, will not this denay,
But trembles and believes a Judgment day.
Oh, that a man dares call without all fear,
Gods precepts, bondage, and his Law severe;
The Devil never Gods Laws durst dare to fame
Illegal, though a rebel to the same.
O woeful England! who e're thought to see
Such wretches born, and monsters bred in thee!
But are there any such? Yea, such are these
Ranters, or Rakehels, call them which you please.
A Ranter! what is he? one that lives in
All wickedness, and says he cannot sin:
He Is one that blusheth not, but in the light
Declares his sin like to a Sodomite.
He Is one that says there is neither Heaven nor Hell,
Prepared for a Saint or Infidel:
He spurns the Bible, and he does deny
To Christ his kingly Sovereignty.
His Ordinances and his Laws so just,
He barks at these, because they bite his lust:
To holiness and Gospel walking he
Equals the Devil for an enemy.
He Will swear, and curse, and drink, and has the face
To boast of these as Characters of Grace:
When he blasphemes the most, he dares express
That God does act him in his wickedness.
He Is one that would all civil right destroy,
And turn all to a strange community,
With each man's interest he will have to do,
His goods, his wife, his maid, and daughter too.
He Is one that has attained the highest degree
In Satan's School, Hels Universitie.
Forgetting God this wretch becomes then
The pride of Devils, and the shame of men.
When he and his fraternity do meet,
'Twould make a man amazed to hear them greet,
With woulds, and blood, thou devil, dog, thou whore,
This is their language, and a deal such more:
These salutations past, they do not fail
To call for Wine, Tobacco, Beer and Ale;
These being the spirits they are inspired by,
Half drunk, half mad, each has his prophecy:
A first stands up and does relate
That he from Heaven is sent,
To cry down both in Church and State,
All forms, and government.
Pack Ministers and Magistrates,
We will have no such things,
We Ranters are sole Potentates,
Both Prophets, Priests, and Kings.
There is no sin, another cries,
This thing called righteousness,
Is but a trick that some devise,
Our freedom to suppress.
Then let us be free, in jollitrie
Let all our time be spent;
He Is but a Daw, that stands in awe
Of a Commandment.
There is no Hell, another cries,
This is a fancy clear;
Nor is there any place of joys
Called Heaven but what is here;
Then let us dance round and tear the ground,
And gig it whilst we may,
We will not fear, although we hear
Tales of a judgment day.
Thus they proceed in speaking till each one
Has told his hellish revelation.
When these are past, then to such pranks they fall
As if there were indeed no Judge at all,
No ear to hear, no eye that e're discries
Their sordid words, and foul adulteries.
It Is shame to tell what these both do, and say
Not in a secret, but an open way.
Here Is dancing, tumbling, swearing, as there were
No men, nor women, but all Devils there;
No God, no good, no sin, no hell, no bliss,
O tremble heaven, and hell, and earth at this!
And tremble Ranters, tremble at your state,
And see your sin before it be too late:
Naked before the Lord your folly lies,
You cannot cheat him with your Mysteries,
Nor yet the world, for all men now conclude,
The Atheist reigns in all your multitude.
I. F. FINIS.

