THE FULL TRVTH OF THE Welsh-Affaires.

Faithfully, and Impartially discovered in a LETTER, from a Gentleman of VVorth
to his Cousen in LONDON.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

To the Reader.
GOod Wine needs no Bush, nor the naked Truth any glorious dress: J shall not
therefore Gentlemen at present invite you to the perusal of these few lines by
any Seraphical expressions, or swell it out into a full sheet by any luxuriant
additions; for J am confident, it will in this its own plain dress, being (as
it is) most true, effect my desires, and also the Gentleman's who sent it, the
public acceptance and belief, that so a poor by lyes-abused people may at
last be undeceived, and the Godmocking Thing at Westminster detected in its
forgeries.

THE Full Truth of the Welsh Affairs; faithfully, and impartially discovered
in a Letter from a Gentleman of Worth, to his Cousen in LONDON.
COUSEN;
I Hope it is not too late to return you thanks for your Letter: the bearer
and J did not forget you, though not in so good element. The next thing that J
have to tell you, is, that I had visited you long before this, but new, and
unhappy Distractions have fallen in these distressed parts of South Wales, the
issue whereof is my only let to stay here, and least it should be thought the
VVell-affected are in a woe se condition than they are; I will give you a
Summary of all the actions since the unhappy breach.

Our Forces of the Parliament, commanded by Colonel Horton, consisting of 4000.
gallant men well appointed, advanced amongst the Rocks and Hills to suppress
the insurrection, but contrary to our assured expectation, the knaves took
four of our best Troops of Horse and Dragoones; which so discouraged our
common Soldiers, that we made an honorable Retreat, having a fortunate color
to save our Reputation, a private Gentleman near the Town of Brecknock on
Gamri (suspected to be ill-affected) giving us occasion to come thither, to
prevent his grand Design, (endeavoring to stop our intelligence, and hinder
our retreat, upon which we were then) and to this effect he had got 167. men
of all sorts to act his intentions, which timely occasion we gladly laid hold
on, and chearefully marched to the Town of Brecknock, where most gallantly we
took the Gentleman and his boys; having rested a few days there, the knaves
our Enemies had taken Swansey a Port Town, and in a very good order were
marching toward the maine and strong Castle of Cardiff, which rouzed us very
unwillingly toward that place, where for four days we faced our new Enemies,
but at last, Horse and Man being almost starved, which they labored; we found
an opportuty to fall very advantagiously on them, which they made us repent,
most courageously defending themselves, and killing us, till at last their
Ammunition was spent, and the Horse at great distance not able to come to
relieve their Foot, which caused them to the number of four hundred to yield
to our mercy; the rest of the Army affrighted, at this, fled. But this good
News did not last long, for Chepstow was taken by some of their party, and
34000l. of money in it, and great store of Artillery, and on Wednesday night
last, they took 500. of our Horse, which has made, them: and almost undone us:
They are obstinate, and will all perish, if they cannot drive us to our own
Country; which we would do if we had Orders. I have no more, but my true love
to you, and your good Wife; I rest,

Your true Cousen, etc.
May 14th. 1648.
FINIS.

