A FAST SERMON PREACHED On Innocents day BY THOMAS FVLLER, B. D. Minister of
the Savoy.

2 SAMUEL 2. 26. Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for
ever? know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? How long
shall it be then, yer thou bid the people return from sollowing their
brethren?

LONDON, Printed by L. N. and R. C. for JOHN WILLIAMS at the sign of the
Crown in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1642.

A FAST SERMON PREACHED ON Innocents day.
MATTHEW. 5. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers.
ON this day a Fast and Feast do both justle together; 1.
and the question is, which should take place in our affections. I pray let
Solomon, the wisest of Kings and Men, be made Doctor of the Chair to decide
this controversy, Eccles. 7. 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning,
then to go to the house of feasting: for it is the end of all men, and the
living will lay it to his heart. Let us therefore dispense with all mirth for
this time, and apply our selves to lamentation.

2. We read Ezra 3. 12. that when the foundation of the second Temple was
laid by Zerubbabel, the young men shouted for joy: But many of the Priests and
Levites, and chief of the fathers, who were ancient men, that had seen the
first house, when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept
with a loud voice, and many shouted aloud for joy. Thus what if young men be so
addicted to their toys and Christmas sports, that they will not be weaned from
them, O let not old men, who are or should be wiser, and therefore more
sensible of the sins and sorrows of the State; let us who are Priests, whose
very profession does date us ancient, be transported with their follies, but
mourn whilst they are in their mirth. The French Proverb says, They that
laugh on Friday, shall cry on Sunday. And it may please God of his goodness so
to bring it to pass, that if we keep a sad Christmas, we may have a merry Lent.

3. This day is called Innocents or Childermas day; a day which superstitious
Papists count unluckie and unfortunate, and therefore thereupon they will begin
no matter of moment, as fearing ill success should befall them. Indeed I could
willingly have sent their follies in silence to Hell, lest by being a Confuter,
I become a Remembrancer of their vanities: but that this fond conceit must be
rooted out of the minds of the ignorant people. Why should not that day be most
happy, which in the judgment of charity (charity which though not stark blind
with Bartimeus, with Leah is always tender eyed) sent so many Saints by Herod's
cruelty to Heaven, before they had committed any actual sin. Well, out of
sacred opposition and pious crossing of Popish vanities, let us this day begin,
and this day give good handsell of true repentance. To the cloane all things
are clean. To the good all days are good: We may say of this day as David of
Goliahs sword, 1 Samuel 21. 9. There is none like that, give it me. No day like
this day for us to begin our sanctified sorrow, and to hearken to Gods word,
Blessed are the Peacemakers.

4. In this and the two next Chapters Christ having a Mountain for his Pulpit,
and the whole Law for his text, seeks to clear it from those false glosses
(corrupting the Text) which the Priests and Pharisees had fastened upon it; and
shows, that Gods Law was not to be narrowed and confined to the outward act
alone, but according to the will of the Lawgiver (the Surveyour that best knew
the latitude thereof) is to be extended to the very thoughts of the heart, and
takes hold of men's wicked inclinations, as breaches thereof, and offenses
against it. We use to end our Sermons with a Blessing, Christ begins his with
the Beatitudes, and of the eight, my Text is neither the last nor the least,
Blessed are the Peacemakers.

5. Observe in the words the best work and the best wages; the best work,
Peacemakers: the best wages, They are blessed. I begin with the work, which
shall employ my pains and your attention this day. Now the goodness of peace
will the better appear, if we consider the misery of war. It is said, Genesis
12. 11. And it came to pass when Abraham was come near to enter into Egypt,
that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold, now I know that thou art a fair
woman to look upon. Why Now I know thou art a beautiful woman? Did Abraham
live thus long in ignorance of his wives beauty? Did he now first begin to know
her handsomnesse? Learned Tremelius on the place starts and answers the
objection Now, that is, when Abraham came into Egypt, as if he had said, When I
see the tawny faces and swarthy complexions of the sunburned Egptians, thy face
seems the fairer, and thy beauty the brighter in mine eyes. I must confess,
I ever prized peace for a pearl; but we never did or could set the true
estimate and value upon it till this interruption and suspension of it. Now we
know, being taught by dear experience, that peace is a beautiful blessing:
And therefore we will consider war first in the wickedness, then in the
woefulness thereof.

6. First, war makes a Nation more wicked. Surely, swearing and Sabbath
breaking do not advance the keeping of the first Table. And as for the second
Table, how hard is it in these distracted times to be practiced? Yea, it is
difficult to say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, or ten Commandments: The Lords
Prayer for that Petition, And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. The Creed for that Article, The Communion of Saints,
which does tie and obliege us to the performance of all Christian offices and
charitable duties to those who by the same Christ seeks salvation, and
profess the same true Christian Catholic faith with us: The ten Commandments
for that precept, Thou shall not kill: and though men in speculation and
school distinctions may say, that all these may be easily performed in the
time of war; yet our corrupt nature, which is stark naught in time of peace,
is likely to be far worse in war, and if these times continue, I am afraid
we shall neither say the Lords Prayer, nor believe the Creed, nor practice the
Commandments. And as hard it will be preparedly and profitably to receive the
Sacraments, when we shall drink Christ's blood as on to day, and go about to
shed our brothers blood as on to morrow.

7. Secondly, let us consider the woefulness of war, and that both in its
self, and in its attendance: See a Map of war drawn by a holy hand, Psalm. 87.
63. The fire consumed their young men, and their maidens were not given to
marriage, their Priests fell by the sword, and their widows made no
lamentations. The fire consumed the young men. We behold with contentment ripe
fruit to drop down to the ground, but who will not pity green apples when
they are cudgelled down from the tree. And the maidens were not given in
marriage. So that the fairest flowers of virginity were feign to wither on the
stalk, whereon they did grow, for want of hands to gather them. The Priests
were flaine with the sword; Sed quid cum Mart Prophetis? Well then, there they
were, though they were none of the best of the Priests, being lewd Hophnee and
Phyneus, and there they were killed, for ought I know, if these times hold,
Gods best Samuels must go the same way. And their widows made no lamentation.
You will say, the more unnatural women they: O no, they made no lamentation,
either because their grief was above lamenting, such as only could be managed
with silence and amazement, or else because they were so taken up with
deploring the public calamity, they could spare no time for private persons to
bemoane their particular losses.

8. But war is not so terrible in it self, as in its attendants; first the
Plague which brings up the rear of war: the Plague, I say, which formerly used
to be an extraordinary ambassador in this City of London, to denounce Gods
anger against it, but is of late grown a constant legier, and for these many
late years has never been clearly removed from us: surely some great
unrepented sin lies on this City, that this constant punishment does visit us,
which will be more terrible when it shall be extended over the whole Realm.

9. Secondly, Famine, a waiter in Ordinary on War. Truly it may seem a
riddle, and yet it is most true, that War makes both less meat, and fewer
mouths: First, because in time of war none dare attend husbandry, wherewith
Solomon says, The King himself is maintained. Secondly, because Soldiers
spoil more out of prodigality, then they spend out of necessity: When our
Savior multiplied loaves and fishes, there were those appointed who took up
the twelve baskets of fragments; but, alas, no such care is taken in soldiers
festivals. Hitherto indeed we have had plenty enough, and as yet in this City
are not sensible of any want. But you know next Pharaohs full ears came
Pharaohs blasted ears, next Pharaohs fat kine came Pharaohs lean kine; and I
pray God poor people sor this years store be not next year starved.

10. Thirdly, wild beasts, see Gods four cardinal punishments reckoned up,
Ezech. 14. 21. For thus says the Lord God, for much more when I send my four
sore judgments upon Jerusalem: the sword, and the famine, and the noisome
beast, and the pestilence to cut from it man and beast. Some perchance will say,
that there is more danger of wild beasts in our Island, which is environed with
water. Truly there need no other wild beasts then our selves, who are Lions,
Bears, Boares, Wolves, and Tigers one to another. And though as yet we were
never plagued with wild beasts, yet we know not how soon God may hiss for
them over, and for our new and strange sins, cause new and strange punishments.
Now conceive a City as big as your thoughts can imagine, and fancy the Sword
marching in at the Eastgate, and the Plague coming in at the West-gate, and
Famine entering in at the North-gate, and wild beasts passing in at the
South-gate, and all meeting together in the Marketplace, and then tell me how
quickly will your voluminous City be abridged to a poor pittance.

11. But hitherto we have only spoken of the miseries of War in general, but
the worst is still behind, for we are afflicted with Civil war, many wars
have done woefully, but this surmounteth them all. In Civil war nothing can be
expected but a ruin and desolaion. What said Mordecai to Hesther, Hesther 4.
13. Think not with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings house more
then all the Jews. So let none in what house soever, in the Kings House, or
Houfe of Lords, or House of Commons, or strongest Castles, or walled Towns, or
fenced Cities, flatter themselves with a fond conceit of their safety, for if
Civil wars continue long, they must expect as well as others to be
devoured, yea, none can promise great Persons so much happiness as to be last
undone: For, for ought any knows, it may come their turns to be the first, as
being the fairest marks to invite envy and malice against them. Mean time
poor Ireland, which as the man in the vision cried to Saint Paul, Come over
into Macedonia and help us, which has so long, so often, so earnestly
entreated, implored, importuned our assistants, must be lost of course. The
Protestants there which have long swom against the tide till their arms are
weary, must at last of necessity even give themselves over to be drowned: That
Harp, which when it was well tuned, made so good music, must now and
hereafter for ever be hung upon the willowes, a sad and sorrowful tree, and
our distraction will hasten their final destruction. We read, Deuteronomy. 28. 56.
That in a great Famine the eye of the mother shall be evil toward her son and
toward her daughter, she shall grudge every morsel of meat which goes
besides her own mouth, preferring nature before natural affection. If these
times do continue, London will grudge Londonderry her daughter, and England
Mother generally of Ireland (as a Colony deduced from it) will grieve to part
with the least meat, money and munition to it.

12 But all these Mischiefs are nothing in respect of the last, namely the
scandal and dishonor which hereby will redound to the Protestant religion,
whereof a true Christian ought to be more tender and sensible, then of any
worldly loss whatsoever: Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in Ascalon, lest
the daughters of the Philistims rejoice, lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph. O what music does our discord make to the Romish
adversaries. We read, Genes. 13. 7. And there was a strife between the
heard-men of Abraham's cattle, and the heard-men of Lots cattle, and the
Cananite, and the Perizite dwelled then in the Land. And Abraham said unto Lot,
Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between my etc. Wherein observe, that the
Canaanites and Perizites being there in the Land, is mentioned as a motive with
Abraham to make him make the speedier accommodation with Lot, lest the true
religion and service of God should suffer in the censure of Pagans by their
discords, being Uncle and Nephew, engaged in a brawle by their servants
dissension. How many Canaanites and Perezites behold our bloody differences,
and clap their hands to see us wring ours, yea, insult and rejoice to see us
sheath our swords in one another bowels; we used formerly to task the
Papists of cruelty to Protestants; but hereafter, as Abner said to Asahel, 2 Samuel 2. 22. How then shall I hold up my face to Joab thy brother: So how shall
we look in the face, from this day forwards, of our Romish adversaries. Tell
them no more of their cruelty to the Protestants at Hedlebergh, of their
cruelty to Protestants of Magdenberge, of their cruelty to the Protestants at
Rochel; for if these wars continue, we are likely not only to equal, but to
outdoe these cruelties one to another; so that discharging this accusation of
bloudinesse against them, it will rebound and recoile in our own faces. Put all
these together, that war makes a Land more wicked, makes a Land more woeful,
is bad in it self, is worse in its train, destroys Christian people, and
disgraces Christian profession, and then will all have just cause to say as it
is in my Text, Blessed are the Peacemakers.

13. If any object that peace also has her mischiefs which attend thereupon;
for it brings plenty, and plenty brings pride, and pride brings plagues upon
it: peace makes men pampered, and with Jessurun to kick against God. War indeed
brings cleanness of teeth, whilst peace brings fullness of bread, which is as
bad and worse, making men presumptuously to rebel against God. The answer is
easy, woes may come from peace, but they must come from war; miseries arise
from the very use of war, which come but from the abuse of peace, being
essential to war, but accidental to peace, inherent always in the one,
adherent too often to the other: in a word, in war calamities proceed from the
thing it self, in peace from men, abusing it.

14. Object. But peace without truth is rather poison then a cordial: O let us
not be like the thirsty traveller, who so long longs for water, that at last he
drinks mud and water together, not only without distinction or distaste, but
even with delight: O let us not with Sampson so dote on the Dalilah of peace,
as to get her love to betray truth, wherein our strength lies. Some perchance
would propound peace unto us, but on such servile conditions as Naash the
Ammonite offered a truce to the men of Jabesh-Gilead, 1 Samuel 11. 2. On this
condition will I make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right
eyes, and lay it for a reproacb upon all Israel. And so if we will give in
truth to boot, and put out our own eyes into the bargain; forfeit the true
faith and knowledge of God, with the purity of his service, then perchance a
peace may be proffered us; but as Peter said to Simon Magus, Act. 8. 20. Thy
money perish with thee, so let such a hellish peace perish with those that seek
to promote it.

15. In the answering of this objection, give me leave as Peter said, Act. 2.
29. Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the Patriarch David; so
let me boldly and fully speak in answer to the objection: If leave be denied
me: I know whence my commission is derived, I am an Ambassador for the God of
Heaven if I speak what is false, I must answer for it; if truth, it will
answer for me. And what I have to say, I will divide into four Propositions.

16. Prop. 1. Cursed be he that seeks to divide Peace from Truth. I must
confess I was never bred upon Mount Ebal, neither did ever my tongue take
delight in cursing. The rather, because we may observe Deuteronomy. 27. 12. that the
most eminent Tribes from which the Princely and Priestly men descended, Levi,
Judah, Ephraim, and Benjamin, took their station in Mount Gerasin, to show,
that Magistrates and Ministers are principally to inure their mouths to
blessing. And yet for those that feek to sever peace from truth, I cannot
refrain my self, but must say, Cursed be they in the city, and cursed be they
in the field, cursed be they in their basket and in their store, cursed be they
in the fruit of their body, and in the fruit of their land, in the increase of
their kine, and in the stock of their sheep, cursed shall they be when they
come in, and cursed shall they be when they go out.

17. Pro. 2. Before this war began, we had in England truth in all
essential to salvation. We had all necessary and important truths truly
compiled in our 39. Articles. We had the word of God truly preached (I could
wish it had been more frequently and generally) the Sacraments duly
administered, which two put together does constitute a true Church. S. Paul, 1
Cor. 15. 18. being to prove the resurrection of the dead, presses the
Corinthians with this among other Arguments, Then they also which are fallen
asleep in Christ are perished. Putting them a most uncharitable absurdity, that
in case the dead arise not again, they must be bound to confess, that all the
Saints formerly deceased were perished. And surely, such as deny that England
before this war began had all essential truth to salvation, must of
necessity split themselves on the same uncharitable rock, and pass a sentence
of condemnation on all those which dyed in our Church before these two years
last past.

18 3. Pro. Many errors in Doctrine and innovation in discipline, did creep
fast into our Church. Arminian positions, Tenants, reason to Gods grace,
invaded the truth of the Word in many places. One Ceremony begat another, there
being no bounds in will worship, wherewith one may sooner be wearied then
satisfied. The inventors of new Ceremonies endeavoring to supply in number
what their conceits wanted in solidity; and God knows before this time where
they had been if they had not been stopped.

19 4. Pro. The best and only way to purge these errors out, is in a fair and
peaceable way; for the sword cannot discern betwixt error and falsehood, it may
have two edges, but has never an eye. Let there on Gods blessing be a Synod
of truly grave, pious, and learned Divines; and let them both fairly dispute,
and fully decide, what is true, what is false; what Ceremonies are to be retained,
what to be rejected; and let civil authortie stamp their command upon it, to
be generally received under what penalty their descretion shall think fitting.
But as long as War lasts, no hope of any such agreement; this must be a work
for Peace to perform. So then under the notion of Peace, hitherto we have and
hereafter do intend such a Peace, as when it comes we hope will restore truth
unto us, in all the accidental and ornamentall parts thereof; and add it to
that truth in essentialls to salvation, which we enjoyed before this War
began, and in this sense I will boldly pronounce blessed be the Peacemakers.

20 Come we now to consider what be the hindrances of Peace: these hindrances
are either general or particular. The general hindrance is this: The many
national sins of our kingdom being not repented of; I say of our kingdom,
not of one Army alone. Think not that the Kings Army is like Sodom, not ten
righteous men in it, (no not if righteous Lot himself be put into the number)
and the other Army like Syon consisting all of Saints. No, there be drunkards
on both sides, and swearers on both sides, and whoremungers on both sides,
pious on both sides, and profane on both sides, like Jeremies figs, those
that are good are very good, and those that are bad are very bad in both
parties. I never knew nor heard of an Army all of Saints, save the holy Army of
Martyrs, and those you know were dead first, for the last breath they sent
forth proclaimed them to be Martyrs. But it is not the sins of the Armies
alone, but the sins of the whole kingdom which break off our hopes of
Peace, our Nation is generally sinful. The City complains of the ambition and
prodigality of the Courtiers, the Courtiers complain of the pride and
covetousness of Citizens, the Laity complain of the laziness and
state-medling of the Clergy, the Clergy complain of the hard dealing and
sacrilege of the Laity, the Rich complain of the murmuring and ingratitude of
the Poor, the Poor complain of the oppression and extortion of the Rich: Thus
every one is more ready to throw dirt in another face then to wash his own
clean. And in all these though malice may set the varnish, sure truth does lay
the groundwork.

21 Of particular hindrances, in the first place we may rank the Romish
Recusants, Is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this, was David's question
2. Sam. 14. 19. but is not the hand may we all say of Jesvites in these
distractions. Many times from my youth up have they fought against me may
England now say, yea many times from my youth up have they vexed me, but have
not prevailed against me. At last, the Popish party perceived that the strength
of England consisted in the unity thereof. ( Sampson is half conquered when it
is known where his strength does lie) and that it was impossible to conquer
English Protestants, but by English Protestants. Is this your spite and malice
O you Romish adversaries, because you could not overcome us with Spanish
Armadoes, nor blow us up with Gunpowder treasons, nor undo us with Irish
Rebellions, to set our selves against our selves, first to divide us, then to
destroy us. Well, God knows what may come to pass. It may be when we have
drunk the top of this bitter cup, the dregs may be for your share, and we may
all be made friends for your utter ruin and destruction.

22 Next, the Papists the Schismatickes are the hendrances of our Peace. These
know their kingdom cannot be established but by War, as assured that the
wisdom of the State is such, as will blast their designs when matters are
settled. I have heard (when a child) of a Lawless Church, sure these if they
might have their will, would have a Lawless Church and a Gospellesse too; and
yet they as falsely as fondly conceive that the State gives approbation and
connivance to them. We read Psalm. 50. 21. where Gods spirit reckons up many
sins which the wicked had committed, that God says; These things have thou
done, and I kept silence; thou thoughest that I was altogether such a one as
thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. In
which place of Scripture three things are considerable. First, God is said to
keep silence when he does not presently and visibly punish offenders, Psalm. 35.
22. O Lord keep not silence, and so Psalm. 83. 1. Keep not thou silence O God.
God, for reasons best known to himself, and for some known to us, namely, to
make wicked men swel and break with a Timpany of good success for the time,
does not outwardly express the dislike of their bad courses, in inflictine a
sudden and sensible puuishment upon them. Secondly, observe the false Logic
and bad inference of wicked men* who who conceive that God is altogether such
an one as themselves, yea make accessory and confederate with them because
silent, therefore consenting: Qui tacet satis laudat. Thirdly, see time will
come when in time best known to himself he will publicly reprove them, and
show not only his free dissent but full displeasure. Thus Schismatickes
improve themselves upon the clemency and long suffering of our State. Because
they are taken up with matters of higher concernment, and are not at leisure to
stoop to their punishment, as employed in business of more present and
pressing importance; Separatists and Sectaries conceive that they favor, what
they do not punish. But time will come when to the glory of God and their own
honor, though slowly, surely they will visit their offenses, and as the
Psalmist says; Set their sins in order before them; who have been the
partial cause of the disorder and confusion of this kingdom.

23 Thirdly, those are enemies to Peace, whose being merely consists by
War and discention. Indeed the truly noble English spirits, desire a
foreign Foe for a mark for their Bullets; but many there be rather turbulent
then valiant, who as Demetrius by this craft they get their gain, desire a
perpetuity of War for their possession. We read in Plutarch of one Demades
who by profession was a maker of Coffins, and he was banished out of the City
of Athens for wishing that he might have good trading; that wise Sare truly
interpreting the language of his wish, as desiring some epidemicall disease;
his private profit being inconsistant with the public flourashing of the
Commonwealth. So those people who are undone, and cannot live but by undoing
of others, certainly wish no good to our Church and Kingdom, but must needs be
State Barrettors to keep the sore always raw, betwixt Prince and people.

24 Let us now come to see the means, whereby private persons may and must
endeavor the obtaining of peace; The first is prayer, pray for the peace of
Jerusalem; let every one in that prayer which he uses in his Family, or
private devotions, build a room more and enlarge it, to pray for peace in our
Israel.

25 Secondly, let us petition for peace, not only to the God in Heaven, but to
the Gods on earth; first to his Majesty, but alas there is a great gulf
between us and him fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to him
cannot, neither can they pass to us that would come from thence. The sins of
our Realm are amounted to such a height that we deserve this and worse
punishment. Next, let us petition to the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament, next under God and the King the hope and help of our happiness,
Let none say it is presumption to petition them, as undertaking to tell them of
what they are ignorant, or to put them in remembrance of what they may forget,
for herein we apply our self to them, in immitation of our access to God, and
surely their greatness cannot and their goodness will not be displeased in
our compliance and conformity to such an Architype. True it is that God,
Matthew 6. 8. Our Father knows what things we have need of before we ask
him, and yet it is his will and pleasure to be sought too by our prayer. And so
no doubt that High and Honorable Court, though that they know fulwell that
peace is that we stand in need of yet they take delight in our duty, yea expect
our service herin to petition for peace, that so our begging of peace, may in
effect be a modest and mannerly expression of an hearty thanks for their long
and constant endeavors herein. Wherefore what Tertullus said flatteringly to
Felex, we may say truly and feelingly to them; seeing that very worthy deeds
are done to this Nation by their providence, Acts 24. 3.
we accept always, and in all places with all thankfulness. Notwithstanding I
pray you, that you of your Clemency would hear us a few words. And let us in
all Humility, not directing but beseeching them, without a tumultuous thought,
most peacable and pathetically beg of them and sue unto them to continue
their care in advancing a seasonable and happy accommodation, that so the
blessing pronounced in my text may lie both upon them and theirs Blessed are
the Peacemakers:

26 Thirdly, we must be content soundly to pay for peace, we read Exodus 38. 8.
And he made the Lever of Brass and the foot of it of Brass, of the
Looking-glasses of the Women assembling, which assembled at the door of the
Tabernacle of the congregation. It seems that the backsids of their
Looking-glasses were made of brass, which commonly with us are made of wood,
and they consigned them over for Gods service; and good reason too, for
formerly they had given their eraerings for the making of a Calfe; Justly
therefore now they did penance for their pride, as counting it Honor enough,
that that wherein they looked their own faces, should make the foot of Gods
Leaver. But what should not people give to buy a true peace and a peace with
Truth? O how many years purchase is it worth? let us not think much, to give
all our superfluities, but to give foam of our necessaries, for the advancing
and obtaining of it.

27 Fourthly, ler us banish out of our mouths all words and phrases of
contempt and reproach, (I could instance in the word, but that it is beneath
the Majesty of a Pulpit) which the malice of men has minted and fastened on
opposite parties; O let us have no other Christian name, then the name of
Christians, or other surname then Christian Protestants, neither answering to,
nor calling others by any term of disgrace.

28 Fifthly, let us with a speedy, serious and general repentance, remove the
crying sins of our Kingdom, which as long as they last, will bane all peace
amongst us. I say speedy, least the physic come too late for the disease;
serious, least the tent be too short for the wound; general, least the plaster
be too narrow for the sore. Suppose that the Sea should break forth in this
Land, as such a thing may come to pass, The Lord is King, says David, let the
earth rejoice yea let the multitude of of the Isle he glad thereatr, Psalm. 97.
1. And good reason has the Isles to be glad, as more particularly concerned,
for if the water were not countermanded by Gods Prerogative Royal, it would
speedily recover its natural place above the earth. But suppose the Sea should
break into the Land, it is not the endeavors of a private man can stop it;
what if he goes down with a faggot on his back, and a matrock on his
shoulder, and a spade in his hand, his desire is more commendable then his
discretion, it being more likely the Sea would swallow him then he stop the
mouth thereof. No, the whole Country must come in, children must bring earth in
their hats, women in their aprons, men with handbarrowes, wheelbarrowes, carts,
carres, waines, wagons, all must work least all be destroyed. I rather
instance in this expression of the irruption of the Sea, because I find Gods
anger so compared in holy writ, 1 Chronicles. 14. 11. David said, God has broken in
upon mine enemies like the breaking forth of waters. So when a general deluge
and inundation of Gods anger seaseth upon a whole Kingdom, it cannot be stopped
by the private endeavors of some few, but it must be an universal work, by a
general repentance; all must raise banks to bound it. Till this be done, I am
afraid we shall have no peace, and to speak plainly I am afraid we are not yet
ripe for Gods mercy, as Gideon Judge. 7. 4. had too many men for God to give
victory to: so we are too proud hitherto for God to give peace too, many of us
are Humiliati, but few of us are Humiles. Many by these wars brought lo, but
few made loely, so that we are proud in our poverty, and as the unjust Steward
said, to beg I am ashamed, so we are too stout though half starved on the
bended knees of our souls, with true repentance, to crave pardon of God for
our sins, which till it be done, we may discourse of peace and superficially
desire it but never truly care for it, or can comfortably receive it.

29 And indeed we may take forcible motives from our own miseries, to
endeavor peace by all possible means; for look upon the complexion of the
war, and does it not look of a most strange and different hue from other
wars. The wars of Germany (which give me leave to say if we had pitied by
the proxy of a true Simpathy, we had never so soon suffered them in our own
person) were far lighter affliction then ours. In Germany people when hunted
with war took covert in their fenced Cities. But here in England we have no
guard against wars blow, but lie open to plundering and destruction. Germany
was a great Continent bearing six hundred miles square, so that whilst one part
thereof was mowed down with war, the other enjoying peace, might grow up in
the mean time. But little England (great only in her miseries, severed by the
Sea from other Countries, and by devisions parted from het self) is a morsel
which civil war will quickly devour. Thirdy, in Germany commanly they lay
in Garrison in winter and fought in summer; we read 2 Samuel 6. 1 And it came to
pass at the time when Kings go forth to battle. This all Comments generally
expound of the spring time; But alas if we in our woes were Antipodes to all
others, our miseries begin when others end, in the winter time. Pray (says out
Savior) that your flight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabboth-day: winter
fights woeful fights, Sabbath wars sorrowful wars, and yet such are these in
our Kingdom. Lastly, in Germany Papists did fight against Protestants, where
as our intestine wars, are against those that profess the same Religion.

30 It has been a great curse of God upon us, to make a constant
misunderstanding betwixt our King and his Parliament; whilst both profess to
level at the same end. I cannot compare their case better than to the example
of Ruben and Judah, Genesis 37. There Ruben desired and endeavored to preserve
the life of his brother Joseph, and Judah desired and endeavor to preserve the
life of his brother Joseph; and yet these two embracing different means, did
not only cross and thwart, but even ruin and destroy the desires of each
other; for Ruben moved and obtained that Joseph might not be killed, verse. 22.
And Ruben said unto them, shed no blood, but cast him into this Pit that is in
the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him; that he might rid him out of their
hands, to deliver him to his Father again. Judah also desired the same, but
being not privy to Rubens intents, and to avoid the cruelty of the rest of his
Brethren, propounded and effected, that Joseph might be sold to the Medianitish
Merchants, meetly so to preserve his life; and thereby he did unravell all the
web of Rubins designs, and frustrated his endeavors. Thus when God will have
a people punished for their sins, he will not only suffer but cause
mistakes without mending, and misprisions without rectifying, to happen betwixt
brethren who mean and really intend the same thing; so that they speak the
same matter in effect, and yet, be Barbarians one to another, as either not or
not right understanding what they say each to other. Thus the maintaining of
the Protestant Religion in the purity thereof; the vindicating of the lawful
Prerogative of the King; the ascertaining of the just rights and privileges of
the Parliament; the defending of the dues and properties of the Subject are
pleaded and pretended on both sides, as the ultimate ends they aim at. Well,
as our Savior said to the blind man, Mat. 9. 29. according to your faith be
it unto you: so, according to the sincerity and integrity of their hearts whom
God knows means most seriously, be it unto them; we wish them good victory in
the name of the Lord: and yet even herein a friendly peace were as much better
then victory it self, as the end is better then the means; for, blessed are
the Peacemakers.

31 Objections. But may some say, though we do never so much desire peace, we
shall not obtain that blessing, which is pronounced in my text, for the
Peacemakers are to be blessed. And it is to be feared, that our breaches are
too wide to be cured, and Gods justice must have reparation upon us.

32 By Peacemakers, Peace-endeavourers are to be understood, not only the
effectours of Peace, but even the Affectours of Peace shall be blessed. Romans 12.
18. If it he possible, as much as in you lies live peaceably with all men. God
out of his goodness, measures men's reward, not by their success but desires,
2 Cor. 8. 12. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

33 And yet I am not out of heart, but that there is hope of Peace, and that as
yet our sins are not sweld so high, but that there is mercy with God for our
nation. First, my hope is founded on the multitude of good people in this land,
which assault and batter Heaven with the importunity of their prayers. We read
of Ptolomeus Philodelphus, King of Egypt that he caused the Bible to be
translated by seventy Interpreters, which seventy were severally disposed of in
seventy several Cells, unknown each to other; and yet they did so well agree in
their several translations, that there was no considerable difference betwixt
them, in rendering the text; an argument that they were acted with one and the
same spirit. Surely it comforts me when I call to mind, what shall I say,
seventy, nay seven times seventy, yea seaventy hundred, yea seventy thousand,
which are peaceable in Israel, which on the bended knees of their souls, daily
pray to God for peace. These though they know not the faces, no not the names
one of another, nay, have neither seen nor shall see one another till they meet
together in happiness in Heaven; yet they unite their votes and center their
suffrages in the same thing, that God would restore Peace unto us, who no doubt
in his due time will hear their prayers.

34 The second thing that comforts me, is, when I look on Gods proceedings
hitherto in our Kingdom, his judgments seem to be judgments rather of
expostulation then of exterpation: we read Exodus 4. 24. that God being angry
with Moses for not circumcising his Sons; It came to pass by the way in the
Jane that the Lord met him, and sought to kill him. Sought to kill him?
strange: did God seek to kill him, and not kill him? Speak Lord, speak to
the Fire, and it shall with flashes consume him; to the Air, and with
pestilent vapors it shall choke him; to the Water, and with deluges it shall
over-whelme him; to the Earth, and with yawning chops it shall devour him.
Well, the meaning is this, God sought to kill him, that is, in some outward
visible manner whereof Moses was apprehensive God manifested his displeasure
against him, that so Moses might both have notice and leisure to divert his
anger, with removing the cause thereof. He that says to us, Seek and ye
shall find, does himself seek and not find; and good reason too, for he
sought with an intent not to find. Thus I may say, that for these last four
years God has still sought to destroy the Kingdom of England, manifesting an
unwillingnesse to do it, if in any reasonable time we would compound with him
by serious repentance. Thus the loving Father shakes the rod over his wanton
child, not with an intent to beat him, but to make him beg pardon; and such
hitherto has been Gods dealing with our Nation, that he even courts and woes
us to repentance, as loath to punish us, if we would understand the signs of
his anger, before it break out upon us.

35 But if all fail, yet those that are Peacemakers in their desires, do
enter a caveat in the Court of heaven; That if wars do ensue, yet for their
part they have labored against it. If a man slain were found in the field,
and it not known who slew him, God provided Deuteronomy. 21. 7. That the Elders of
the next City should wash their hands in the blood of an Heifer, and say, Our
hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it, be merciful, O
Lord, unto thy people Israel whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent
blood unto thy people of Isreal's charge, and the blood shall be forgiven them. So
this one day will be a comfort to the consciences of godly minded men, that
they may appeal to the God of heaven, how they have prayed heartily for peace,
have petitioned humbly for Peace, have been contented to pay deerly for peace,
and to their powers have endeavored to refrain themselves from sins, the
breakers of peace; and therefore they trust that Christian English Protestant
blood, which shall be shed, which has been and hereafter may be shed in these
woeful wars, shall never be visited on their score or laid to their charge.

36 But if all fail, and if we must be involved in a final desolation, then
let us go to the Assurance Office of our souls, and have peace of conscience
with God in our Savior. It was wont to be said A man's house is his Castle, but
if this Castle of late has proved unable to secure any, let them make their
conscience their castle, if beaten from all our parapets and outworkes, let us
retire to this strength for our defense; It may seem, be it spoken with all
reverence, a blunt expression of the holy spirit, Luke 12. 4. Be not afraid of
them that kill the body, and that have no more that they can do. Yea, but one
may say they may kill me with torment and with torture, make me drop out my life
by degrees; why the total some of their malice, is but to kill the body, and
then they have no more that they can do. But they may forbid my body Christian
burial; herein they do not do but suffer, for the living will be more troubled
then the dead, if thy corpse be not committed to earth so that this in effect is
just nothing. Then let Drums beat, and Trumpets sound, and Banners be displaid;
let swords clash, and pikes push, and bullets fly, and Cannons roar; war
do thy worst, Death do tby worst, Devil do thy worst, their souls shall be
happy that sleep in the Lord, for they rest from their labors. However, if it
be possible, and if so great mercy be stored up in God for us, we would rather
have peace in this world; and on the promoters thereof let the blessing in the
light and rest, Blessed are the Peacemakers.

37 And now as I began with the mention of the Fast, so to conclude with the
same, let us keep this day of humiliation holy to the Lord. Some perchance may
make this but a mock-fast, and fast for some private and sinester ends, but
every one that will may make it a true fast to himself, therein to be grieved
for the misery of Gods Saints. God complains, Amos the sixth, of the gluttony
of the Israelites, wherein we find the complete Character of an Epicure,
making wantons of his five Senses, entertaining their eyes with bedsteads of
Ivory, verse 4. curious to behold for the milk-whitenesse thereof; pleasing
their feeling, they stretch themselves on Couches; courting their ears, they
chant to the Violl, ver. 5. contenting their taste, and making that sense a
Pander both to gluttony and drunkenness, they eat the fat of Lambs, and
drink Wine in boules, verse 6. delighting their smell, and annoint themselves
with the chief ointments; and then concludes all with this sharp close, but
they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. Wherein the Prophet alludes
to the story of Joseph, Gene. 37. 24. who was put into a pit without water
(except such as flowed from his eyes) where he must either dye for want of
meat, or dye for being meat to wild Beasts; and yet in the mean time his
Brethren, though they saw the anguish of his soul, Gene. 42. 21. (made visible
and transparent through the windows of his weeping eyes, bended knees, begging
tongue, folded hands) did most barbarously sit down to eat; I dare boldly say
they said no grace with a good heart, either before meat or after.

38 Just such is the cruelty of many of us, (who profess Christianity) to our
Brethren in the Country, because as yet the City of London is as the Land of
Goshen, being light when all the rest is darkened with miseries, they lay not to
heart the afflictons of Joseph, which our Contrymen do suffer. Where is the
man that sounds a retreat to his soul when he feels it marching to fast in
mirth, who abates a dish of his Table out of principles of Conscience, though
perchance many do out of reasons of thrift; and I am afraid all shortly must
do out of necessity. Well, if we be not the more penitent, it may come to
pass, that that sad dance which has been led all over the Kingdom will come
to us to this City at last, and God grant we pay not the Music for all the
rest.

39 Remember Vriah who kept a Camp in the Court, and would not enjoy those
pleasures the marriage bed reached unto him. Think of Mephibosheth lame but
loyal, who went not out with David in his person, but attended him with his
affections, and during the Kings absence, dressed not his feet, (enough to
gangrene them) as not caring for his own feet, whilst his Sovereigns head
was in danger. Seriously consider Nehemiah, who sympathized with the calamities
of Jerusalem, which sadded his countenance even in the presence of the King.
Two things only can make a Courtier sad, sickness (which cannot be
dissembled) and his Princes displeasure. Nehemiah had neither of these, he was
in perfect health, and he stood rectus in curia, right in his Sovereigns
esteem, as appears, Nehemiah 2. 2. by the Kings favorable and familiar
questioning him, why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? So
then, it was nothing else but the impression of the suffering of Gods Saints,
which clouded the brightness of his countenance with sadness. And God grant
we having the same cause, we may have the same compassion with him. Amen.

Errata.
Page 2. read, not us who are Priests: p. 13. line 3. r. ^treason to Gods
grace: l. 14. r. betwixt truth and error: p. 28. l. 27. r. but they may forbid
my body christian burial.

FINIS.

