A true and exact RELATION Of the several Informations, Examinations, and
Confessions of the late Witches, arraigned and executed in the County of Essex.

Who were arraigned and condemned at the late Sessions, holden at Chelmesford
before the Right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of Warwick, and several of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace, the 29 of July, 1645.

Wherein the several murders, and devilish Witchcrafts, committed on the
bodies of men, women, and children, and diverse cattle, are fully discovered.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton, and Benj. Allen, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

THE PREFACE.
INGENUOUS READER;
THou have here presented to thee a sad Emblem of the strange sleights and
cunning subtilties, whereby Satan labors daily to ensnare souls, and at last
to bring them to utter ruin; who being that grand impostor, soon began this
work, even in the morning of the Creation, in the body of a Serpent
miraculously, to reason, dispute, speak, and confer with Evah; and never
ceased till he had laid the honor of those glorious creatures in the dust: and
therefore is called that old Serpent, that deceives all the world, by whose
deceitful promises and subtle devices (for his own end, and desire of their
destruction,) has ensnared and drawn these poor silly creatures, into these
horrid and detestable practices, of renouncing God and Christ, and entering into
a solemn league and contract with the Devil As one them witnesed in open
Court, Rebecca West
; the thought whereof is sufficient to cause a man to be filled with horror and
astonishment. The Law and express command of God does allow of no familiarity
or inquiry of any other spirit, but from himself; as Isa. 8.19. And when they
shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto
Wizards, that peep and that mutter, should not a people seek unto their God,
etc. Under this interrogative is understood this affirmative, A people should
inquire of no other spirit, but of their God only. By which also it is
evident, that all spirits that do suffer themselves to be inquired at, are
evil spirits, and therefore Angeli boni non possunt peccare confirmatiper
gratiam, Angeli mali per malitiam obstinati non possunt been velle.
Devils. And though these devilish practices were frequent and common amongst
heathens and infidells, who usually held familiarity with these spirits, and
many inquired of them in their Oracles; and therefore called those spirits that
gave answer by them, Demons (...) q d. (...) peritus ex (...) disco scio,
divido. Vide Lexic. Pasoris, 157.
of their skill and knowledge in soretelling things to come: yet now when the
light of the Gospel shines so gloriously, that such a generation of poor
deluded souls (and to such a number as has of late been discovered) should be
found amongst us, is much more matter of admiration and astonishment See Deuteronomy.
8.14, 15.
. I doubt not but these things may seem as incredible unto some, as they are
matter of admiration unto others. Nolle nimis sapere, says the Poet, It is
true wisdom not to be too wise; that is, not to know nor desire to know more
then is allowed or needful; needful not in our desires, but in Gods decree:
Here then let reasonable men be persuaded not too much (as is usual) to swell
with indignation, or to be puffed with impatience, where God does not apertly
reveal and plainly (as they desire and think needful) the subtle Engines
and mystical craft of the Devil in the machinations of Witches and Sorcerers;
but soberly, modestly, and discreetly, so far forth-be contented to pursue the
trial and just way of their discovery, as with sense, with reason, with
Religion, is just and righteous; knowing, that whatsoever is beyond these
lists, is reasonlesse, senseless and impious. The greatest doubt and question
will be, whether it be in the power of the Devil to perform such asportation
and local translation of the bodies of Witches; it seems in reason a thing
whereunto the Devil is unable: And whether these supernatural works, which
are above the power of man to do, and proper only to Spirits, whether they are
real, or only imaginary and fained. In answer to which, it is very probable
that the Devil has power to dispose and transport the bodies of men and
women, where God himself does not countermand or prohibit: as instance, when
he took the body of our Savior and set it upon a pinnacle of the Temple; and
these supernatural acts may appear to the outward sense, as Histories; and
many other true reports and Records of other wonderful works and supernatural
feats, all alike offered to the outward sense. It is true, that a Spirit, and a
spiritual work simply in it self, in the own nature and substance cannot be
seen by any bodily eye, or be deprehended by any outward sense,
notwithstanding, as they do mix themselves with bodily substances, are
certainly tried and subject to the sense: For illustration hereof, instance may
be given in holy Scripture, as the Sorcerers of Egypt, where water was turned
into blood, the rod into a Serpent, etc. By a spiritual power their eyes did
manisestly see the water, and as apparently after see the blood, and the rod
turned into a Serpent, the eye being a true and undeceived witness of both:
Things imagined and fancied, are easily discerned from those things that are
real and true objects. But it may be demanded, whether a Spirit or Devil can
cause such a transmutation of the bodies of Witches into those several shapes
and forms of Cats, Dogs, Birds, and other creatures, as is often reported,
where Witches and Sorcerers have lived. The answer is, that it is impossible in
nature, and in the ordinary unchangeable course of all things created by God,
that one individual and continued substance or entire thing should be wholly
divided from it self, and yet be it self; Diabolus Deiaemulus, quo se fallaci
similitudine insinuet in animos simp^icium: Calv. lib. 1. Instit. cap. 8. Sect.
2.
for there can be no real or true transmutation of one substance, or nature
into another, but either by creation or generation. Now creation is the work
of in infinite power, and therefore of God alone. The Devil then cannot
create, neither can he do it by any course of true generation, Naturaest
ordinaria Dei potestas.
because a true and real generation has many precedent alterations, and by
little and little, in space of time Generatio non est nisi in tempore idque
apparata materia per antecessionem mutationis, etc. Scal. de subt. exercit.
Sect. 6
grows unto the perjection of that kind unto which it does tend, or is
begotten; therefore they are but seeming and juggling transmutations of the
Devil: And here that saying of Augustine may be alleged, De civit. Dei, lib.
18. cap. 18. (Nec sane Daemones naturas creant, sed specie tenus, quae a Deo
creata sunt commutant, ut videantur esse quae non sunt) that is, Devils cannot
create any nature or substance, but in juggling show, or seemingly only,
whereby with false shadows covering those things which are created of God to
cause them to seem that which they are not indeed. Take one instance of the
jugglings and illusions of the Devil above all the rest, which does most
palpably detect him herein, is a History related by Johannes Baptista Porta, in
his second book, de Magia naturali; he there witnesses, that upon the Devils
suggestion, a Witch believed firmly and persuaded her self, that all the night
she had rid in the air, over diverse great mountains, and met in conventicles
with other Witches, when the same night, the mentioned Author himself, with
others that watched her and saw her all that imagined time of her transvection
in the air, to be within her chamber profoundly sleeping; yea, had smitten
her, made her flesh blew with strokes, and could not awake her, nor persuade
her afterward when she was awaked that they had so used her, or at all had
seen or beheld her; thus prevalent was the juggling power of the Devil.

Many other like instances of like nature might be added, only what here is
published and communicated unto the world, may sufficiently discover those
strong delusions which these poor souls were given up unto, who now according
to their demerits, and according to the Laws of God and this kingdom
established, have received their just reward.

H. F.

THE INFORMATION of John Rivet of Mannintree, Tailor, taken before Sir
Harbottell Grimston, Knight and Baronet, one of the Members of the Honorable
House of Commons:
And Sir Thomas Bows, Knight, another of his Majesty's Justices of Peace for
this County, the 21th of March. 1645.
THis Informant says, That about Christmas last, his wife was taken sick, and
lame, with such violent fits, that this Informant verily conceived her
sickness was something more then merely natural: Whereupon this Informant
about a fortnight since went to a Cunning Woman, the wife of one Hovye at
Hadleigh in Suffolk, who told this Informant, that his wife was cursed by two
women who were near neighbors to this Informant, the one dwelling a little
above his house, and the other beneath his house, this Informants house
standing on the side of an Hill: Whereupon he believed his said wife was
bewitched by one Elizabeth Clarke, alias Bedingfield, that dwelt above this
Informants house, for that the said Elizabeth's mother and some other of her
kinsfolk did suffer death for Witchcraft and murder.

The Information of Matthew Honkins, of Mannintree, Gent. taken upon Oath
before us the 25th day of March. 1645.
THis Informant says, That the said Elizabeth Clarke (suspected for a Witch as
aforesaid) being by the appointment of the said Justices watched certain
nights, for the better discovery of her wicked Practices, this Informant came
into the room where the said Elizabeth was watched; as aforesaid, the last
night, being the 24th of this instant March, but intended not to have stayed
long there. But the said Elizabeth forth with told this Informant and one
Master Stern there present, if they would stay and do the said Elizabeth no
hurt, she would call one of her white Impes, and play with it in her lap; but
this Informant told her, they would not allow of it; And that staying there a
while longer, the said Elizabeth confessed she had had carnal copulation with
the Devil six or seven years; and that he would appear to her three or four
times in a week at her bed side, and go to bed to her, and lie with her half
a night together in the shape of a proper Gentleman, with a laced band, having
the whole proportion of a man, and would say to her, Besse Imust lie with you,
and she did never deny him: And within a quarter of an hour after there
appeared an Impe like to a Dog, which was white, with some sandy spots, and
seemed to be very fat and plumpe; with very short legs, who forthwith
vanished away: And the said Elizabeth said the name of that Impe was, Jarmara:
And immediately there appeared another Impe, which she called Vinegar Tom, in
the shape of a Greyhound with long legs: And the said Elizabeth then said
that the next Impe should be a black Impe, and should come for the said Master
Stern, which appeared, but presently vanished: And the last that appeared was
in the shape of a Polcat, but the head somewhat bigger. And the said Elizabeth
then told this Informant that she had five Impes of her own, and two of the
Impes of the old Beldam Weste (meaning one Anne Weste, widow) who is now also
suspected to be guilty of Witchcraft: And said sometimes the Impes of the old
Beldam sucked on the said Elizabeth, and sometimes her Impes sucked on the old
Beldam Weste. And the said Elizabeth further told this Informant, that Satan
would never let her rest, or be quiet, until she did consent to the killing
of the Hogs of one Mr Edwards of Mannintree aforesaid, and the Horse of one
Robert Tailor of the same Town: And this Informant further says, That going
from the House of the said Mr Edwards to his own House about nine or ten of the
Clock that night, with his Greyhound with him, he saw the Greyhound suddenly
give a jumpe, and ran as she had been in a full course after an Hare; And that
when this Informant made haste to see what his Greyhound so eagerly pursued; He
espied a white thing about the bigness of a Kitlyn, and the Greyhound standing
aloose from it; and that by and by the said white Impe or Kitlyn daunced about
the said Greyhound, and by all likelihood bit off a piece of the flesh of the
shoulder of the Greyhound; for the Greyhound came shrieking and crying to this
Informant with a piece of flesh torn from her shoulder. And this Informant
further says, That coming into his own Yard that night, he espied a black
thing, proportioned like a Cat, only it was thrice as big, sitting on a
strawberry-bed, and fixing the eyes on this Informant; and when he went toward
it, it leaped over the pale toward this Informant, as he thought, but ran
quite through the Yard, with his Greyhound after it to a great Gate, which was
underset with a pair of Tumbrell Strings, and did throw the said Gate wide
open, and then vanished; And the said Greyhound returned again to this
Informant, shaking and trembling exceedingly.

The Information of John Stern, Gent. taken upon Oath before us the 25th day
of March. 1645.
THis Informant says, That watching with Elizabeth Clarke, (suspected for
Witchcraft, as aforesaid) she confessed that the Devil had had carnal
copulation with her in the likeness of a man; and that the said Elizabeth
desired this Informant, and the rest that were in the room with her to sit
down, and said, she would show this Informant and the rest some of her Impes:
And within half an hour there appeared a white thing in the likeness of a
Cat, but not altogether so big: And being asked if she would not be afraid of
her Impes; the said Elizabeth answered; What do ye think I am afraid of my
children? And that she called the name of that white Impe, Hoult. And this
Informant further says, That presently after there appeared another white
Impe, with red spots, as big as a small dog, which she then called Jarmara:
And that immediately after, there appeared at the threshold of the door
another Impe about the bigness of the first, but did presently vanish away.
And then the said Elizabeth being asked if any more Impes would come; she
answered, That Vinegar Tom would come by and by. And forthwith there appeared
another in the likeness of a dumb Dog, somewhat bigger then any of the
former: And the said Elizabeth also told this Informant, That she had three
Impes from her mother, which were of a brown color, and two from the old
Beldam Weste: And that there had five Impes appeared; But she had one more
called Sack and Sugar, which had been hard at work, and it would be long
before it came, but it should tear this Informant. And a while after the said
Elizabeth said, That it was well for this Informant he was so quick, otherwise
the said Impe had soon skipped upon his face, and perchance had got into his
throat, and then there would have been a feast of Toades in this Informants
belly. And the said Elizabeth further confessed to this Informant, that she
had one Impe for which she would fight up to the knees in blood, before she
would lose it. And that her Impes did commonly suck on the old Beldam Weste;
and that the said old Beldams Impes, did suck on her the said Elizabeth
likewise.

The Information of Frances Milles, Grace Norman, Mary Phillips, and Mary
Parsley, taken upon oath before the said Justices the 25th of March. An. Dom.
1645.
THese Informants say jointly, That watching with the said Elizabeth Clarke,
suspected as aforesaid, about twelve of the Clock last night, the said
Elizabeth smacked with her mouth, and beckned with her hand, and instantly
there appeared a white thing about the bigness of a Cat; and that these
Informants saw five Impes more, which the said Elizabeth named as aforesaid.
And that the said Elizabeth told these Informants, That the old Beldam (meaning
the said Anne Weste) did by Witchcraft kill the wife of one Robert Oaks of
Lawford in the County aforesaid; and was the death of a Clothiers child of
Dedham in the said County of Essex: both which dyed as these Informants very
well know about a week since. And the said Elizabeth told these Informants,
that the said old Beldam Weste had the wife of one William Cole of Mannintree
aforesaid in handling, who dyed not long since of a pining and languishing
disease.

The Information of George Turner taken upon oath the 25th day of March. 1645.
before the said Justices.
THis Informant says, That going to the said Elizabeth Clarke, alias
Bedingfeild, after she was apprehended, and asking her whether she had any
hand in the drowning of one Thomas Turner, this Informants Brother, who was
cast away at Sea about thirty months since; the said Elizabeth answered, That
the old Beldam Weste raised that wind that sunk his Hoy: And that she the
said Elizabeth had no hand in that business.

The Information of John Banks of Mannintree taken upon oath before the said
Justices the 25th of March. 1645.
THis Informant says, That watching with the said Elizabeth, he does inform
and confirm all the particulars expressed and set down in the Information of
the said Mr Stern.

The Information of Edward Parsley of Mannintree, taken upon oath before the
said Justices the 25th of March. 1645.
THis Informant says, That watching with the said Elizabeth Clarke, alias
Bedingfeild, the last night, he asked the said Elizabeth if he should continue
still in the room with her; And the said Elizabeth desired he should, if he
would fight for her with the Devils, for they would come this night, and that
which she called Hoult would come first, and then that which she called
Jarmara; which did appear in the likeness of a white Dog, with red spots;
and presently after there appeared that Impe which she called Vinegar Tom; and
then that which she called Sack and Sugar: And the said Elizabeth then told
this Informant, that the Devil had had possession of her six or seven years.
And that he had oftentimes knocked at her door in the night time; and that she
did arise, open the door and let him in; and that he went to bed to her three
or four times in a week, and had the carnal knowledge of her as a man.

The Examination of the said Elizabeth Clarke, alias Bedingfeild, taken before
the said Justices the 25th of March. 1645.
THis Examinant says, Executed at Chelmesford.
That about six months since she met with the said Anne Weste, widow, (who is
now likewise apprehended) in a field near the house of the said Elizabeth,
where the said Elizabeth was picking up a few sticks; The said Anne Weste
seemed much to pity this Examinant for her lamenesse (having but one leg) and
her poverty; And said to this Examinant, That there was ways and means for
her to live much better then now she did: And said, that she would send to
this Examinant a thing like a little Kitlyn, which would fetch home some
victuals for this Examinant; and that it should do her no hurt. And this
Examinant says, that within two or three nights after there came a white thing
to her in the night, and the night after a gray one, which spoke to this
Examinant, and told her they would do her no hurt, but would help her to an
Husband, who should maintain her ever after: And that these two things came
into this Examinants bed every night, or every other night, and sucked upon the
lower parts of her body.

The Information of Robert Tailor of Mannintree, taken upon oath before the
said Justices the 23th day of April. 1645.
THis Informant says, That about nine weeks since, Elizabeth, the wife of
Edward Gooding (who is accused by the said Elizabeth Clarke to be a confederate
with her) came to the Shop of this Informant, and desired to be trusted for
half a pound of Cheese, which being denied, she went away, muttering and
mumbling to her self, and within a few hours came again with money, and bought
a pound of Cheese of this Informant, and the same night this Informant having
an Horse standing in his stable, the said Horse was taken in a strange manner
sick and lame; whereupon this Informant sent for four Farriers to have their
best advice, who could not discover the cause of the disease; but the said
Horse about four days after died: And this Informant also says, that it was
observed by himself, and diverse others, who often went to see the said Horse,
that still upon their coming into the stable, he lay quiet, and looked
cheerfully, but as soon as the door was shut, and the Horse alone, he did
violently beat himself, and that the belly of the said Horse would rumble and
make a noise, as a foul chimney set on fire: And this Informant further says,
that he is induced to believe, that the said Elizabeth Gooding was the cause
of the death of his said Horse; for that this Informant has heard, that
Elizabeth Clark, and Anne Leech widow, (who stand both accused for Witchcraft,
and have confessed themselves guilty) have impeached the said Elizabeth Gooding
for killing of this said Horse, and that the said Elizabeth Gooding is a lewd
woman, and to this Informants knowledge, has kept company with the said
Elizabeth Clark, Anne Leech, and Anne West, which Anne West has been suspected
for a Witch many years since, and suffered imprisonment for the same.

The Examination of Elizabeth Gooding, taken before the said Justices the 11th.
of April, 1645.
THis Examinant says, Executed at Chelmesford.
that she is not guilty of any one particular charged upon her in the
Information of the said Robert Tailer.

The Information of Richard Edwards of Mannintree aforesaid, taken before the
said Justices the 23. day of April, 1645.
THis Informant says, That about twelve months since, upon a Sabbath day,
after the afternoon Sermon, driving his Cowes home by the house of Anne Leech
of Misley widow, about forty yards from her said house, a black Cow of this
Informants, (being very well to his thinking) fell down, and within two days
after died. And the very next day driving his Cowes from the same pasture, this
Informant had a white Cow that fell down within a Rod of the same place, where
the other Cow fell, (being also, as this Informant conceived, sound and well)
and within a weak after dyed; and he further says, that he caused both the
said Cowes to be opened, and that there could be no disease discovered, which
might occasion their death: And this Informant likewise says, that about
August last, he had a child nursed by one Goodwife Wyles, dwelling near the
houses of the said Elizabeth Clark and Elizabeth Gooding, and that his said
child was taken sick, and had very strange fits, extending the limbs, and
rolling the eyes, and within two days after dyed: And this Informant does
verily believe, that Anne Leech, and the said Elizabeth Gooding, were the death
of his said child, as is confessed by the said Anne Leech in her own Confession
and Examination.

The Examination of Anne Leech of Misley in the County aforesaid, widow, taken
before the said Justices, April 14. 1645.
THis Examinant says, Executed at Chelmesford.
That she had a gray Impesent to her, and that this Examinant, together with
the said Elizabeth Clark, and Elizabeth, the wife of Edward Gooding, did about
a year since, send their Imps to kill a black Cow and a white Cow of Mr.
Edwards, which was done accordingly: And this Examinant says, that she sent
her gray Imp, Elizabeth Clark a black Imp, and Elibeth Gooding a white Imp: And
this Examinant says, that about thirty years since, she sent a gray Imp to
kill two Horses of one Mr. Brag of Misley, which were killed accordingly; and
that the occasion of her malice was, because Mistress Brag had told this
Examinant, that she suspected her to be a naughty woman; and this Examinant
confesses, that she and the said Eliz. Gooding, sent either of them an Imp to
destroy the child of the said Mr. Edwards; this Examinants Imp being then a
white one, and Elizabeth Goodings a black Imp; and that about thirty years
since, this Examinant had the said white Imp, and two others, a gray, and a
black Imp of one Anne, the wife of Robert Pearce of Stoak in Suffolk, being her
brother; and that these Imps went commonly from one to another, and did
mischief where ever they went; and that when this Examinant did not send and
employ them abroad to do mischief, she had not her health, but when they were
employed, she was healthful and well, and that these Imps did usually suck
those teats which were found about the privy parts of her body; and that the
said Imps did often speak to this Examinant, and told her, she should never
feel hell torments, and that they spoke to her in an hollow voice, which she
plainly understood: And this Examinant also confesses, that she sent her gray
Imp to Elizabeth, the daughter of Robert Kirk of Mannyntree, about three years
since, to destroy her; and upon the sending of the said Imp, the said Elizabeth
languished by the space of one whole year, until she dyed, and that the
occasion of offense this Examinant took against her the said Elizabeth was, for
that she had asked a Coife of the said Elizabeth, which she refused to give to
this Examinant. And further, this Examinant says, that long since, but the
exact time she cannot remember, she sent her gray Imp to kill the daughter of
the widow Rawlyns of Misley aforesaid; and the reason was, because this
Examinant was put out of her Farm, and the said widow Rawlyns put in, where
she dwells at this present. And moreover, this Examinant confesses, that
she was acquainted with the sending of an Imp by the aforesaid Elizabeth
Gooding, to vex and torment Mary the wife of John Tailor of Mannyntree
aforesaid about three years since; and this Examinant being asked why she did
not discover it to the said Mary, she sald, the Devil would not suffer her,
and that the cause of the said Elizabeth Goodings malice against the said Mary
was, because the said Mary refused to give to the said Elizabeth some
Beeregood. And lastly, this Examinant says, that about eight weeks since, this
Examinant, the said Elizabeth Gooding, and one Anne West of Lawford widow, met
together at the house of the said Elizabeth Clark, where there was a book read,
wherein she thinks there was no goodness.

The Information of Grace the wife of Richard Glascock of Mannyntree, taken
upon oath before the said Justices, the 11th day of April, 1645.
THis Informant says, that there being some falling out between Mary the wife
of Edward Parsley of Mannyntree, and one Hellen Clark, the wife of Thomas Clark
(which said Hellen is the daughter of the said Anne Leech, whose confession
does immediately precede) this Informant heard the said Hellen to say, as the
said Hellen passed by this Informants door in the street, that Mary the
daughter of the said Edward and Mary Parsley should rue for all, whereupon,
presently the said Mary the daughter, fell sick, and died within six weeks
after.

The Information of Edward Parsley of Mannyntree, taken upon oath before the
said Justices, April 11. 1645.
THis Informant says, that his said daughter sickned very suddenly, as the
said Grace Glascock has before informed, and died about six weeks since; and
this Informant does verily believe, the said Hellen Clark was the death of his
said daughter.

The Examination of Hellen Clark, taken before the said Justices the 11th of
April, 1645.
THis Examinant confesses, Executed at Mannyntree.
that about six weeks since, the Devil appeared to her in her house, in the
likeness of a white Dog, and that she calls that Familiar Elimanzer; and
that this Examinant has often fed him with milk-pottage; and that the said
Familiar spoke to this Examinant audibly, and bade her deny Christ, and she
should never want, which she did then assent unto, but does altogether deny
the killing of the daughter of the said Edward Parsley.

The Information of Prudence Heart, the wife of Thomas Heart of Lawford, taken
upon oath before us the 23. of April, 1645.
THis Informant says, that about eight week since, being at her Parish Church,
on the Sabbath day, half a mile distant from her house, and being about twenty
weeks gone with child, and to her thinking, very well and healthful, upon the
sudden she was taken with great pains, and miscarried before she could be got
home; and this Examinant says, that about two months since, being in her bed,
in the night, something fell down upon her right side, but being dark, she
cannot tell in what shape it was: And that presently she was taken lame on
that side, with extraordinary pains and burning, but recovered again within a
few days after: And this Informant further says, that she verily believes,
that Rebecca West, and Anne West her mother, were the cause of her pains; for
that the said Rebecca has in part of her Confession expressed, that she had
much maliced this Informant, because the said Rebecca West ever thought this
Informant to be her greatest enemy.

The Information of John Edes, Clerk, taken upon oath before the said Justices
the 28th day of April. 1645.
THis Informant says, That Rebecca Weste confessed unto him, that about seven
years since, she began to have familiarity with the Devil, by the
instigation of her mother Anne Weste; who has appeared unto the said Rebecca
at several times, in diverse shapes: At one time in the likeness of a proper
young man, who desired of her, that he might have the same familiarity with
her, that others that appeared unto her before had had: Promising that if she
would, he would then do for the said Rebecca what she desired, and avenge her
on her enemies; but required further; that she would deny God, and rely upon
him. Now there was one Thomas Heart of Lawford, where the said Rebecca lived
with her said mother, Anne West, and the said Rebecca told this Informant, that
she required of him, that he would avenge her on the said. Heart by killing
his son, who not long after was taken sick, and dyed, whereupon the said.
Rebecca told this Informant, that she conceived he could do as God; after
which time she gave entertainment to him, who lay with her as a man; and the
said Rebecca further confessed to this Informant, that whilst she lived at
Rivenall in the said. County of Essex, the said Anne her mother, came to the
said Rebecca, and told her the Barley corn was picked up (meaning one George
Frances (the only son of one George Frances, one of the chief Inhabitants of
that town, where the said Anne West dwelt) and that his father thought the said
George his son was bewitched to death; and the said Anne then said unto the
said Rebecca, Be it unto him according to his faith.

The Confession of Rebecca West, Found by the grand Jury, but acquitted by the
Jury of life and death.
taken before the said Justices at Mannyntree, the 21. of March, 1645.
THis Examinant says, that about a month since, the aforesaid Anne Leech,
Elizabeth Gooding, Hellen Clark, Anne West, and this Examinant, met all
together at the house of the aforesaid Elizabeth Clark in Mannyntree, where
they together spent some time in praying unto their Familiars, and every one in
order went to prayers; afterward some of them read in a book, the book being
Elizabeth Clarks; and this Examinant says, that forthwith their Familiars
appeared, and every one of them made their several Propositions to those
Familiars, what every one of them desired to have effected: And this Examinant
says, that first of all the said Elizabeth Clark desired of her Spirit, that
Mr. Edwards might be met withal about the middle bridge, as he should come
riding from Eastberyhoult in Suffolk; that his Horse might be scared, and he
thrown down, and never rise again: And this Examinant says, that the said
Elizabeth Gooding desired of her Spirit, that she might be avenged on Robert
Taylers Horse, for that the said Robert suspected the said Elizabeth Gooding
for the killing of an Horse of the said Robert formerly: And this examinant
says, that the said Hellen Clark desired of her Spirit, that she might be
revenged on two Hogs in Misley street, (being the place where the said Hellen
lived) one of the Hogs to die presently, and the other to be taken lame; and
this Examinant further says, that Anne Leeeb desired of her Spirit, that a
Cow might be taken lame of a man's living in Mannyntree, but the name of the
man this Examinant cannot remember: And this examinant further says, that the
said Anne West, this Examinants mother, This Anne West was executed at
Mannyntree the first of August. 1645.
desired of her Spirit, that she might be freed from all her enemies, and have
no trouble: And this Examinant says, that she desired of her Spirit, that
she might be revenged on Prudence the wife of Thomas Heart, and that the said
Prudence might be taken lame on her right side. And lastly this Examinant
says, that having thus done, this Examinant, and the other five, did appoint
the next meeting to be at the said Elizabeth Goodings house, and so departed
all to their own houses.

The Information of Richard Edwards of Mannintree, Gent. taken upon oath before
the said Justices the 23th of April. 1645.
THis Informant says, That not long since, about three months to his best
remembrance, as he was coming from Eastberyholt in Suffolk, half an hour
within evening; within ten score of the middle bridge (according to the desire
of the said Elizabeth Clarke, as is declared in the confession of the said
Rebecca Weste) this Informants horse started with him, and greatly endangered
him; and he heard something about his horse cry, Ah, ah; much like the shrieke
of a Polcat. And this Informant says, That with much difficulty he saved
himself from being thrown off his horse. All which, this Informant reported to
his wife and neighbors as soon as he came home.

The Information of Matthew Hopkins, Gent. taken upon oath before the said
Justices the 18th of April. 1645.
THis Informant says, That being lately at Colchester, he went to the Castle,
where the said Rebecca Weste, with the other five, are secured until the next
Jail delivery: And this Informant going to Rebeeca Weste, and asking her how
she came first to be a Witch, the said Rebecca told this Informant, that about
a year fince, or thereabouts, half an hour before Sunset, the said Anne
Weste (her mother) carried the said Rebecca Weste toward Mannintree, (which is
about a small mile from the place where the said Anne dwelt) and the said
Rebecca told this Informant, that as her mother and she walked together, the
said Anne told the said Rebecca, she must keep secret whatsoever she saw,
whither they were then going; and the said Rebecca promised so to do; And the
said Rebecca told this Informant, that her mother and she went to the house of
the aforesaid Elizabeth Clarke, where at their coming in they found the
aforesaid Anne Leech, widow, Elizabeth Gooding, Hellen Clarke, and the
housekeeper Elizabeth Clarke, and that forthwith the Devil appeared to them
in the shape of a dog; afterward in the shape of two Kitlyns; then in the
shape of two dogs; and that the said familiars did do homage in the first
place to the said Elizabeth Clarke, and skipped up into her lap, and kissed
her; and then went and kissed all that were in the room, except the said
Rebecca: And the said Rebecca told this Informant, that immediately one of
their company asked the said Anne her mother, if she had acquainted her
daughter (the said Rebecca) with the business; and her mother answered she
had, and told them all, they need not fear her the said Rebecca for revealing
any thing: And the said Rebecca told this Informant, that forthwith the said
Anne Leech pulled out a book, and swore the said Rebecca never to reveal any
thing she saw or heard; and if she should discover any thing, they all told
the said Rebecca, she should endure more torments on earth, then could be in
hell: And the said Rebecca told this Informant, that she promised to keep all
their secrets; And moreover, they all told her, that she must never confess
any thing, although the Rope were about her neck, and she ready to be hanged:
And that after she had consented to all these things, the Devil came into her
lap, and kissed her, and promised to do for her what she could desire; and
that within half a year after the Devil appeared to her the said Rebecca, as
she was going to bed, and told her, he would marry her, and that she could
not deny him; she said he kissed her, but was as cold as clay, and married her
that night, in this manner; He took her by the hand and lead her about the
Chamber, and promised to be her loving husband till death, and to avenge her of
her enemies; And that then she promised him to be his obedient wife till
death, and to deny God and Christ Jesus; And the said Rebecca told this
Informant, that she sent the Devil to kill the son of the said Thomas Heart,
which he did within one fortnight; and that after that she took him for her
God, and thought he could do as God.

The Information of Susan Sparrow, taken upon oath before the said Justices the
25th day of April. An. Dom. 1645. at Little Bentley.
THis Informant says, That about thirty years since, living under the same
roof with Mary Greenleif of Alresford, either of them had a Daughter of about
thirteen or fourteen years of age, and being one night in bed with their
children, this Informant heard the child of the said Mary Greenleif to cry out
in a fearful manner; Oh Mother, now it comes, it comes, oh help mother, it
hurts me, it hurts me: Whereupon this Informant called to the said Mary, and
said, Good-wife Greenleife, Good-wife Greenleife, if your child be asleep,
awaken it, for if any body comes by, and hear it make such moan (you having
an ill name already) they will say, You are suckling your Impes upon it:
Whereupon the said Mary replied; I do so indeed, and I will fee with them
(meaning her said Impes,) that they shall suck my daughter one night, and thine
another: And this Informant says, that the very next night, her child cried
out in the same manner, and clasped her arms about this Informants neck,
being much affrighted, sweating, and shrieking in a terrible manner,
complaining that she was nipped and pinched on her thigh; and that the next
morning searching what the cause should be, she found above the right knee of
her child, a black and blew spot, as broad and long as her hand: And this
Informant says, that her child did complain on that leg, at least a month
after. And this Informant says, that the house where this Informant and the
said Mary did dwell together, was haunted with a Leveret, which did usually fit
before the door: And this Informant knowing that one Anthony Sharlock had an
excellent Greyhound that had killed many Hares; and having heard that a child
of the said Anthony was much haunted and troubled, and that the mother of the
child suspected the said Mary to be the cause of it: This Informant went to
the said Anthony Sharlock and acquainted him, that a Leveret did usually come
and sit before the door, where this Informant and the said Mary Greenleife
lived, and desired the said Anthony to bring down his Greyhond to see if he
could kill the said Leveret; and the next day the said Anthony did accordingly
bring his Greyhound, and coursed it, but whether the dog killed it this
Informant knows not; But being a little before coursed by Good Man Merrills
dog, the dog ran at it, but the Leveret never stirred, and just when the dog
came at it, he skipped over it, and turned about and stood still, and looked on
it, and shortly after that dog languished and dyed. But whether this was an
Impe in the shape of a Leveret, or had any relation to the said Mary, this
Informant knows not, but does confess she wondered very much to see a
Leveret, wild by nature, to come so frequently and sit openly before the door
in such a familiar way.

The Information of Elizabeth Hunt and Priscilla Brigs, taken upon oath before
the said Justices the 25th day of April. 1645.
THese Informants say, That being by the said Justices employed to search the
said Mary Greenleife, upon suspect for being a Witch, these Informants found
that the said Mary had bigges or teates in her secret parts, not like Emerods,
nor in those places where women use to be troubled with them; and that they
verily believe, these teates are sucked by her Impes; for that these Informants
have been formerly employed to search other women suspected for Witchcraft, who
have had the like bigges, and have afterward confessed themselves to be
Witches.

The Examination of Mary Greenleife taken before the said Justices, April 25.
1645.
THis Examinant being asked how she came by those teats which were discovered
in her secret parts, She says she knows not unless she were born with them;
but she neven knew she had any such until this time, they were found in those
parts upon the said search; And she does deny that ever she had any Impe sucked
on these teats: But she does confess she has seen a Leveret once sitting
before her door within a yard of the threshold; and that she wondered much at
it, being about noon time as she remembers. And further says, she is not
guilty of any accusation charged upon her this Examinant.

The Information of Elizabeth Otley of Wyvenhoe taken upon oath before the said
Justices, April 25. 1645.
THis Informant says, that Alice Dixon (who now stands committed for a
suspected Witch) did in the presence of Mary Johnson of the same Town, charge
and accuse the said Mary Johnson to be the death of his Informants child,
saying, that the said Mary Johnson did carry an Impe in her pocket to this
Informants house, and put the said Impe into the house, at an hole in the
door, bidding it go rock the Cradle, and do the business she sent it about,
and return to her again: And this Informant says, that upon a Monday before
Michaelmas last, the said Mary Johnson came to the house of this Informant, and
gave her child an apple, and kissed it; And within a short time after the said
child sickned and died: And the said Alice Dixon did also affirm, that the Impe
which the said Mary Johnson sent to this Informants house, was in shape
somewhat like a Rat, but without tail and ears. And this Informant says, that
the said Mary Johnsons answer was, that if she did it, she did it, she could
but receive punishment for it. And at the same time the said Mary Johnson said,
the said Alice Dixon did the mischief to this Informants child her self. And
this Informant further says, that after the said Alice Dixon had made this
discovery, she, this Informant, was taken with extreme pains in her body, and
that during the time of her extremity, the said Mary Johnson did many times
come to this Informants house, persuading her, that she was not the death of
this Informants child: But this Informant could not be satisfied until she had
gotten the blood of the said Mary Johnson; And meeting with her after long
scuffling, this Informant made the said Mary Johnsons teeth to bleed, and
immediately after, this Informants extraordinary pains left her, and her
stomach came to her, having eat little or nothing a fortnight before, and slept
very well the night following, having been restless by reason of her extreme
pains all the time aforesaid. And this Informant further says, that the next
day after the said Mary Johnson had given this Informants child the Apple, the
child was taken with very violent fits, and in the fits (although the Child was
but two years old) yet this Informant could very hardly with all her strength
hold it down in the Cradle, and so continued until it died.

The Examination of Mary Johnson taken before the said Justices the 25. of
April, 1645.
THis Examinant says, that she is not guilty of any one particular charged
upon her in the Information of the said Elizabeth Otley touching the killing of
the child of the said Elizabeth.

The Information of Joseph Long Minister of Clacton in the County of Essex,
taken before the said Just: April 29. 1645.
THis Informant says, Executed at Mannintree the (...) of August.
that Anne the wife of John Cooper of Clacton aforesaid, being accused for a
Witch: Confessed unto this Informant, that she the said Anne was guilty of the
sin of Witchcraft; and that she has had three black Impes suckled on the lower
parts of her body: called by the names of Wynowe, Jeso, and Panu: And this
Informant says, that the said Anne told him, that once she cursed a Colt of
one William Cottingams of Clacton aforesaid, and the said Colt broke his neck
presently after going out of a gate: And the said Anne further confessed unto
this Informant, that she the said Anne offered to give unto her daughter Sarah
Cooper an Impe in the likeness of a gray Kite, to suck on the said Sarah: which
Impes name the said Anne called Tom boy: and told the said Sarah, there was a
Cat for her; And this Informant says, that the said Anne confessed unto him,
that she the said Anne about ten years fince falling out with Johan the wife of
Gregory Rous of Clacton a foresaid; the said Anne Cooper sent one of her Impes
to kill the daughter of the said Gregory and Johan named Mary: And this
Informant says, that to his own knowledge about the same time the said child
was strangely taken fick, and languishing, within a short time died.

The Information of Roger Hempson taken upon oath before the said Justices,
April 29. 1645.
THis Informant does confirm the Information of the said Joseph Long, and
concurs in every particular.

The Information of Roger Hempson taken upon oath before the said Justices,
April 29. 1645.
THis Informant says, that Mr. Long telling Elizabeth Hare, Condemned, but
reprieved.
that she was accused by one Mary Smith, for giving of her the said Mary two
Impes: And that the said Elizabeth Hare, praying to God with her hands upward,
that if she were guilty of any such thing, He would show some example upon her:
And this Informant says, that presently after she shaked and quivered, and
fell down to the ground backward, and tumbled up and down upon the ground, and
has continued sick ever fince.

The Information of Anaball the wife of George Durrant taken upon oath before
the said Justices, April 29. 1645.
THis Informant says, that about ten months fince, going from Wivenhoe
toward Fingeringhoe, in the County of Essex, by the way Mary Johnson the wife
of Nicholas Johnson met with this Informant, whom this Informant never saw
before to her knowledge; And this Informant leading her Child upon her hand,
being about two years old, and perfectly well: the said Mary Johnson took
occasion of her own accord to commend the said Child, saying, it was a pretty
child; and stroaked it upon the face, and gave it a piece of bread and butter,
and so left this Informant. And this Informants child did eat a piece of the
said bread and butter: and within half a quarter of an hour after, her said
child shricked and dried out it was lame; And this Informant carried her child
home, and had the advice of one Mr. Dawber a Surgeon, who could find no
natural cause of its lamenesse; and so the said child continued for the space
of eight days shricking and tearing it self, and then died.

And further, this Informant says, that immediately after the death of her
child, she was taken with extremepains in her body, sometimes every day or at
least every third day, for the space of seven or eight months together as if
she had been to be delivered of a child, but was not with child; And this
Informant says, that setting up of broom in an out-house presently after her
child was dead, she had the perfect representation of a shape, to her thinking,
like the said Mary Johnson, and was struck with a lamenesse in her Arms, and
such a stiffnesse that three or four that came to help her, were not able to
bow her Arms: and this Informant continued speechlosse all that day and the
night following, and had such a weakness in the rest of her limbs, that she
was carried into her house by some of her friends, and continued by the space
of a fortnight, being before until this present (as she conceived) in perfect
health and strength: And further this Informant says, that she being charged
by the Constable by virtue of a Warrant to give this her Information before the
said Justices against the said Mary Johnson this day: this Informants husband
called her up in the morning, wishing her to make her ready to go before the
said Justices; And presently after he gave a great shrick, and said the said
Mary Johnson would be his death, and had a great swelling risen up in his
breast, and now lies sweating, and in great extremity. And at this very instant
a noise was heard in the Room where her husband lay like an Hornet, and
thereupon her husband cried out, It comes, it comes, Now good wife Johnsons
Impe is come, Now she has my life; And forthwith a great part of the wall in
the said room fell down. And this Informant says, that she does verily
believe the said Mary Johnson was the cause of her child's death: And that she
is now the cause of her husbands extremity.

The Information of Ric. Carter and Heary-Cornwall of Thorp, taken upon oath
before the said Justices, April 29. 1645.
THese Informants say, that being appointed to watch Margaret Moon, after she
was accused and apprehended for a Witch, the said Margaret going about the
Room, these Informants did see a thing drop from under her coats (as they
thought) in the likeness of a Rat for bigness and shape, but of a greyer
color; And presently there was such an extreme offen five stink in the Room,
that these Informants were scarce able to endure to stay in it; And these
Informants asking the said Margaret what it was that dropped from her, she bids
them coop it up and catch it if they could. And this Informant Henry Cornwall
says, that the said Margaret did confess to him that she had twelve Impes,
and called them by their names; of which he remembers only these following:
Jesus, Jockey, Sandy, Mris. Elizabeth, and Collyn.

The Information of Will. Dammon, Hen. Cornwall, Bevis Vincent, and Tho.
Burles, taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 29. 1645.
THese Informants say, that upon the 21. day of April last past, they heard
Margaret Moon confess, that she was a Witch, and that she had twelve Impes,
that she had killed a Cow of Stephen Cookers, and had two Cowes more of the
said Stephen in handling; that she had killed a Cow and a Sow of Henry
Robertsons. That she was partner with the aforesaid Eliz: Clark of Mannintree,
in killing of a Child of one Mr. Edwards of Mannintree aforesaid, and spoiling
of 3 Brewings of beer of the said Mr. Edwards. That she the said Margaret Moon
spoiled a batch of bread of one Philip Berrimans; that she was the cause that
one Philip Daniels horse broke his neck going down an hill in his Wagon. And
the said Informant says, that the said M: Moon did freely and voluntarily
confess unto him, without any question being asked, that she was the cause of
the death of Johan Cornwall this Informants daughter. And this Informant says,
that the said Margaret Moon before his child fell sick, sent for this
Informant to do some work for her, and then she desired to buy an Hook which
he carried with him in his hand; And they agreed she should have the said Hook
for half a peck of Apples: And as this Informant went home he did eat one of
the said Apples, and was presently taken sick with an extreme shaking and pain
in all parts of his body; And his Informants wife knowing the said Margaret
Moon to be a woman of a very bad fame and suspected for a Witch, and had
formerly been questioned at an Assize for the same, she flung away the Aples.
And this Informant says, that he continued in great extremity for the space of
twelve weeks, and most part of tha; time deprived of his senses. And at the
same time his wife was taken in the same manner, and is not yet perfectly
recovered. And lastly this Informant says, that the next day after he had been
at the said Margarets house as aforesaid, that his child (which the said
Margaret confessed she was the death of) was taken sick with strange fits, and
shrickings out, and so continued languishing for a month, and died.

The Information of Richard Caley of Thorpe taken upon oath before the said
Justices, April 29. 1645.
THis Informant says, that being called into the house where Bevis Vincent,
and Henry Cornwall were appointed by the neighbors of Thorpe aforesaid to
watch Margaret Moon, the said Margaret did confess before this Informant,
that she had by Witchcraft killed a Cow and a Sow of one Henry Robinsons. And
that one Henry Dorr being then called to write what she should confess, the
said Margaret refused to make any further discovery, before this Informant; but
fell upon other discourse, saying, that she had been told forty times, that
this Informant thought in his conscience she was no Witch: And that this
Informant knew that one William Caley his brother let the said Margaret an
House about twenty years since, and afterward warned her out of the said
house; and that then she went into an house that was built for her by one
Thomas Turner, and being also turned out of Turners house, that one Rawbood and
his wife gave ten shillings more for the said house, then the said Margaret,
and came and dwelt in the said house: But the said Margaret said, they (meaning
the said Rawbood and his wife) had as good they had not meddled with the house,
for they did never thrive after. And this Informant says, that after the said
Rawbood had taken the said house, he and his wife were always lame or sick
until they died: and that the wife of the said Rawbood being a very tydy and
cleanly woman, sitting upon a block after dinner with another Neighbor a
little before it was time to go to Church (and as he remembers) upon an Easter
day, the said Rawboods wife was on the sudden so filled with Lice, that they
might have been swept off her clothes with a stick; And this Informant says he
did see them, and that they were long, and lean, and not like other Lice. And
this Informant being asked, whether the said Margaret were at this time
sensible, he says that she spoke very plainly and very intelligently,
discoursing of some things done long before, her memory serving her very
exactly.

The Information of Francis Milles taken upon oath before the said Justices,
April 29. 1645.
THis Informant says, that being employed by the Neighbors of Thorpe
aforesaid, to search Margaret Moon, who was suspected for a Witch, she found
three long teats or bigges in her secret parts, which seemed to have been
lately sucked; and that they were not like Pyles, for this Informant knows well
what they are, having been troubled with them her self. And this Informant
says, that she asking the said Margaret for her Impes, which sucked those
teats: she said, if she might have some bread and beer, she would call her
said Impes; which being given unto her, she put the bread into the beer, and
set it against an hole in the wall, and made a circle round about the pot, and
then cried, Come Christ, come Christ, come Mounsier, come Mounsier: And no Impe
appearing, she cried out and said, she had Devilish Daughters which had
carried her Impes away in a white bag, and wished they might be searched, for
they were naught: And upon the searching of her Daughters, this Informant found
that two of them had biggs in their privy parts as the said Margaret their
mother had.

The Information of Mary Philips, Elizabeth Harris, widow, Susan Burles, and
Philip Tumnor taken upon oath before the said Justices, April 29. 1645.
THese Informants do all and every of them concur with Frances Milles in her
said Information, in that particular concerning the teats of the said Margaret
Moon, and her two daughters; And the said Mary Philips does also confirm and
concur with that part of the Information of the said Frances Milles, touching
the pot, the circle, and the calling of the Impes by the said Margaret Moon.

And this Informant Mary Philips does also say, that being sent for to search
the said Margaret Moon, as she was coming toward Thorp aforesaid, and going
over a broad foot Bridge, this Informant sensibly felt a great blow on her
head, which struck her into a ditch up to the neck. And this Informant and the
said Francis Mylles, do both of them say, That as soon as they came into the
room where the said Margaret Moon was, she called these two Informants,
Mannintree Rogues (they both dwelling at a Town so called,) and said, Who a
Devil sent for you? But I hope I have met with some of you.

The Examination of Margaret Moon, Condemned and dyed by the way to execution.
taken before the said Justices, the 29. day of May, 1645.
THis Examinant being examined to all the particulars charged upon her, in all
the aforesaid several informations, denies every particular.

The Examination of Judith Moon, daughter of the said Margaret Moon, taken
before the said Justices the 29th day of April. 1645.
THis Examinant (being a single woman and having such marks of a Witch, as
aforesaid) says, that about a fortnight before her Mother was apprehended for
a Witch, the said Margaret bid this Examinant go and fetch a bundle of wood,
and this Examinant told her mother she would not fetch any wood: Whereupon the
said Margaret threatened this Examinant, and told her she had as good have gone
for some wood; And that the next night as this Examinant lay in her bed, she
felt something come into the bed, about her legs, being at that time broad
awake, and that she searched to see what it should be, but could not find any
thing.

The Information of Bridget Reynolds, the wife of Edmond Reynolds of ^amsey in
the said County of Essex, taken upon oath before the said Justices the (...) of
May. 1645.
THis Informant says, That she with some other women, were (...) Sarah Hiting,
the wife of William H^^ing, Elizabeth Harvy, widow, and marian Hocket, widow,
who are all suspected for witchcraft, and upon her said search (being a
Midwife) found such Marks, or Bigges in their privy parts, that she never saw
in other women: for Sarah Hating had four Teats, or Bigges in those parts,
almost an inch long, and as big as this Informants little finger: That the
said Elizabeth Harvy had three such Bigges, and about the said scantling: And
that the said Marian Hocke^ had no such bigges; but was found in the same parts
not like other honest women. And this Informant further says. That the said
Elizabeth Harvy said (since she was found with the said suspicious marks) unto
this Informant, That if she were a Witch, she was so made by the said Marian
Hocket; for that the said Marian brought unto her the said Elizabeth Harrvy,
three things about the bigness of Mouses, and willed the said Elizabeth to
make much of them, for they were pretty things; which the said Elizabeth
received: And the said Elizabeth told this Informant, that ever since she
received those three things which the said Marian delivered unto her, ^he has
been much torn and troubled in her privy parts, where the said Bigges were
found. And that the said three things were delivered to her the said Elizabeth
about six or seven years since.

The Information of Elizabeth Durden, the wife of Edw^^^ (...) Mary Philips,
taken upon oath before the said Justices the (...) day of May 1645.
THese Informants do concur in every particular with the said Briget Reynolds
in her Information touching the search of the said Sarah Haring, Elizabeth
Harvie, and Marian Hocket: And this Informant Elizabeth Durden further says,
that the said Elizabeth Harvie told her, that if she were a Witch, she was so
made by the said Marian Hocket.

The Information of Francis Stock and John Batilly, taken upon oath, before the
said Justices, May 3. 1645.
THese Informants say, that the said Elizabeth Harvie confessed to them with
many tears, that she had three marks, two before and one behinder (as is
already informed by Bridget Reynolds and others,) And that the said Marian
Hocket made her have the said marks or bigs, by bringing of three things to her
the said Elizabeth, and telling her, if she would receive them, she should
never in no so long as she lives, which three things have since made the said
marks in her privy parts, and the said Elizabeth told these Informants, that
the said three things were of a reddish color, and that since, the said Marian,
and the said Elizabeth falling out, she the said Elizabeth would have put away
and sent home the three things which the said Marian brought to her, and that
ever since the said things have tormented her in her bed, in the places
aforesaid, as if they had pulled her in pieces.

The second Information of Francis Stock, taken before the said Justices upon
oath, May 3. 1645.
THis Informant says, that about five years since, being one of the Constables
of Ramsey aforesaid, he impressed William Hiting, husband to the aforesaid
Sarah Hating for a soldier, whereupon the said William threatened this
Informant very much, and not long after, this Informants wife told him, she
espied a Snake lying upon a shelf in this Informants house, about three yards
high from the ground, which falling down into the house, she endeavored to
kill with a spade; and striking at it, the Snake suddenly vanished away, and
could no where be found: And this Informant says, that presently after his
said wife was taken sick with extraordinary fits, pains and burnings all over
her body, and within one week dyed: And further this Informant says, that
within two or three days, after the death of his said wife, he had a daughter
taken sick after a very strange manner, who in all the time of her sickness,
cried out much on the said Sarah, the wife of the said William Hating, saying,
that the said Sarah was the cause of her death, and dyed presently after; and
that within two or three days after the death of his said child, this
Informant had another child taken sick in the same manner, and within a few
days dyed also: And lastly, this Informant says, that about three quarters of
a year after, he had a manservant, that for some ill language given to him by
John Hating, one of the sons of the said William and Sarah Hating, his said
servant did beat the said John, and the very next day he was taken sick, and
so continued in a pining and languishing condition, crying out often of the
said Sarah, that she had bewitched him, and was the cause of his death, which
soon after ensued.

The Information of Francis Stock, and John Felgate, taken upon oath before the
said Justices, May 3. 1645.
THis Informant John Felgate says, that speaking with one Sarah Barton, the
sister of the said Marian Hocket (which said Sarah is now imprisoned in the
Jail at Harwich upon suspicion of Witchcraft) who told this Informant, that
the said Marian had cut off her bigs, whereby she might have been the more
suspected to have been a Witch, and laid plasters to those places: And the
said Francis and John say, that the said Sarah Barton, told them, that the said
Marian had given and delivered unto her the said Sarah three Imps, and that the
said Marian called them by the names of Littleman, Pretty-man, and Dainty.

The Examination of Marian Hocket, Sarah Hating, and Elizabeth Harvie of Ramsey
within the County aforesaid, taken before the said Justices, May 3. 1645.
THis Examinant, Executed at Mannyutree, Aug. 1. 1645.
Marian Hocket says, that she is not guilty of any of the particulars charged
upon her, touching Witchcraft, notwitstanding the several accusations against
her.

THis Examinant, Sarah Hating says, Executed at Chelmesford.
that she is not guilty of any particular wherewith she stands charged in the
Information of Francis Stock and others.

THis Examinant, Elizabeth Harvie says, Executed at Chelmesford.
that about half a year since, the said Marian Hocket brought three things to
her house, two of them being smaller then Mouses, and the other somewhat bigger
and longer; and that the said Marian told this examinant they were pretty
things, and would do her and this Examinant good, if she this Examinant would
keep them; and that afterward she was very much pained in those parts of her
body where the said tears or bigs were discovered by the said searchers, as
aforesaid.

The Information of Robert Turner of St. Osith Carpenter, taken upon oath
before the said Justices, May 6. 1465.
THis Informant says, that about eight days since, his servant was taken
sick, shaking and shricking, and crying out of Rose Hallybread, that she had
bewitched him: And this Informant says, that sometimes his said servant, since
he was taken sick, as aforesaid, has crowed perfectly as a Cock; sometimes
barked like a Dog; sometimes violently groaned beyond the ordinary course of
nature; and struggling with such strength (being but a youth) that four or five
strong men were not able to hold him down in his bed; and sometimes sung diverse
and sundry perfect tunes: And that this Informant could not perceive his mouth
to open, or so much as his lips to stir all the time of his singing.

The Examination of Rose Hallybread, Died in the Jail.
taken before the said Justices, the 6th of May, 1645.
THis Examinant says, that about fifteen or sixteen years since, there was an
Imp brought to her house by one Goodwise Hagtree, which Imp this Examinant
entertained, fed it with oatmeale, and suckled it on her body, for the space of
a year and a half, or thereabouts, and then lost it: And this Examinant
further says, that about half a year since, one Joyce Boanes (who is now also
accused for Witchcraft) brought to this Examinants house another Imp, in the
likeness of a small Gray bird, which this Examinant received, and carried it
to the house of one Thomas Toakley of St. Osyth, and put the said Imp into a
cranny of the door of the said Toakely's house, after which time the son of
the said Thomas languished, and dyed, crying out of this Examinant, that she
was his death: And this Examinant further says, that about eight days since,
Susan Cock, Margaret Landish, and Joyce Boands, (all which stand now suspected
for Witchcraft) brought to his Examinants house each of them an Imp, (in all
three) to which this Examinant added one of her own Imps; and then the said
Joyce Boanes carried the said four Imps to the house of one Robert Turner, to
torment his servant, because he had refused to give unto her this Examinant,
the said Susan Cocks, Margaret Landish and Joyce Boanes a few chips: And this
Examinant further says, that the said Robert Turners servant forthwith fell
sick, and oftentimes barked like a Dog: And this Examinant says, that she
believes that the said four Imps were the cause of his barking and sickness.

The Examination of Joyce the wife of William Boanes, Executed at Chelmesford.
taken before the said Justices, May 6. 1645.
THis Examinant says, that about thirteen years since, she had two Imps which
came into the bed to her in the likeness of Mouses, and that they sucked on
this Examinants body; and that afterward this Examinant employed and sent the
said Imps to a Farm house in St. Osyth, called Cocket-wick, where one Richard
Wealth then lived, where the said Imps killed ten or twelve Lambs of the said
Richards: And this Examinant says further, that a little while after, she
sent her said two Imps to the house of one Thomas Clynch, where they killed a
Calf, a Sheep and a Lamb: And this Examinant also says, that she carried one
of her said Imps, called Rug, to the house of the said Rose Hallybread; and
that her said Imp Rug, with three Imps of the said Rose Hallybread, Susen Cock,
and Margaret Landish, each of them sending out, were carried by this Examinant
from the house of the said Rose Hallybread, to the house of the said Robert
Turner to kill the servant of the said Robert; whereupon his said servant has
oftentimes crowed like a Cock, barked like a Dog, sung tunes, and groaned:
And this Examinant says, that her said Imp made the said servant to bark like
a Dog; the Imp of the said Rose Hallybread enforced him to sing sundry tunes in
his great extremity of pains; the Imp of the said Susin Cock, compelled him to
crow like a Cock; and the Imp of Margaret Landish made him groan in such an
extraordinary manner.

The Examination of Susan Cock, Executed at Chelmesford.
taken before the said Justices the 6. day of May, 1645.
THis Examinant says, that about three or four years since, one Margery
Stoakes, this Examinants mother, lying upon her deathbed, and this Examinant
coming to visit her, she the said Margery desired this Examinant privately,
to give entertainment to two of her Imps, and withal told this Examinant, they
would do this Examinant good: And this Examinant says, that the same night her
said mother dyed, the said two Imps came to her accordingly, and sucked on he
body: And this Examinant says, that one of the said Imps was like a mouse, and
the name of that was Susan; that the other was of a yellow color, about the
bigness of a Cat; and that the name of that Imp was Besse: And this Examinant
says, that she employed her said Imp called Besse, together with the Imps of
the said Rose Hallybread, Joyce Boanes, and Margaret Landish, each of them one,
to the house of one John Spall, where the said Imps killed ten or twelve Sheep
of the said John Spalls; and that the cause of this Examinants malice was,
because she being with child, desired to have some curds of the said Spalls
wife, which she refused, either to give or sell to this Examinant: And further,
this Examinant says, that about a week since, she, together with Joyce Boanes,
Rose Hall^bread, and Margaret Landish sent four Imps to the house of one Robert
Tuener (by the said Joyce Bo^nes) to torment his servant, for that the said
servant of the said Robert Turner refused to give to this Examinant a sack full
of chips: And this Examinant further says, that she, together with the said
Margaret Landish, sent her Impe to the house of one Thomas Mannock in St Osyth
aforesaid, where their said Impes killed six or seven shoots or hogs of the
said Mr Mannock; and that the occasion of offense was, because the wife of the
said Mr Mannock refused to give to this Examinant such relief as she desired,
telling this Examinant, that she was a young woman, and able to work for her
living.

The Examination of Margaret Landishe, Executed at Chelmesford.
taken before the said Justices the 6th day of May. 1645.
THis Examinant says, That about eight or nine weeks since lying sick by the
fire side in her own house, something came up to her body, and sucked on her
privy parts, and much pained and tormented her: And this Examinant says, that
if it were an Impe that came and sucked her as aforesaid, that the said Susan
Cock sent it to her: And this Examinant denies, that ever she joined with the
said Joyce Boanes, Rose Hallibread, and Susan Cock, in the tormenting of the
servant of the said Robert Turner, and does utterly deny the sending of any
Impe to destroy or kill the hogs of the said Mr Mannock, as the said Susan
Cock has charged her withal in the Examination of the said Susan.

The Examination of Rebecca Jones of St Osyth, Executed at Chelmesford, and the
first that was arraigned.
taken before the said Justices the 9th of May. 1645.
THis Examinant says, That about 24. or 25 years since, dwelling with one
John Bishop, of Much-Clacton in the County of Essex as his servant, there came
one morning one to the door of the said John Bishop and knocked, and that this
Examinant going to the door, she saw there a very handsome young man (as she
then thought) but now she thinks it was the Devil; who asked this Examinant
how she did, and desired to see her left Wrist, which she showed unto him:
and that he then took a pin from this Examinants own sleeve, and pricked her
wrist twice, and there came out a drop of blood, which he took off with the top
of his finger, and so departed. And this Examinant says, that about a quarter
of a year after, as she was going to St Osyth, (where this Examinant does now
dwell) to sell her said Masters butter, a man met with her, being in a ragged
suit, and having such great eyes, that this Examinant was much afraid of him;
who came to this Examinant, and gave her three things like to Mouses, having
four feet apiece, but without tails, and of a black color, and bid this
Examinant nurse the said three things, until he did desire them again; And
this Examinant asked the said man, what she should give them to eat, and he
told this Examinant milk, and that they would not hurt her, and wished her not
to be afraid of them; And the said man told this Examinant, that those three
things which he gave her, would avenge her on her enemies, and bid her murder
some, but not too many, and he would forgive her; and then went away from this
Examinant: And this Examinant says, that the first time she employed any of
the said things, she sent one of them to kill a Sow of one Benjamin Howes of
Little-Clacton in the County aforesaid; and the said Sow was killed by the
said Impe accordingly: And this Examinant says, that the names of her three
Impes were Margaret, Amie, and Susan: And that a while after, this Examinant
and one Joyce Boanes (now in prison) did send each of them an Impe to kill one
Thomas Bumstead of St Osyth aforesaid, who died about three weeks after. And
this Examinant says, that she believes that the said two Impes did kill the
said Thomas Bumstead; and the Impes name which this Examinant sent to destroy
the said Bumstead was Margaret: And that the Impe which the said Joyce Boanes
sent was a dund one like unto a Mouse. And this Examinant says, that she did
send another of her Impes called Amie, to the said Bumsteads house, which did
kill the wife of the said Bumstead within a short time after: And this
Examinant confesses, that the cause of offense she took so to destroy and
kill the said Bumstead and his wife, was because the said Thomas Bumstead did
beat the son of this Examinant for eating up of some honey which he found
about the house of the said Thomas Bumstead. And this Examinant further
confesses, that she did send her other third Impe called Susan, to afflict
the child of one Mistress Darcy of St Osyth aforesaid: But did withal bid the
said Impe it should not hurt the said child too much, and come away again: And
this Examinant says, that the said Imp is come again from the said Mistress
Darcies child.

The Examination of Johan Cooper, widow, taken before the said Justices, May 9.
1645.
THis Examinant says, Died in the Jail.
that she has been a witch about twenty years, and has three Familiars, two
like Mouses, and the third like a Frog: The names of the two like Mouses, are
Jack, and the other Prickeare, and the name of the third like a Frog, is Frog:
And this Examinant says, that she sent one of her said Imps to kill a child of
one Thomas Woodward, which her said Imp did kill within a fortnight after: And
this Examinant says, that she did send her said Imp called Frog, to kill two
of John Cartwrights children, of Much-Holland in the County of Essex aforesaid,
which said Imp did kill the said two children within a fortnight or three weeks
after: And this Examinant says further, that at another time she sent her
said Imp Frog, to destroy the wife of one George Parby of Much-Holland
aforesaid, which did kill her within three days after.

The Examination of Anne Cate, alias Maidenhead, of Much-Holland, in the County
aforesaid, taken before the said Justices the 9th day of May, 1645.
THis Examinant says, Executed at Chelmesford.
that she has four Familiars, which she had from her mother, about two and
twenty years since; and that the names of the said Imps are James, Prickeare,
Robyn, and Sparrow: and that three of these Imps are like Mouses, and the
fourth like a Sparrow, which she called Sparrow: And this Examinant says, that
to whomsoever she sent the said Imp called Sparrow, it killed them presently;
and that first of all she sent one of her three Imps like mouses, to nip the
knee of one Robert Freeman, of Little-Clacton, in the County of Essex
aforesaid, whom the said Imp did so lame, that the said Robert dyed on that
lamenesse within half a year after: And this Examinant says, that she sent
her said Imp Prickeare to kill the daughter of John Rawlins of Much-Holland
aforesaid, which died accordingly within a short time after; and that she sent
her said Imp Prickeare to the house of one John Tillet, which did suddenly kill
the said Tillet: And this Examinant says, that she sent her said Imp Sparrow,
to kill the child of one George Parby of Much-Holland aforesaid, which child
the said Imp did presently kill; and that the offense this Examinant took
against the said George Parby to kill his said child, was, because the wife of
the said Parby denied to give this Examinant a pint of Milk: And this
Examinant further says, that she sent her said Imp Sparrow to the house of
Samuel Ray, which in a very short time did kill the wife of the said Samuel;
and that the cause of this Examinants malice against the said woman was,
because she refused to pay to this Examinant two pence which she challenged to
be due to her; And that afterward her said Imp Sparrow killed the said child
of the said Samuel Ray: And this Examinant confesses, that as soon as she had
received the said four Imps from her said mother, the said Imps spoke to this
Examinant, and told her, she must deny God and Christ, which this Examinant
did then assent unto.

The testimony of Sir Thomas Bows, Knight, which he spoke upon the Bench,
concerning the aforesaid Anne West, she being then at the Bar upon her
trial.
THat a very honest man of Mannintree, One Goff of Mannintree, a Glover.
whom he knew would not speak an untruth, affirmed unto him, that very early
one morning as he passed by the said Anne Wests door, about four a clock, it
being a moonlight night, and perceiving her door to be open so early in the
morning, looked into the house, and presently there came three or four little
things in the shape of black rabbits, leaping and skipping about him, who
having a good stick in his hand, struck at them, thinking to kill them, but
could not, but at last caught one of them in his hand, and holding it by the
body, of it, he beat the head of it against his stick, intending to beat out
the brains of it; but when he could not kill it that way, he took the body of
it in one hand, and the head of it in another, and endeavored to wring off the
head; and as he wrung and stretched the neck of it, it came out between his
hands like a lock of wool; yet he would not give over his intended purpose,
but knowing of a Spring not far off, he went to drown it; but still as he
went he fell down, and could not go but down he fell again, so that he at
last crept upon his hands and knees till he came at the water, and holding it
fast in his hand, he put his hand down into the water up to his elbow, and
held it under water a good, space, till he conceived it was drowned, and then
letting go his hand, it sprung out of the water up into the air, and so
vanished away: and then coming back to the said Anne Wests door, he saw her
standing there in her smock, and asked her why she did set her Impes to molest
and trouble him? to whom she made answer, that they were not sent to trouble
him, but were sent out as Scouts upon another design.

FINIS.

