FEAR OF LOSING THE OLD LIGHT.

OR, A SERMON PREACHED IN EXETER.

BY THOMAS FULLER, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for John Williams, at the sign of the Crown in
Paul Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Mr. COOPER, Mayor of the City of EXETER, and to all
the Members of that ancient Corparation.
WHat the sin against the holy Ghost is in Divinity, the same Ingratitude is in
Morality; an offense unpardonable. It argues a base Disposition in those who
are glad to receive what others give, but loath to confess what they Receive.

I must acknowledge my engagement unto you to be great, Is not Exeter a little
one, and my soul shall live? where I safely anchored in these tempestuous
times: It is a high advancement in this troublesome Age, for one with a quiet
conscience to be Preferred to Life and Liberty: It fared better with me; for
whilst her Infant Highness, (on whose Soul and Body God crowd all blessings
Spiritual and Temporal, till there shall be no room to receive more) though
unable to feed her self, fed me, and many more of her servants: other
accommodations were bestowed upon me by your liberality.

In expression of my gratitude, I present this Sermon unto you, hoping it shall
receive the same entertainment from your eyes, as it formerly found from your
ears, and still be read with as much favor, as it was once heard with
attention. And then, this widows mite of mine will be made a tallent by your
courteous acceptance thereof.

May the sbield of Divine providence, which only is of proof against the
fiery arrows of his shooting, defend you from the noisome pestilence, and
encompasse you with a wall of Help and Deliverance: yea, may God himself stand
watchman at the Gates of your City, to forbid the entrance of any thing that
may be prejudicial unto you, And give full and free admittance to whatsoever
may tend to the advancement of your happiness here and hereafter. So rests

Your servant in all Christian offices, THOMAS FULLER.

FEAR OF LOSING THE OLD LIGHT.
REVEL. 2. 5. And will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou
repent.
1. THis Epistle was wrote to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, to him
eminently, not exclusively, to Him chiefly, not only; to Him, yet so to Him, as
a Letter of Public concernment, directed to the Prolocutor, with intent that
He (according to his office) should acquaint all the Christian Members of the
Ephesian Church with the contents thereof. Yea, the very word Angel imports no
less, signifying a messenger, employed by appointment, and entrusted for the
benefit of others.

2. Ministers ought not to monopolize the spiritual intelligence which they
have received from God, but to communicate it to others. And the more precious
the knowledge is which they have, the greater is their obligation to impart it.
David says, Psalm. 119. 11.
Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee; and yet
the same David had Psalm. 40. 10.
said, I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy
faithfulness and thy salvation. Ministers must, and must not hide Gods word in
themselves; must, as faithful Stewards, must not, as crafty Hucksters; must,
out of carfulness to observe it; must not, out of covetousness to ingrosse
it.

3. The Epistle consists of three principal parts.

1. A commendation of the Ephesians former Piety and Patience. 2. A Reproof of
their present backsliding, that they had forsaken their first love. 3. A
Threatening of them with future misery, in case they did not quickly amend.
Preachers must vary their voices interchangably using frowns, smiles, swords,
salves, cordials, corrasives as occasion is offered. If all the Body of our
Sermons be Praising, where is reproving? if all be Reproving, where is
Comforting? Physicians advise Nurses, not always to give the same receipt to
their Infants sick of the worms, but rather to make use of several Medicines,
lest otherwise, the Worms accustomed to the constant taking of the same thing,
by degrees turn that Physic into their food, and so are increased, by what
was intended for their destruction. It is wisdom in Ministers to try all
ways, to work on the hearts of their Hearers, full of ill Humors, and whose
Corrupt Nature, if ever used to one Receipt, will improve their badnesse upon
it, and be the more confirmed by what was prescribed to confute them.

4. See here, no Church in this world can be free from all Faults. Even
Ephesus, the best of the Seven, had somewhat amiss in it. As long as there be
spots in the Moon, it is vain to expect any thing Spotless under it. The
earnest of Perfection (which is Sincerity) may be received in this life, but
the full Payment thereof must be expected in another. Such as Fancy a
Possibility of a Perfect Church here, must not only mold a New form, but make
a new matter, cause frailty to be firm, folly to be wise, flesh to be Spirit,
Men to be Angels, Saints being too little in this Life, as full of their
Infirmities. Witness the Church of Ephesus: For though He that was, praises
them for what they had bin, yet He that is reproves them for what they were,
and He that is to come, threatens them with what they shall be. And will
remove thy Candlestick out of his Place, except thou repent.

5. I will sing (says Psalm. 101. 1.
David) of Mercy, and Judgment. Of these two, Judgment the most solemn,
Mercy the most pleasing Music. Behold them both in the Text. Judgment
pronounced in the Commination; And I will remove thy Candlestick out of his
place. Mercy promised in the Condition, except thou repent. Yea, the Text
consists wholly of Mercy, and Mercy, there being Mercy in the very Commination;
God, not surprising this Church with sudden Destruction, but in some manner
arming it against himself, by forewarning it. Satan never barks before he
bites, never tells before he tempts, because he desires and endeavors the
ruin of mankind. But God who intends their Amendment, not confusion, always
warnes before He wounds, that so by tendering them the Opportunity of a
seasonable Submission, they may prevent the misery of their final destruction.
And I will remove the Candlestick out of his Place, etc. By Candlestick is
meant not the dull and dead Candlestick, but it quickened and enlivened with a
Candle, namely the Word of God. Which amoun^eth to this effect, that God would
Un-church Ephesus, and deprive it of the Benefit of the Gospel, which
enlighteneth men's Souls in their ways to heaven. In the Commination three
Doctrines are observable, whereof this the first.

6. I. Doct. God alone is the manager of the motions of the Candle of the
Gospel. He that causes it to Amos 4. 7.
rain upon one City, and causes it not to rain upon another City, one piece
was rained upon, and the Piece whereupon it rained not withered: He it is that
vouchsafed the Gospel unto unrepenting Corazin and Bethsaida Mat. 11. 21, 22.
, and denied it to Tire and Sidon, bestowed it on unthankful Capernaum, and
withheld it from Sodom, which would have made better use thereof; God alone it
was that forbad Paul to preach the word in Acts 16. 6.
Asia, yea, when he assailed to go into Bithinia, the Acts 16. 7.
Spirit suffered him not, but he was diverted with a Vision, Come over into
Macedonia, and help Us.

7. Nor can any other Reason be rendered hereof, save only the Council of his
Ephesians. 1. 5.
Will. This appears plainly in the People of the Jews. The Lord did not set
his love upon Deuteronomy. 7 7.
you, nor chose you* because ye were more in number then any People (for ye
were the least of all People) but, Because the Lord loved you etc. Fewest of
all People, being soon summed up in Abraham and Sarah, no more then two
Ciphers in point of Procreation, without a Miracle. And as their number was
inconsiderable, so their Nature was intolerable, for when they wandered 40.
years in the wilderness, their intricate windings in their Progress seemed
strait in comparison of their crooked Conditions, and their ways toward God,
were more indirect, then their walking on Earth. Yea, in every outward respect;
some of their neighboring Nations did surpass them. The Egyptians excelled
them in Wit, the Phaeniceans exceeded them in wealth, the Edomites in
Antiquity, the Persians in Industry, the Arabians in Activity, the Syrians in
Cunning, the Assyrians in command, the Philistims in strength, and the Anakims
in stature, notwithstanding all which, the Lord loved the Jews before and above
them all, even so Father because it pleases thee.

8. And blessed be God that it is in his power alone, to order the Motions and
Stations of the Gospel. Good success have He with his Honor: He that has the
most might and right holds the Candle. It cannot be put into a better Hand.
Had some Envious or Covetous men (such as our Age affords too many) bin
employed in so great a trust, absolutely to dispose of the Gospel, when, where,
and to whom they pleased, O what strange work would they have made? Our
Savior said, Mark 10. 23.
How hardly shall they that have Riches enter into the Kingdom of God? But in
this Case, how Hardly should they which want wealth be saved? their Poverty
being unable to Purchase Gods Word for themselves, and such Misers charity
unlikely freely to bestow it upon them. Such Simoniacall Patrons as Sell so
dear their Presentations to Church Livings, what unconscionable rates would
they set on the Gospel it self, if it were in their Power to make merchandise
thereof? But this marres their Mart, that the giving of the Gospel to any Place
or Persons, sooner or later, the continuing it longer or shorter, the removing
it, slowly, or suddenly, are all, and every one, only and absolutely placed in
his power and pleasure, who speaks in my Text, And I will remove the
Candlestick out of his place, except you repent.

9. Come we now to the second Doctrine contained in the Commination, which may
thus be propounded. God will not finally extinguish, but only remove the
Candlestick of his word. The Dove will not wholly fly away, but only build
her a new Nest; the Setting of the Gospel in one Place, will be the rising
thereof in another, what is lost in a Kingdom, will be found in the World;
Particular Churches may, the Church cannot fall away. And it is worth our
observing, that when the word has been slighted and neglected by some,
immediately it has bin embraced and honored by others.

10. Thus the Gaderens Luke 8. 37.
, the whole multitude of their country besought Christ to depart from them.
Strange that this wind should blow from all parts of the Compass, that
Wanderers should entreat the Right Way to leave them. Sure the Patient is more
sick in Mind then Body, that is importunate to send away his Physician. Well,
their Suit is granted, ask and ye shall have, the Gospel is a Guest which will
not stay, where it perceives it Self not to be welcome. Away goes our
Savior to the other Side, (opposite to the Gadarens in Position, and
Disposition) where behold his entertainment, And it came to pass that when
Jesus was returned, the People gladly received Him, for they were all waiting
for him. Thus Gods word is a Commodity of quick Vent, it will not lie long on
the Merchants hand for want of Chapmen, but if one will not, another will have
it. Another Instance is presented us in the Jews, who despised the Preaching of
S. Paul at Acts 13. 42.
Antioch, And when the Jews were gone out of the Synagogue, the Gentiles
besought that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath. The
Leavings, yea the Loathings of the Jews, were the longings of the Gentiles; the
ones fragments, the others feast. They requested not the Apostles to make new
Provision for them, (conscience desires not what is novell, but what is
needful) but would be pleased with the Repetition of what He had formerly
delivered; and indeed, a Sermon being newly broached, tastes the best at the
second draught. The Result of all is this, Those feet of Gods Ministers, who
finding themselves unworthily used, do shake the dust off from them, (according
to Christ's Mat. 10. 14.
command) in witness against an ungrateful Place. I say, those very
selfsame Individual feet, shall elsewhere be welcomed, as the Romans 10. 15.
Beautiful bringers of the Gospel of Peace, and glad tidings of good things.

II. And here it will be neither improper nor unprofitable, to observe some
Passages concerning the Motions and Postures of the Candlestick in my Text. And
first, we may take notice, that the Persecution gave the Occasion to the speedy
propagatio^ of the Gospel. Had Satan bin contented to suffer the Saints to dwell
peaceably in Jerusalem, probably Christianity had not made its Progress so
fast, and so far into the world. But it was Death to Him to see Good Men live
in quiet, and therefore his malice mustered all his might to disperse Acts 8. 1.
them, after the martyrdom of Stephen, whereby he scattered the fire of the
Gospel instead of quenching it. Infant Christianity, like infant Luke 2. 52.
Christ, increased in stature, and in favor with God and Man. Yea, it is
uncertain, whether Martyrs which did dye, or Confessors who did fly,
contributed more to the advance of Religion, the former by their patient
suffering confirming more, and laying the Truth the thicker, the latter by
their Painful preaching converting more, and spreading the Truth the broader.
Thus the Devil did the Church an ill office, and God made it a good turn. We
will pay our thanks where they are due, not to his malice who intended it to
our mischief, but to his strength, wisdom, and goodness who disposed it for
our happiness.

12. Secondly, we hitherto cannot find a Country, from which the Gospel did
totally depart, to which it ever afterward returned. The white Revel. 6. 2.
horse in the Revelation, (which generally is interpreted the word of God) went
forth conquering, and to conquer. Went forth, still in a Progressive not
Retrograde motion, like the Sun in the Firmament, which Psalm. 19. 5.
comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to
run his course, his retreating ten Degrees on the Dial of King. 20. 11.
Ahaz, being extraordinary and miraculous. Wherefore seeing it seems not to
stand with the State of the Gospel, to go away animo revertendi, it will be
our wisest course, carefully to retain, what we have no President to recover.

13. Thirdly, Christendom is a Zoar, a little one, in comparison of the Pagan
part of the world. Call for a Map, as our Savior did for a Penny, and see how
small a circuit thereof has the Image and superscription of Christ upon it.
Thus it is meet, that all the Earth being Gods Demeanes, his Private Garden
should be less then his common grounds about it. There was a place in the
city of Jerusalem, called the Daughter of Zion, so named, says an Adricomius
Theatro. Ter. Sanct. p 152. numb. 26.
Author, because it was a parcel of buildings, which branched or issued out of
old Zion, as a Colony thereof, and surely pretty it was to behold this Babe in
the arm of her Mother. But, oh that I might but live to see a Daughter of
Christendom borne! I mean a Plantation of Piety amongst the Pagans, a Copy
like our Original, (save only that it be not written with such red Ink) in
matter of doctrines, and knowledge of Religion.

14. Fourthly, Christianity has been these last hundreds of years, little
effectual in converting of Heathen. For, be it reported to Serious
Consideration, whether those Indians, rather watered then baptized, driven into
the Church, as the money changers out John 2* 15.
of the Temple, deserve to be accounted solid Christians. Abate these, and then
we shall find small impression and Improvement of the Gospel in these latter
Ages on Paganism. I have not heard of many fish (understand me in a mystical
meaning) caught in New England, and yet I have not been deaf to lissen, nor
they I believe dumb to tell of their Achievements in that kind. I speak not
this, (God knows my heart) to the disgrace of any Laborers there, being
better taught, then to condemn men's endeavors by the success; and am so
sensible, how poorly our Ministry prevails here at home, on professed
Christians, that I have little cause, and less comfort, to censure their
Preaching, for not taking effect upon Pagans. Only I speak this, to the
intent that we all should enter into a strict Scrutiny in our own souls; what
may be the Reason, of this unusual barrenness of our Christian Religion.
Surely it is no infirmity in the Doctrine it self, disabled with Age, like
Naomi that could have Ruth 1. 11.
no more Sons in her womb: the fault is not in the Religion, but in the
Professors of it, that of late we have been more unhappy in killing of
Christians, then happy in converting of Pagans.

15. Lastly, from Jerusalem (whence the Gospel first started) this Candlestick
is observed to have a favorable inclination to verge more and more Westward.
This puts us in some hopes of America, in Gods due time; God knows what good
effects to them our sad war may produce, some may be frighted therewith over
into those Parts (being more willing to endure American, then English Savages)
or out of curiosity to see, necessity to live, frugality to gain, may carry
Religion over with them, into this Barbarous country. Only God forbid we
should make so bad a bargain, as wholly to exchange our Gospel for their Gold,
our Savior for their Silver, fetch thence lignum Vitae, and deprive our selves
of the Tree of life in liew thereof. May not their planting be our subplanting,
their founding in Christ our confusion; let them have of our light, not all our
light; let their candle be kindled at ours, ours not removed to them, as God
threatened the Ephesians in my Text, I will remove thy Candlestick out of his
place, except thou repent.

16. The third and last Doctrine couched in the Commination is this, God never
removes the Gospel from a Nation, until they or their Ancestors first remove
themselves from his service. Where the Gospel is given, it is Gods Mercy, not
man's Merit, where it is denied, it is Gods Pleasure, no Injury to man; where it
is removed, it is Gods Justice, and man's punishment, who has been unthankful
for it, and unprofitable under it. Thus the Jews our elder brethren were
disinherited for their Infidelity, at this day wandering in all lands, yet
having no Land, sine Rege, Lege, Solo, Salo, (I had almost said Coelo too)
stumbling at Him that should stay them, unhappy if they knew their condition,
and more unhappy, because they are ignorant of it.

17. Object. But this is hard dealing, so just, that it is unjust, that
children for the default of their Parents shall be debarred from the means of
their Salvation. Will God banish the sound of a Proverb Ezekiel. 18. 3.
out of Israel, and practice the Sense thereof in his own proceedings, setting
the childrens teeth on edge, (even to their Mat. 8. 12.
gnashing in Hell fire) for the Sour grapes which their fathers have eaten.

18. Ans. The Day of Judgment will be the day of the manifestation of the
righteousness of God, whose actions which now are just, shall then appear so,
to the clearing of his ways, and convincing of others wickedness. The Damned
shall want a drop of the water of a colorable excuse, to cool their tongues
with, discontented with their condition, but satisfied with the cause thereof,
so that they may blaspheme, but not complain. Until then let us be content,
to tarry the Lords leisure, suspending our Censures, and admiring what we
cannot understand. David says to God, Thy way Psalm. 79. 19.
is in the Sea, and the sense is the same though inverted, There is a Sea in
thy way, and that a bottomless one, (not like the Adriatic, Acts 27. 28
wherein the Mariners sounded, and found it 20. fathoms, and when they had gone
a little farther, they sounded again, and found it 15. fathoms,) but in this
Ocean the farther we sail the deeper we sink; and therefore let us make what
speed to the Shore, except the Pilot here had more skill, or his tackling more
strength.

19. Mean time, how careful ought Parents to be, lest by their wickedness
they wilfully deprive their Posterity of the Gospel. Here, O let me plead for
them who cannot speak for themselves; yea, I know not how to call my Clients,
being as yet unnam'd, unborne, unbegot, I mean such little little Levi's,
which as yet lie hid in the Loins of their Grandfathers: Oh let not their
Souls be slain before their bodies be borne, by wilful debarring them, by the
profaneness of this present Age, from the future benefit of Gods word. Let
that sturdy father, careless of himself, be conjured into Piety, by that
potent charm, per spem crescentis Iuli. Who can read the horrid History of so
many thousand Childrens corpses, drowned (as they say) in one fishpond in
Italy, by those Votaries, their mothers, and is not instantly ready, if the
fact be proved, to arraigne, condemn, and execute the Memory of such Monstrous
Murderers. What then shall we say to such Parents as plunge the Souls of
Millions in the Pit of Perdition, sacrificing the Spiritual lives of their
Sons and Daughters to Devils? so that as they walk on in their wicked ways,
the floor whereon they tread, may be said to be paved with slaughtered
Infants, and that they trample on a Charnel-House of childrens Souls of their
own killing, because the candlestick of the Word, was removed from them for
their fathers offenses.

20. See a sad spectacle hereof, in the Church of Ephesus, to which God at this
Day has done, what he threatened in the Text. Indeed, some hundreds of years
after the writing of this Epistle, Ephesus still continued the Staple of
Religion and learning, where some General Counsels were celebrated. Till at
last, growing notoriously erroneous in doctrine, and vicious in Manners, it is
at the present reduced to a miserable condition, shrunk almost invisible in
our Modern Maps, save that some charitable Geographers, in reverence of what
she has been, allow her a bare remembrance in their larger Descriptions. The
few Christians therein, and thereabout, grow contented vassailes to the Turk,
and the soundest of them are infected in the Point of the Progression of the
holy Spirit, with many other grievous errors. Generally in those Parts, God
has permitted his Arc to fall down before Dagon, the Alchoran has banished
the Bible, the Candle of the word is put out, and in the room thereof the
Moon of Mahomet is risen, whose Light is worse then darkness it Self. All
which had been seasonably prevented, if the Ephesians had been but as
careful to take, as God was kind to tender the Caution in my Text. And will
remove the Candlestick out of his Place, except you repent.

21. Now for application, to leave Ephesus and come to England: Know then in
the first place, our Land has equalled Ephesus in favors received. No Island
in the world so far distant from Jerusalem, saw the Light of the Gospel so
soon; yea, it was morning here, when it was midnight in Germany, the last, was
first, our Country placed in the Rere of the world, marched one of the foremost
in receiving the Christian Religion. And since the Word was here once planted,
hitherto it was never totally lost, but still grew amongst the barren
Mountains in Wales; as Piety has ever an ambition to keep company with
Poverty. Yea, here Religion has enjoyed her self as purely and plentifully,
as in any other place, and though often sick of several Superstitions, yet
these were not the Peculiar Diseases of England, but the Epidemicall Infections
of those Ages.

22. Secondly, England (what by her sins, which have caused this war, and
which this war has caused,) has equalled Ephesus in faults committed. In one
particular has exceeded Her. For, the holy Spirit commends Ephesus in the
next verse, for hating the Nicolaitans, whom he also hated. These Nicolaitans
were so called, from Acts 6. 5.
Nicolas one of the seven Deacons, who (as Ecclesiastical History reports)
having a Beautiful wife, and being taxed for being causelessly Jealous of Her,
to confute his Accusers, prostituted his wife to the unchaste embraces of any,
thereby to wipe off the Aspersion of Jealousy. So then, those who evidence
their opposition to any Error in Judgment, or demonstrate their distance from
any vice in practice, with such violence and furious indiscretion, that they
fall into the opposite error, or reele into the contrary Vice, are most truly
and properly, though not Literal, spiritual Nicolaitans. And in this Sense,
how many we have of this Sect in our Kingdom, not hated, but favored, and
fostered, I am grieved to think, and unable to number.

23. But now the third Parallel I dare not speak, and I dare not conceal.
Yet, why should I not speak it? In Spain, great rewards are given to such, as
first are the messengers of Bad news, provided they do not disperse it to the
Disadvantage of the public, but impart it only to the State, which may mend
ill accidents before they become worse. Sure then, though I desire no favor, I
deserve no frown, if from the simplicity of my heart, without sinister
intents, I show the danger likely to cease on us, if not providently diverted
by speedy repentance. Plainly it is this, I fear we shall be like Ephesus in
future punishment, and that the candlestick will be removed out of his place.

24. Objection. There is no danger of the departure of the Light which now
daily increases. Preaching now a days is like Silver in the reign of 1 King.
10. 21.
Solomon, so plentiful that it was nothing accounted of. The Gospel formerly
going afoote, now rides on horseback. Wherefore concerning the removing of the
Word, you fancy causlesse fears, then fear your causlesse fancies, it now
shines brighter then ever before.

25. Answ. As all is not Gold that glisters, so all is not light that shines,
for Glowormes and rotten wood shine in the dark. Firebrands also do more
harm with their Smoke, then good with their Light; and such are many
Incendiaries, which without either authority of calling, or ability of learning
invade the Ministerial function. Whose Sermons consist only of two good
Sentences, the first, as containing the Text, and the last, which must be
allowed good in this respect, because it puts an end to a tedious and
impertinent discourse. Notwithstanding all pretended new lights, and plenty of
preaching. I persist in my former Suspicion. Yet am I not so much affrighted
with all the Prodigies reported to have appeared in the Air, as with the
portentous Sins which I daily behold committed on the Earth. And this I say.
God commonly moves the candle before he removes it. The light seems sick and
faint before it dies. In Mines, before a dampe comes, candles begin to burn
blew, as by instinct mourning their own funeral before hand. Some such sad
symptoms discover themselves in our Candle, in the preaching of the word, if
seriously considered.

26. First, it is an ill sign that so many wantonly play with the Word. When
children begin to try Conclusions with a Candle, sporting themselves at in and
out with it, their Parents use to take it from them, leaving them to do
penance in the Dark, for their wantonness. I am afraid God will serve us in
like manner: so many have dallied with the Scripture, producing it for the
maintenance of their upstart monstrous Opinions. Secondly, so many Thieves in
the Candle, such variety of Sects and Schisms, which wast and mispend the
light, is another ill boding Symptom. Yet whilst others wonder that they are
so many, I wonder they be no more; for until a good Peace be settled, which God
Speed, and whilst the great Bond of Discipline is broken, every stick in the
Faggot will be absolute and set up for it self. Lastly, if the wax be taken
away from the candle, (as in many places it is, and Tithes denied for the
Ministers maintenance) the light must decay; the five foolish Mat. 25. 8.
Virgins having so much wisdom, as to know that their Lamps could not burn
when they wanted oil, except any do think Ministers may be like the
miraculous Exodus 3. 2.
Bush, which did burn and not consume, that so they may always work, and yet
never wast. Put these together, (and others I could instance in) and though
Ministers, Gods Doves, delight not to be Ravens to croake Funerals, though they
Gods fixed Stars, would not be Comets presaging sad Events, though these 2 Cor.
5. 20.
Ambassadors, praying you to be reconciled to God, are loath to be Heralds
to proclaim war: Yet be these things seriously considered, and may they not
amount to make us Jealous over England with a godly jealousy, what for the
future will become of us? And this I will boldly add, that an awful fear of
losing the Candlestick is the best Hope we have to keep it.

27. But I foresee a Posterne Door ready to be opened, that escaping through it
my Auditors may decline whatsoever this Day I have delivered. Some will say,
what Josiah was ^ Cron. 34. 28.
promised, we presume on, the Evil will not come in our Days. The Gospel will
last my life in the Land, and if we are not to care for to morrow, much less
will we carke for the Day after our Death. Besides, if a general Judgment
should come in my Time, I shall bear but my share, and shift as well as
another.

28. Well, Beloved it is true, this inconvenience attends all general
discourses, (such as this Days Sermon is) that as filius populi has no
father, so public reproves are seldom particularly applied by any to
themselves. But, that I may catch some fish, I must weave my net closer, and
draw the threads thereof nearer together. Be it granted what we hope, and thou
believe, that the light of the Gospel will last thy life, yet how long or
little time thy life will last, there is the Question. Nor will it be any
violence to my Text, in a secondary Sense, to expound this Candle, of the Life
of every man, which how long since it has been kindled we know, but how soon
it may be quenched God knows. Some wares in England, are usually set to sale
by the candle; that chapman carries them, who gives the most before the
candle is burnt out. Such is all our condition at this time; Heaven now is to
be had, Happiness to be purchased, Prove. 23. 23.
Buy the truth, and sell it not, lose not a good bargain, bid bountifully, be
not body wise, and soule-foolish; the candle wears, the candle wastes, casualty
may, sickness will, Age must extinguish it. If once the light be out it is too
late, there is no work, Eccles. 9. 10.
nor devise, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go.

29. I should now come to the Condition, except thou repent. But it is high
time for me at this present to leave preaching, and more then high time for us
all to begin practicing of this point of repentance. Let us rend our hearts,
and not our garments, and turn to the Lord our God. The melting of marble, so
that it become fufill or runnable, is recounted one of those Mysteries, which
are lost in our Age, though formerly known to, and performed by the Ancients.
But, O let us labor that the Art of melting stony Hearts, (such as ours are by
Nature and custom of sinning) be never lost or forgotten, but kept in ure, and
put in daily practice. That so the Candlestick may remain amongst us, not
only 50. days, the time prescribed for Jonah 3. 4.
Niniveh's Repentance, or 15. years, the lease of 2 King. 20. 6.
Hezekiahs health restored, or term of our life outright, a gift granted to
good 2 Ch^. 34. 28.
Josiah, or for an hundred and twenty years, so long was allotted for the Genesis
6. 3.
amendment of the old world, or for four generations successively, which
Lease of Lives on the Throne of Israel, was bestowed on 2 King. 10. 30.
Jehu, but so long as the Gnolam the Eternity of this world shall last, as long
as the Psalm. 72. 7.
Moon endures in heaven.

30. Men naturally decline Death, and the Quick at the day of Judgment desire,
not to be Cor. 5. 4.
uncloathed, but clothed upon that mortality may be swallowed up of Life. The
same is our request, that there may be no interruption or intermission of our
Light, that it may be not put out, but took up, not destroyed, but devoured
in the transcendent Splendour of Glory. Then it will be no thrift to burn Day,
and there shall be no night there, and they need no Revel. 22. 5.
candle, no use of preaching, Sermons shall cease, and God alone shall be the
Text, the Hallelujahs of Angels and Saints the Comment upon it.

31. And now I am to take my final farewell of this famous City of Exeter. I
have suffered from some, for saying several times, that I thought this or this
would be my last Sermon, when afterward I have preached again. Yet I hope
the Guests are not hurt, if I bring them in a course more then I promised, or
they expect. Such would have forborne their censures, had they consulted with
the Epistle to the Romans. In the 15. Chapter, verse 33. the Apostle seems to
close and conclude his Discourse, Now the God of Peace be with you all, Amen.
And yet presently he begins afresh, and continues his Epistle a whole
Chapter longer. Yea, in the sixteenth Chapter, verse 20. S. Paul takes a second
solemn vale, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen: and
notwithstanding still he spins out his matter three verses farther, till that
full and final Period, verse 27. To God only wise be glory, through Jesus
Christ for ever, Amen. Thus, loath to Depart, is the tune of all loving
friends; The same I may plead for my Self, so often taking my farewell,
wherein if any were deceived, none I am sure were injured.

Now this is all, The Rabbis have a conceit, that Manna relished so to the
pallats of the Jews, just as the eater thereof did fancy or desire. Consult
with your selves, and wish your own spiritual and temporal conveniences,
wish what you will, for Body, Soul, both, You, Yours, your Private, the
Public; confine not your happiness with too narrow measure of your own
making. And my constant Prayer to God shall be, that he would be pleased to be
to you all in General, each one in particular, that very thing, which You for
your own Good do most desire.

Amen.
FINIS.

