A FAMOUS BATTLE Fought by the Earl of Cork, the Earl of Ormond, and the
Lord MOORE Against the Rebels in IRELAND WHEREIN Is showed the brave Valor of
the Lord MOORE HOW HE RECOVERED DVBLIN FROM the Besiege of the Rebels, and by
his policy undermined the ground, and laid 20. Barrels of Gunpowder in a
Vault, and killed 2000. of the Rebels at that time.

Also a great and bloody Battle betwixt the Earl of Ormond and Tyrone, and
the number of men that were slain.

Whereunto is added the treacherous Plots against Dublin, and how it has bin
defended, and is now very strongly fortified

As also of the great Guard that is daily set to defend London Derry, and of
some plots lately intended against the same.

With the Relation how some English forces are come upon the rebels and have
slain many of them.

LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1642.

A famous Battle Fought BY The Lord Moore, the Earl of Cork, and the Earl of
Ormond, against the Rebels, December the 23. 1641.
Upon the 23. of December. the rebels prepared themselves for battle, and their
intent was to beat down the famous city of Dublin: but first they came to
Kilmanum and burnt down all the houses there, using unheard of torments to the
poor protestants, but then about the space of two days after Tyrone was to
bring an Atmy of ten thousand men to assault the aforesaid city of Dublin, and
to march by Kilmanam, but the Lord Moore having intelligence of it, he caused
the drums to beat up, to call his soldiers together, and then related to them
what the rebels intent was: wherefore he made a proposition to them, which they
very willingly agreed to it, that was, to undermind the ground by the way that
they in ended to come, and to lay 20 barrels of Gunpowder in the same vault,
the one end of it came to Kilmanum, and there by the policy that he used, the
fire caught hold on the powder just as they were marching over the said place,
and there at that instant were slain and wounded of the rebels about the
number of 2000, which put them in a great perplexity, and caused them to
retreat back upon the sudden. Then the Earl o^ Cork and the Earl of Ormond
pursued them, which the rebels seeing, resolu^ely withsthod them, and there a
bloody ourtell did ensue, the rebels being in number 1^000. the Earl of Tyrone
were their General: the Lord Moore and the Earl of Ormonds force were 6000.

The Earl of Ormond bringing up his men so courageously, that it was his hard
fortune to receive a wound in the thigh with a bullet: but God be praised, he
has recovered it again. Tyrone had a great wound in the arm, but the good
Lord Moore received no harm at all.

In this great and victiorious battle were slain on the rebels side 4000. and
of the protestants side nine hundred.

Upon the 24 day of December. the rebels renewed their forces, intending to
assault the City of Dublin, but they were beaten back by that true, valorous,
and experienced Soldier Captain Field, who has bin in the King of Swedlands
wars these 16 years last past.

Then the rebels seeing that they could not gain the aforesaid city, by reason
they were so often resistted, and beaten back therefore Tyrone devised another
way to gain it by policle, as may appear by this ensuing story.

Upon the 19 day of December, the rebels sent a great company of men with great
store of moneys about them to the city of Dublin, under pretense of being
protestants, and that they were feign to fly from the County of Co^noham for
safeguard of their lives, and to leave all their goods behind them, save only
some moneys which they brought with them.

Therefore they desired, and entreated, that they might have Lodging, and they
would pay for all things which they called for.

Whereupon they were let in, and some Lodged in one place and some in another,
where they behaved themselves well in an outward show, but treachery and cruelty
lodged in their breasts; for they had taken an Oath before they came from the
rebels to be true to them, and not to discover any of their sccrets or intents,
but to kill all the protestants they possible could, after their time was
expired.

For they had so plotted together that when they were entered the City, after
the space of fourc days they should kill all the protestants they possible
could, the hour was set down which they should begin at, they having great
store of pistols and bullets about them.

Upon the 4. day toward evening, the rebels intended to approach near the
city, and to enter into it by trecheny; for upon the third day three or four
of them were talking together, saying, tomorrow night about twelve of the
clock, we shall be about our blessed design of killing the heretics: but
there was a poor man in the next room overhearing of them, who presently went
to the Lord Chief Justice, and told them how it was.

Whereupon there was a general search made throughout the whole city, and took
and imprisoned all strangers which they found in every house and being examined
before the Lord chief Justices, they confessed how it was, that when they were
about this bloody massacre, he rebels were to come against the city, and to
batter it down.

The Major of Londonderry having some intelligence that the rebels were
shortly resolved to assault it, did give str^ct command, that the city should
be strongly guarded, and have a great fo^trfication set about it to defend it.

At the publication of which warrant, each man prepared Arms to the same
intent, and about the evening as many of the reb^ls came supposing to have
taken it* they very strongly defended themselves and the city and repel^ed the
rebels, driving them back^ wi^^ great strength and courage, slaying many of
them, (...) ^^k^ng (...) other fly.

The Red-shanke^ likewise hearin^ how bloudily and inhuman^^^ they did
prosecute the protestants, came on the back side of Ireland, and slew many of
them, not sparing either man, woman, or child, whom they suspeded to be
rebels, but killing them all with courageous puissance.

The City and Castle of Dublin is now is very strong^y fortified, and they do
work with home work, so that they now defend themselves from the rebels
Tyranny very valiantly.

For by the help of the Scots, that are on the back side, and other English
men lately gone over on the front they do now massacre the Rebels notably, and
have sufficiently kept and defended the Castle of Dublin from their bloody and
inhumane designs.

Thus we see that misery and calamity may sometimes continue, for a night, but
joy and comfort comes in the morning.

For Almighty God will not suffer his people to perish altogether, but at
length he rises himself, and confounds all their enemies.

FINJS.

