THE Fundamental LAWS and LIBERTIES OF ENGLAND Claimed, asserted, and agreed
unto, by several Peaceable Persons of the City of London, Westminster,
Southwark, Hamblets, and Places adjacent; Commonly called Levellers.
Presented to the serious consideration of all the Free-people of this
Commonwealth. July the 9. 1653.
IT is a Maxim of Common Right yielded and granted of all hands, of Parliament
and Army throughout their several Papers, That the People of England are a free
People, the sole Original of their own Authority, and in no wise to be
subjected to the Iron yoke of animposed Government, the Agreement and Election
of the Free People being the true Fountain of the Supreme and of all
subordinate Authorities of this Land; and what is of other Derivation, the same
not to be admited or submitted unto; but declined as Arbytrary, and Foreign.

1 For the People in general have all Law and Authority within themselves,
managing their public Affairs by their Own elected Parliaments or Comm^n
councels of England,

2 Judging, deciding, and determining all Matters and Causes whatsoever by
their Juries;

3 And in all things betwixt party and party, whether of Bargains, Sales,
Conveyances, Bonds, or Releases, the Agreement, Consent, or Con^ract of the
party and parties concerned, is the Law of the Land, Fundamental and
unalterable.

So that the People are the Beginning, Medium, and End of, and through the
whole Frame of England's Laws and Government thus founded and laid by Our
Fathers, whose Heirs we are, and which we must claim as our chiefest
Birthright and Inheritance: All is prepared and ready to our hands, our Laws
made, our Government founded: Our work is not now to tear up these Foundations,
to innovate or introduce any new Constitution or Frame of Government, but to
maintain, defend, and preserve the Old freed from the Encroachment and
Usurpations of Kings, Lords, and Pri^sts. And within these ancient
indisputable Bound^ries are our Parliaments or gr^nd Councels to be confined:
beyond this they are not to swell; hither are they to go, and no farther.

And it is the Inheritance of our Child^en, which our selves have not power to
give away from them.

It is out of the limits of our Trust; for the People, who are the Trusters,
are as well limited as their Elected Trustees: they cannot confer more then
they have in themselves: ^s Generation cannot of right dis-inhe^i^e the next.

Thus is our Government (if rightly considered) certain and st^bl^, as the
Foundations of the Earth, not to be tossed and varied from this to that at Will
and Discretion (the Parent of Factions, Discentions, and War^) but to be
preserved as sacred and unalterable: And then the Commonwealth, as it shall be
free, so shall it be safe and quiet in it self.

And now the wars being over, we cannot look upon our selves as a conquered
people, to receive our Laws and Government at the hand of a Conqueror, Conquest
being a Title more proper amongst Bears and Wolves, then amongst the free
people of England. The Army being raised not against the People, or for
subversion of their Rights, but for the maintenance of their Fundamental laws
and liberties; in doing whereof, they have had the cordial assistance of all
the well-affected of this Nation, as part whereof we always esteemed them to
be: So that, in subduing the common enemy, we subdued not our selves, nor lost
our Birthrights.

And therefore we cannot deem it any Crime to lay claim unto the Fundamental
laws and liberties of our dear and native Country, the constant Claim of our
Forefathers through all succession of Governments and Changes in this Nation;
and to agree unto, maintain, and assert the same, hoping that the Gentlemen
convened in Council at W^stminster, will never go about to take that from Us,
they never gave Us, Our Law^s and Liberties; but will imptove this blessed
Opportunity now in their hands, to restore us to the full fruition and
enjoyment thereof, which will engage Us freely of our own accords, as occasion
shall be offered, to h^zard and spend our lives, and all that is near and dear
unto U^ in their just defense.

And therefore they may (amongst other of the freeborn people of England) be
pleased to take no^ice, That amongst other of our Liberties and free Customs of
England, these following, as our Fundamentals, we claim and expect in behalf of
our selves, and all the rest of the free people of this Commonwealth; and let
none think it strange, or that it is our presumption: For our Liberties are our
own, and our Childrens after Us; they are not of Grace or Favor: And therefore
we crave them not at an Alms, but claim them as Our and our Childrens Right.

1. And first, that the Government of England is not to be Arbytrary.

2 That the Supreme Authority cannot be devolved upon any person, or persons,
but by Election of ^he free people.

3. That yearly Parliaments (to be chosen of course by the people) is the only
Supreme lawful Government of England.

4 That all Officers and Magistrates of the Commonwealth are to be ordained
and commissioned only by the Election of the People of the several places
where they are to officiat^; none to be in public place above a year.

5 That no other ways of Trials be in England for life, limb, liberty, or
estate, but by Juries of any person of what quality soever: all other ways of
T^yals; as, by Commissioners, Committees, High-Courts of Justice, Councels of
State, Privy Councels, Councels of War, Courts Spiritual, etc. being but the
branches of Popish, Regal, and Arbytrary Power innovated upon the Liberties of
the People.

6 That Parliaments have not power to continue their Sitting above a year.

7 That Parliaments are not Executioners of the Law.

8 That the whole execution thereof be referred to particular Courts of Justice.

9 That no man is to be judged before due Trial, or by a Law made after the
Fact committed.

10 That Punishments are to be proportioned to the Offenses, an Eye for an Eye,
a Tooth for a Tooth, and Blood for Blood.

11 That the Iuries of England are Judges of matter of Law, as well as matter
of Fact.

12 That upon all Trials Witnesses on both sides may be sworn, the Accuser and
the Accused brought face to face, and all Courts to be public and open.

13 That no man is to be compelled to swear or answer to Questistions, to
accuse himself or Relations.

14 That no coercive Power is to be admitted or exercised in matters of
Religion.

15 That the maintenance of a Clergy, by way of Tithes, or other enforced
Maintenance, is not to be imposed, or submitted unto.

16 That all Suits be ended, past all Appeal within a short prefixed time, in
the Hundred, and County Courts only.

17 That Bale in no Case is to be denied, Trials to be speedy, and tedious and
hard Imprisonments no longer to be suffered.

18 That the right of the Poor, in their Commons, may be preserved, and freed
from the Usurpations, Enclosures, and Encroachments of all manner of
Projectors, Undertakers, etc. and that all servile Tenures of Lands, as by
Copy-holds, or the like, be abolished and holden for naught.

19 That no Fees are to be taken by Gaolers of their prisoners.

20 That all proceedings in the law are to be free, without charges or Fees
from the parties to the Officers.

21 That no man's Body is to be imprisoned for Debt; but all Estates to be
liable to make satisfaction.

22 That no man is to be impressed to serve in the Wars.

23 That the Militia is to be in the Power of the several Counties, and the
persons entrusted therewith, elected by the people from time to time.

24 That all persons be equally and alike subject to the Law.

25 That Trade to all parts beyond the seas be equally free to all Englishmen;
that no Monopolies, Pattents, Ingrossings, Fore stallings, Excize, or Customs,
be longer admitted or continued, and that all public Moneys be raised by the
old way of Subsidies.

26 That it is the English-man's liberty, concerning Iuries, upon any Trial, to
make his challenge or exc^ption against 35, without showing cause, and against
as many more as just cause can be alleged against, until the party do
evidently see, that his Tryers do stand indifferent.

27 That all Statute-laws, Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, and all corrupt
Customs or practices, of what Antiquity soever, contrary to these Fundamentals
of Freedom, are to be holden for naught; not to be obeyed or used in England.

28 That the grand Councels or Parliaments of England, have not power to
diminish, violate or alter any of these Fundamentals; These being the just and
lawful Claim the standing, unalterable liberties of the people; and which we
lay down as the Landmarks, the very Basis and Foundations of Freedom, the very
Elements and first Principles of Common Right, and as without which the
Government of England cannot be a Free Government, nor this Nation a Free
Common wealth; these being the only Bars against Monarchy and Arbitrary Power,
and the true Conservators of the public Peace and weal of the people, and
which by this our Agreement and Claim we own; And profess as in the presence of
God, to live and dye in the just maintenance and profession thereof.

As for the Claims of Kings, Lords or Priests, though they challenge great
Antiquity in this Nation, yet are they no other then the Fundamentals of
Bondage and Tyranny.

Prerogative and Supremacy with that of unknown, unlimited Parliament
Privilege, being the very Mothes and Caterpillars of the Fundamental Laws and
Liberties of the Free people of England. For these and all laws in favor of
them, are but the Claim of Domination and Greatness over the people. Whereas
this our Claim in behalf of the people, is of certain Maxims and Foundations of
our Government, that tends, not to the particular advantage of our selves (or
any other sort of men) but to the common and universal good and benefit of all,
and therefore inconsistent with the other.

The people can not be a Free people, while the Supreme power or Authority is
wrested out of their hands, into the hands of one particul^r, or some few; so
much of their Authority as they let go, so much of Bondage they let in; and the
prime Badge and principle of their Freedom is, Their own Election; while that
is wanting, they are mere slaves, a^ will and Discretion.

The consideration of which, cannot but put us in mind of the many solemn Vows
and promises of the present Army, as to the restoration of the Fundamental Laws
and Liberties of England, one place or two we shall recite; Declar. June 14.
1647. they there tell us, That their Desires as to the complete settlement of
the liberties of the people is that blessing of God, then which (of all worldly
blessings) nothing was more dear unto them, or more precious in their thoughts;
and all their enjoyments of life or livelihood, or nearest relations, but a
price sufficient to the purchase of so rich a blessing, that themselves and all
the free born people of this Nation, may sit down in quiet under their own
Vines, and under the glorious administration of Justice and Righteousness, and
in full possession of ^h^se FVNDAMENTAL RIGHTS and LIBERTIES, without which we
can have little hopes (it is their own words) as to humane consideration, to
enjoy any com^orts of life, or so much as life it self, but at the pleasures of
some men ruling merely according to Will and power.

And in the same Declaration they may remember they professed themselves, Not a
m^er mercinary Army, hired to serve any Arbitrary power, but called forth and
conjured by the several Declarations of Parliament, to the Defense of their own
and the peoples just and Fundamental Rights and Liberties, and so took up Arms
in judgment and Conscience to those ends; and so resolved to continue, against
all Arbitrary power, Violence and oppression. And in their Solemn Engagement
made at New Market Heath, June 5. 1647. they did promise and engage to God and
to the People, not to divide nor disband, nor suffer themselves to be divided
nor disbanded, until the full enjoyment of our Freedoms; most seriously
promising in several of their papers, not to meddle with the advancement of any
particular party or interest wha^soever, but only mind the COMMON RIGHT and
interest of the people.

And therefore it cannot but be matter of amazement unto us, that any Officer
or Soldier who has thus promised and protested for the Fundamental Laws and
Liberties of the people, should now question, whether there be any Fundamental
Laws and Liberties or no? yea, and affirm, that two lines of them are not to be
produced; as we were answered at the delivery of our Petition in the behalf of
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne (now Prisoner in Newgate, as against the
Fundamental Laws of England, so against these Vows of the Army) whose Liberty
forth with we Claim and Expect; as also the liberty of all others imprisoned
contrary to these or any one of these Fundamentals of Common Right.

And of no less astonishment it is unto us, That after we had presented to the
General and the Officers of the Army, our Advice concerning the Restoration of
the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, we were told at a public
meeting by one of the Council of Officers, That the things therein presented to
their consideration were acknowleged to be just and good, but our persons were
so obnoxious to them, that if the Gospel should be brought by our hands to
them, and they knew it came down from Heaven unto us, yet would they reject it
for our sakes, or to this effect.

Yet we hope these are but words of passion, such as they will not justify;
for indeed they are of a very ill kind, of an ill savor unto us, and such as
they cannot in conscience or honor seem in the least to countenance; yet if
they should as God forbid) or be offended at us for this our Claim and
Agreement, we must notwithstanding persist in our affections, and constant
peaceable acknowledgement of our Fundamental Rights, and the God of Heaven and
Earth be Judge betwixt them and us.

FINIS.

