Vindiciae mediorum and mediatoris. OR, THE PRESENT Reigning Error Arraigned,
at the Bar of Scripture and Reason.

WHEREIN IS DISCOVERED the Falsehood and Danger of that late borne Opinion, that
pretends to an immediate enjoyment and Call of the Spirit of God, both above
and against its own Fffects, Cause, Word, Ministry, and Witness, in all
respects.

OCCASIONED BY A PAMPHLET, entitled, The Saints travel to the Land of Canaan,
or a Discovery of Seventeen false Rests, etc. By one R. Wilkinson, a Preacher
of this Error about Totnes in the West.

IN THE TREATISE FOLLOWING, the Reader shall find, most of the maine
Fundamental Doctrinall Truths that this Age does controvert, faithfully
vindicated, cleared, confirmed.

By F. FULLWOOD, Minister of the Gospel at Staple Fitzpane in the County of
Somerset.

Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for
the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest
for your souls: but they said, We will not walk therein.

London, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, and are to be sold by Jo: Ridley at the
Castle in Fleet Street, by Ram Alley, 1651.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, and truly Virtuous, THE LADY MARY FAREWELL:
MADAM,
THE A. B. C. of the Infants language, is Dad and Mam, that thus the first
fruits of their lips might acknowledge their Parents: And since most happy
Providence has brought me forth into so near a relation to your Ladyship, to
offer you this, the first fruit of my labor in this kind, seems but my
dutiful acknowledgement of you.

Madam,
I am most fully confident, that your advantage gained, by the dew of Heaven,
upon your Church, Family, and Closet means of knowledge, with the so many
years influence of the most Learned and gracious, your head and (late
deceased) Husband; the fruit of all these made yet more sollid, by your
exceeding great, though by you esteemed light afflictions, especially in these
late Troubles, have bred within you an utter dislike to the receiving weighty
Truths into light and doubtful Disputations.

1. Yet may you please to behold, that spirit allayd by the Charm of the Word,
that moves their Disturbance.

2. Moreover, you may easily call to your remembrance, that God by the shaking
of the House, did once, more strongly establish the Faith of his Saints; and
does not the Plant take deeper root, by too weak endeavors to pluck it up? And
why may not Truth be more deeply rooted, more firmly established in our
hearts, by the malicious, yet weak hand of Error, though it put to all its
strength, to shake and supplant it?

At the first (though but a superficial) view, I may guess a Castle to be
strong, but when upon a doubt, I examine, and upon examination, find the
foundation sure, the Walls imbatterable, and prove it well supplied, with Men,
Meat, Ammunition, Ordnance, and whatever else is requisite for to keep it
invincible; then I may with how much more confidence, judge and report it a
strong Castle: Thus upon a superficial receipt of Truth, we may happily
discern it to be stronger then Error; but when, urged by Errors impetious
motion, we examine the Truth, When we have walked about Truth, and gone round
about her, and told the Towers thereof; Psalm 48. 12. 13.
when we have marked well her Bulwarks, and considered her Palaces, and have
seen with our eyes the greatness of its strength, and the strength Heb. 2. 3.
of its foundation, Viz. Christ and his Apostles: How may we then glory in our
strength? How well fortified, how safe and secure may we boast our selves to
be, in this our invincible Castle, Psalm. 48. 11. with 13.
Truth? With how much more courage shall we be able to repel malignant Error
in all its assaults? And say, Let mount Sion rejoice, and the Daughters of
Judah be glad, and tell it in triumph 1. Esdras 4. 38. 40. Nil tam certum quam
quod ex dubio certum.
unto the Generations following, that as for Truth it endures and is always
strong, it lives and conquereth for ever and ever; she is the strength,
Kingdom, power, and majesty of all ages: Blessed be the God of Truth.

3. It is empty Chaff, not sound Corn, that is carried away with the wind,
and they are rotten Trees, which a storm overthrows: But the Sons and
Daughters of Truth, are sound and steadfast, though the rain descend, the
Floods come, and the Winds blow against them, they shall not fall, because they
are founded upon a Rock: And Madam, I doubt not, but that the God of Truth will
preserve you rooted and grounded in Truth, to the end, that when all the Gusts
of Error have done their utmost spite against you, you will be found to stand:
The Devil may thus but winnow out your Chaff, but as for your Wheat that cannot
be tossed up and down with every wind of Doctrine.

4. Yea, you will become more fit and serviceable for your Masters use by
winnowing: The fire burns hottest when the weather is cold, and the Candle
shines brightest when the air is dark: nature teaching these inanimate
Creatures, to rejoice as it were in danger, and to triumph over oppression, and
I make no question, but by the like heavenly Antiperistasin, the chillness and
darkness of Error, will brighten and heighten both your light and heat, your
knowledge and zeal, even unto all the riches of full assurance of
understanding, Col. 2. 2.
and to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of
Christ.

For this most blessed end I presume, good Madam, to put this small Treatise
into your hand; and now I beseech the Lord God of the holy Prophets, that he
would be your light in the reading hereof; and by all means make your Path as
the shining light, that shines more and Pro. 4. 18.
more unto the perfect day: This is the prayer of,

Madam, Your obedient Son, And most humble Servant, In the Truths of the
Gospel; F: FULLWOOD.

TO The Reverend Pastor, and his Pious Flock, AT TOTNES in Devon: ss. And in
them, to all the Faithful and Pious Ministers and People (especially in the
West) of ENGLAND, Truth and Grace.
I Would you knew, most dearly beloved, how great conflict I have for you,
though very many of you have not yet seen my face in the flesh.

REVEREND SIR,
I Need not mind you of what our Savior once preached, and our sad and daily
experience repeateth, that there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets,
who if that it were possible, should even deceive the very Elect: and your
dwelling is near where Satan's Seat is, and where his Ministers shine Mat. 24.
24.
as Angels of light. Now though I doubt not in the least, but that your self
are so strongly rooted and built up in the faith of the Gospel, that the gates
of Hell shall never be able to prevail against you, yet must I needs sympathize
with you in that troble of heart that must needs be occasioned by that Godly
Jealousy, wherewith you are jealous over your flock.

Ever since I left you, I have traveled for you, yet not for you, but yours,
or if for you in yours, that I might bring forth this word of warning for them.
Whreunto I have labored till now, as the other my manifold occasions left me
opportunity, and according to his working that works in me.

Sir, My Request to you is only this: that this poor Issue of my faithful
labors might have the honor and advantage of being delivered by your hand.
For as that will be an honorable, so a certain convey, and gain it imbracement
with better welcome at least, if not effect. This done, worthy Sir, I must take
my leave of you, and turn to your people.

And I have but a few things for you, deer Christians, which if there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any Pil. 2. 1.
fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, receive, and fulfill ye
my joy therein.

The great and main word of warning which I think may most seasonably be
commended to you, I find in Coll. 2. 18. 19. Take heed of being so vainly puffed
up in your fleshly mind, as not to hold the head, from which all the body by
joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases
with the increase of God. Hold, (...), here used comes from (...), Robur,
strength: it is not only, barely to hold, but Firmiter teneo, hold fast, hold
hard with all your might and strength, as if Satan and his Instruments were
plucking and tugging at you to wrest you away from your head. So we find it
construed in Apo. 3. 11. Hold fast what you have, hold your hold in Christ.
Secondly, Hold the head, hold Christ as a head; in subordination and union:
(i.* Not as the Pope and too too many among us, also, that set up themselves
Check by Jole with Christ their head, yea and exalt themselves above him: If
the Body be not under, and subordinate to the head, how can it receive
influence from it? when the Body suffers not the head to be the head for
eminence, it rejects the same as a head for influence. Secondly, Hold Christ as
your head (i.) be united, keep near and close to Christ, least his influences
should loose their heat, or abate of their strength before they reach you. Take
heed of not holding the head, in these respects, if we once cut our selves off
from Christ, we cut our selves off from al growth Col. 1. 18, 19. Ephesians. 3. 19.
and nourishment. It pleased the Father that in him (alone) should all fullness
dwell, and he is the head of the body the Church. Do you ever think to be
filled with all the fullness of God, and not through Christ? to increase with
the increase of God, and not by keeping your selves subordinately united to
Christ? be not deceived, Col. 2. 9, 10.
deer Christians, for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead Bodily,
and ye alone can be complete in him.

2. Take heed of such a corrupt mind as 2 Timothy 3. 18.
to be reprobate concerning the Faith, or as in the Margin of your Bibles, of
no Judgment concerning the Faith, of no judgment (i.) indifferently, inexpert,
unsettled, ignorant, (...), Experience.
Hetrodox in judgment, concerning the Faith. If you take Faith here in a strict
and special sense, as one of those bands betwixt Christ and the Soul, the
Instrument of its union with its head, surely not so light, slight, or
indifferent a thing, as that we may be (...), concerning it, as our redemption
Psa. 49. 8. 1 Pet 2. 7. 2 Pet. 1. 1.
is precious, our Christ is precious, so is Faith precious also, herby we hold
the head, and by holding the head we have nourishment ministered to make us
increase with the increasing of God. Therefore the Holy Ghost has so honored
Faith by ascribing unto it mighty acheivements: we are justified by To. 3. 28.
faith, faith purifies the heart, yea by Grace we are saved, through faith.
Secondly, Take Ephesians. 2. 8
Faith in a larger sense, for the belief or profession of the Gospel, and
Faith as it believes the word, receives the truth as taken in the place now
quoted, surely Faith is no indifferent, but a most necessary thing. Take heed
of holding the belief of the Scriptures, a thing indifferent, as Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses, so this also resists the truth; this is the fruit of
the corruption of our Mind chiefly, and is of most dangerous consequence: If
we hold Christ, we must hold his Word also, we believe in Christ alone as in
his word; we are knit to Christ the head by this Band his Word, alone.
Therefore Christ is (...), the Word, the Joh. 1. 1.
World has in it, the (...), that that may be known of God, but the word
alone, (...), that that may be known of Christ. Therefore says our Savior,
Search the Scriptures, for they testify of me, yea they are they, which
testify of me: As if nothing else, but the Scriptures did witness to Christ:
But the Scriptures are able to make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

3. Despise not prophesyings. This is another These. 5. 20
special Band, whereby we receive nourishment and growth from Christ by his
spirit. Therefore it is immediately prefixed, quench not the spirit (i.) by
dispising prophesyings (...), despise, comes from (...), Nihil, it is the
vanity and folly of our age Pro nihilo Habere.
to account the Ministry as nothing worth, a needless, fruitless thing. But the
able Ministers of the new Testament, are the Ministration of the spirit, and in
Effect, the Ministration of Righteousness and life: Now does not this exceed
in Glory? this 2 Cor 3. 6. 6. and 9. and 11
is the Ministry that remains, and shall remain, for the word of the
Ministry, the edifying of the Body of Christ, until the top stone of this
building is laid, without the help of these Builders (according to the revealed
will) we shall never be built up to perfection. Therefore they must work in
this house till we all come (not a few but till we all come) in the Unity of
the Faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God unto a perfect man. Ephesians. 4.
12, 13.


Therefore let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, to dispense the mysteries and fullness of
Christ to all his Members: But though it be a very small matter to be judged of
you, or man's judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 1 3, 5.
yet judge nothing of the Ministry, much less condemn it before the time,
until the Lord come, and the ministerial Kingdom be given up to the Father.
As you prize the virtue and influence of Christ your head, despise not
prophesyings: And as you prize the fulness of God despise not the virtue and
influence of the head Christ. By Faith we are united to the head, and by
holding the head we receive all spiritual nourishment and growth, and who is
Paul, who Apollo, but Ministers by whom ye believe. By Faith Romans 10. 17. 14.
in Christ, we are justified, sanctified, saved, and Faith comes by hearing,
and how shall we hear without a Preacher.

Be not deceived by any means whatever to slight your Savior and his
salvation thus, by sleighting his Ministry, your Minister, who has been and is
in labors more abundant among you.

Lastly, Pray evermore; in every thing 1 These. 5. 17. Ephesians. 4. 6.
by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your Request be made known
unto God. God has indeed promised all things to his People: yet unto them as a
praying People. Eze. 36. 37. Notwithstanding, all the promises before
mentioned, thus says the Lord, I will yet for this be Joh. 1. 12. 16. Verse.
compared
inquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them. Faith indeed is that
vital spirit by which, but yet prayer is the Organ through which, we receive
from the fullness of our head, and grace for grace. Faith is the Bucket, but
prayer is the rope whereby we let down the Bucket of Faith and draw water out
of the wells of Salvation, whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord Romans
10. 13.
shall be saved. In this verse both ends of a Golden Chain are lincked
together. Here is Salvation promised to Prayer; but shall every one that says
Lord, Lord, enter in? no verily, Salvation is promised to such a Prayer alone
as proceeds from Faith; How shall they call on him on whom they have not
believed? but as Salvation is promised to prayer, and all true prayer proceeds
from Faith, so Faith comes by hearing: How shall they believe on him on whom
they have not heard, and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Faith comes by
hearing, by Faith comes prayer, and by prayer Salvation. Cast away prayer and
you have denied the Faith, refused your own mercies, yea neglected your own
Salvation. And the height and depth, the length and breadth of this word
(Salvation) the Epitomy, and Center of all and every mercy, the sum and all of
every promise, Salvation. And yet, whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord,
shall be saved.

You cannot loose the Benefit of Christ, but you loose Salvation, you cannot
loose the use of Faith, but you loose the benefit of Christ; and lastly, you
cannot loose the use of the word and prayer, but ye loose the use of Faith. He
that neglects Christ, Faith, Word, or Prayer, neglects Salvation. O then take
heed, for how shall we escape Heb. 2. 3.
if we neglect so great Salvation.

But least my Porch should be too large for the Temple, I have but a word or
two of caution more, by way of reflection for you, and I speedily conclude.

1. First, Then beware of such in general as teach otherwise (that fight
against teaching, with teaching against ordinances with the use of Ordinances)
and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, such are proud, knowing
nothing but doting about questions and strifs of words, whereof come perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds destitute of the truth.

2. But especially take heed of such, who concerning the Faith have erred,
saying, 2 Timothy 2. 18.
that the resurrection is past already: take heed of such, because of their
prevelancy and danger; for the first, Their word does eat as does a Canker. For
the second, It overthrows ver. 17.
the faith of them that receives it, and seems not compttible with truth of
ver. 18.
grace, nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having the Seal, the
Lord ver 19.
knows them that are his.

Now for these great ends, dear Christians, I make bold to offer you this small
means this little Treatise which indeed was compiled (though as in Public it
commend it self to all) especially for your and your Neighbors sakes, you
having occasion to be acquainted, more then others, and I fear, then enough,
with my Antagonist. Now the Lord manifest his strength in weakness and make
this my small endeavor to be greatly effectual at least for prevention, if
not the subversion of this error among you. I therefore commend you to the Act
20. 32 ver. 29.
word of his grace, which, notwithstanding all grievous wolves, which, spare
not the flock, if you watch, is able to build you up ver. 31.
and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified; and
subscribe my my self, as truly I am, your Christian Brother,

That loves you with all Christian brotherly love: FR: FVLLWOOD.

The Analysis.
This Error is considered here, 1. Generally, where we have two things, 1. Its
Definition, 2. Its Grounds.
2. Specially, where it is handled two ways, 1. Absolutely, or in its
Doctrine, about which two things. 1. Its Division (i.) into five sorts: It
opposes the spirit against its own, 1. Effects. 2. Cause. 3. Word. 4.
Ministry. 5. Witness.
2. Its Parts, (i.) All its particular propositions, and of them five things
usually. 1. Whither reduced. 2. What they are. 3. Whence they are. 4. Their
Grounds. 5. Their confutation, this twofold. 1. Mediate answering their
Arguments. 2. Immediate, confuting the Error.



2. Respectively, or in its use, where are showed two things. 1. Its End,
namely, to be chiefly a Rest and Evidence. 2. Its Falsenesse and weakness, as
to that End.


THE TRUTHS THAT are maintained in this Treatise in order, are,
First, concerning Evidences, and are these. 1. THE word of Grace or gracious
qualifications are sufficient good evidences of Gods favor. 2. The spirit of
Christ does not with its own immediate light discover it self to the Soul.


Secondly, concerning Christ. 1 The person of Christ is not a Form, Type and
shadow only, or a bare representation of his spirit. 2. The Person of Christ
is the Object or Medium of Faith.


Thirdly, concerning scripture, as first absolute. 1. The visible scripture is
more then a bare Allegory. 2. We are bound to believe more of Gods words then
the spirit has cleerd and persuaded to us.


Secondly, respective to our use, thus both in the whole. 1. The Scriptures are
to be the rule of Faith. 2. The Scriptures are to be the trial of spirits.


Thus also in many parts, especially. The Scripture is profitable in its
Doctrine for instruction; in its commands for obedience, in its promises for
comfort and consolation.


Fourthly concerning the Ministry. 1. Communion of Saints is the way of God. 2.
The Ministry of the word and prayer, are yet abiding Ordinances in the Church
of Christ.


Lastly concerning Experiences. That we may take comfort to our selves against
both our present and future ends from former experiences.


These markable Scriptures following, especially, are largely opened, in this
Treatise, accordingly as the Margin points to.
Romans 8. 16. The spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are
the Children of God.

2 Cor. 5. 16. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea though
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more.

Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them.

1 John 4. 1. Dearly beloved belleeve not every spirit: but try the spirits
whether they be of God; for there are many false Prophets gone out into the
World.

2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of prophesy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed. as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn and the day star arise in your hearts.

Rev. 21. 22. 23. And I saw no Temple therein: For the Lord God almighty and
the Lamb are the Temple thereof, etc.

Heb. 8. 11. And they shall not teach every man his Neighbor saying know the
Lord: for all shall know me from the greatest to the least.

A Table of the several Chapters contained in this following Treatise.
CHap. 1. Of its Definition fol. 1. Chap. 2. Of the grounds or rise of this
Opinion in general. fol. 5. Chap. 3. Of qualifications. f. 15. Chap. 4. Of the
immediate witness of the spirit. f. 55. Chap. 5. Of the knowledge of Christ
after the flesh, or in his Mediatorship. f. 68. Chap. 6. Of the Allegorical
sense of Scripture. f. 91. Chap. 7. Of believing those truths of the Word, that
we are not yet convinced of by the spirit. f. 104. Chap. 8. Of the Scripture as
it is the Rule of Faith, 115. Chap. 9. Of the Word as Judge of spirits, f.
133. Chap. 10. Of the Word as profitable for Instruction, f. 154. Chap. 11. Of
the Scripture, as profitable in its command for obedience, f. 161. Chap. 12. Of
the Scriptures, as useful in their promise for comfort. f. 179. Chap. 13. Of
the Gospel, Communion of Saints, or Church fellowship, f. 192 Chap. 14. Of
Gospel Ordinances in general, f. 186 Chap. 15. Of the Ministry of the word,
f. 205. Chap. 16. Of Prayer. f. 233. Chap. 17. Of Experience, f. 252. Chap. 18.
Of the spirit of Christ, as the Souls immediate Rest and Evidence. f. 263. A
farewell to the Reader. f. 309.
THE GENERAL CONSIDERATION of the ERROVR.
CHAP. I. Of its Definition in General.
IT is a pretense unto the immediate enjoyment of Definition.
the Spirit of God, as alone the only All-sufficient means to the Soul, even
for all intents and purposes, especially, for Evidence.

1. It is a pretense, Viz. As opposed to that, that is true and real; or so
indeed.

2. The fallacy, and formality of the Error, lies hid in the words, Immediate,
as alone, Means, as they have their place and sense in this Definition.

1. Immediate, that is not to be taken in opposition to distance of place, but
to the means of enjoying: But this word Immediate, will be better cleared, if
we will join it with the second term of fallacy mentioned, as alone.

2. As alone, without the use of any means, whatever subordinate thereunto.
Thus whatsoever we can call Religious helps, Gospel means, though owned and
ordained by God himself, is plainly excluded this their Canaan, as imperfect,
or a very needless thing, and all use thereof flatly condemned as a living and
resting below God; and Of false rests, which is wholly used in this Treatise.
therefore oftentimes compared in his Book, to the Children of Isreal's resting
in the Wilderness. In a word, it pretends to be in the Sun, and holds the
beams in contempt, trodden under foot.

It is in an everlasting Light, and has cast a veil of darkness upon these
things below it, Viz. Ordinances, Graces, Scriptures, Experiences; and not
only upon those means, but upon Christ Jesus the Mediator himself. These
are forms, types, shadows, while it is swallowed up in the Power, Truth,
Substance, God, its glorious Heaven.

3. Means, it is not said, Efficient' nor yet End; I advise the Reader to take
special notice of both those.

1. The question is not, whether the Spirit of God be not as alone, the only
All-sufficient, Efficient of all in the Soul of a Creature: Here we dissent
not, but subscribe with both hands to that of the Apostle, That it is God that
works in us both to will, and to do of his own good pleasure.

2. Neither is the question here, whether God as alone, be the only
All-sufficient End of the Soul; in this we agree: For God is our Portion for
ever. Nothing below God, nothing but God, is the rest of Souls in this sense.
The sound of this most frequent term, namely, Rest, is so equivocall and
dubious, that the weaker Reader had in a most especial manner, need to retain
this Item, That we controvert not about the Final rest of our Souls, but the
means thereof: not about our Objective, but our Evidentiall rest.

3. Therefore the Spirit here, is to be understood as means, or as the supply
of all means to the Soul; it is confessed, we cannot call the Spirit means, but
in an unusual, and improper sense; yet we can no way better, if any way
otherwise, express their sense, who prefer, I am sure, and recommend their
Spirit, in stead both of the cause, and means also.

3. To all intents and purposes, it stands in the room of all the means, both
of knowledge and grace, but especially of comfort, all our usual and most
comfortable Evidences of the truth of our grace, Gods love, and favor to, and
presence in us, these especially are most suspicious, and forcibly beat back
with an high and zealous Arm out of this their rest. This Error will tell you,
that Christ in us has this Prerogative to be immediately (i. e.) without, and
above the use of any means, both the Spirit of Truth, Grace, and Comfort; even
All in All unto its subject: It pretends to the immediate enjoyment of God, as
alone the only Allsufficient means to the Soul, even to all intents and
purposes, etc.

CHAP. II. Of the Grounds or rise of this Opinion in general.
WE come now to consider, what may be the Grounds and Principles that afford
most occasion and help, to the bringing forth of this fond conceit into the
inventions of men, and among many others perhaps, we have thought upon these
following.

against the very use of lawful things: such is the vulgar unstayed rashness,
it puts too an inconsiderate violent hand, and does not only bow as much the
other way, but even break the stick to make it straight.

The ways of God are as Apples of Gold, in Pictures of Silver, and they that
enjoy the outside only, not tasting the sweetness, can never know the
goodness of Christ's Apples: Alas, how easily are such cheated and guld by the
subtle Serpent, of this blessed Fruit of the Tree of Life, for the dangerous
Apple of the Tree of Knowledge and Speculation; a prize is put into the hands
of fools, and they have no heart to it: The Devil puts a gloss upon his brass,
and how willingly men part with their true, and upright Crown-Gold, for a
Counter. Many never trod enough the good old way, to know the profit, pleasure,
and safety thereof, and therefore it is, that they take out their foot, and
will not walk therein, but seek out to themselves such strange inventions.

Peter, despise and reject them, because they are common and Acts 10. 14, 15.
unclean. But let such take heed of unclean lips, and hear that voice that
checks from Heaven, What God has Consecrated, count not thou common. For
satisfaction hereunto, let us remember three things. 1. That Jesus Christ
himself did eat with Publicans and Sinners. 2. God has promised to those later
days, that he will power forth his Spirit upon all flesh. 3. The devices of
Satan, are to Ape and immitate the best of Gods ways, as an Angel of Light.


Est natura hominum novitatis, Avida: O how do our ears itch after noveltie?
How weary are we with walking so long in the old way, the ordinary means are
old enough (such is the vanity of our thoughts) to be dead and buried, that a
Spirit might arise out of their Ashes, and carry up our Souls into a Fools
Paradise.

to whom I chiefly relate, does almost ever confound Rest and Evidence, as if
we made the Evidence our End, when as it is only used as the means of our Rest.

God we acknowledge is the only Center of our Souls; yet, though Christ by the
help of Scripture, and Ordinances, in our graces and experiences, as Mediator,
Means, and Evidences, do we Center in him.

as this Error would have it.

In those days, I will power forth my Spirit upon all flesh, says the Lord;
and such like.

1. Here is indeed a Promise of the Spirit.

2. Here is a Promise also of the spreading of the Spirit, Viz. Upon all Flesh.

3. Here is a Promise of increase of the Spirit, and that to abundance, I will
power out my Spirit, to which that is answerably said, And Knowledge shall
cover the Earth, as Water does the Seas: Yet where is the Promise, that God
will inspire the World, or Saints immediately with it; that this breaking in of
abundance of Spirit, shall carry before it, and utterly wash away all former
helps and means. Cannot we expect the performance of these Promises of Spirit,
as powered forth through the same Conduit pipes? Must we needs expect such
overflowings of Spirit as will keep no bounds, as will not only overflow, but
also overrun, and forsake its ancient Channel? If not thus, the Promises make
nothing of countenance toward this Error.

new Heaven, God and Glory, that seems so overcomming, and so mightily
ravishing in these sadly deluded Souls.

Matthew. 25. 29.
even to strik them blind, and to take away from them even that which they
have* it deprives them many times of that Spirit of reason, discerning and
judgment Romans 1. 28. (...).
that they had before, delivering them up into an injudicious mind, and sending
them strong delusions, that they should believe lies.

2. Especially, when in the day and season of light; when God by a more then
ordinarily Providence, has put a Prize into men's hands to get knowledge: If
men now love darkness, rather then light; and when God comes to visit his
Fig Trees, with full expectations of answerable Fruit, but finds none; or in
stead of Grapes, wild Grapes: shall not God be avenged on such a People as
this? shall not his anger wax hot against the trees that bring not forth fruit
in their season, even to scorch, and to make them to wither immediately,
pronouncing that speedy and effectual Curs against them, Never Fruit grow on
you more.

3. Finally, when men have happily for many years together (the Candle of the
Lord within them enlightened, at least with common Illumination) have shown in
a Christian Profession, if they will venture into the Pit, and wantonly hazard
the Candle of the Lord to the Damp of Error; how easily may now the Father of
Lights, and yet his Justice safe, suffer the light of these men to go out, and
leave the men offensive as the snuff of a Candle. Men that have a long time
apparently drawn hard in the ways of God; If they draw back, surely Gods Soul
shall have no pleasure in them: but as an effect of his high displeasure, while
they are drawing back, he shall let go the Cord wherein they were holden, that
they may fall as far back, as the violence and force of the swing will cast
them. Those that have set their (...). Luke 9. 62.
hands to this Plow, if they do but look back, they are hereby ill disposed
for the Kingdom of God, and made more meetely fit to be Satan's Bond-slave, to
go to Plow for him: Therefore Wisd. 12. 25.
unto them, as unto Children without the use of reason, thou did send a
Judgment to mock them.

THE SPECIAL CONSIDERATION of the ERROVR.
CHAP. II. Of Qualifications.
NOw we shall descend to fix a more strict and special eye and hand, upon the
Error aimed at; and that first in its Doctrine, Secondly, in its Use.

The Doctrine thereof in its division, divides betwixt the Spirit, and most of
his near and dear Relations, it opposes the Spirit. 1. Against its own
Effects, Viz. true and gracious Qualifications. 2. Against his Cause, namely
Christ. 3. Against his Word, the Scriptures. 4. Against his Ministry, to wit,
Church Communion and Ordinances.


Lastly, against its Witnesses, or former Experiences.

The Doctrine of the first of these kinds, namely, touching Evidences, wherein
the Holy Ghost is made to oppose its own effect in us, brancheth it self into
these two Assertions.

1. That no Qualification of the Creature, whatever, can be, or may be, used as
a sufficient Evidence of Gods Love or Presence: this as the intelligent Reader
may find, is the sense of the 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 15. falls Rests.

2. That the Spirit of God does ever manifest his presence to the Soul, with
his own immediate Light, Page 60.

Thus does the Errors Rod in the first place, devour the Antinomian Rod: But
of them in order; For the first of these, we shall give you its Sense:
Secondly, its Reasons. And having first raced the foundation of the Error, we
shall afterward build up the Contrary Truth, upon better Grounds; and though
this undertaking be long, yet I hope not tedious, for that the Truth, this
Error gain-saies, is known by us all, to be opposed by many, questioned by
more; and chiefly struck at by those that maintain this Opinion in hand. You
may better understand the sense of this particular, by the Book of Rests, that
tells us that,

No Qualification, that is, no Gifts, or Graces, though truly infused or
wrought in the Soul, by the Spirit and Finger of God himself, either in their
Root or Branches, themselves, or effects; whether it be the gifts of Knowledge,
(Page 3. line 18.) or Prayer, etc. (the third false Rest) or whether that Grace
more general, to wit, a suitable answerable frame of Spirit to the Word of God,
(false rest the Tenth:) or more particular, whether the Grace of Evangelicall
Faith, (false Rest, 15.) Humility, (False Rest the third, page 22. line 22.)
Ropentance, (false Rest the 6. page, 38. line 15.) or Zeal, (false Rest the
fourth, page, 28. line 14.) Not any, or all of these, together with their acts
and expressions, either of Negative, or Positive Godliness, Righteousness, or
Sobriety, (false Rest, the first, second, and fifth,) can be, or are to be, the
Creatures evidence of its true enjoyment of God.

The first Reason for this, we find page 24. line 2. Of the false Rests,
namely, Why, says he, should any man place his Rest upon any thing which will
come to nothing, or is given to change? or why should we make that the ground
of our happiness, which is but a Talent given only to be improved, which may
be taken away at the owners pleasure: which words would prove our
Qualifications to be deceivable Evidences from their Mutability; but before we
discover the Fallacy, let us understand the terms, and strength hereof.

For the terms, it is most requisite for us to consider his impropriated sense
of this word Rest: which is here seconded with the ground of Happiness, and we
must know that it is utterly besides his intent and scope to mean by Rest, in
the place now cited, or throughout his Book, the objective, final objective
Rest of Souls, which we as well as he acknowledge to be only God. This term
may hear fallaciously in the Vulgar ear, and therefore I here (at first, least
we should both be by any mistaken) take occasion to declare his meaning herein.
For he certainly means nothing else, when he calls the particulars lately
mentioned, false Rests, but that they are false means of Peace and settlement
to the Soul, so far as we use them for the assuring of our Souls of Gods Love
and presence; he means, they are no infallible or warrantable tokens of Gods
Love, or symptoms of his presence to us: therefore he almost throughout his
Book, Ushers in the word Rest: with this Interpreter, Evidence: his most
frequent Conclusion is this, that such and such things, as he there treats of,
are not to be Rests and Evidences to the Soul. I am very confident the Author
will bear with, and accept this Candid Interpretation of his sense and meaning,
as in general, throughout his Book, so particularly in the place now
mentioned; wherein his endeavor is to draw us off from this means of our rest
and comfort, Qualifications, with arguing their Changeableness, and by
consequence their Falsenesse, that is, Fallibility.

2. For the strength of this Argument it seems double: First, our
Qualifications are changeable in their own nature: Secondly, and with respect
to the givers disposal. The first, I think I may safely gather from these two
expressions; They shall come to nothing, and are given to change: the last is
as clearly expressed in the later words, They may be taken away at the owners
disposal.

Now to the first of these that affirms, Our gifts and graces are given to
change:

1. By Concession, that Grace in it self may be said to be changeable, that is,
the gracious holy frame and disposition of the Soul, may be spoiled by sin, and
lost in ruins, as is sadly instanced in the unhappy fall of the first holy
Man, and glorious Angels. Yet,

2. By Exception, to say notwithstanding, That the Graces wrought by the Spirit
of God in the Members of Christ the second Adam, are given to change, is an
unsavory Arminian Position: Let us learn to distinguish, there is Natural,
Common, and Special, (i. e.) saving Gospel Grace: the Natural, Original
Grace, that Image of God in our first Parents, and the Grace that is wrought by
the common influence of the Spirit of God upon Hypocrites, was and is liable to
change and ruin; yet that later special saving Gospel Grace, that is, the
fruit and blessing of the Spirit, and promise of the Gospel, is not as the
flower that fades away, though it fades, it shall never die: Is it ever
seemingly dead? It is but as the Coal that is covered with Ashes, buried alive.

Grace is of an Eternally conquering Immortal Seed.
Nature, and spite of all opposition in the end, shall discover it self most
certainly effectual in the Redemption of its Subject the Soul, from Hell to
Heaven. Grace came from Christ, and will return to him again, but yet not
empty, it will do its work for which it was sent, and carry our Souls to Heaven
with it; that where he is, we may be also: that Water, that Radical Moisture,
Christ gives, and deriveth into his Branches, is within them, as a Well of
water springing up into everlasting Life. Though it meet with opposition that
would keep it down, and choke it, it will up again, and with a most prevalent
force, at the last overcome all enmity, and in high contempt, and triumph,
bubble up it self into life everlasting, Jo. 4. 14.

This Water shall never be wholly exhaust, for the assurance of which, the
Church is a Fountain, and for the more security, a Fountain sealed.

A true Member of Christ, shall never be without Grace for Grace, while the
immeasurable fulness of the Grace of our Head, and the inexhaustible Fountain of
the Fathers love, be dried up and emptied; till the Principle and means die and
fail: how is it possible that Soul should wholly and finally fall away; that
is, is kept, i. e. held up, By the power of God through Faith, unto Salvation?
1. Pet. 1. 5.

Yet then our Grace may be a firm Evidence, it is not fallible, by being thus
changeable.

But he that gave it, I hope may take it away at his own pleasure: This the
second Plea.

to be considered, either De Jure, or De Facto.

1. If we consider it in matter of right, then the question is (and indeed it
is the main question; for as it is concluded in matter of Right, it must also
be yielded as touching Fact, in God that injures none.)

The question is, whether God can justly take away that Grace, that he himself
by the special operation of the spirit has given. For the clering whereof, we
must look upon this Right, as it De meritorie incurrit iram Dei, licet non
effect ve.
respects us, and God. First, then with respect to our unworthiness, or
abuse of Grace, doubtless God, as he might have denied us, so he may most
justly deprive us of it: But secondly, with respect unto himself, if we take it
in a sober sense, he cannot; and that because of his already acceptance of his
Sons merits, and his own voluntary Obligations for us.

1. These outward gifts and mercies, are given as but Exhypothesi, we breaking
the condition, as we have forfeited, so are we liable to give them up, at the
owners pleasure and demand. But God has engaged himself, never totally to take
away Grace, and therefore lawfully without breach of Bond, cannot do it.

Now this Engagement is Real, and Vertuall.

1. God has properly Engaged himself in Bargain with Christ, not to recall the
gift of Grace from his, Christ loved us, and gave himself for us, that he might
Redeem us from our vain conversation, to be a holy People, even with the price
of his life and blood: God accepted, Justice is satisfied, by his stripes we
are healed, the bargain ended; it was then, Isai. 53.
as we may read, concluded; That by this knowledge, or by the acknowledgement
of himself, he should justify many: Now the price being tendered and received,
the property of the goods is altered. Can God in Justice now, (for Justice is
satisfied) reclaim our Grace, ours not only by gift, but purchase also? 1 Timothy
2. 6. Heb. 3. 6.
Christ is our (...), Ransom, and the Mediator of that bargain of Grace
also, even to see it performed and kept.

Secondly, as God properly Engaged Jer. 32. 40.
by bargain, not to take away Grace, so by Promise also. Has not God promised,
Deuteronomy. 26. 18.
and most solemnly Covenanted, That he will put his fear into our hearts? and
to what end and effect? Even that we should be kept thereby, from falling away,
that we shall not depart ftom him: For the gifts of God are without repentance,
yea, let this add to our great comfort, That he will not only Isai. 42. 3.
not break the bruised Reed, not only not quench the smoking flax, but bring
forth Judgment into Victory: being confident of this very thing, That he Phil.
1. 6.
which has begun a good work in us, will perform or finish it to the day of
Jesus Christ; for shall not God be as good as his Word? Let God be True, and
every man a liar.

2. There is likewise a Vertuall Engagement, whereby God is bound never to
withdraw his Spirit and Grace from his; which is an addition of strength to the
Engagement of Promise, to hold God to his Word. The Spirit and Grace is not
only the token of Gods love, but a Pledge to supply Christ's absence; and our
security for our Beloveds return, Joh. 14. with 16. Our Seal whereby we are
sealed, and made Ephesians. 4. 10. Ephesians. 2. 13. 14.
sure to the day of Redemption; yea, and the earnest of our Inheritance: Is not
the man bound to stand to his bargain, that has given Earnest? he must either
have the one, or lose the other. Now think ye, is the precious Faith and
Spirit of God so vile in Gods eyes, that he will lose his Earnest? Is the
Redemption of the Soul, that is precious; or that his Name, his merciful
gracious Name, that is exalted above all his Word, so slight or worthless in
Divine thought, Gratia semel recepta, non potest am tti, respectu Patris. Jo.
10. 29. Filii, 1 Cor. 6. 7. Spiritus Sancti, Ephesians. 1. 13. Weams.
that God will or can suffer the one or the other to fail or miscarry? Yea, He
delights in mercy, and his mercy endures for ever, and precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints; see here the heights and depths, etc.
of Divine love and tenderness to his, for our Comfort and Joy: with these
Obligations God has tied his own hands, he can only give, not take away his
Grace given; he can bless, and only bless and not curse us; so that it is
but right and equity on his behalf, not to deprive us of that Grace and
Holiness he has once given us. Now certainly, if God cannot lawfully, he
cannot at all take away Grace, 1 John 1. 9.
if he cannot De Jure, he will not De Facto, who is Just and Faithful; Just,
with relation to our Saviors Purchase, Heb. 10. 23.
and Faithful, that has Promised.

To conclude, then Grace is no fallible Evidence upon this account, it is
neither changeable in it self, nor yet with respect to Gods disposal.

But were it so, that our Grace were at the owners disposal? what advantage
yet is gained to this way of the Spirit by such a grant? Is not Gods Spirit as
much Gods own as our Grace? We read of our Light, our Grace; but seldom of any
such or so clear an interest we have in the Spirit: is Grace, Gods right, and
not much rather the Spirit? Is Grace in Gods Power, Will, Disposal, and the
Spirit wholly in ours? cannot God suck in his own Breath, as easily as to blot
or put out our Life? has not God the same, (if not more immediate) Power, over
the Cause as effect? Yet this is the way wherein we must walk to meet and
close with the Spirits coming.

But it might be further added, that though Grace cannot totally, yet may it
Not quoad habitum, yet quoad gradum.
surely so far perish, as not to be decernable, and so not evidentiall.



2. For further satisfaction, let us a little weigh this case, in the balance
of Experience; and we shall find that as there is a twofold desertion,
namely, of Grace and Comfort, so these seldom or never fall in together to the
same person; for where we find an Ebb of Grace, we usually find a Flood of
Confidence; and we many times see Streams of Grace flowing from the wounded
bleeding Conscience.

The Spirit is called Fire, and it does many times give much heat and little
light; when it has denied to bring with it the Light of Gods Countenance, yet
it has been as a Refiners fire, to purge the Soul to burn up its lust, and to
take away dross and Tinn.

So that very many, even while they do miserably labor under such sad
desertions of Comfort, they are zealously affected to the glory of God, the
benefits of Christ, the comforts of the Spirit, and do even hunger and thirst
after Righteousness: But to apply, If the desertion be of Comfort, as is most
agreeable to the Case in hand, I conclude, that all sincerity and fear of God
is never so far gone, even under the greatest desertion of Comfort, as not to
be discernable even by the Soul it self that suffers, if Enlightened, assisted
by the Spirit, the Comforter: do not all the expressions of Spirits so
laboring experience so much, and testify for them to all the hearers, their
fear to offend their prizing of Christ, etc?

But admit the desertion be of Grace, as it is sad to think how far even those
that are truly in Christ, may fall; so is it as hard to imagine, how a person
while under the state of Apostasy, should ever have so serious a
self-reflection, as to have any occasion to make use of his Evidences; it is all
one to him, while he lies in this state, whether they be clear or blur'd.

But suppose him new enlightened, newly convicted; then he will have need of
Evidences, and find none.

matter of Evidence and comfort: For if a man be so far humbled as to question
his condition, and to bring himself to Trial, and so to Conviction; this is
undoubtedly a good, visible, decernable mark in the light of the Spirit, even
of the true enjoyment of God.

So that we see it nothing avails either to our Case, or indeed to any purpose,
to Object, that Grace may not be visible, and so not Evidentiall.

But let us observe two things by the by.

1. That the Change with respect to Comfort, is not in our Grace, but in the
Spirits presence or absence.

2. The Spirit it self, we find thus far changeable, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

Then what advantage has this way of the Spirit against Qualifications by this
discourse?

The second Argument.
The second Argument against Qualifications, is found in page 23. line 26. It
is an abuse of the Gift, Viz. Qualifications, and an affront put upon the
Giver, Viz. God; to make the Gift and Evidence of the true enjoyment of God.

This Argument is so absurd and senseless, that I shall only call Earth,
Earth; Sense and Nature to bear witness against it: Such an instinct we find
in all tameable beasts, even by the Gift, to acknowledge the grace and favor
of the Giver: Does not Nature teach you, etc. That herein has God commended
his love, that while yet sinners, Christ died for us? Must not we now observe,
and acknowledge his love herein? If we endeavor thereby to know the Love of
God that passes knowledge, is this an abuse of the Gift, an affront put upon
the Giver; to conclude, acknowledge, bless, and admire his Grace and Favor
for Gifts, and Mercies, Earthy, yea Heavenly; the Graces of his Spirit, the
Image of his Son, the Earnest and Seal of our own Inheritance, the proper
End, yea, and appointed End of all Gods Mercies, Especial, Spiritual, and to
his Saints, That we might be to the prais of the Glory of his Grace? Ephesians. 1.
6.

The third Argument.
That nothing can be a sure Evidence, that may be true or false, but our
Qualifications, may be true or false.



1. Qualifications may be said to be true or false: 1. With respect to the
Cause and Principle, as Effects.

2. With relation to their End, as means, because,

3. They may be true or false with regard to our knowledge: Now according to
the first Interpretation, gracious qualities cannot be false; and therefore not
either true or false: for they are true effects of the Spirit of Truth; and if
that be his Sense, his Argument is guilty of contradictory qualities, he before
having frequently granted them all, to be truly wrought by the special
operation of the Spirit, and still denying them as to be Evidences of the true
Enjoyment of God, Page 22. line 22. Page 21. line 14. But if we conceive true
or false in the later Constructions, namely, by our ignorance of the Truth
thereof, they may be false means, with respect to this End, Viz. The Evidence
of the true Enjoyment of God.

I answer, that as I have already, so hereafter in their place shall more
clearly free them from this Roman scruple, from being false, (i. e.) fallible
Evidences of the true Enjoyment of God.

If it be Objected, that wicked men and Hypocrites, have the same
qualifications, it is a needless thing: For,



It is as little worth to affirm, that Hypocrites may think their Grace to be
true, as well as the Godly. For,

David is Enlightened: the Disciples of Christ have a light within them; a light
that manifests evil from good, truth from Error, even that Anointing that
teaches them all things.

But to conclude, a wicked man may as well, and more easily mistake in his
judgment of his Spirit, if Judge thereof, and not by its effects, then of his
Grace; this being more visible, descernable, as corporal; the other more
subtle and indescernable, as Spiritual.

The fourth and last Argument.
The last Objection against Qualifications, lies in experience: the Abbettors
of this way, have found by experience, that such Evidences as these, are as a
rotten wall to those that trust and lean thereon.



Yea, are not many Experiences of this very kind, left recorded in Scripture on
purpose, for our clear instruction, and strong consolation in this Case? and
that not only in the old, but new Testament also, even of such as had attained
Gospel perfection? Our Pattern, Christ Jesus, takes great boldness to himself
in Prayer to Heaven, that he had glorified his Fathers Name; and if you ask
Holy Paul's advice and experience in this kind, you may hear his answer, 2 Cor.
1. 12. This is our rejoicing, even the Testimony of our Conscience, that in
simplicity, and Godly sincerity, we have our Conversation in the world. Yet
then we may affirm what this Error denies, that Qualifications wrought by the
Spirit, are good and sure Evidences of our enjoyment of God.

Arguments to prove the Affirmative, that Qualifications may be used as
Evidences.
Having pulled down, and laid Error desolate, we shall now attempt to build
up Truth, and render it strong and glorious, upon the Grounds following. that
of S. Peter, 2 Ephesians. 1. 10. where the Apostle does exhort us, To give all
diligence, to make our Calling and Election sure: now how shall we make our
Election sure, but by our Calling? for we are called according to his purpose,
Romans 8. 28. And how shall we make Verse. 5.
our Calling sure, but by the work of Calling, and the effects thereof, but by
adding unto Faith, Virtue, etc. Now if ye do these things, you shall never
fall; do you fear your falling away? is this your desire to make your Calling
and Election sure? This is the way, add to Faith, Virtue, etc. and if you do
these things, you shall never fall, etc.

Whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder; the Spirit of God, and
our Reason: these two make up a truly enlightened and reformed judgment, a
sound mind. Then,

1. While the Scripture has plainly laid down this Proposition, He that
beleiveth, shall be saved: If I can assume I believe; why may not blood be my
witness, and my Faith a blessed Evidence of salvation to me?

2. If the Word of God witnesses the deceitfulness of our heart, in being apt
to persuade us, that we believe, when our Faith is dead: does not the Law of
Reason, as well as of Scripture, command, Examine your selves whether you be in
the Faith, prove your own selves, But how? Therefore,

3. While the Scripture declares, that Faith works by love, purifieth the
heart, etc. As it thus affords a Rule for trial, so by measuring our selves by
this Rule, if we can truly find, That we are such as love God, Christ, our
Brethren, our Enemies, etc. and that our hearts are 1 John 2. 3. cap. 3. 19.
21. Ver. 14. cap. 2. 3.
purifying in the Refiners fire; does it not encourage, yea command to
conclude, That we are past from Death, to Life, because we love, etc. And to
strengthen in our Souls that blessed hope, while we purify our selves as he is
pure: and so for any other true Grace.

I close up this, with that invincible Scripture, that has already been
hinted, and if truly weighed, might end this Controversy, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Examine your selves whether you be in the Faith, prove your own selves, know ye
not even your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, unless you be
Reprobates, (i. e.) unapproved; whence, 1. the ordinary rule for the trial of
our Faith, of which it is a shame for Professors to be ignorant, is the being
of Christ in the Soul.

2. The ordinary way for Professors to find whether Christ be in them, is by a
self-searching examination, not by a waiting for the immediate, invisible,
shining of the Spirit, for its own discovery and evidence.

that may be known of God: So, the new Creation and Government within us, is
that, that may be known of the Spirit.

may not he make use of the Reason of man, so easy, and open, and ready a way
in this particular Case of Evidence, as well as in those particulars following;
wherein I shall argue.



These are in themselves proper contraries, and both equally Relative unto man;
the one the depravation, the other the recovery and reparation of his Nature:
yet we find the first footsteps of God, for the Evidence of sin, in our
first Parents, trod in such a path, God comes toward them, to find out, and
convince them of their sin and Rebellion in eating, etc. How? By a reasonable
expostulation. And has the Spirit of Christ any other way then this, according
to the Gospel? The Truth is my witness, the Spirit at his coming, (this
glorious dispensation of the Spirit) shall convince the World of sin, John
16. 8. the Spirit may discover sin long enough, and I never see it; unless
it be with the eye of Reason, and show me Grace long enough, and I never be
comforted; unless I see it with the same eye: He shows us the things of
Christ, but must not we see them too, John 16. 14.
else how shall we glorify him?

God may accuse, but he cannot convince us of sin, without the enlightening of
our own Reason; and therefore that his ancient People might be convinced of
their sin, and that he did not accuse them without a cause, Come now let us
reason together, says the Lord, Isa. 1. 18.

Therefore to conclude, as the Reprobate shall not be cast into Hell, until
they be fully convinced of their sin, by most clear and invincible Evidence,
having all their Objections answered; their mouths quite stopped, when they
have read their Debts in the Book, that are in their own judgment sufficient
to cast them into the Eternal Dungeon, Matthew. 25. 45. etc.

So* if any of the Saints want the knowledge of the ground of Assurance, while
they are in the World; they shall, it seems, with their reason enlightened by
Christ at that day, know it, before they enter into his Kingdom, Matthew. 25.
37. to 40.

etc. with the glory of Heaven, Grace, and Happiness, and are changed in our
thoughts and ways; and surely also whereby we apprehend the same Objects, and
our selves as freed from the one kind, and interessed in the other, and are
ravished with joy unspeakable and glorious: God is the Primum movens, and he
must first move our Primum mobile, before the inferior Orbs will turn toward
him; the will having its immediate Light and Evidence, not from the Spirit of
God, but the mind, the Candle of the Lord, if the understanding be darkened, it
walks in darkness and sees no light, the heart is blinded: but if this Candle
be enlightened by the Spirit of God, it is subservient, not only to the will,
but consequently to the whole Man, in its turning from Sin and Nature, to God
and Grace. Now the same light that does. convert the mind, by Reflection does
comfort and refresh the heart.

a Savior for Sinners, the way of their Salvatian by him, is beleiving in him.
Now, that God might work up the Souls of sinners to believe and be saved, he
has ordained a Ministry, has put into its hand, a word of Reconciliation, to
show them the necessity and worth of a Savior, by convincing them of Sin and
Righteousness, offering them a Savior, and Life, and Heaven with him, will
they but believe; beseeching in Christ's stead, that through him they would be
reconciled to God, and saved, and all this is, that he might not force, but win
Men to the Faith, that Faith might come by Reason; and in the day of Gods
Power, his Psalm, 110.
People might be a willing People: as we will not believe, so we cannot be
assured, but by Reason, they are both Acts of the same Faith: And now what
should privilege the reflex Act of Faith, more then its direct, from being
beholding to Reason; I know not: The Scriptures say, He that believes, shall
be saved, my reason being enlightened, enabled to see the truth and stableness
of the Proposition, is effectually persuaded to close with this offer, and to
believe. But now I believe, cannot the same faculty of reason, enlightened and
assisted by the same Spirit, reflect Consolation herefrom, He that beleives
shall be saved; but I believe, therefore I am sure I shall be saved; this is
the Joy of my Salvation. What hinders but that the same reason that upon the
persuasion of the truth of the Gospel caused me to believe, may upon the
assurance of the truth of my Faith, together with the veiw of the Glory of
Salvation, cause me to rejoice? because I did not doubt, But he that beleiveth,
shall be saved; therefore I believed: so for that I am assured I believe, I am
assured of salvation, and therefore am at rest. What more need of the
immediate shining of the Spirit in us for Faith of Evidence, then for Faith of
Adherence? as I reason about misery for the work of the first, so I reason
about happiness for the Act of the second; that is the greatest difference.
Yea, insomuch as we having assurance in Adam, and not Faith, Faith is the more
difficult work.

Secondly, insomuch as it being more difficult to attain to any habit, then to
Act from that habit, when attained, to act Faith of Evidence, is far more easy
for beleivers, then for such as do not yet believe, to act Faith of Adherence:
It seems most strange that the Spirit should choose to work a Miracle where is
least need, and work no Miracle, where most; should make use of means or
instruments for the creating of Faith, and yet afterward work comfort in the
same soul, immediately, miraculously. Faith of Adherence is a Creation, and
giving life: Faith of Evidence is only the motion of that life given. For the
first, the Spirit must enlighten; for the last, he need only snuff this Candle
of the Lord in Man. The work of assurance is half wrought, by, and in the
Faith of Adherence, the Soul has received the prime efficient of it, Viz. The
Spirit: Secondly the Principle, or second efficient, Faith: together, thirdly,
with the matter of comfort, Viz. Justification, and a right to Heaven. There
wants nothing for the Soul to be assured of this, but the work of his Faith
through reason of his Qualification, showed to the Soul in the light of the
Spirit. Now how fitly does enlightened Reason, and this habit of Faith, offer
themselves for this blessed work, Assurance? God has put an inclination in
Reason and Faith, toward this work, and shall Potentiality never come to act?
Shall a Miracle be rather wrought to act their proper work without them? No
assuredly, God will not spend his own Omnipotency in such Cases as this, who as
he makes nothing in vain, so he does not delight to work a Miracle for that,
that is more easily Weames.
done in an ordinary way.

in sickness? Why should not the Spirit discover our Grace for matter of
rejoicing, that discovers our sin for cause of sorrow?

But all Reason and Scripture will affirm, that that is no godly sorrow,
Evangelicall repentance, that is not the fruit of conviction of sin: That
sorrow, is again 2 Cor. 7. 8. with 13.
to be sorrowed for, and that repentance to be repented of, that with its
watery eyes looks not at sin, whose tears fall not down on sin. (For, for
what must I greive? surely for something: and for what must I greive with
Gospel-sorrow? surely for sin:) so consequently, Is not Joy infidelious, and
also ridiculous that comes not from Reason, and as exercised on Grace: laughter
is the immediate Affection of the reasonable Soul.

for that, which is unto me the return of Prayer. Now most Evident it is, that
Col. 1. 9, 10, 11. Heb. 4. 16.
I must pray for Grace, and that under the sense of the want of Grace, I must
address my self unto the Throne of Grace, to find Grace to help in time of
need: Therefore, I may and must rejoice in God, as I reveiw that Grace, the
return of my Prayer derived into me from my Head Christ: as the Spirit of
Prayer does make use of my reason, to see and express my want of Grace, and so
teach me to pray: so the Spirit of Praise, does make use of my reason, to
reflect from Grace obtained, my thanks unto, and my Joy in God, and so is my
Comforter.

in the fovour of Heaven?

The consequence is clear, for we must put on the wedding Garment, we must know
our selves to be the friends of the Master of the Feast, before we may enter
and venture to his Feast. Now what is the matter of our Spiritual Joy? yea,
what the Hellen we so much strive for, but even this, The Knowledge, or
Evidence of these conditions, Viz. our Union with Christ, our interest in
Heaven, etc. So that we must know our interest in Heaven, in order to the
knowledge of our interest in the Sacrament, or in our preparing for it.

But the Argument is proved from 1 Cor. 11. 28, 29. Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat, etc. Wherefore examine? That he may eat, etc. of what
examine? Whether he be worthy, (i. e.) fitly qualified for this Supper; (i. e.)
whether he have an interest in the Master of the Feast: but whereby must he
know this? By searching, trying and examining himself, by exerciseing his
reason about his Qualifications, Viz. Whether he can come in Faith, Love, etc.
But can this Examination prove a means effectual for this end? Yes verily,
ordained of God for that very purpose, Let a man examine himself: and by the
Holy Ghost supposed effectual, and so let him eat, having found himself
worthily qualified for it, by a sober, due and rational examination of
himself, so let him eat.

Then examine your selves in the like manner, Whether you be in the Faith, or
no? and if by the Evidence of your own Examination of your selves, impartially
exercised by your reason enlightened by the Spirit of God, you can truly
conclude you believe; Fear not, but rejoice in the light of this Evidence, with
Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory in beleiving, giving thanks unto the
Father, that has made you meet, not only to be partakers of the Supper of
the Lord, Col. 1. 12, 13.
but of the inheritance of the Saints in Light.

Thus we have at length ended, as we hope, this Controversy; for, the fruit of
Righteousness is Peace, and the effect thereof assurance for ever, Isa. 32.
17. 18. Cautions about Qualifications.


But before we conclude this Chapter, we shall subjoyne these necessary
cautious, as a Qualification to Qualifications.

Assurance, and Comfort. For as assurance is the effect of Righteousness, so
Joy and Comfort are effects of Assurance, and as they are diverse in themselves,
so are they differently obtained by us: Even as the Habit, and the Act of the
Habit. For when I would confirm my Brother in a (by him doubted) Truth, as I
fetch all the Arguments from Scripture, and Reason, to prove it to him; even so
must I deal with my doubting Conscience, to bring it unto an assured knowledge
of the truth of my State of Grace, and Title to Heaven. This, as the obtaining
of a Habit, requires some time, with a serious deliberate Exercise of Reason:
but as when we have gotten a habit, there is nothing more ready, and easy,
then to Act therefrom; so Spiritual Comfort is the most proper and immediate
Effluvium, and effect of Assurance obtained. Though we come very hardly to the
assured knowledge of our state of Grace, yet we pass most easily from that
assured knowledge, etc. to joy unspeakable; as the reflection of the Sun does
naturally recoile, by, or from its direct Act: so that as it is necessary, that
there be some glance from the Exercise of beleiving reason upon Pardon, Grace,
God, Heaven, etc. (For every Passion, must have its Object) for the begetting
of Spiritual Joy from Assurance; so does it immediately, and upon a sudden
flash, take life from thence: (as when a Candle is lighted, light immediately
springs all over the house;) yet this Joy is most real, sollid and
substantial.

Assurance upon good grounds, that every Act of their Spiritual Joy, should be
the issue of their immediate Conception of Grace; as if a Christian might never
take Spiritual Comfort to himself, but as from the reflection of reason upon
his Graces. We many times rejoice in our God and Savior, and by Faith, (that
is the substance of things hoped for) even bathe our Souls in those rivers of
pleasure, etc. and that from Assurance already made, and not now questioned;
the Spirit of God does assure us by showing us our own things, and thus giving
us matter of Joy, does comfort us mediately: but he does also show us the
things of Christ, and John 16.
thus is more immediately and properly our Comforter: for we have received the
Spirit of God, that makes us know the things that are freely given to us of
God. To conclude, as when I have sufficiently proved my Doctrine, it would be
but a needless perplexity and folly, to turn back for the renewing of the proof
of my Doctrine, for every Use that I make thereof; so for a Saint upon every
occasion of Spiritual rejoicing, to go so far about, as to the trial of the
grounds of Assurance, as it would be a sign of over much suspicion and
infidelity; so a gross (in that an ungrateful) abuse of Assurance.

the understanding of a man, is the Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27.

CHAP. IV. Of the immediate witness of the Spirit.
HAving done my Endeavor, assisted I hope by the Spirit of God, for the
clearing of our Evidences; we now proceed to lay hold on the other branch
springing from the same root, which has been before delivered in these words,
Viz. The Spirit of God does manifest Error.
his Presence to the Soul, by his own immediate light.

by the disturber of the false rests, is the Spirits sufficiency to discover
himself immediately to us.

sufficiency to an efficiency, is no good arguing; the death of that person
that was God as well as Man, being infinitely meritorious, then how falls it
out that all Men, yea, and Devils themselves, are not saved?

2. From the power, to the Act, gives no good Argument; because the power of
God is sufficiently able to destroy the World, and all therein; therefore will
he, must he do it? Can the spirit discover himself to the Soul immediately?
that therefore he will use no means in this work, is a pure non sequitur; yet
this Assertion is built, especially when illustrated with that that follows,
Viz.

The Spirit is a Sun, Page 60. line 17. Now the Sun does manifest it self
unto the World in its own Light; therefore the Spirit in like manner to our
hearts.

that Christ shall come as a theife, etc. therefore as a theif comes to do that
that is sinful, must Christ also? Such it the absurdity of the precedent
Argument, for comparisons run not on four feet.

2. But secondly, this comparison holds at least thus far:

First, the Sun does manifest it self in its own Light, so does the Spirit:
again, the Sun does convey his Light, whereby we see other Objects and
himself through a Medium. Viz. the Air; so the spirit through our Graces:
Moreover, the Sun requires an Eye of Sense in us, whereby we must see, and
use his light, etc. so the Spirit an Eye of Reason.

Lastly, we feel, as some will have it, the heat and comfort of the Sun by
reflection only; and thus by reflection we grant, we have the sweet and
comfort of this our Spiritual Sun, the Holy Ghost.

3. But thirdly, the Sun and the Spirit must in somewhat be unlike, else not
alike, and this indeed may be received for full solution: The Sun is a
necessary, but the Spirit is a free Agent; the Sun must shine and show it
self, but the Spirit blows where it lists: therefore some have it, and some
have it not; and others have it, and know it not: while the Sun must always,
and always one way discover himself; the Spirit is not bound by this means,
nor yet by that, much less immediately, to show himself to us.

Husband, and that therefore it should seem more answerable to that relation to
tell us, he loves us, with his own mouth, and immediately, then to leave his
Spouse, to construe his love from his tokens only.



Husband, and that therefore it seems more fit, that he himself declare his
Love to us immediately; What is it that must Judge of this Meetenesse? our
Fancy, or Faith? We have most plainly made it appear, out of the Scripture I
suppose, Christ's Will and Way is to make use of his effects in giving us
assurance of his favor, or presence, we must as well acknowledge Christ to be
our Lord, as challenge him to be our Husband, as his way is best in it self,
so let it seem to us; For who art thou that reply against God? what is this
less, then a resistance of the Spirit with Carnal reason, and our vain
imagination, while we pretend and plead for him?

Wife, or best assurance of her Husbands love; the expression thereof by mouth
and words, or its signal Testimony by life and actions, Judge ye.

Husband here, while we are but espoused or betrothed to him; there is a day
appointed, which is not yet come, for the Marriage of the Lamb (and if we may
speak, Humano more, or after the manner and custom, and practice of Men) for a
Lover to assure his Beloved of his heart, affection, by the Special motions
and effects thereof, is not more strange then common; especially, if we commend
this course and practice by these three considerable ingredients, 1. Our
beloved is at a distance of place and absent from us: Secondly, there are
others plead interest in him, and such as are inconsistent with ours.

Lastly, we are too apt to delude our selves, and to be deluded in this Case;
Affection is blind, and our hearts are deceitful, and that above measure.

nature and language, to make their love known by word of mouth, whil this
bears Analogy to Christ and the soul, there is I conceive much difference: for
as a man, and one that knows but in part, according to my measure, I must thus
(yet humbly) Judge; that Christ, I mean not with regard to his power, as
absolute, but as limited by his revealed Will in condescension to our reason
and shallow capacity, Christ cannot acquaint himself to the soul of man, in
such an immediate way and manner as is now discoursed: and first, not in his
Person by reason of distance of place.

Secondly, not in his spirit, because of distance in natures: to me, and yet I
humbly submit to higher apprehensions, yet to me this seems defended by the
hand of sound and upright reason: the presence of Christ in his Spirit is of
too subtle and spiritual a nature to fall under, or any way to bediscerned by
such gross This is largly discussed in Chap. 18.
and carnal Creatures, as the Sons of men, but by and through a medium, I
mean, its effects, is any thing that comes under the name of Spirit immediately,
or in it self decernable to us? Let us bethink our selves with what Eye do we
see Spirits? Is it not the Eye of Reason, which always Judges of their
presence by Effects? Can the wisest man tell me, What Man, or Beast, or Tree,
is alive, has its formal Spirit in it, but by the effects, or motions of it?
Now the Spirit of the Lord, is that pure Spirit, infinitely far more pure
Spirit: the very name of spirit being gross and carnal, with respect thereto:
how shall we then judge of that immediately? A man need not indeed to argue his
life to himself by its motion, etc. For he knows he is alive by the first
light and instinct of nature in himself: So would we conceive that the Spirit
of Christ, did properly inform us, and was part of our Essence; we might know
it to be in us in a way more immediate; but this is the grossest absurdity
imaginable: Till then let us follow the Dictate of reformed Reason, and hear
our Savior speaking his love by his Actions, and revealing his Presence by his
Effects: whose spirit is therefore compared to Wind, by his Word, that blows
where it lists, and no man knows whence it comes, nor whither it goes,
whose presence is knowable only by its Effects upon us; even so is every one
that is borne of the Spirit, which is only perceivable by us, as it makes a
disturbance in the Natural Man; as it breathes into us Spiritual Life, as it
sweetly blows upon the Spices, Graces of our Souls; and moves us daily forward
toward the blessed Haven, Heaven: Such gracious Effects, and Operations in us.

The Truth Confirmed.
But so much may serve for the weakening of the Error, now a few things may be
added for the further clearing of the Contrary Truth; namely, that though the
spirit does only, yet does it not alone, at least ordinarily, much less of
necessity, Evidence it self, or testify our true enjoyment of God. For there
are three that bear witness on Earth; the Spirit, and the Water, and the
Blood, 1 John 5. 8. and these three agree in one, (i. e.) in one end, the
enjoyment of God; Verse. 10. With our right and interest in eternal Life, Verse.
11. And as they agree in their end, so in themselves, as the means, or
testimony: the Spirit does witness to the pureness of the Water, the truth of
our Sanctification: and in the Water, we see the efficacy of the blood, for our
Regeneration; Generatio fit per Sanguinem, per aquam ablutio.

Indeed the Spirit does witness, eminently, Zanch.
and efficiently, but Water and Blood, materially, and our Spirit and Reason
instrumentally. So the Spirit witnesses with our spirits, through or by our
graces and qualifications, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8. 16. As the
spirit of God is derived into us, through the sacred Ordinances, so is it
discovered in us by its holy effects; therefore is it thus plainly said, to
witness with our spirits, etc. in this 8. of the Romans, which Chapter, read
with impartial and due observation (it is so abundantly full for the present
purpose) is doubtless sufficient to end the controversy betwixt us.

The case resolved there, seems very near the case in hand, Viz. How we shall
know whether we be in a state of life or death, Verse. 13. The Efficient is Gods
spirit; the Instrument, ours, Verse. 16. and the Medium or matter of the
argument, Viz. The rules laid down for the trial of the case, such as follow;
if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye; well, but if ye through the
spirit, do mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live, Verse. 9, 10. The
second Argument in order hereunto, is, Our having the spirit of Christ, from
the effect to the cause; if we do mortify the deeds of the flesh, it is
through the spirit, we have the Spirit: and if we have the spirit we live,
therefore the spirit is a spirit of life, and, as it makes us free from the Law
of sin and (consequently) death, v. 2. This Argument is expressly contained, v.
9. Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his. But this
seems to infer another Argument, as subordinate to the main Conclusion taken
from the spirit, not only as a Cause, but as a necessary effect, consequent,
sign, adjunct, or companion of Christ's interest in us, or relation to us; he
that has not the spirit is none of Christ's: but he that has, it then, is his,
his Disciple, his member, his Brother, etc. Now how shall we know that we have
the spirit? By sanctification: for, if the spirit that raised up Jesus from the
dead dwell in you, he that raised up Jesus from the dead shall also quicken
your mortal bodies, etc. verse. 9. and 11. And how shall we know that Christ
has relation or interest in us? by that inseparable consequent or adjunct of
the spirit, for if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.
Lastly, and that that brings the Conclusion and Argument together, is an
Argument drawn from the highest and choicest effect of the Fathers love, and
our Saviors Office; the principal causes of our salvation, viz. our sonship,
verse. 14. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God. Or
we may interpose between the terms of this truth, Christ's interest in us; then
thus; those that are led by the spirit of Christ are his, and those that are
Christ's; (i.) his Members, Brethren, are (by adoption) the sons of God, and
then it is most clear, that if sons, then heirs, coheirs with Christ, verse.
17. and are, for resolution of the case propounded, in a state of life.

These and such like are the Rules, by which a man's spirit, according to Gods
Word, examining his condition, does either acquit or condemn, if this speak
peace, viz. that he is a child of God, and an heir of Heaven, this is the
testimony and answer of a man's own spirit; but to make this our testimony
clear, and demonstrative, sure, and infallible, the spirit it self bears
witness with our spirit, etc. not only together with, as two diverse Witnesses
of the same truth, but with (i.) nor yet only with the qualification of our
spirit, the matter of evidence, Water and Blood; but lastly, and especially
with, (i.) with our spirit, as subordinate in the work, through, by, so with,
making use of the testimony of our spirit, sealing, and clearing our rational
evidence with the truth and light of his, that we are the children of God.

Nothing can indeed persuade us of our sonship to God, but the Spirit of
Adoption; yet the spirit persuades us as rational Creatures, viz. as we have
heard, by inabling us to reason our relation to God, by Christ's relation and
interest in us, and that by the having of his spirit, and that by its holy
effects of mortification of sin, and spiritual life, which gives occasion to
close as we began, that, If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye
through the spirit do mortify the deeds of the spirit, ye shall live:
therefore Examine your selves, know ye 2 Cor. 13. 5.
not, even your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates: and the Lord give you the comfort of the witness in your selves,
with the contest of the spirit, to be an infallible assurance of your adoption
to God, Col. 1. 9.
and of the truth of this point; and for this cause also, godly Reader, since
the day you heard of me, do not, I beseech thee, cease to pray, that with
respect, both to one and the other, I may fight a good fight, and finish my
course, that henceforth I may be comfortably assured with holy Paul, that there
is laid 2 Timothy 4. 8.
up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day, etc.

CHAP. V. Of the knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, or in his Mediatorship.
BEfore, we have reconciled the Spirit, and its effects, our gracious qualities
infused by it. But this following Chapter will engage us to atone the same
spirit on its Causes behalf, the Person of Christ, which I may call without
offense, the cause of the spirit, both with regard to its Person and Office.
First, the Person of Christ is the cause of the person of the Spirit, by
derivation; the Spirit being the joint breath and issue both of the Father and
Son. Secondly, the Person of Christ is the cause of the Office of the Spirit:
first, by merit, 1 Pet. 1. 2. Secondly, by mission, Joh. 14, 15, 16. cap.
Therefore is the holy Ghost in the Gospel so peculiarly styled the Spirit of
Christ.

Yet this their spirit (and the Spirit of God by them so called) how
ungratefully wicked; does even stab at Christ himself, with these two erroneous
Points: namely,

1. That the Person of Christ is but a form, type, or shadow only, or a bare
representation of the Spirit at his coming: as the types and shadows of the Law
were before of the coming of Christ. See false rests in page 103, 104.

2. That Christ is not to be the object or Medium of Faith, (i.) We are not to
believe on Christ as our Mediator and Savior. See the fifteenth false rest.

The first of these the Seekers own; but the last is the very dregs of
Socinianisme; which affirms, that Christ came not among men to procure
satisfaction to God, but to be an Object of imitation to men.

No wonder, we have had boisterous Times of late, while such Devils, such
Errors as these, have been conjuring up.

Yet how great a wonder it is, that such grosness of darkness should call it
self light, and that to the face of the Sun it self, in this our day of Gospel,
when knowledge abounds amongst us.

But I shall not so far question my salvation, as to receive my Savior into
doubtful disputings; yea doubtless, the mention of such Errors as these is
sufficient confutation, and confusion of them also, in all humble ears, and
godly judgments.

Yet though there be not the least shadow of Reason, that will entertain either
the one or the other, there is one notable Scripture, that seems to some eyes,
to cast a very favorable glance and countenance to the first of these Errors,
viz. That the Person of Christ is but a type of the spirit, (a dispensation
Error.
and form that is ruined or dissolved by the coming of the spirit.) The
Scripture Scripture countenancing it.
is the 1 Cor. 5. 16. Yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet
henceforth know we him so no more. To make this Scripture pass for them, the
Abbettors of this Error have stamped upon it, this Interpretation, viz. That
the knowledge of Christ after the flesh, was the dispensation of his Person, a
fleshly dispensation which Paul had formerly been under; but since the
dispensation of the spirit, the dispensation of Christ's Person, it chiefly
meant the Office of his Preisthood, is dissolved, is dissolved to Paul, though
I have known Christ after the flesh, and have had communion with Christ in his
death, suffering, satisfaction, for my peace, righteousness, justification; yet
now I have a more immediate way to God, to wit, by, in, through the spirit,
without Christ's mediation in his person; therefore henceforth know I Christ so
no more; thus are both these Errors become one, and one Answer may serve for
both.

Paul (might it be retorted) now see your inconsiderate rashness, where is that
shame and sorrow for your former Prosopopeia.
(vain it seems though) so deeply resolved determinations? Do you not remember
your self good Paul, how in 1 Cor. 2. 2. how solemnly you determined there to
know nothing else but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, etc. But let us reserve
one ear unprejudiced, to hear Paul's Answer: Me thinks I hear him apologize
after this manner; Alas, poor ignorant Wretches, how apt to mistake, weak and
unadvised Babes, how easily seduced and overthrown! Ah, foolish People, who
has bewitched you? Do you make no difference betwixt the knowledge of Christ
after the flesh, and the knowledge of Christ and him crucified! as a Savior
and Mediator?

How unworthy of so great a trust as is committed unto me in my great
Apostleship, should I openly proclaim my self to God, the holy Angels, and Men;
should I thus, as you would charge me, basely deny my Lord and Master, and
cowardly withdraw my neck from his Cross? Should I be but as unstable in my
words, resolutions, as you silly Scepticks are fickle in opinion, I should
judge my self utterly unworthy of the name of a Christian, but you may be
resolved, that (which might have prevented such unworthy, uncharitable a
Censure of me, and so fond a delusion of your own souls) that intended nothing
less, then the denying and dying to the knowledge and communion with Christ in
his person, or Office of Mediatorship: will you read and understand the Verse
but one immediately following the Text abused, where I have left my
acknowledgement, and plain profession of Christ Jesus, as Mediator of
Reconciliation, as a Witness for me; expounding the same to the end of the
Chapter, concluding all out of controversy with this undeniable, that Christ
was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Did
I in my former Avouchment give you any allowance for such a mistake,
mis-interpretation; yet will ye read on, you shall therein be prevented,
before you have time enough to fasten such a foolish conceit in your
misunderstanding. But take my Reproof, as precious Balm, and henceforth, I
charge and beseech you, to tremble with fear of grounding an opinion of so
great importance upon one single Verse and expression, without an answerable,
due, and sufficiently serious considering the Context and Circumstances.

But let us reason the case a little further, and is there not light enough in
the same Verse, at least (if not fully to clear Paul's truth) to convict this
erroneous Mistake?

Henceforth, says he, know we no man after the flesh, yea, though we have
known Christ after the flesh, etc. Now can any man think, can any that has but
half the use of his Reason, imagine, that there is any difference in the, here
twice mentioned, Knowledge after the flesh? the invincible meaning of Paul must
needs be this, We henceforth will know no man, yea, nor Christ himself after the
flesh. So that the carnal knowledge of Christ that he here resolves against,
must needs be, doubtless, the very same, that he will not take, not own men in.
Now if Paul meant a knowing and acknowledging of Christ in his person; in
distinction, to his spirit; of Christ without, as the Object of Faith; to
Christ within, as the Author of Holiness; then the same sense must be held in
our or Paul's knowing of men after the flesh here also. Paul then resolves, it
should seem, according to this Error, not to know men in their persons as
crucified, as Saviors and Mediators, but in their spirit, as comforting and
sanctifying. And how ridiculous, how absurd is this?

viz. Know Christ after the flesh in this place?

negatively, that this is a Mistake, and not the true meaning thereof.

Romans 9. 3. A knowing men as brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh. So
say they. Paul in this place, resolves not to look on men, as men, so much as
Christians, not to acquaint and sociate himself with men, so much, as they are
related unto him according to the flesh, but according to the spirit, and for
Christ himself, for that he was, being a Jew, Paul's kinsman according to the
flesh; Paul it seems, had been too apt to glory too much in his carnal relation
to Christ, that he came of the same race and stock with the Messiah himself;
but Paul resolves, though he have known Christ thus, after the flesh, yet would
he know him so no more; this might satisfy.

Paul (as is most easy to observe) especially throughout the whole Chapter
upwards, was mightily transported in a rich Contemplation of Heaven: now while
he was walking upon the Battlements of Heaven by faith, and not by sight, v. 7.
he perceiving how dangerous and hurtful this carnal distinguishing of men and
Christ, this claiming an outward relation and interest in them, was to the
truth, spirit, and power of Godliness, he makes this Resolution, Henceforth
know I no man after the flesh; yea, though I have known Christ after the flesh,
yet henceforth know I him so no more. This I judge to be the direct, true, and
only true meaning of the words; and therefore he adds, If any be in Christ, by
faith and profession, let the truth thereof appear by his Renovation: If any
man therefore be in Christ let him be a new Creature; that is the thing I will
henceforth regard, not any man will I henceforth look after, that is in Christ
by relation, or outward profession alone, etc. unless he be a new Creature. But
is not this far from knowing, owning, or improving of Christ in his Person, or
Office for Peace, Atonement, and Satisfaction? etc. Yea, we must be in him,
though not satisfy our selves with the hopes of our ingrafture, by the means
of any kind of relation whatsoever, into a new stock, without bringing forth
fruit worthy and answerable; we must be in Christ, and new Creatures too; If
any man therefore be in Christ, let him be a new Creature.

see and abhor their loathsome monstrousness: Is Christ, the Truth it self, a
Type? What then is Truth? Is our Rock a Shadow? What then can support us? Must
we not believe in Christ, who then shall be saved? But Moses it seems must not
enter Canaan; nay, nor (i.) Jesus
Joshua neither, this new Jerusalem. Dear Christians, Let him that loves not
the Lord Jesus, be Anathema Maranatha. How venomous is the Breath that blasts
the mouth from whence it issues? How ungrateful the effect that denies its
Cause? Can that be the ingenuous self-denying, Humble Spirit of Christ that
defames his Person, and nullifies his Office? A bad Servant surely, that seeks
to eclypse the glory of its Master; and he that denies the Son is Antichrist. O
how needful and seasonable a Caution is that for us, viz. Try the spirits?

But that we may wipe off, let us a little The Argument for this Error.
examine the usual gloss and color which paints and sets off this Errors
ugly and deformed face, viz. That every new dispensation dissolves the former:
the spiritual dispensation must therefore put an end to the carnal, or fleshly
dispensation of Christ; the coming of the Spirit (which now is) must drive
away, and banish the Person, or the use of the Office of the Person of Christ.

aliquid nihil, that would fain be something, to mischief our Savior, but how
vainly and idly: for,

1. Though the dispensation of the means may in part be dissolved, as the
Figures and Types of the Law were, by the coming of a better and higher
dispensation of means, viz. the Gospel. Yet the last end is still aimed at, and
endeavored by all, viz. the knowledge and honor of the glorious Trinity,
among the sons of men, Matthew. 28. 19. 2. There is not any really distinct
dispensation of the coming of the Son and holy Ghost into the World, no more
then betwixt the coming of the knowledge of the Father and Son into the World:
the Father was, though darkly known unto his Children, as appears in Malachy,
If Mal. 1. 6.
I am your Father where is my honor? Before the coming of Christ into the
World. But this knowledge, I suppose, of God as a Father in those days, was
only by virtue of the promise of the Son. For how know we, how have we God as
our Father, but by Adoption? And how have we this, viz. Adoption, but through
the Son? So in like manner, before the great and markable descention of the
Spirit, by our Saviors ascension, there was some knowledge and faith of the
Son of God, which came from the more ordinary presence of the Spirit among us,
For flesh and blood did not reveal him to us. And as we Matthew. 11. 27.
see not, know not the Father aright, but in the light, and by the help of the
Son: None knowing the Father but the Son, and him to whom the Son shall reveal
him. So the coming of the Spirit does more clearly and excellently reveal them
both; for thus, we receive the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Romans 8.
John 16.
Father; which Spirit also takes off the things of Christ, showing them to us,
and for this very purpose, That we might glorify him; as our Savior can
affirm, Father, I have glorified thy Name. So the glory of the Son, is not as
the glory of Moses, that must be done away by any future glory, that excels
the three Persons of the Godhead are not like the strong man and the stronger;
as if the Spirit at his entrance, as the stronger man, should bind both the
Father and Son hand and foot, and cast them out a doors. Though indeed they
come gradually into the World, yet not successively; when the second comes, the
first with-draws not, and with the last they all appear: that God may be all,
even all in all, as Father, Savior, Sanctifier, for acceptance, satisfaction,
and application, in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

They are coequal, and co-honorable; one in essence, will, power, and in glory
also; not like to such Lights, as eclypse and darken each other, but rather as
Beams of the same Sun, or Lamps of an equal glory and luster, whose Lights do
sweetly interweave, incorporate, and every one gains by other. And to say no
more in this case, the Blood and Spirit of Jesus Christ are like the natural
moisture and heat in man; both mutual preservers of each other, and both most
necessary for our Salvation: and the heat that eats out and consumes tht
natural moisture, that spirit that dries up the Blood (i.) mediation of Christ,
is false, preternatural, and Antichristian.

But to come a little closer; Is Truth a Type? Christ is Truth, and that in
distinction 3. Joh. 14. 6. with 16. and 17.
to the Spirit, I am the Truth, and I will send the Comforter, my Spirit, the
Spirit of Truth, etc. Now, nihil vero verius, nothing is truer then Truth; and
as Christ therefore cannot be a Type, so we may believe the Truth.

The dispensation of the Son, if so called, must last and continue even while
the last days iast, Heb. 1. 1, 2. And glory shall be to God by the Church, in
Christ Jesus throughout all generations, Ephesians. 3. ult. And God shall continue
to tender salvation and happiness in Christ unto the World, even after their
new Jerusalem is built, until the last coming of Jesus Christ, and by the
Spirit himself, For the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; Rev. 22. 17.
and let him that hears say, Come; and let him that is athirst come; and
whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely. And he that
testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly; Amen, So come Lord
Jesus. Rev. 22. 17. and 20. Further, though Christ must give up his Ministerial
Kingdom to his Father, yet he shall most certainly retain the glory of a
Savior in his Mediatorship to the days of Eternity. We that are Christ's Sheep
shall be set indeed at the right hand of God; but our Forerunner is there
before us, who therefore shall be still nearer to God then we, and if we shall be
at, yet he is upon Gods right hand; and to which of us, yea, To which of his
Angels shall he say at any time, Sit on my right hand, etc. Heb. 1. 13. Now
does not he sit betwixt us and God, to the end, that what we receive from God,
we might receive through him? He is our Head, and shall be our Head for ever.
And the glory of Heaven must first have its influence, and pass first from God,
upon our Head, and thence flow down upon us, Even to the skirts of his
Garments. And we shall most undoubtedly continue in the presence and favor of
God in Heaven, until the day we are able to pay our own Debts to the utmost
farthing (which will be even for ever and a day) in the virtue of the Merits
and Mediation of him, that is the Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ
Jesus. For Psalm. 75. 3.
He that bears up the Pillars of the Earth is the Rev. 2. 10. etc.
Atlas that upholds our Heaven also.

But I am so well persuaded of the love of all Christians, both to their
Savior and themselves, that I am persuaded, I need not say more in the be half
of this Truth, or against its Enemies: Will not every stone in the spiritual
Temple threaten that hand that endeavors to remove the Cornerstone? And every
one that bears the name of a Christian, abhor and detest that wicked Engine,
that seeks to subvert the very foundation of Christianity? O let us fear and
tremble, to think of laying other foundation, then what is laid by the wise
Master Builder Jesus Christ, that Rock of Ages. I apply it not, but should an
Angel from Heaven preach another Gospel, then that which consists Gal. 1. 8.
with Acts 20. 21.
in repentance toward God, and faith towords our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
accursed, rather then believed.

But let us sit down, and consider a 1. It denies Christ's Priestly Office; for
2. It denies Christ's satisfaction to Divine Justice; therefore, 3. It denies
our Adoption. 4. It denies our imputative Righteousness. 5. It thus puts the
soul upon immediate communion with God. 6. It confounds faith and holiness,
justification and sanctification.


All these are not only immediately necessary inferences, from the former
principles in themselves, but are all of them clearly hinted by the maintainers
thereof, as he that runs may read. Now as these race out every Letter of our
Gospel, so of our Names in the Book of Life also; for how shall we pay our
Debts without a Surety? or appear before God without a Propitiation? or have
communion with him without a Mediator? For can dry stubble embrace a consuming
fire? and Who can dwell with everlasting burning? Are not those that walk in
the way, we are discovering, even of all kind of Professors the most
miserable? The Turk has his Mahomet, and the Jew beleives in his Messiah to
come, but this strange Generation have cast off all notion of a Mediator, as if
their hinderance, a moat in their eye, accounting it their perfection to stand
alone; their only full happiness, to be taken up into the immediate enjoyment
of God. O how does this way smell of Antichrist, Popery, gross Socinianisme:
yea, it has set one foot already upon the bank of Heathenisme, and I fear it
will not rest till it center in Atheism. These men are gone beyond the
Christian, Turk, or Jew, they are about to shake hands with Socrates and Plato:
and it is much, very much, to be feared, that their end will be, to be drowned
The Ranters.
with some of their forerunners, in Aristotle's sea, and utterly lost in his
Ens entium.
universal being.

O my most dear Savior! who can choose but be zealously affected for him?

When I seriously think upon that heavenly glory, that he was freely pleased to
put off, for us: and in my sad Meditations, become a Spectator to that
matchless, horrible, and most inhumane Tragedy, that naked Innocence acted, or
suffered rather, upon the Stage of the World for our sakes, and sins. What
contradiction of sinners, for sinners he endured? What cursings, buffettings,
shames, pains, and death, even from a combination of sin, the World, Hell, and
Heaven, he received, underwent; and for no other end in the world but that he
must be a Sacrifice, Atonement, Mediator, Advocate, and Savior, for us. And
with an eye of faith behold him, maugre all, to have spoiled Principalities and
Powers, and counting it his glory, to make a show of them openly, triumphing
over them, as the Lord of Life, and the Captain of our Salvation, being made
perfectly so by his Sufferings: even the Author of eternal salvation to all
that obey him. Moreover, when as I consider all this as the Result, Issue, Act,
and Decree of eternal Counsel: the most markable, pregnant testimony and token
of the Fathers everlasting love to the World, (most remarkable surely, that God
should give his Son, most pregnant also, in that with him he should give us all
things else) as the great Promise of the Law, blessed Gift of the Gospel, the
whole sum and substance of divine Oracles, Gods whole and only revealed will;
and to conclude, for the Application and efficacy whereof, the holy Ghost
himself has his only business, and that special Embassy and Errand from the
Almighty God, and the Father, and Christ, to the sons of men.

When I read with wondering eyes this sacred Story; and hear with trembling,
and amazed ears the Tale this Error tells us, viz. That Christ is,
notwithstanding all this, but a Type, a Shadow; that we must not believe in
him, that there is no trusting to him, depending upon him for eternal
happiness; that they have found out a nearer way and cut to Heaven, then by
him, that is the Way; a Truth, for the Truth; opposing to Christ, the immediate
enjoyment of God in the Spirit without him. I am (and I judge deservedly) at a
stand what to think of the Abbettors thereof. For (ah!) what a rude Affront and
Contradiction is this to divine Wisdom, Counsel, Will, and Word at once? What
an horrid contempt, and insufferable slighting of the Fathers everlasting Grace
and Love, so highly commended in him? Yea, what an ungrateful indignity,
undervaluing, trampling under foot the Son of God, together with a most
desperately wicked despite of the Spirit of Grace? And to conclude, by a direct
refusing our own mercies thereby, a most bloody and cruel destroying and
ruining, (miraculous Grace preventing us not) of our most precious and immortal
Souls for ever: For of how much soever punishment shall he be thought worthy,
that has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of Grace. Heb. 10. 29. And to add a word more, the punishment
of such, as it will be thus heavy and sore, so sure and swift also; sure and
inevitable; for how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? Heb. 2. 3.
Swift and unexpected, for such as shall bring in damnable Heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, bring 2 Pet. 2. 1.
upon themselves swift destruction. But let this be my trust, support, and
comfort, together with all those that wait for his appearing, that he* that is,
the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be revealed from 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9, 10.
Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
obey not his Gospel; shall be glorified in his Saints, and admired by all us
that believe; appearing able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God
by him, seeing he Heb. 7. 25.
ever loves to make intercession for us.

Wherefore also we pray always for you, (even you that yet oppose your 2 Thessalonians.
1. 11, 12.
selves) that our God would count you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all
the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power. That the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may yet be glorified in you, and ye in him,
according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VI. Of the Allegorical sense of Scripture.
WE have hitherto been employed in the reconciliation of the Spirit to his
Effects, and Cause: but now how great occasion of Endeavor have we put into
our hands of making peace, betwixt the Spirit and his Word? Their unchangeable
Spirit does deny his own word, and opposes the Scriptures, As, Absolute, and
that both in the whole, As, Respective, to our use, and that both, in in many
parts.


First, then we find that this Error does gainsay the Word of God in an
absolute acception in these two particulars.

1. That visible Scripture, or the Bible, is but a bare Allegory. Page 64. Page
65, ult.

2. We are bound to believe no more of Gods Word then the Spirit does persuade
and clear up to us.

How much of Popery, Familisme, and Anti-scripturisme, are couched under these
two Propositions, we may in a measure guess by the first hearing, and may
further understand by the following Discourse hereof. But of them in order.

For the first of these, that that lifts an high hand to pull down the plain
express and visible meaning of Scripture, to exalt an allegorical sense; I know
no other seeming ground whereon it sets footing to do this feat, but one, and
that is borrowed from the Scripture it self, (that it might be an Engine for
its own subversion) and is, the word Mystery.

Mystery of the Gospel, Mystery of the Kingdom, Mystery of Faith, Mystery of
Godliness, etc. They gather, that in all that is written, or spoken, there is
hidden Manna, a hidden Mystery. That the outward visible sense is not to be
regarded, but their inward sense alone, their allegorical interpretation is the
Word of God, the Scripture.

Author, who makes so very much of that little nothing in it. But I answer
hereunto.

Mystery also in a mistical sense, and look for a mystery in the word Mystery?

Revelation of the word Mystery. Now we as readily grant, as you can demand,
that the whole Fabric and Frame of the Gospel is very mysterious, deep, and
unsearchable, yet not allegorical. But that that makes the difference betwixt
us, is the Papistical Equivocation of the word Mystery; this word is first made
pregnant, and then is delivered of a double sense; though the Mystery, that is
in the literal meaning, be only lawfully begotten, and that that is in the
Allegorical, be Illegitimate. But since we are forced to be Midwife, for want
of one of more skill, in this present exigency, we deliver into the World this
Distinction. There is a Mystery of the Sense, Allegorical. Real.
Subject,



The first may be when we, dis-regarding the plain and open meaning of the
words, seek and pick out a further mysterious interpretation of them. The
later, namely, the Mystery of the Subject, the real Mystery, is when in the
very opening of the plain intention and sense of the words, there is found
contained, some wonderful, rare, deep, and mysterious matter in the same. And
now how easily is it determined, that the Mysteries so frequently mentioned in
the Gospel, are such as respect the Subject Matter of the Gospel, and not at
all the visible and outward sense and phrase thereof; let any man that has but
the Spirit of the Gospel; yea, but the use of his Reason, judge.

The Gospel is a Relation or Report of the most strong deep and unsearchable
Truths of Heaven, concerning the recovery Acts 26. 21.
of miserable man out of the Kingdom of Darkness, into mavelous light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, by Jesus Christ. Now when you have found this
out once, assure your selves, you have the Truth, look for no higher vain
imagination, no other Mystery then this; which is the Mystery of the Gospel. O
take heed as you prize your Souls and Heaven, of catching at any seeming,
though seeming never so glorious, a Shadow of the Gospel; least you with the
Dog in the Fable, let slip away from you, and lose irrecoverably the substance
thereof.

the Mystery of the Kingdom, therefore let us take heed of mistaking it for
the Mystery of the Sense, but of the Subject, the Mystery, (i.) of the
Kingdom: (i.) the mysterious way of the Reign of the Gospel. Mysterious,
because the Kingdom of Christ comes, conquereth, rules, and governs, so
secretly, strangely, mysteriously; The Kingdom Luke 17. 20.
of God comes not with observation. (i.) with outward pomp and victory; which
makes it so worthily called the Mystery of the Kingdom.

Mystery of Godliness, we must not understand it, as if we were to look for an
allegorical sense and meaning of Godliness! how weak and ridiculous is such a
construction; and yet there is a Mystery, and Great is the Mystery of Godliness
notwithstanding. Now what is this Mystery? Must we allegorize God manifested in
the flesh, into Christ in the Spirit, to make this Mystery of Godliness? Yea,
God in the Spirit is no Mystery at all, at least in comparison of the Mystery
of God in flesh, this is a Mystery; though it be revealed in the plainest and
easiest words and phrase, a Mystery still, and such a Mystery as is
incomprehensible by the largest and deepest capacity of Reason; for without all
controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness; God manifested in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the World, received up into Glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16.

the Mystery of Faith is also to be revealed, and understood in like manner.
Faith is mysterious two ways, Objective, as Christ, the former Mystery, is the
Object or Medium of Faith. Secondly, Effective, its Effects are mysterious,
deep, and unsearchable by humane Reason: as it unites with Christ, justifies,
adopteth, regenerateth, 1 Timothy 3. 8, 9.
sanctifies, saves. Thus plainly, there is a mystery in Faith: And that far
greater, then ever can be found in any other allegorical faith imaginable.

But what color or gloss can they possibly have for their allegorically
interpreted resurrection, day of judgment, matters of such high import and
concernment* I say no more, but I will avouch and testify, they had as good in
plain English to deny them both. What hinders, yet, poor Souls, but you
may, if God suffer you, see your fallacy, surely you need not go beyond the
material, real Gospel of Christ, for one allegorical, if this be all you
seek, to wit, a mystery. What part of the Gospel of Christ is not deep and
mystical, which the Prophets of old counted worthy their inquiry and diligent
search, and which the intelligent Angels themselves desire to look into. 1.
Pet: 1. 10, 11, 12.



First, Then since that the immediate end and undertaking of the Gospel, is
for the advancement of Christ, both in his Flesh and Spirit together, for both
our Justification, and Sanctification, and comfort: I desire to be informed,
whether this way will lead us to an allegory, in the former only, or in the
later also. If in only one, I desire to know the reason of the others
exemption. But, if in the Spirit and Sanctification and comfort, as well as in
the flesh of Christ and our Justification, then my request is, what may be the
allegory of Sanctification and comfort, what is the Spirit of the Spirit?



Author, the first and great Preacher of the Gospel to the Sons of men. Now we
read, Heb. 2. 3. that it was at first preached by the Lord himself. Moses
indeed may be the Minister of types and shadows, but when Moses Antitype, the
Prophets which the Lord shall raise up Acts 3.
like unto Moses, he shall doubtless bring into the World the truth and
substance with him. The Son himself shall, whatever the servant has done,
declare his Fathers mind clearly and plainly, according as our Savior
himself assures, Ye are my friends, for all things that I have heard of my
Father, I Jo. 15. 15.
have made known unto you: to which we may hear his Disciples and Friends
ecchoing back an answer, Lo now speak Jo. 16. 27.
thou plainly and no parable, (i.) no allegory, for though the Law was given by
Moses, yet Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh: 1. 17.

the matter thereof. The mediate sense and substance of the Gospel. Viz. The
way and means of fallen man's recovery.

This was first revealed in the first promise as man received it in the
serpents curse, the seed of the Woman shall break the serpents head. So much
of this, as was preached before, was Gospel, this is the Epitomy of that
Gospel, that is now more fully and clearly revealed to the World: which is
truly the truth and not an allegory. But how is Christ to break the serpents
head? only in the spirit? surely as the seed of the Woman also, who is, as
distinguished from the spirit, the way, the truth, and the life: as Joh. 14.
Priest, Prophet, and King, plainly and really so. He that came to seek and to
save that which was lost is the only savior; but Christ in his person, as
well as in his spirit, came to seek and to save that which was lost, therefore
he is, as in both, the only savior; whose spirit as it is a spirit of Life;
so his flesh Joh. 6. 55.
is meat indeed, and his Blood drink indeed, (i.) (...), truly and really,
not allegorically.

The last, is taken from the manner of the delivering of the Gospel to us. 1.
by our Savior himself, the truth, who cannot ly, he that eats my Flesh and
Joh. 6. 40. and 54.
drinks my blood (not he that seeks for an allegorical, but metaphorical
meaning in this,) he that sees the son and believes on him, has everlasting
life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

And secondly, by Paul, etc. 1 Cor. 15. at the beginning, which may serve for
all: Brethren, says he, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto
you, which also you have received, and wherein you stand, by which also you are
saved. Well now what is this Gospel to end all controversy, verse 3. I
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ
died for our sins according to the Scriptures, that he was buried and rose
again according to the scriptures, etc. Thus we preached, you believed, and
were saved, and the truth believed, is no more an allegory, then the end
thereof, salvation, but all in plainness of speech, not in mysteriousness in the
simplicity of the truth, not with double meaning, and in the demonstration of
the spirit, notallegorically. But I am jealous over you with a godly Jealousy,
fearing lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtilty;
so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2
Cor. 11. 2, 3.

But Caveat Emptor, for who ever deals with this opinion is miserably deceived:
She winds up all Religion to the airy Pinnacle of towering speculation, and
there fairly promises the discovery of the glory of Heaven, the new
Jerusalem; but in the end, this is all it receives at her hand, even to be cast
down thence into a troublesome sea of uncertainties, fallibilities,
absurdities, and what not: this spirit of theirs blows up a specious, amiable
bubble; but if you once but close with it, it immediately desolves and vanishes
into a mere and empty nothing, lay but once a side the literal sense of the
Word of God, and let the allegorical pass for Authentical, there must needs be
admitted, and that unavoidably as several minds of God as there are various
Phansies and different apprehensions of men in the world: every ones spirit
will coin a new mystery, Divinity, Quot homines tot sententiae, what divisions,
distractions, confusions, will follow hereupon; we can hardly agree about the
literal, O how shall we then differ, about this mysterious Allegorical Truth
and Gospel.

Methinks, and truly I averr it, with a mind unprejudiced, there glides a
perceivable, though silent, stream through every channel of this Error into the
sea of Rome. And especially, in the case in hand. It will have the Scriptures
universally allegorical, so will the Papists, and as the Papists descend below
Scripture to unwritten traditions, so this way ascends above the Scriptures
into unwritten mysteries. The worst of the Papists have said, the Gospel was
written not to rule our faith but to be ruled by it, calling it a nose of wax,
a dumb judge, etc. And does not this way of allegorizing Scripture speak
aloud all this: And blush not to say, that the Scripture is fitted to the time,
and variably understood, the sense thereof being one while this, and another
while that according as it pleases the spirit to change its dictates, as the
Papist, according as the Church is pleased to change her judgment. that is all
the difference, and how large a step is that to a total rejection of
Scripture? it gets it self above the reach of the letter, and what is not
proveable by an allegorical gloss? wicked men and seducers wax worse, and
worse deceiving and being deceived.

CHAP. VII. Of beleiving those truths of the Word, that we are not yet
convinced of, by the spirit.
WE now shall endeavor to disapoint that other maine desperate Engine directed
by the wicked cunning hand of this Error against the scripture in general,
namely, that we are not bound to believe any more of the Bible, then the Error.
spirit does persuade and clear up to us.

The Grounds or Reasons thereof, Grounds.
I find amongst them to be these.

we can believe no more.

the Book of the Scripture has been, and is still liable, to corruption

In the Vindication of truth against this Error, according unto my former
method, I should discover the Error first, and then the danger: in convicting
this assertion of Error, according to my use, I shall weaken and ruin the
grounds by refuting their reasons: establish the truth for the first of these
reasons, that because we cannot, it is not in our power; therefore we ought
not, we are not bound by duty to believe of the Word more then the Spirit does
convince us of: I answer.

Pharaoh, though God should deal with us upon the same terms, we could not
say God is unjust, yet God made man upright, and man's own inventions trifled
away, the heat and fire of his own lusts, burnt up and wasted, the straw that
God had allowed him for to do his work. Now shall our lie make the truth of
God of none effect? Shall our self-sought, self-wrought inability, discharge us
of our duty? how short, and excellent a way is this to manifest and magnify
strength in weakness? and being unable to do any thing, in a trice, by this
slight to perform all things.

persuaded, Faith inspired. The later, believing the first truth for it self
without or besides our reason, is indeed, the supernatural gift or Geace of
God. For the first of these, viz. Faith persuaded, arising from the probability
of reason, is certainly reachable by natural men. And for beleiving of the
Scripture in an historical way, this will, I mean, this faith persuaded by
reason will clime very high. 1. Reason persuading us to believe that God is
omnipotent, what will it not persuade us to conclude as feazable by him.
Secondly it persuading us further to believe that God is the truth and cannot
ly: What will it not urge us to believe, if he speak it, therefore to those,
that could not tell how to believe the resurrection, our Savior replieth, you
err, not knowing the Scriptures and the Power of God: Matthew. 22. 29.
you err in gainsaying this truth, because, as you do not believe the
Scriptures, so neither do you certify your reason about the Power of God, to
whom all things are possible.

viz. even for the glorifying of Justice in condemning of sinners: And of mercy
and grace, in giving strength by commanding for the Obedience, in giving glory
hereafter for the reward of the obedience of all the Elect. This great mystery
I shall have fitter occasion hereafter to unfold, and therefore Lonely touch it
here and lay it by, till then.

inability of beleiving more, etc. By reason of the real corruption of our
natures) is drawn from the inconveniency of beleiving more, viz. then the
spirit shall clear to be truth, by reason of a supposed, or feared, possible
or probable corruption of Gods Word.

Pope as their spirit can move them, they are all the while tied by the tail to
him. as Sampsons foxes were joined together, while with contrary faces, they
endeavored to run from each other.

Yet among some of the, more moderate, Papists, we may read a distinction that
will sufficiently salve the present Objection, namely, translations are liable
to corruption only in respect of the words, D. Stapleton.
not of the sense; and if not translations, surely not the originalls.

(Greek and Hebrew) though they have sacralegiously formed up a Gospel, even to
their own mind and humor in Latin.

It is the greatest infidelity and Charity as well as Faith then, in beleiving
the Scripture, if this be all can be said against it.

divine, not humane testimony or Authority. Though the words of a man, are the
means to express Gods Mind unto us; yet the light of Heaven in the face of
Jesus Christ through scripture, is our conversion and persuasion.

Argument for the Affirmative.
But that we may not leave the contrary truth in question, take these things
following for its confirmation.

real Precepts; then we ought to believe more truths of Gods Word then the
spirit has revealed and cleared to us.

But such Precepts, must needs be acknowledged real, because they prove
effectual and the consequence is also undeniable; because a command does
directly and immediately imply a duty; and if the command be instrumentally
used for our belief, then, as the means is before the end; we were commanded,
before we believed, and by consequence ought to believe, before we believed,
(i.) before the truth was revealed unto us by the Spirit of God.

unbeleif is sinful. Which appears. First, from Pro. 2. 3, etc.
the command of knowledge. Secondly, Faith, as also from the punishment of Mar.
1. 15
such an unbeleif 2 These. 1. and, wherefore does the living man complain, a man
(for nothing else but) for the punishment Lam. 3.
of his sin. The consequence, is clear as the Sun, for what the Spirit has
revealed to us, we cannot have an ignorant unbeleif thereof.

to believe every Truth that God has revealed to the World in Scripture. But
there are many Truths in the Scripture that the Spirit has not yet revealed to
most, if to any.

Therefore we are to believe more Truth and Scripture, then the Spirit has yet
revealed to us.

The Proposition is clear, because all revealed Truth is to be believed.

First, by that Law of Reason that is implanted in every man by Nature.

Secondly, by the Law of God, that condemns every spirit as foolish and
bewitched, that obeys not the Truth in believing of it. Gal. 3. 1.

But now how shall we prove the Assumption to them that deny the Scripture,
viz. that there is more Truth in Scripture, then the Spirit has yet revealed
to any. They will be forced to grant it, will they but yield a little to
consult their own experience: for they will acknowledge, that there are some
that are more enlightened, inspired with the spirit of Truth, then others, even
among themselves. Now that revelation that has honored them above and beyond
their Brethren, was either made known by a spirit of Truth or Error; but they
not acknowledging the later of these, then, that they have received from the
Spirit of Truth, must needs be Truth; and that may be the Truth, for their
sufficient conviction, that is not revealed by the Spirit to many. There is
some Truth in Scripture that is not yet revealed to some men; all the Truth in
Scripture ought to be believed by all men, therefore men ought to believe more
Scripture then the Spirit has yet made clear and manifest to them.



no sin Ignorantia Juris.
of ignorance can possibly be committed: for if I am bound to believe no more
then the Spirit does reveal, I can be ignorant of nothing that I ought to know;
for whatsoever the Spirit does reveal, I must needs know.

sin of unbeleif; for so far as the Spirit persuades and enlightens, I must and
cannot but assent.

Heathens, for they either have the Spirit of Christ or not. The first is too
absurd to be imagined. Then if they have not the Spirit, they cannot have the
Law revealed to them by it; therefore the Law concerns them not; and where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression.

Man of sin himself, as so, cannot sin, (i.) against the Gospel, the Saints, or
Christ, since he is not persuaded by the Spirit of Truth, that these are true.

People of God can sin either; for so far as they receive the Truth from the
Spirit, so far, do they not obey it? and no further are they bound to regard
it. Or to conclude, if the Saints can sin, the Saints it seems are the only
sinners in the World upon this account.

in the grossest profaneness; and yet not lose their Cloak. The Spirit has
not revealed it to me, it will be said; I am not yet convinced, that what I do
is sinful or evil. And,

blind and ignorant Indians; rise up, and call this way above all other
blessed, it freeth you from sin and punishment also; for where there is no
Conviction of spirit, there is no Law; and where there is no Law, there is no
Transgression; and where there is no sin, there is no punishment.

Ignorance and Error also. Well might the Papist say, that Ignorance is the
Mother of Devotion; it being so good a Preservative against sin and wickedness.
And for Error, this will lead us to deny Jesus Christ, and God himself, the
Resurrection of the Body, Immortality of the Soul, Heaven, Hell, and worse, if
possible; and bring a man safely off, and free from any sin or check, upon this
account, plea, ground, and warrant; I am not yet convinced hereof by the Spirit
of God.

holy Bible with any other Book whatsoever, whether godly or profane, and make
the Word of God of no better Authority then they, which (even the very, very
worst of which) I am bound to believe, so far, as the Spirit, I mean, by
Scriptures, shall convince and assure me of the truth thereof.

And yet (which I greive to think, and tremble to write) this is a most
commonly received Opinion among us in this Age. Ah! let us take heed of loosing
that, (if such Errors as these once spread and prevail) wherein our very Souls
are bound up, Religion it self.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Scripture, as it is the Rule of Faith.
WE now shall pass on in the defense of the Scripture, to consider it
respectively to our use thereof: and first, altogether in the bulk and whole
thereof: as denied by this error in these two assertions.

1. That the Scripture or Bible is not to be the Rule of Faith. Page 128.

2. Nor the Judge and trial of the spirits, page 66. line 2. 3. page 127.

Both these are also known to every one, that has any knowledge, of popish
tenets, to be rank Popery. The difference lies only in the different use
hereof, the Jesuist using them to advance his Pope, and the men of this Error
making them a mean to carry on the design of their spirit; but of them in
order.

Now in answer to the first, viz. The denial of the Scriptures to be the rule
of Faith, these popish assertions are found in the Jesuits Books: Namely, That
the Gospel was written not to rule our Faith but to be ruled by it: That it
receives all the Authority it has, from the Church: And that we must live
more according to the Authority of the Church then Scripture, etc. Now may we
but call the Church here the Pope, and the Pope the Spirit, a most easy
mistake, and in these and many other particulers, the Abbettors of the Error
we are disputing against, do willingly bow and do obeisance to his holiness, if
not even fall down, and kiss his Toe. But there being nothing to be brought
for this Errors upholding, that I can think of at present, that has not
already The truth proved.
received an answer upon an other occasion before: I shall immediately betake
my self, for the strength and establishment of the contrary affirmative, viz.
That the Word or Scripture, is to be the rule of our Faith. For,

First we have clear and pregnant scriptu^e for it, 2. Tim: 3. 15. The
scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation, through the Faith that is
in Christ Jesus: where observe, 1. That Christ is here held out to be the
object of Faith: Faith the prime means of our salvation; and the Scripture the
way, rule, and guide of Faith. The practice of this has attained an honorable
record of the men of Berea, the Holy Ghost still testifying, that they of Berea
were more noble then others, even in this, for that they would not give credit
or Faith to the truths delivered by the Apostles themselves, further then they
made and found the word of Scripture to be the rule thereof; they searching the
scriptures daily whether these things were so, Acts 18. 11.

But the men we speak of, while they wind up all Religion and rules of Faith
into their unadvised, presuming spirit, what do they less (so heinously
obnoxious they are to the way of the spirit of truth) then to be wise above
that which (...).
is written.

viz. That the Word of God or Scripture is the rule of Faith.

1. That is, and only is the rule of Faith, that is of infallible truth.

But the Scripture is and only is of infallible truth, it being the word and
mind of truth.

Therefore the Scripture, undoubtedly is and only is the rule of Faith.

Truth being the proper and immediate object of Faith, it must needs be the
rule Rectum norma sui and obliqui.
thereof, (i.) of that that is to be believed. For truth, or what ever is
straight and right, is the rule and measure, both of it self, and that that is
Erroneous and crooked,

of Faith, must be certain, and known; for if it be not certain, it is no
rule at all: And if it be not known it is no rule to us: But nothing is more
certain, nothing is more known, then the Holy Scriptures, contained in the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles; wherefore the sacred Scripture is the
rule of Faith most certain and most safe.

And for the case in hand, it is worth our notice, that the Scriptures must
needs be better known then the spirit, in some cases; as namely, where it is
received, where it speaks plainly, and the question is concerning the spirit.
These are Bellarmines own Reasonings, not against us, but Libertines relying
upon Revelations; which as they will serve to condemn the
Scripture-blaspheming-Papists out of their own mouths; so also to confute, our
Anti-scripturists in this particular.

These things are written (notwithstanding) that we might have the certainty of
that wherein we are instructed, and that we might believe in Jesus, and in
believing, have Life Eternal.

But how many absurdities and dangerous Danger.
consequences are the issue of the denial hereof. It follows: 1. That the
scripture is not the word of God, and it is all one in effect to say so, and to
deny it to be the rule of Faith; for that that is the Word i.) the will, sense,
and truth, of God revealed, must needs be the rule of Faith. And if the
scripture be not the rule of Faith, it may not be received as the Word of God;
for as we see God by the eye of reaeson in the World, through that (...), his
Creation and Providence, so with the eye of Faith alone, in the Holy
scriptures, as he is there revealed to us by his Prophets and Apostles. Thus,

2. It robs the Lord of his infinite Glory, and injuriously strips the World of
the greatest Blessing wherewith ever God in blessing blessed it, the
scriptures: for as to God, they are the greatest outward pledge of his
admirable favor; and as to us, the best, yea the only ordinary way and means
of heavenly light, life, and happiness.

scripture as to the rule of Faith, it must of necessity either expose us, to
the folly of acknowledging unwritten Traditions, and to fall professed Papists,
or worse, to the danger of waiting and attending, on immediate Revelations, and
arise to Familisme. But since the way of this Error, does directly lead to the
later of these; we have a considerable price put into our hand to purchase
(though short yet seasonable) digression, touching Revelations, of this Quere.

Is it not lawful in these days of light, to expect Revelations?

Revelation is used in the scripture in the good sense, but such Revelations as
either take away from, or add to the Scriptures; and such Revelations as claim
to be immediate, may not be expected. And such are the Revelations we now
speak of.

Such as derogate from, (i.) deny or contradict any part of the scripture, is
utterly unlawful and ridiculous; and cannot possibly be of the spirit of God:
For observe,

When there was but part of the Word express and extant, and God showed, at any
time, by revealing his mind to the Prophets, his intention to add an increase
and enlargement toward the decreed perfection of the Holy Writ: He never
argued so much former improvidence or present contradiction to himself, as by
the now reigning spirit of truth, to charge the other truth, that had been
revealed before by the same spirit to be false and Erroneous. And even as Gods
word of six several days, in that most admirable frame and fabrik of the
World, does sing and set forth the praise of the Glory of Divine Wisdom, with
the sweetest Harmony; even so does the glorious building of scripture, though
the stones thereof were laid at sundry times, by several instruments, and in
diverse manners. That Land is not surely the Finger of God, that endeavors to
demolish it, yea or to take down a stone thereof.

But this Error, would remove the very corner stone, and with violent hands
labors every way to bury the beauty of this building in the ruins thereof;
denying not only the Word to be the rule of Faith, but the trial of Faith at
all, yea Faith it self and Christ himself, etc. and almost, what ever the
scriptures affirm, unlawful abominable Revelations! For I protest, says our
Savior, unto every man that hears the Words of the Prophecy of this Book,
that if any man shall diminish of the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God
shall take away his part out of the Book of Life, and out of the holy City
(the place you so much boast in) and from these things that are written in this
Book, Rev. 22. 19.

to the word is as impious and unwarrantable also. The top stone is laid, the
work is finished; the whole Will and Mind of God is already revealed to us in
the scriptures, and we may look for, wait for no more; John's writings
contemning every thing to be known, to the end of the World, even till he which
testifies these, says, surely, I come quickly, etc. Rev. 22. 20.

And yet this Error will expect more truths yet, the scripture being not the
rule of Faith sufficient for it, but I Protest unto every man that hears the
words of the Prophecy of this book, if any man shall add unto these things,
God shall add unto him the Plagues that are written in this Book, Rev. 22. 18.



For though it was necessary, or at least most convenient, for God, intending
to bless the World at the length, though gradually, with a standing visible
mean for its recovery in knowledge, etc. To reveal his will at the first in a
more immediate manner to some, yet if I mistake not, we never read of any such
inspirations, so absolutely immediate way of Revelation, as my Antagonists boast
of; God for the most part making use of some kind of mean, more or less,
through which he conveyed his mind, to the men of God themselves: He did not
distill, inspire, and reveal it into them, much less into the People, in so
secret, insensible a manner as this age mentions: Which we shall further clear
unto you, by a few meditations upon this scripture, viz. God who at sundry and
in diverse manners spoke of old to our Fathers by the Prophets, has in the
last days spoke unto us by his Son, Heb. 1. 1, 2.

These words may testify, not only that, but how, God has declared himself
to the World, both in the first and last dispensation. But the question in
hand, is not about the truth, but the manner, of these Revelations.

how did God declare himself in the time of the Law?

diverse manners, he spoke to our Fathers by the Prophets. Observe,

God did not, of old before any part of the Bible was written, immediately
reveal his mind to our Fathers (i.) the People, but by the means of his
Prophets.

our fathers by the Prophets here, must needs be meant of his speaking to the
Prophets, and rather in, then by them, to our Fathers: For the Prophets, for
ought I have read, had only one way of revealing (i.) by voice, the Word and
Will of God to the People; but here, this speaking, must therefore be the
speaking of God to the Prophets, since it is as that was, not only at sundry
times but in diverse manners also.

the Prophets, that they were to declare to the People in diverse manners (i.)
not immediately, but by diverse ways and means. Sometimes by Vrim and Thummim,
sometimes by a voice, sometimes by dreams, sometimes by visions, etc. these are
all mediums in and through which, God cannot reveal himself immediately. These
are all carnal ways of Revelation, when compared with our late inspirations;
the spirit of our days, not only speaking into, but in them, without the help
of the shadow of any means whatsoever; But,

1. The Prophet of Gods People in the days of the Gospel, is the Son of God.
2. The way, wherein the son of God, gives us his Fathers mind and Council,
is his word, voice, or speaking to us. 3. Until the very last of days shall
expire, we must look for the Mind and Will of God, in the word of Christ his
Son. Has in these last days, etc. 4. That in these very last of days, the
Son of God instructs immediately, by speaking unto us by his Word, rather
then by speaking immediately in us by his spirit.


Object. Then what use of the spirit? is not it promised to lead us into truth?
yea, and to put into our minds what we shall say when occasion serves, etc.

Answ. We admire and adore the promise and blessing of the spirit, in all its
use, yet does not the spirit or breath of Christ still come with his Word? see
the Office of the spirit declared and expounded Joh. 14. 26. verse. 25. These
things, says our Savior, have I spoken unto you, being at present with you,
but the Holy Ghost, ver. 26. shall come and teach you all things, but how? it
is immediately expounded, for he shall bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you.

Christ by his word, both writ and preached, declares to the World his Fathers
Council: As writ, his mind is revealed, as preached his Word is revealed to
the World, but the spirit can only take off the veil from our hearts and make
it effectual, and thus it does its Office, and makes the Word to be spirit
See Joh. 6 36.
and life, and the Ministers thereof the savor of Life unto Life, and the
ministration 2 Cor. 2. 16.
of the spirit. If it be in point of truth, the spirit brings the word to our
minds or understanding, and thus it is said to lead us into truth; the way of
truth is already laid in Scripture, the spirit Joh. 16. 13
only leads us into it: For he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak, if in point of Grace and Comfort.

The spirit does work these in us Joh. 1. 17. 17.
by and in the use of the Word, thus bringing the Word of Christ to our
remembrance (i.) to our knowledge and improvement, approving himself according
to the Scripture in all respects, as a Romans 14. Acts 9. 31.
spirit of truth, and Holiness and consolation.

supplication to us, and does he not then immediately inspire, when as he
speaks our prayers in us?



1. There is a difference observable, betwixt the spirit speaking in us with
respect to God by Prayer, and with respect unto our selves by truth; the sense
we are now about. Besides, there is a double meaning in this little particle
and preposition (in) as in these two propositions it is used: His speaking in
us by prayer, is rather a speaking by us.

But his speaking in us by teaching, is a speaking immediately into us.

2. But more plainly, the spirits speaking in us by Prayer, or as he is a
spirit of Prayer in us, is not, happily, to be taken in such an immediate sense
and way as some may think of, it implies, as I can conceive only. 1. A
teaching us, 2. An helping us, to pray.

1. The spirit as a spirit of prayer, teaches us to pray, either before
prayer, or in our praying.

2. The Spirit teaches us how to pray, before we pray by preparing our hearts
to prayer, by means and by degrees; by bringing unto us the knowledge of our
estates, wants, the mercy and fullness of God, by the word, the Law and Gospel,
and by its daily increasing this habit of prayer by daily acts; instanti, but
by degrees. But secondly, It teaches us to pray in the very exercise, now is
not that immediately?

totally immediately, neither; the spirit infuseth nothing into us while we
pray, that we had not some kind of knowledge of before; as the spirit in
begetting a habit of prayer in us, at the first, it brings things to our
knowledge: So in the very exercise, it brings things to our remembrance, viz.
Our sins wants, etc. Gods Fullness, Goodness, and promises, etc. for petition.
2. Our mercies, privileges, hopes, experiences, etc. For thanksgiving: so
teaching us how to pray.

2. The spirits Office is to assist us in Prayer, as well as to teach us to
pray; bringing things to our sense, bearing up our infirmities. So stirring up
our affections to be carried up to God, with our heart, might, and soul, in a
Heavenly powerful importunity, that the spirit as a spirit of Prayer, does not
any way encourage our expectation of an immediate Revelation, the spirit only
helping our infirmities: For we know not what we should pray for as we ought
(therefore he directs us) the spirit himself making intercession for us with
groanings, which (must be by us, though they) cannot be uttered, Rom: 8. 26.

holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. 21.

viz. a visible word, to leave Joh. 15. 22.
the word without excuse being now attained.

2. But remember, that these were the men, the Prophets, whereby God in times
past spoke unto our Fathers in diverse manners. How we have already found and
cleared, that these diverse manners, were all of them means, and such as stood
betwixt a mediate Revelation, and an immediate inspiration.

3. Lastly, Let us consider the Phraze a little nearer, it is said they were
moved, (...).
it is not said they were inspired. Not inspired, that they themselves might
know it, but moved, that they might declare it to others, and moved in their
declaration thereof. They were moved, (i.) 1. by Impulsion. 2. Guidance.

As a Scrivener moves his Scholars hand to the paper first, and then guides
the hand in writing thereupon, that it may write, and write true; So these holy
men of God, spoke and wrote as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 1. to speak
and write. Secondly, In speaking and writing, so that they could not choose but
declare, and rightly and truly declare, the things that they had seen and
heard. So the blessed Apostles, the great and honorable Penmen of the Gospel,
had in a more especial manner the performance of that promise, the Holy Ghost
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever
I have said unto you, in that their great undertaking. But were they not rather
moved, guided to, and in, then immediately inspired with the infallible spirit
in their glorious Work? but in what I have here written concerning the Spirit,
I leave with submission to wiser and better judgments, and pass on to --

CHAP. IX. Of the Word as Judge of Spirits.
THe fellow of what has been lately handled coming now to trial, is.

That the Word of God or the holy Scriptures Error.
is not the Judge or Trial of Spirits.

This is a Papisticall Tenet, Toridem verbis.

advance the letter above the Spirit. The Judge, as so, being ever above the
Prisoner, which we rank into mood and figure thus.

That which sets the Letter above the Spirit is not to be allowed.

But, that which makes the Word the Judge of the Spirit, sets the letter above
the spirit.

Therefore that which makes the word the Judge of the Spirit, is not to be
allowed.



1. There is a judging or condemning, and a judging of, or thinking or
conceiving of, things or persons. Now we must be advised, that it is not said,
that the word is to judge the spirit, but to judge of the spirit, though the
first has its truth and place.

2. There is a vertuall, and a real Judge. The Law is the vertuall Judge: It
with a secret kind of virtue, even of and in it self, condemning the guilty and
accquitting the innocent aforehand; as it is the rule and square whereby the
real Judge does actually measure the actions of men, and in order to his last
and determinate sentence, judge of them: but observe, this judging of, may as
well precede acquittance, as judgment or condemnation. And to apply, the word
or Scriptures in the present sense, is not the real, but the vertuall judge
(i.) the Law the rule and measure, whereby we judge of our own, or others
spirits; we our selves, or others, that call our spirits in question, being
rather Judges.



known but doubted; for that which we have the knowledge of, what need we put
upon trial: Indeed, upon assurance of the truth, and Divinity of the spirit we
speak of, the word cannot properly be called the Judge and Trial of it, but
rather its Proof and Evidence.

But as our Spirits are suspicious, questionable, so only we judge of, and try
them by Scripture, the truth, the touchstone. The Law being not made for a
righteous man: Yet if a righteous man fall under the shadow of Suspicion, the
Law must try and clear him. He is not tried for judgment but satisfaction, he
is not tried as a good and righreous man, but as one that is feared, doubted,
to be an evil doer. The Law being made for man and not man for the Law, it is
inferior to him, yea, even his servant in this respect, as it serves to try
and judge of suspicious and doubted men. No more is the word above but a
Servant to the spirit, as it is the Judge and Trial of suspicious spirits.
Moreover,

2. The word does never try any spirit in it self but in its effects, it does
properly therefore, not judge of the spirit, but as it tries its effects and
judges of them: We finding our ways, our thoughts to be truth, conclude
therefrom, that they are guided and acted by the spirit of truth, we by the
Scriptures likewise, trying and measuring men's opinions and practices, do thus
consequently and accidentally only judge of the spirit.

Lastly, While we make the word of God the Judge and Trial of the spirit, we
try the spirit only by the word as its own effect, and whether it be
unreasonable to judge of the fire, by its heat, the cause, by its effects,
judge ye.

Then this is the result and resolution of the case, by making the word the
trial of the spirits, we do no more abase or abuse the Holy spirit of God,
then we make the cause to stoop as inferior to the effect, by clearing or
proving it by the same; or then a righteous man is inslaved by the Law, when as
he is acquitted to liberty by it.

But something it behooves us to speak in defense of the affirmative part,
namely.

That the Word of God, and holy The affirmative truth.
Scriptures, is the only Judge and trial of spirits, that is to say, To end all
controversies, clear the truth, discover Error, and every false way. Which I
argue,

1. From the matter, thus, that which contains the Will of God must needs be
the judge of, the trial of truth, and the decider of all Controversy.

But the Holy Scriptures confessedly contain the Will of God.

Therefore the holy Scriptures must needs be the Judge of spirits, the trial
of truth, etc.

The second of these must needs be granted, even upon most immediate reason,
God that is every way truth, that cannot ly, and speak any thing that is not in
his thought or Heart, his word must needs contain his mind and will.

Now for the Consequence in the first proposition, viz. That which contains
the Will of God must needs be the judge of spirits, trial of truth, Decider of
all Controversies, you have most easily the reason of it, by considering what
it is, that the whole world of men do so much argue for, what that is, that is
called and honored with the name of truth, by every mouth that speaks? Is it
not that very thing which we call the Will and sense of God in other words?
what is our truth, the Helen for which the whole World is at debate, and
varience; but the way the will, the virgin truth of Heaven? would we know who
is true and who a liar, let God be true and every man and spirit else a liar,
his Word is truth, and the measure therefore of it.

Would we know whether the first in Rectum norma sui and obliqui.
our Land be strait or not? the most ready way is by an even comparing it with
that, that is undoubtedly so. So we doubt, which way and spirit is of God, of
truth, and which of Satan, a liar from the beginning; take the fruits thereof,
the practice and opinions, and look into the word for the warrant of them. The
doubt is whether they be according to Gods Mind, his Word reveals his Mind,
look there and search the Scriptures. The word of God is the Revelation of his
Mind, whither shall we go for truth, or to know what is truth, the word is
truth.

Bible to have the mind, and to be the Word of God, or else subscribe to this
undoubted truth: That the word of scripture, is the Judge and Trial of truth
and spirits. From the Charge and Cammand of God, concerning the Scriptures, the
end of Gods intention in giving, our use and duty in having them, being to try
and judge of the spirits by them. Isa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the testimony,
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no Light in
them.

This Text, though dis-regarded, has certainly very much in it, for the
defense and clearing of the truth in hand, the whole drift thereof, and not
only the face of the words, directly looking with great respect, to our present
purpose; for here is a clear command, a strait charge we see: To the Law and
to the Testimony, etc. (the Word of God may be called a Law, it containing
those rules according to which we must be obedient, a Testimony, as a standing
and visible witness and evidence of the Mind and Will of God, concerning the
World) about which we may observe (for the better application of the same to
our purpose) something precedent in the verse immediately standing before, and
something consequent in the following words of this same verse. The part of the
context preceding and observeable is the occasion whereupon this charge is
brought in; the part of the context, subsequent is the reason thereof. First,
for the occasion thereof, ver. 19. It should seem that the People in those
days of old, had some wise men among them, men wise above what is written, who
boasting of the spirit, a spirit of divination, promised an answer and
undoubted resolution of all their doubts and inquiries: spirit of God as
touching these? when they shall say unto you inquire at them that have a spirit
of Divination, etc. answer them thus; should not a people inquire at their God?
But (it may be demanded) now how shall a people inquire at their God?

To the Law and to the Testimony, there and there alone, you may know your Gods
Mind, and find to your selves, satisfaction and quietness, which is further
pressed, by the reason and motive (already hinted) following, viz. If they, if
any man, the best Southsayer, diviner, of them all, if they, speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. Now, did not
God know very well that these men were acted by a lying spirit? Yes verily, but
this is spoken for our sakes doubtless, that we might have a way to know them
also, and Southsayers may murmr what their hellish spirit dictates,
endeavoring to answer by inquiry, but rest not here, venture not the least
weight of credit or faith thereupon; until thou have tried this their spirit
by my revealed will, written Word. For if they speak not according, not only
not against, but if not according to this word, it is because there is no true
spirit, nor light in them. All light proceeding from the Father of lights, by
the beam of his spirit, through the Window of his Word, both for satisfaction
to thy self, to the Law and to the Testimony; inquire at thy God, and for the
trial of their spirits, to the Law and to the Testimony, for if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.

Whence we may conclude, and conclude with these four things. 1 That spirit
that speaks not according to the Word, has no light in it. 2 The only Judge
and trial of spirits, is the written word. 3 Upon every doubt and suspicion of
spirits, we are commanded and charged to the Law and to the Testimony. 4 So
much of Gods will as has been already revealed, has been always sufficient,
for his People in general.


In Moses his time we read that secret Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
things belong to God, and things revealed to us, and not to us alone, but to
all that shall come after us and to our Children.

Therefore not only so in Moses time but in these days of the Prophets, to the
Law and to the Testimony.

Now if but part of the Mind of God, now revealed to the World, was sufficient
for Gods People in these former days, is not the whole sense and truth of God,
both in Law and Gospel sufficient for us? when as we have so much of written
word, let us not be so foolish as to be wise above it; our Savior, our King
commands the like, therefore upon us that live under the Gospel: Search the
Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. The whole Chapter argues the wicked infidelity of the
Jews against Christ himself, who did not only doubt of his spirit, but said in
plain terms, he was a blasphemer, and in any other place that he was acted,
assisted by the Joh. 5. 18.
Prince of Devils, the spirit of Beelzebub. Yet Christ, will have his own
spirit tried, even by scripture; search the scriptures, to the Law and to the
Testimony; your Law is my Testimony; they are they that testify of me; I
protest to every one that shall add to the Words of this book, I will add all
the curses that Rev. 22.
are written in it.

Now if God has commanded this way; he has surely intended it, if it be the
way of God, surely then it is the way, and we may conclude it in divine
authority to be truth also, viz. That the word of scripture is the judge and
trial of spirits.

3 From example, that way that Christ and his Apostles did try and judge of
spirits, clear the truth, and discover Error by, must needs be the best and
surest way.

But that way that these walked in, Mat. 21. 42. 22. 29. Luke 4. 1. Joh. 7. 42.
Acts 17. 2. 18. 28.
for this end, was the written word, which must needs be therefore the best and
surest way.

4 From Divine Testimony, 2 Timothy 3. 16. 17. Framed thus, that which is able to
make the man of God perfect and thoroughly furnished, etc. is a sufficient good
Judge and trial of spirits.

But the Scriptures are able to make the man of God perfect, etc. therefore the
Scriptures are a sufficient good Judge, and trial of spirits.

The major must needs be granted, (as the minor is unquestionable) for it most
properly belonging to the man of God, or a Minister of Christ, to try the
spirits, whether they be of God; it being a necessary qualification in him, and
an essential part of his ministerial perfection, to be able to convince
Gainsayers: if the Tit. 1. 9.
Scriptures be not found sufficient for this, it cannot make him perfect, and
thoroughly furnished to every good work, But doubtless, All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improve, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly
furnished unto every good work.

divine encouragement, that which the holy Ghost has not only appointed,
commanded to be the judge and trial of spirits in general, but has also
highly and honorably commended, to all future posterity in holy Writ, for the
judging and trying of himself, must needs be the Judge and trial of spirits.

The Assumption is most clearly found, Acts 18. 11. where we have it not only
related, not barely commended, but highly honored, and honorably recorded, for
an act of a truly and bravely noble spirit, that they searched the Scriptures,
whether those things were so: that they would not receive any truth from Paul
himself, yea the Spirit of God in Paul, without searching the Scriptures,
making the Scriptures the Rule, Judge, and trial thereof.

How easily then may we conclude, that the Scriptures are the judge and trial
of (all other) spirits, unless we will deny divine truth, divine commands,
divine examples, divine authority, and divine encouragement, and invitation.

But, this Branch will appear more worthily cut off, if we will but a little
Danger of the Error.
consider what wild and dangerous fruit it bears. For,

If this be concluded, that the holy Scripture is not the judge and trial of
spirits; we strip our selves of all possible means for this important, and most
weighty end. Once, it is our duty to take heed what we hear, to try all things,
yea and expressly to try the spirits, John 4. 1. Does God command his Children
to make him Brick without straw? It is their duty totry the spirits, and have
they no way left, no means of obedience? Dearly beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God. I desire my candid Reader,
to bear with a short Digression for the opening of this Text. We find the holy
Ghost has not only laid this Command upon us negatively, Believe not every
spirit; and positively, but Try the spirits: but has also pressed this
Doctrine with a Reason or Motive, seconding that with Directions respectively.

The Reason why we should try the spirits, is immediately subjoyned viz. For
many false Prophets are gone out into the world. The false and heretical
Prophets go out into the World, but the true ones are sent, for how shall they
preach Romans 10.
except they be sent? But this Motive here, has three steps in it, whereon we
might ascend to obedience.

true, and therefore try, etc. There are men abroad, that bearing the name of
Prophets, though false, carry Lies in their right hand; that carry on Error
very dexteriously; and thou may, if thou take not good heed; if thou do not
try before thou trust, thou may happily shake such a hand; therefore, Try the
spirits.

many false Prophets, as they are deceitful in quality, so numerous in
quantity; he that walks in a place over-crept with many Snakes, Adders, etc.
will he not take heed, be very careful, watchful, over every step he treads?
Now are there not many Wolves in Sheeps clothing? many Snakes and Serpents
under the herbs in Gods Church, Garden? Take heed therefore, Try therefore,
etc.

laid, but executing, and that not in private, or secret only, but publicly,
openly, (the Deceivers very cunning, or the Times most corrupt) Many false
Prophets are gone out into the World, therefore believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they be of God.



John has left us two or three here, as being more seasonable for those Times,
and happily not unsuitable for ours. For,

Hereby ye shall know the spirit of Error, every spirit that denies that
Christ, that is come in the flesh, is not of God, but this the spirit of
Antichrist, who is already in the World, Verse. 3.

Whosoever hears not [us] (i.) does not with Faith and Conscience receive the
Word, whether written or preached) is not of God, for hereby know we the spirit
of Truth, and the spirit of Error: Verse. 6.

He that loves not, knows not God, (i.) He that does censoriously,
uncharitably contemn or condemn his Brethren, does not show himself by love,
and the carriages of love, knows not God, for God is love. Verse. 8.



spoke to immediate Revelations of the spirit; I add, that the light of the
Text does clear the contrary; for, who were they to whom John writes? Were
they not such as had the Spirit of God? Verse. 4. Yet this command of trying the
spirits, reaches, and immediately falls on them; as if most fit, and
properly convenient for such, as have the spirit to try the spirits: though
they are Children of Light, they cannot immediately discern betwixt things that
differ, but these must use means for the exercise of their spirit of
discerning, these must try the spirits.



whether they be of God; if of God, we must know them to be so, by trial and
examination.

But it is now high time to shake hands with that Text, and to weigh the
Consequence of this bold Denial of the Word of God, to be the judge and trial
of spirits. For then,

convince another of the Error of his spirit upon good Grounds. What course
will thou take with such a spirit? Will thou tell him that thou art assured,
that he is in an Error? And will not he answer with assurance as stout, that he
is in the truth? And if thou would convince him by reasoning the Case, can
this be done without some outward Rule and Ground, to which both parties,
acknowledging it Umpire, must make their Appeal? Now this outward third, this
Rule, Judge, Umpire, must of necessity be the Word of God, or some humane
Tradition. The Word of God is silenced in the Case by this same spirit, and
what a Popish Absurdity follows?

Word of God not being his trial) cannot possibly convince himself of Error,
upon good Grounds. For what shall be the word or Rule of Truth, for his
instruction, reproof, conviction, if the Word of God be not? The spirit that is
undoubtedly true? But then I demand, how shall we know that spirit that is of
Truth, to be so? Or since None know the things of a man, but the spirit of a
man that is in him. How shall I know, what is the truth of such a spirit of
truth in any man, but by his word alone? and now is not the word of Man
preferred above the Word of God? The Word of God must not, and must the word of
man be the judge and trial of truth and spirits? The word of a frail and
fallible man, exalted above the Word of the true and infallible God? The word
of a private, single man, take up the place and Office of the public Word of
God, that has been so highly honored, and had in so famous acknowledgment and
credit, by all religious holy men of all Ages successively? Profanum vulgus!
this way speaks every man true, and God alone a Liar; Let God arise, and let
his Enemies be scattered.

Word in this use laid aside) every man make his own spirit, to be the Rule and
Standard of all Truth and Faith? While one more presumptuous then the rest,
intrudeth his Tenets for Truth, another brings in his, so a third, so a
fourth, etc. Every man self-conceited, beleiving his own way and opinion to be
truth, why may not every man claim the same privilege? By what Law is he
forbidden? The Law of Gods Word? that is repealed, the Law of spirits? they are
all equal. How shall we now be reconciled? What can end the Controversy? Whom
shall we hear? Whom follow? How shall we become of one mind, one Faith? What
Town Clerk can allay this Hubburl, Confusion, Disturbance, and make Peace and
Union? Either every man must yield, retreat, draw back to himself, into his own
opinion, going away quickly guided by his own spirit, the blind corrupted
Dictates of decayed Nature; or by a proceeding, and that of necessity, either
by a Sword, or Vmpire. First, by the Sword, one urging, thou shall yield to me;
another threatening, subscribe to me; a third swearing, you both are heretical,
and I am alone in truth, you both must and shall be of my way, etc. until a
Bacillous Argument end the Controversy; the strongest arm be the best spirit,
and the Sword has cut and decided the matter. Or secondly, by an Vmpire, all
pitching upon one, to mediate betwixt them, to end and reconcile their
Differences: to whom they must give all power and sovereignty to command them
Truth, Peace, and Union: thus creating to themselves a Pope, and themselves
Papists.

But to prevent all this, let us hold-fast what we have received; that the Word
of God is both the Rule of Faith, and the judge and trial of spirits.

CHAP. X. Of the Word as profitable for Instruction.
HAving reconciled the spirit to its Word, whether taken absolutely, or
respectively to our use in the whole body or bulk thereof, we now have occasion
to make peace betwixt the same spirit, and some special parts, or particular
uses, of the same Word; for this spirit that claims to be the Spirit of God,
denies the Word to be any way profitable either for instruction, obedience, or
consolation, in its Doctrine, Commands, or Promises.

First, then, it denies the Word to be profitable in its Doctrine for our
teaching and instruction. Now the Scripture, False rest, page 45. l. 14.
says he, does not reveal Christ within any man: his sense must be, that the
Scripture is not the means appointed or made use of by God, for the spiritual
teaching of the soul of man.

This being so general, to the particulars behind, we shall have direct and
just occasions of Answer hereunto, in answering to them: yet for present
satisfaction, I make a Proposal of these two Queres.

Word of God is not a means to reveal Jesus Christ within any man; what then is
meant by such Attributes of it, as are found, Heb. 4. 12. The Word of God is
lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and
enters through, even to the dividing of the soul and of the spirit, and of
the joints, and of the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and of the
intents of the heart; we say not, the Word without the spirit, but yet the
spirit with the Word does, according to most sure and frequent experience, all
whatever we here have read; therefore it is otherwhere called, the Sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17.
and what cannot that do, when set home by such a hand? Yea, the weakness of
God is stronger then men; but now the Word and Gospel is the power of God unto
salvation; spirit and life: and directly, the means of sanctification so
called, and acknowledged by truth it self, John 17. 17. Sanctify us through
thy truth, thy Word is truth. But,

Church of God is only found where the Gospel dwells? What reason can be given,
why God has not an equal number, and share of Professors among the Indians? Is
the spirit free? yet surely it does prize, value, and countenance that air to
live, and breathe in, much more, that is filled (not to say blessed and
purified) with the sound of the Gospel. A general darkness we see, covers the
People, where the Oracles of God give no advantage, while the Land of Goshen is
full of light.

But we have here most room and occasion to take notice, and clear that Text,
on which indeed hang both the Law and the Prophets of Anti-scripturisme.

Rudiments, and beginnings of the knowledge of Christ; but this Milk is for
Babes, and strong men must have stronger meat; when they have received the
spirit once, they put away these childish things, to live above the Scriptures,
and harden themselves in such a practice as this, upon that notable Scripture,
2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, to the which ye do
well that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until
the day dawn, etc. Hence, say they, we did take heed to Scriptures, while we
were ignorant, until we received the spirit; but now what need have we
thereof, this place of Scripture it self inviting us to take no more heed
thereto?

stay a little upon it, and take its genuine sense along with us, we should
certainly understand, and know it to be otherwise.

There are two gross mistakes committed, in this same fallacious construction
of the words this way.

[Comma] at the word [Place] and read the words thus, We have a sure word of
Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed: so far we both agree; but
these men would construe next, until the day dawn, etc. but upon what account,
let us read, construe, and understand them as they lie in the Verse, Whereunto
ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place
until the day dawn, etc. Which words are not to limit the time how long, but
to describe the manner how we ought to take heed. It is not, we must take heed
unto this Prophecy, till the day dawn, but to it as a light that shines in
the dark till the day dawn.

sense of the very terms themselves; they read the words as a Collation
between the whole Book of Scripture and the coming of the spirit; and indeed it
is only of the Law and the Prophets, and the coming of Christ, as the Context
does most clearly manifest. The Prophecy of old shining in those Days that
were dark, till the Day, not properly of the spirit, but of Christ, did dawn,
(i.) till the Gospel; for Christ is called a Sun, the Light of the Gentiles, at
whose coming into the World, The day spring from on Luke 1. ult.
high did visit us. And the Times and Dispensation of the Gospel, the Day, and
the Children of the Gospel, Children of the Light and of the Day. God 1 Thessalonians.
5. 8. Ephesians. 5. 8.
that commanded Light out of Darkness, shining thence in our hearts, to give us
the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 2
Cor. 4. 6.

Therefore this is the sum of the Apostles sense in that place, he having given
them a glimpse of the Vision, wherewith he was blessed with Christ on the
Mount, in verse. 16, 17, 18. He seems in verse. 19. somewhat fearful, least he
should by this means, have stirred up a hankering in their minds after such
Visions, to the weakening of their heed and respect, to the Writing of the
Prophets; and therefore thus adds, We have a more sure word of Prophecy; More
sure, (i) not more true in it self, but as to you, which you have means of more
assurance of, having been a long time received for the Word of God, etc.
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed: and not to slacken your faith or heed
thereunto, any thing said by me of my Vision, notwithstanding: but least they
should err on the other hand, and prize the Law and the Prophets above the
Light of the glorious Gospel; he adds further, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed, but you must heed it no otherwise, but as a Light that shines in a
dark place, before the day, or until the day dawn; the Days of the Gospel
being Days of greater Light, then the Days of the Prophets; yet not to
undervalue these Prophesies neither, we must know this first, No Prophecy
Verse. 20.
in the Scripture is of any private Interpretation: though we must look upon
them as shining in a dark place, until the day dawn, yet must we bear respect
and heed thereto, as unto the Word of God also, For the Prophecy came not in
old time by the will of man, but holy Verse. 21.
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

And now what advantage have any from hence for the Denial of the Gospel? or
to make the Word of God of none effect, for our teaching?

CHAP. XI. Of the Scripture, as profitable in its commands for obedience.
THis Error would strike at the very Majesty of God, and his divine Authority
in the holy Scriptures, and therefore sticks not to deny the Commands thereof,
they being not by any to be heard, or hearkened to, as the voice of God. And
this I conceive upon a double respect; as they look to the wicked and
unregenerate world, or relate to the godly and spiritual Church: and upon this
dilemma, because the commands of Scripture, cannot come in upon us, at this or
that door, they must be shut out.

unregenerate, they imply the command is vain, such having no power to obey it,
and God cannot enforce or intend it to them, who does nothing in vain.

regenerate, the command is needless also; they having the spirit, the Law
within them, written in their hearts, there is left no need, no use of the
letter, or the Law without.

As the natural man receives no help, so the man that is spiritual has
neither help nor need of the command of the Letter; and therefore the command
in the Word is nothing to either.

positively answer; that the commands of the Word are not vain, even as they
respect dead, natural men, and such as have no power to obey the same.

In the clearing hereof, I shall first endeavor to show you the Truth, viz.
that God does lay Commands upon such men.

Secondly, the Grounds or Reasons thereof; it is most certainly true, that God
does lay commands upon men, that in the state in which they are at present,
they are not able to obey: does not the whole Scripture testify as much both
in Law and Gospel? Is not this a command, Repent, repent, the great command of
the Gospel, Repent and believe the Gospel: Mark 1.
Now can a Leopard change his skin, or a sinner of himself repent, or believe?
Take one Text for all, for this purpose, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that
sleep, arise from the dead, etc. As the author of this command is God, so
the object thereof must needs be impotent, natural, and unregenerate men:
Every one, sleeping, or dead in sin, who ever thou be, this command lies upon
thee, whether thou art able to obey it or no, thou art thus commanded by God
himself, Awake thou that sleep, arise from the dead.

Now could we find no reason of such commands, yet we ought to believe they
have their reason; shall our lie make the truth of God of none effect? this
should satisfy us, when we read such commands, Viz. O the depth, both of the
wisdom and power of Goa, etc. and not because we know not Gods end, wickedly
explode and nullify his means, nor term it in any point, tyranny or cruelty
for God thus to command, more now then before, natural men before being
altogether as insufficient and impotent, as to their obedience of this great
command of Awakening themselves, and arising from the dead as now; and what use
could such commands as these, upon such objects as these serve for then, more
then now.

But it is queried, what possible end or Cursit.
intention can God have with himself, in laying such commands upon poor men,
that are no way able to obey the same.

exception against; and secondly, of answer unto this Quere.

1. I except against it, for that, most usually, such cavills as these being
the bublings up of a corrupt Fountain, flow from the rebellion of
unregeneracy: For this savours first, of a proud and arrogant, and secondly, of
a profane and disobedient heart, there is pride and arrogance discovered in
it, for that it replyeth against God; calling the ways of an omnipotency it
self into question; yea, and setting the party that ownes it, so far above
his Master, King, and Maker, as he that is the party questioning, is superior
to him that is questioned; such will know a reason why God commands them,
taxing the authority and Justice of him, to whom none may say, What do thou?

2. Such questioning as this, as it savours of pride and arrogance, so of a
spirit of profaneness and disobedience also; and that not only as it clearly
argues a loath and unwillingnesse to obey, by asking a reason of the command;
but likewise as it offers an easy oppertunity to fling off every yoke, and
opens a gapp for the vilest extravagancy whatsoever; the drunkard, the
Whoremonger, the Murderer, Blasphemer, etc. will they not all hence argue, why
does God command, men persuade, and why should I spend any of my endeavor
about things impossible: Can a Leopard change his spots? yet can I never leave
my lust.

Let us not therefore be too busy, too witty, in such Queres as these, lest we
discover our selves more then we should, or would, but rather, let us see the
authority of him that commands, and wait upon him, in our faithful
endeavor and prayer, for strength to obey; for all our sufficiency is of God.

Yet men of sincere intentions may possibly move such a question as this, for
their own satisfaction, and conviction of gainsayers: I therefore proceed to
consider what Gods ends and intentions may be, in such commands as these; and
first, as they concern natural men in general, secondly, in special.

1. The ends and intentions of God in such his commands as relate to
unregenerate men in common (i.) without difference, distinction, etc. may be
first concerning himself, secondly, his creatures.

Such ends in such commands, as respect God himself, may be,

1. To manifest that free and most absolute power and soverainty, that he, as
the great Creator of all things, has over his Creatures: What though we
cannot come up to obedience, yet we way learn this lesson, even by that
command that we cannot obey, that King Nebuchadnezzar learned in the
Wilderness, Viz. That God works all things according to his will, both in
the army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth; that none can stay
his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? Dan. 4. 32.

2. To declare unto the World, That he is God and changes not, with whom is no
variablenes nor shadow of turning: though we have changed much, having lost our
strength and power to obey, God is the same; his will, his authority is the
same to command, and to command the same things: God made man perfect, and
agreeable to his ability, God measured his commands; but man having found many
inventions, to loose his ability; yet retains man his duty, and God his
soverainty: therefore says God, Remember the former things of old, Remember
how suitable my will was once to the power I gave thee: Remember the former
things of old, and condemn thy own folly, not my Justice, thy own
instability, fickleness, and changing, not my samenesse and immutability, For
I am God, and change not, which declare in my commands, which thou art not able
now to obey, the last things from the beginning; and from of old, the things
that were not done; my will that was not fulfilled, saying, My counsel shall
stand, and I will perform all my pleasure, Isa. 46. 9, 10.

3. That all the World may know, that he, a holy God, and delights in
holiness, although we cannot leave our sin, and become as holy, as God is
himself, and commands us to be, yet his commanding us to be holy, declares,
it is his will that we should be so: proclaims holiness to the Lord all the
World over: For this is the will of God, even our sanctification; ye know,
what commands we gave you by the Lord Jesus: and these commands declare the
will of God, for this is the will of God, even our sanctification; that we
should abstain from fornication, that every one possess his vessel in
holiness, even our sanctification, 1 These. 4. 2, 3, 4.

4. Lastly, to show his general good will and merciful respect to fallen man,
as rather inclined to save, then to ruin and destroy his poor creatures: God
delights not in the death of a sinner, but rather that he repent; not that
any thing can happen besides the will and intention of God, but for that God
takes more delight in the conversion and happiness, then in the disobedience
and ruin of any of his creatures. Judgment is therefore his strange work, but
mercy pleases him: God is a Sun, which never does hurt but only by accident;
the reason why God, or the Sun, does hurt, is ever unnatural to the one and to
the other, and only in the evil and perverse disposition of the object; now
the merciful disposition in God toward sinners, is declared and glorified by
his commands of conversion; which commands, though we cannot obey, which is our
misery, yet they ever aim at our good, they are for our own good always, and
testify for God, that he could delight more in life then death, our bliss and
happiness, then Hell and misery: So that were there no other ends but these,
such as concern God himself, it might suffice us, who by his commands, though
we cannot obey them, yet manifests to the World his own glorious Attributes;
his soverainty, unchangeablenesse, holiness, and mercy: But,

Secondly, In such his commands as we cannot obey, God may intend some things
concerning us, Viz. even our conviction and trial thereby.

First, They may serve to convince us both of sin and righteousness, John
16. 5.

1. Of sin, original sin, or our disobedience to such Commands as lie upon us
in our natural condition, as we are the seed and posterity of the first man,
Adam, Ephesians. 4. 10
it is by nature insensible to us; we nor knowing, nor feeling it: For first,
it Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.
is our death, in its extent, and so it leaves us past feeling: Secondly, in
its quality, it is natural to us, and so it is not perceivable; death
transporting us beyond, and nature holding us on this side sense, in the Grave
we complain not of misery, neither can we perceive or greive for natural
imperfections: By nature therefore we being better conceited of our selves,
then to know or suspect our guilt of sin, or lyability to any command; this
good end, God may have in commanding, though we cannot obey, even to convince
us of our sin, of our irregular and rebellious walking against God and his
commands all our days, by the renewing and pressing his former commands, that
we know not of, upon us; Thus God is most merciful to us, we knowing not sin
but by the Law; for we had not known lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall
not covet. Romans 7. 7.

2. And consequently such commands as these may convince us of duty and
righteousness; we being by nature dead in sin, we cannot know our Masters
will, or what he requires at our hands; and as we cannot, so we know not how,
to walk so as to please him; but when the command is opened to, and pressed
upon us, we know by the Commandment, being holy, just, and good, that this is
the will of God, even our sanctification.

2. Moreover commands serve, as for our convertion, so also for our trial,
when not for obedience, for we measuring our selves by such commands as lie
upon us in unregeneracy, we may be able to know, both what we were, and what we
are; how strong we were, and how weak we are: I know no plainer, safer way for
man, now fallen, to know his perfection of strength in innocence, then by
comparing himself with such commands of God as then were laid and imposed upon
him; God would not impose injunctions of holiness on man, above his
principles; that would have seemed harsh and cruel, nor yet beneath them, for
then Adam would have been more holy then required. The commands being the rule
and measure of our strength in innocence, we may, as men consuming, measure
our selves, and see how big and strong we are, and how we are decayed, how weak
we are, we like melancholy men, are apt, presuming too much upon our strength,
to think we can do any thing before we try; now the commands put us upon
trial, and thus convinced of our, unthought of insufficiency, we are shamed of
our boasting. I was alive once, says Paul, without the Law, (i.) I counted my
self of perfect vigor, life, and strength, before the Law was brought close
upon me; before I knew what God required of me; but when the commandment came,
I found my inability and weakness, the strength and glorying of sin over me,
which made me hide my head in shame and sorrow; when the commandment came, sin
revived, and I dyed, Romans 7. 9, 10.

2. Again, If we consider God, as regarding the natural seed and posterity of
Adam, under the distinction of Elect and Reprobate; he has ends and intentions
in his imposing his commands upon them, severally, and as a Father that
designeth one Child for a Scholar, the other for a Tradesman, his intentions
are different in the means of his Educating and bringing them up; so that one
God, the Father of whom are all things, has in his word and providence, not
only some general ends toward natural men as so, and in common, as we have
heard; but also respectively different intentions, toward them, as Elect and
Reprobate: For the end of Gods intention in such his commands and carriages
toward wicked men, thus differenced, must needs be diverse (Gods intentions
never frustrate) since the end of execution is so, to wit, salvation and
damnation.

But what are Gods different ends in his commanding the Elect and Reprobate.

Commands of God thus severally directed, work the will of God, with respect
unto himself, Viz. The glory of his mercy in the one, the glory of his Justice
in the other, with respect unto the creatures, to the one kind, perdition, to
the Phil. 1. 28
other salvation, and that of God: and thus the ends are more ultimate.

2. But the primary and more immediate ends of the commands of God upon men
thus distinguished, are found both together, in that 1 Cor. 1. 18. For the
Preaching of the Cross, is to them that perish, foolishness, but to us that
are saved, the power of God. Here we have two widely different ends, come upon
several persons, by the same names; Salvation and Perishing, both by the
Preaching of the Cross; the reason hereof cannot be imagined to be in the
means, the Preaching of the Cross, but in the use and abuse thereof:
Therefore, those that are designed to perish, they count the only way of
Salvation, foolishness, but to those that must be saved, it is the power of
God (i.) unto salvation. Verse. 23. 24.


1. But a little more distinctly, in order to the glory of Justice, on
reprobated men; the commands of God have a double intention, partly here, to
harden them, as God by commanding Pharaoh, did harden Pharoahs heart, Romans 9.
So men are hardened by the Sunshine of the Gospel, and by its commands, fitted
for destruction: Read and tremble at Isa. 6. 9, 10. And partly hereafter, by
leaving them utterly without excuse; otherwise happily this might have been the
Plea of ungodly men then; How should we believe except we had heard? But they
having heard, the word being in their mouths, yea even and in their hearts, and
yet they believed not; their mouths are stopped, they being judged by the
Gospel: Had not I come, says our Savior, and spoke unto them, they had had
no sin, (i.) in comparison; but now have they no cloak for their sin, John 15.
22.

2. And in order to the glory of grace on the Vessels of honor, the commands
of God upon them have a twofold end also; one in this World, for their
obedience (i.) to give them power, by the very command to obey the same, it
being the power of God (i.) having the power of the spirit of God along with
it, to make it successefully command us to obedience. Thus the Word of Christ
is spirit and life, and he having the words of eternal life, while he calls
upon us, Awake thou that sleep, he does awaken us; and while he commands,
Lazarus come forth, the dead John 11. 43. John 5.
do hear the voice of the Son of God, and those that hear, do live.

And as one end of Gods commands to his Children here, is for their obedience;
so the other end, both here and hereafter is for a reward of their obedience:
Godliness being profitable for all things, and having both the promise of this
life, and Matthew. 25. ult.
also of the life that is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8.

Thus we have largely showed and cleared, that we need not deny the commands of
the Word, as they look toward wicked, unregenerate men, for want of an end, or
as vain and fruitless, though they in themselves have not power to obey them.

Viz. The commands are needless to the regenerate, they having the Law within
them, what need of a Law without? They having the spirit, what need of the
letter? But we shall now endeavor to match it, with these Answers.

Paul himself, nature as well as grace, flesh as well as spirit, A Law in
their members warring against the Law of their minds, and leading them captive
to the Law of sin: And now to answer this, there is need of Kom. 7.
a Law without to stir up and assist the Law within, against that too often
prevailing party of wickedness in them.

2. As the commands were at first made use of for the beginning and begetting
of grace; so afterward they serve for the preservation, motion, and increase
thereof: Read only for each of these one Text, as Heb. 3. 12, 13. and Revel.
2. 5. and lastly, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.

3. Outward, or commands, without us, do only give occasion to manifest that
grace that is within the heart, to the eyes of the World; of which is produced
two notable effects: First, the Law, that we obey, being known and believed by
others, as well as our selves, to be the Law of God; thus our light so shines
before Mat. 5.
men, that they seeing our good works, glorify our Father which is in heaven.
Secondly, and thus the World becomes reproved and condemned by us: We doing
all things (i.) that are commanded us) without murmurings or reasonings, that
we may be blameless and pure, and the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst
of a wicked and crooked Nation, among whom we shine as lights in the World,
holding forth the Word of life, Philip. 2. 14, 15, 16.

But for that we were so large upon the The affirmative proved.
preceding particular, we shall only by a few breife hints of things, argue
out to the Reader, the affirmative part, Viz. That it is not needless for God
to lay outward commands upon such as are already regenerate, and conclude this
Chapter. Then,

1. Christ, his Disciples heretofore had need of commands and a Law without,
Matthew. 5. 16. Joh. 15. 17. etc. and why not now also?

2. They that had the spirit of Christ heretofore, even that anointing within,
that should teach all things, had yet need of, and use for commands in the
letter, 1 Ioh. 2. 27, 28. and why not now also?

3. Those that are perfect with the perfection of the Gospel, have use for
such commands, Phil. 3. 15, 16. and why not we?

4. Yea Adam in innocence, that, with the perfection the Law it self requires,
was perfect and upright, had need and occasion for the Law without him, and
what then can privilege us? Lastly, and

5. Jesus Christ himself, received words and commands from his Father, Ioh. 17.
8. have we more of the spirit and Law within us, then Christ's Disciples,
Apostles? are we more perfect and holy then they, then Adam, then Jesus Christ
himself? let us then claim freedom and privilege from the commands of the
Word, but not otherwise, for notwithstanding what is yet objected against it,
the Word is profitable in its commands: not vain, for such as are
unregenerate, not needless or useless for the regenerate themselves.

CHAP. XII. Of the Scriptures, as useful in their promises for comfort.
THat this way might sufficiently vent its spleen and enmity against the holy
Scriptures, it having already most desperately endeavored to abase and
falsify the soverainty and truth of the great God by rejecting his Doctrine,
and denying his commands therein, it sets it self here to deject our Comforts,
by weakening and sleighting, the Promises of God contained there also. It
plainly telling us, that no promises, whether they be sought or cast in, Error.
are to be a rest unto any Heart. You may read this position in p. 73. of the
false rests with its explication and meaning in the foot of p. 68. where he
defines the twelfth false rest to be viz: a closing with, and drawing comfort
from the promises, expressed Its meaning.
in the letter of the Scripture.

abuse thereof. And that with respect to the principle of application, and the
extent thereof.

1. The abuse of the promises is argued, first from the Principle that usually
moves thereto, viz. Necessity. Because we many times are driven for comfort to
a promise by the sensile want of those things that are offered therein.

necessity, make the comfort we have thence weak or vain? Vanity of vanities!
When men are pricked to the heart and out of a sense of their sin and misery,
cry out, as we read, what shall we do? why then does the ministry of the
Spirit presently tender unto such, some special promise.

Yea and prick them to the heart in order Acts 2. Acts 16.
thereunto; even that a promise of salvation by believing in Christ, through
the means of this spiritual sense and grief, might be applicable to them.

Yea what else can be the fit and proper season of promises? what is it that
renders any promise whatsoever comfortable? yea appliable to us, but the sense
of the want of the things promised?

2. Again, the abuse of the promises would feign be argued from the extent of
our applying of them, our resting too much upon, and drawing too much comfort
from them.



This I am most certain of, that men very seldom err on this hand; the most
of Christians being rather guilty of too much infidelity and mistrust in the
truth, and fidelity of him that has promised. The Scriptures therefore every
where plentifully warrant, and powerfully injoyne, even our rejoicing with
exceeding joy, joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

But what can the mouth of this abuse forced open, speak against the Lawful
use of the promises, at which indeed this errors spiteful hand strickes too
hard?

May we not lie down and take our rest in the promises, when moved, driven
thereunto by a restless spirit, a hint unreasonable? or may we not sinck over
much from these breasts of Consolation, a word unseasonable? yet when in truth
and measure, the promises are taken, applied, closed with: What can forbid or
hinder, or who can say unto that happy hand, what do thou?

The truth and safety of which comfort and practice I plead for, and prove by
the following Arguments, quere-wise.

Argument for the affirmative.
1. Why may not the promises truly and duly applied, speak comfort to us, as
well as to our Fathers? what kept David's Head up even in the depths? but the
truth and word of God in the promise; what encouraged our Father Abraham to
believe against hope (i) reasonable hope) Romans 4. 18
but that he remembered the promise and staggered not; and all the Saints of old
we read, that through patience and hope, Heb. 6. 12.
they inherited the promises; yea lastly, what invited our dear and blessed
Savior himself, even to endure the Cross, to Heb. 12. 2.
despise the shame, but the Joy that was set before him? how? why in a promise.
Isa. 53. ult. are not these examples, for our instruction and imitation? we may
look unto Jesus, surely we, whom the Gospel it self has styled the Children,
the Heirs of promise, we may take up our Cross and follow our forerunner,
even in this, in Romans 9. 8.
applying the promises, for our Joy and Comfort: Being the rather willing to
suffer here with him, for that it is promised us that if we suffer with him, we
shall also reign with him. The promises belong unto us as well as to our
Fathers. And is not the comfort of the promises ours also? the promise
belongs to You and to your Children, and to all that are afar off, as well in
time as place, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call, and why not then
appliable to us, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call also, for the
comfort thereof, Act. 2. 39.

What true sollid, I mean spiritual comfort, can be possibly received, by any
other way and means whatsoever, and not through the promises. All our hopes
depending thereupon, all our Joys must flow therefrom: We having no pure and
spiritual Joy, but what has entrance into us by the door of hope; and the
Object of hope being nothing else but the substance of the promises. Secondly,
Aagain, Faith is the only hand whereby we take to our selves, all real and
spiritual joy and comfort, and now the only matter of Faith is the Promises.
It being the substance of things hoped for (i) the matter Heb. 11. 1. 1 Pet. 1.
8.
of the promises; therefore all joy unspeakable, and glorious is by believing
(i) applying the promises.

3. What can be imagined, by any reasonable phansy, to be the proper and
genuine end of a promise, but rest, support, comfort, etc.

The world being a Wilderness so full of annoyance to the Children of God, he
surely has so filled his word with promises, plainly intending to lift up
their heads to bear up their hearts against all their trialls, with promises
(i) Of the supports and comforts of his presence with them here, and of
another, a better place, Land, Canaan, Heaven, and rest hereafter.



form thereof; a promise does properly, yea and formally speak and declare
comfortable things. This is essential to it, it cannot be a promise, unless
its most direct and immediate intention aim something toward comfort,
endeavor some satisfaction and rest in its Object more or less. Either these
parts of holy scripture are not promises, or there end an intention, is
comfortable to us.

2. From the matter, that being comfortable also; now the matter an form do
mutually illustrate and prove each other as in the promises. For let a promise
be made and confirmed with all possible Zeal and strength of security, yet if
the matter be of no worth, it speaks no comfort, so if the matter be never so
precious and rich, what is it to me, unless I either have it already or have
some hopes and assurance thereof by promise? but now the things of Heaven,
being a Pearl, a Treasure, an Inheritance, a Kingdom, etc. The matter is most
rich and precious, but all this being promised, there being a promise of the
eternal inheritance, and the Kingdom promised, Heb. 9. 15. Jam. 2. 5.

The form is also most cordial and comfortable, and both together made precious
promises, exceeding great and precious promises, Pet. 1. 4.

3. From the end of promises, as God himself has declared it to be by his own
authority in the holy Scriptures, and sealed it according to his truth and
power in man's experiences.

1. Gods own end in promising (that none might have the least occasion left, of
so gross an error) is almost every where found with his promise in Scripture.
And what is it but the end we speak of, rest, quietness, peace, contentation,
etc. Fear Isa. 30. 10.
not thou my servant Jacob, but is it demanded how Jacob must remedy fear? I
answer, the believing and applying the promises following; lo, I will save
thee from far, etc.

Again, be contented with such things as you have, but upon what ground? for,
or because he has said, I will never leave Heb. 13.
nor forsake thee. Yea let us hear one famous Scripture, speak for all the
rest: For God willing more abundantly, to show unto the Heirs of promise, the
immutability of his Council, confirmed it by an Oath, that by two immutable
things, (a promise being one of the two) in which it was impossible for God to
lie, we might have strong Consolation. Heb. 6. 17. 18.

2. Experience strongly proves the end of the promise to be such as we speak
of: In that they have so constantly been, throughout all generations,
effectual good means of rest, comfort, satisfaction, or ease in their
application; we may safely conclude these and such like to be the ends thereof.
Nothing being an able and effectual means in any of the works of God but such
as are appointed and consecrate thereto by God himself: And the end of
Execution ever discovering, reveiling the end of intention in God, who works
all things according to the council Ephesians. 1. 11.
of his own will,

Yea certain it is, this way of a promise is a means of a moral and eternal
efficacy to gvie hope, rest, satisfaction, and the like.

This way is regular to the Law of right reason not being only the way of men,
but God also. And may we not use the promises now, for the intents and
purposes, for which both reason and Scripture, nature and God has appointed
them? has God sent us glad tidings of great joy in a promise? and shall we
not? must we not believe the Gospel? and rejoice therein? God has made us
pertakers of a better covenant, and must we not take comfort therefrom, because
it is established upon better promises? Heb. 8. 6.

Gospel Christians, are the Heirs of the promises, they inherit the promises,
and shall not the Heir rejoice and be glad, with his rich Inheritance; sit
under his Vine and his Fig Tree singing Praises,

Yea the spirit our comforter himself, is Ephesians. 1. 13
the spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13. Wherein after ye believed, ye were sealed
with the spirit of promise, we are invited, persuaded, to believe, by a
promise, as so, in the form thereof, when we believe, we are Heirs of the
promise, that is, of the mattter thereof, then, we not able to apply our
Privileges in promise of our selves, for our comfort; we are sealed with the
spirit of promise, that seeing our riches by our right to the promise; we might
rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious in believing.

4. And lastly, Why may not the promises be the ordained means of comfort, as
well as the means of Faith and Holiness?

1. Promises in their tender and offer are the only ordinary Gospel way and
means of encouraging and gaining sinners to believe: The Law in a sense may be
said to lead or rather to drive a Soul to Christ, but the Gospel only (i) the
tender of Christ in a promise, does prevail upon the Soul, to lay hold on
him. The tenor of the Gospel being in a word but this, he that believes
shall be saved. The promise of salvation herein, upon this condition of faith,
set home upon the Soul by the spirit of Christ, does but reasonably persuaded
it to believe for Salvation: And why not likewise to rejoice in the evidence of
faith, applying the promise, yea a Soul groaning under the weight and burden
of sin, must needs have some refreshment, from the very apprehension, much more
application of the kindness of Christ, so sweetly expressed in the inviting
promise: Come unto me all Mat. 11. 28.
ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you. That there is such a
pomise that gives any hopes of ease and rest, it gives surely some ease and
comfort to a truly weary and heavy laden Soul, as it incourageth to come for it.

But furthermore, is not a promise more natural and proper, to comfort being
applied, then to persuade to believe being apprehended? For I may know of a
certain that the promise of salvation belongs to me after I have Faith, but
not before: So must needs have more encouragement, for application of the
promise for comfort When I do believe before; then by a general proposition to
venture my self, for Faith. Yet as we have found, a tender of promise, by the
blessing of haven is the only effectual means of Faith.

Secondly of holiness: Seeing we have 2 Cor. 7. 1
those promises, let us cleanse our selves; now is there not Wine to comfort,
as well as water to cleanse, in the Fountain of the Promises.

To us are given exceeding great and precious promises, that by these we might
be 2 Pet. 1. 5.
made Pertakers of the divine nature* And are the promises given for this end
only, and not much rather that by them we might be pertakers of Divine comfort,
strong consolation? I might, but I forbear to digress, to show how these
promises serve to sanctify and cleanse us; yet thus much will clear and
strengthen the argument; Promises, are means of holiness only accidentally
indirectly: But of comfort, directly and naturally. They are the breasts of
consolation, though wanton and untowardly wicked Children, may vex, deface, and
spit upon them: Yet let our Father encourage, enable us still to hugg and kiss
them, to stroke them with the hand, and suck them with the mouths of our Faith,
thence to draw sweet milk, to comfort and strengthen us against all temptations
and trialls: And shrew be to all such as offer them despite, or injuriously
endeavor to pluck them out of our mouths,

For the word of God notwithstanding what ever is said against it, is still
(...), profitable to us, both in its proposition, Precept, and Promise: For
Instruction, Obedience, and Consolation.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Gospel, Communion of Saints, or Church fellowship.
WE now are fallen into a considerately capacity of attoneing and mediating for
the poor despised ministry, with the Spirit of the Gospel. But we shall here
undertake on its behalf in two respects only, viz. In its way and manner, and
in its matter, its ordinances. (Leaving the condition of its contemned
forforsaken, and condemned Officers, as too too desperate and even past
recovery, by my inexpert and impotent hand.

First, Then this error indeavoreth, to Error.
subvert the way of Church Fellowship, condemning this, as the very worst and
most false of all the rest. Now,

experience, of the fained disturber of the false rests, for he was In the
ninth false rest.
never under more gross darkness, more Laodicean lukewarmnesse, he was never
more spiritually proud, more carnal, more censorious, etc. Then when under
this dispensation, Viz. a member of a visible church in Church fellowship.

Viz. the corrupt abuse that your own and others hearts do make thereof.

But how strangely argued, may it not be yet the way of God? though man abuse
it? is it not possible for our unwashen hands to pollute and defile the holy
things of God? was not the holy Child Jesus, innocence it self, disgraced and
spit upon? scourged and crucified? and the Servant is not greater then his
Master, nor the things ordained then the Ordainer himself.

Moreover we might bring many thousand experiences, and those of as good
authority perhaps as yours, for the way you explode, that will seal to the
divinity and testify to the most comfortable excellency of the use and benefit
of Church fellowship; answering that they were ever more fearful to offend,
never more humble and self denying, less carnal, less censorious, etc. Then
while they walked in the good, sweet, safe, and sacred way of Saint-Communion.

But is his abuse, against this way? 1. Argument for affirmative
Gods own Command of use, is for it.

Let all things be done decently and in order, If no Church, no order in it, if
no visible Church, no disorder in the Church; there being no disorder in the
Church invisible.

2. Where there is no Church Communion, there can be no Admission or
Excommunication: what then is become of these duties? what meant by 2 Cor. 5.
and more the like places?

What is the meaning of the Keys of the Church? Which signify both, a shutting
some in, and the turning the Key upon others, as also the privilege of the
first, and the loss and disgrace of the later.

3. If no Church fellowship, then what room, use, or occasion of the Sacraments?

4. And lastly, What is become, with the men of this way, of the ancient
practice of primitive Christians (which was wont to be held the nearest to
Perfection? for they ranked into a visible order, continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and Acts 2. 42, 46, 47.
fellowship, and breaking of Bread, and Prayers.

But the Saints joint experience has, I hope, so powerfully, fully convinced
them of the expediency, comfort, necessity hereof, that there need no more be
said for their confirming in it. Only, let us hold fast the profession of our
Faith without wavering, considering one another, to provoke one another to love
and to good Works: Not forsaking the Assembly of our selves together, as the
manner of some is; but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye see
the day approaching; not so much the less, as we see Christ coming in his
Spirit or Person, to guide or to judge Heb. 10. 33, 34, 35.
us: But so much the more, assembling our selves and exhorting one another as
we see the day approaching.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Gospel Ordinances in general.
BUT we pass on from the way of the ministry, to that is most material, viz.
the Ordinances themselves, the matter thereof.

The general conclusion of these men against Ordinances is plainly this.

Those forms that Christ appeared in, when Error.
in the flesh, are dissolved and cease, at his coming in the spirit. And they
for their parts have received the coming of the Spirit, therefore all forms
(i.) Ordinances cease to them.

The potent Scripture for this end and the ground.
purpose, is, Revela. 21. 22, 23. And I saw no Temple therein: For the Lord God
almighty and the Lamb are the Temple thereof, and the City has no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it: For the Glory of God did light it, and
the Lamb is the light thereof. Hence they conclude, they being in this City,
therefore they have no Temple of Ordinances, no need of Sun or Moon, the Lord,
etc. and the Lamb lighting them.

But in answer hereunto, I shall, I hope, prove these two things. Eirst, That
this glorious City is not yet built. And secondly, That when this glorious day
shall be, it shall not, probably, dissolve or darken, but rather inlighten and
certify Gospel Ordinances.

1. First, to prove this glorious City, here mentioned, magnified, is not yet
in the World. Some hold that it is the state of the Church in Heaven; and that,
upon such like grounds as follow. 1. Because of its entire perfection, no ver.
27.
unclean thing being admitted into it, and none but such as are written in the
Lambs Book. 2. Because of the full, and even immediate ver. 23.
Presence of God there. 3. Because then shall be the day of ver. 24. and ver. 4.
Redemption, even of completed Salvation. 4. Because the day of Judgment
seems chap. 20. ult.
to precede it.


Now if we look upon this new Jerusalem, as the perfect Estate of the Church
after Judgment in Heaven: As our Savior will submit to give up his
ministerial Kingdom to his Father, then, so those wickedly presume, that
would take it out of his hand before.

But others, and they perhaps, more truly, conceive, this new Jerusalem to be
the Church on earth, made exceeding glorious, by the wonderful presence of the
Spirit of Christ, (for we here take no notice of the presence of his person
with it.

And this opinion has these grounds amongst many more, against the former.
Cap. 12. 20
1. Because the glory of this City seems to appear before the last coming
of Christ. Verse. 25. compared with Mat. 25. 10.
2. Because there is yet a proffer of Salvation, and the water of Life, the
Gates of this City being not shut by day, and there shall be no night there,
but the Gate of Heaven at the last day is shut, upon the foolish Virgins. Verse.
10.
3. And chiefly, because this great City, and new Jerusalem discendeth out of
Heaven from God.


But to apply to our present drift, now as we cannot imagine, that, unless all
tears, pain, sorrow, death, yea resurrection, and Judgment, are already past
us. Things most gross, ridiculous, and senseless; that the state of the
Saints, is already Heaven; and conceit our selves to be set free from the use
and performance of duties and Ordinances upon that first account; so neither
can we plead our freedom from them, upon the second construction of this
City; namely, to be that glorious appearance and presence of Christ, upon, and
with his Church, at the day there spoken of, which though indeed it be nearer
to the World, our sins; yet I suppose it is as truly absent yet from us, as
Heaven it self: And first,

1. Because this new Jerusalem comes down out of Heaven, after the
condemnation, Verse. 2, 3.
judgment, and burning of the great Whore, the utter downfall and ruin of
Antichrist.

2. This new Jerusalem comes down from God, after, or upon the glorious
Forbes.
and visible conversion of the Jews, verse. 24. with 27. Now neither is
Antichrist yet totally ruined, or the Jewish Nation and People, yet visibly
converted.

3. Because this City shall be so illustrious, as that it shall be glorious in
the eyes of all: It shall be generally, both ver. 24. 26
by Kings and Nations, owned, honored, and admired.

4. And lastly, There shall no unclean thing enter into it. Now is there any
way, Church, People, yet in the world thus owned and admired by all? thus pure
and undefiled? has no unclean Livers or lying hypocritical men, to be the
followers of it?

comparatively, there is none unclean or hypocritical person that enters into
her; if you compare her followers with other Professors. And the place is to be
taken comparatively, and not absolutely.

viz. of Temple, Sun, Moon, etc. We now are discussing: We shall endeavor and
desire to end the Controversy and conclude; That,

As it cannot easily be imagined that no unclean thing shall be admitted into
this City, so neither, that there shall be no form or Ordinances allowed, or
practiced there.

Let both these expressions be received in a sense comparative, and not
absolute; and without much difference, we may here shake hands in the receiving
thereof. Yet,

Not that we argue in the least (we having sufficiently proved the contrary)
that this way or any other yet in earth, is this new Jerusalem; but only thus
much we consent to, that when ever God shall please to send down this holy City
from himself in Heaven there shall not be so much of form in the World; yea in
the Church as now.

Observe me, I dare not say there shall not be even in this City so many, forms
in your sense, Ordinances, much less none at all, but not so much form opposed
to power, not so much formality opposed to Reality and Spirit in Holiness and
Worship. The second thing, I have promised to speak to. Therefore,

The true meaning of the Text.
2. Could it be thought that this City is already come, or coming down from
Heaven; I see not that the fall thereof, must needs crush Ordinances: Must
needs take away the use, but rather, and only the abuse thereof: The full and
genuine meaning of the place being thus, viz.

The most of this Chapter, is a beautiful, rare, and goodly description of the
glorious Estate of the Church at the conversion of the people of the Jews;
therefore, the Church, the Lambs Wife here, is called the City of the new
Jerusalem: Therefore also, we read the whole description, almost, in the
language of the Jews; we have an Application of the promises formerly made for
the restitution, recovery, Glory, of the Jews; and to conclude, we therefore
read here of a Temple, a place of worship peculiar to the Jews; and something,
even God and the Lamb, to bear Analogy thereto.

And now when it is said that there shall be no Temple in the City, it is not
meant that the Gospel Churches of the Gentiles, shall loose and leave there
Gospel Ordidinances, but that the Jews must not here expect a Jewish Temple, a
rituall Jewish worship, as if it had plainly been said, that the Jews may not
be so far deceived, as to expect the restitution of their old Legal and
rituall worship. Let them know, that in this City the wonderful presence of
God in Christ, in a purer, truer, worship of him, shall fully supply all their,
heretofore, external Pedagogy, that they had by their Law, in their Temple
then. The Veil of this error yet lying over their hearts; they being two much
wedded to their Law, the Law of Moses, and the rites thereof, in opposition to
the Gospel, and the spiritual service and worship thereof, the Apostle
tells them that this new Jerusalem has no Temple, but that God and the Lamb,
are Ezekiel. 48. 33. 2 Cor. 3. ult. Rev. 21. 21.
the Temple thereof. And when their heart shall be turned to the Lord, this
Veil shall be taken away, and they shall then see with open face, as in a
Glass, the Glory of the Lord, for the Glory of God shall light the City, and
the Lamb shall be the light thereof. And the Jews of the glorious appearance
and enjoyment of God and the Lamb, among them, forsaking their former formal
way of worship, shall now worship the Father in spirit and Truth, for the
People that are saved shall walk Joh. 4. 23. Verse. 24.
in the light thereof.

Not that all or any the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, but of Moses only
signified here by the Temple, shall be taken away: Now,

Arguments against. 1. Cor. 15 24.
The performance of them being only cleared, brightned, and purified, in the
light of this new Jerusalem, holy City: For, 1. The ministerial Kingdom of
Christ, according to his Gospel does not terminate, until the end shall be.
2. Christ must rain in his ministerial ver. 25. 26.
Kingdom, till he has subdued the last of his Enemies, death, till there be
no more Rev. 21. 4
death. As, 1. The Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord must be done in
remembrance of Christ till he come. 2. The Commission of Baptism reaches,
Math. 28. ult.
always even to the end of the World. 3. For the preaching of the word, even
after this new Jerusalem is come from Heaven, there is a tender of the Gospel
Rev. 22. 17.
and water of life, not only the Spirit, but the Bride says come, etc. 4. And
Prayer is exercised after it also, for the hastening of the coming of Christ
Rev. 22. 12. and 20.
to Judgment, Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.



Thus it then appears that none (much less not all) of the Ordinances of the
Gospel of Christ do expire at the coming down of the new Jerusalem from
Heaven: Much less are they to be dissolved or abolished before, as the men of
this error would have them. But,

In the Chapters following, we shall single out the two maine standing
Ordinances in the Church, which we find in these days, too too much
neglected, slighted, and contemned by many, viz. the preaching of the Word and
Prayer: And endeavor, at least, if possible, to recover, their credit and
practice again.

CHAP. XV. Of the Ministry of the Word.
WE are now descended to the special defense of these two special and most
profitable Ordinances, the ministry of the Word and Prayer

Against the first of these, viz. The ministry of the Word, they argue thus.

The coming of the spirit, brings so much Light and Knowledge with it, that we
have no need of the teaching of men, such low and inferior means of
Knowledge. We shall Heb. 8.
all be taught of God, and we shall not need every one, to teach his neighbor:
saying, know the Lord, for all shall know him from the greatest to the least.

Preaching is dissolved, and yet the World must know this by their preaching;
they go up into the Pulpit to pull down, beat down, preaching; and yet at the
very same time, and for that very end they preach, is their hand so happy that
while they go about to ruin, they must needs build: or so unhappy, that they
by building, it must needs destroy, must all be taught of God immediately? then
why do they that believe make so much haste and darken the work of Gods own
hand? by being the means of teaching themselves? does not this their own
practice discover to all, that they themselves are suspicious, that either the
spirit of God does not immediately teach and lead us into truth, or that what
they vent and publish is not the truth?

But we know, that the Judgment of God is according to truth, against them
which commit such things. For thou that Romans 2. 2. 22, 3.
preachest, a man should not preach, do thou preach? thou that abhorrest
Idols do thou commit sacraledge? think thou this, O man, that judge
them, which do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape, etc.

2. Let us search the Scriptures, and in the primitive times, we shall find, a
semblance at least of this glorious day of the Spirits coming: Let us observe
what an aspect that casts upon preaching there and we may thence partly judge
whether it will be so malevolent or not, at its fuller appearance.

Act. 2. We find an abundant performance of the promise of the Spirit upon the
Apostles assembled together. And what, did it now silence them all, and forbid
them to preach any more? did this coming of Christ in the spirit, disanull, and
dissolve this ordinance of preaching committed unto them by the Person of Mat.
28. ult.
Christ.

No certainly, it came not to abolish but to fulfill the same. Therefore it
falls down upon them, in no other figure and shape but of tongues; and they
were all filled with the holy Ghost and began to speak, Act. 2. 3. 4. 11.
immediately began to speak, the wonderful things of God, as the spirit gave
them utterance. now let not any think, that the spirit of the unchangeable God
is fickle as themselves, ever to despise that way and ministry that he has so
highly before promoted and honored.

3. Paul we know, was immediately called to his great Appostleship, by the
voice of the spirit; he was a Minister of the spirit and not of the Letter. Let
us 2. Cor 3.
make Paul Umpire then, in the case: But we find Paul preaches and preaches
this Doctrine; that Faith comes by hearing: And how shall we hear without a
Romans 10.
Preacher?



of the Enemy: Now for this end, we shall attempt, at least, these two things.
1. To take of the dint of this Argument that flourishes it self, and
threatens so much in this Scripture: And secondly, to show the proper and
natural drift thereof.

1. And first, This Scripture cannot possibly make void the preaching of the
Word, if we consider this following gradation. 1. That it is a branch of the
Covenant of Grace. 2. Christ is the Mediator and Performer of it for us. 3.
Christ promised the spirit for the same purpose, even to lead us into all
truth. 4. That the same Christ, when he ascended, Ephesians 4.
gave Ministers also, for this same purpose. 5. At the same time, when as he
ascended to give these gifts, he sent his spirit upon the same errand: And
therefore not likely to beat his fellow Servant, to jossle the Minister out of
the World.


2. Now for the meaning of this place: In a word, it is either to be taken
hyperbolically, or comparatively, but mediately still, or with Calvin,
restraining the accent to these later words, saying, know the Lord: the meaning
then being no more then this As the effect of the pouring forth of the spirit,
there shall be a general profession of the name of God abroad, knowledge
covering the earth as water does the Seas, in a general sense of knowing the
Lord. Therefore they shall not need every one to teach his Neighbor, saying,
Know the Lord, after this manner, saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me,
etc.

And therefore to conclude, the Text forementioned, speaks not the ministry
null but effectual: God will not take away means but make means more
prosperous by a more especial presence and help of his spirit, God will teach
us by his Son: Christ will instruct us by his Spirit: And the spirit shall lead
us into all Universale accommodum.
truth, by the faithful ministry of the word. And observe, this Covenant was
in force as well then as now: Then why Note 1.
should it null the preaching of the Word more now than then?

2. The Ministry, therefore, was a Coworker with God in that age, and why not
now also?

own names: But they presume to bring us the word of God, and that in the name
of God also, and this offends and troubles us.

a stumbling stone and a Rock of offense to themselves! we must look upon the
Ministry, either as of Christ, or not of Christ: If we receive it not as the
Ministry of Christ, that we have partly already, and shall more fully presently,
when we prove the succession thereof, make clear to you; if you grant it to be
the ministry of Christ, then are they not Stewards? and what Stewards do, is it
not in the name of their Master? again, are they not Ambassadors, and do not
Ambassadors declare the word of their Master? the word of Reconciliation is
committed to them, and they treat with man, yet in the name and with the Word
of God.

uses of the word? is all this the word of God?

preaching of the word, and to bring us upon the other extreme, from living
immediately upon the spirit, to a bare reading of the word. But let the Reader
beware, and consider its falacy, indeed we grant, that preaching, expounding,
etc. Is but the secundary, not the primary truth and word of God: Therefore our
Sermons as they are to be deduced from, so they are to be reduced to, and
examined by, the rule, the word of God.

Yet the word of God is either that, that is expressed or employed, or that,
that is deducible from the holy Scriptures: And that, that is naturally drawn
therefrom, is as truly and properly the truth and mind of God as the Scripture
it self: Upon the very same terms Divines observe, that though the Septuagint
sometimes differs from the Text both in sense and words, yet those very places
are quoted by Christ himself (for that they are according to the Analogy of
Faith) as very Scripture. So that while our Sermons are the truth of God, and
we our selves in commission from God, the words that we speak are the words of
God, and we may speak them boldly, as in the name of God; and he that has an
ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

Preachers: it knows not why we should put such a difference betwixt Ministers
and others: And therefore will have those that are gifted to preach without any
more ado.

Officers, and such as are common to Members also; but they both have their
place proper to them, and do 1 Cor. 12. 17, 29.
not lash or jossle: And are all teachers? if the whole Body were an eye, where
were the hearing?

Ast. 8. 4. go preaching the Word every where? and why have not we the same
Gospel liberty?

toward the wide and common practice of preaching by the presuming illiterate
men of our times. For,

1. First, It is to be observed, that the word here use* for Preaching is
commonly used for publishing or declaring any thing abroad in the World: The
same is used of the impotent man that was healed Luke 8. 39. it is said he went
away, (...), preaching (i.) declaring the same and praise of him that had
healed him, so the Disciples here went preaching, (i.) reporting the word,
Gospel, Christ, for which they suffered.

2. Observe that before they went out of Jerusalem, as also when once they came
into Jerusalem again, where the Ministry was settled, we hear nothing of their
preaching. And we dispute not here how far private Christians may, exercise
their gifts, where there are none that may preach by way of office: But we
dispute and argue against such only as by their allowance of common preaching,
would destroy the Function.

that we may all prophecy and by prophesying is meant 1 Cor. 14. 31.
preaching, therefore, why may not all preach?

Corinthians as extraordinary Officers, as their name and 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29.
Cap. 14. 5.
place (they being still ranked with Apostles and such as speak with tongues
would seem to intimate) then without doubt the Prophets among us do not so much
as pretend to their work or office.

But and if we take these Prophets in a more ordinary capacity, then they are
as much below, as before they were above Pastors and Teachers. For it is
generally concluded, even by such as complain of the loss of this exercise in
our Churches, that this way of Prophecy was but an exercise of our gifts as
members, not Officers: Acts 13. 15. 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31, 32.
And that it was only used in a Church, that had Officers, and that by their
invitation: and not till after public preaching ended, and both it and its
spirit were ever liable and ready to be tried, and censured by the rest of the
Prophets, the spirit of the Prophets, being subject to the Prophets: All which
circumstances clearly differ prophesying and preaching, prophesying being only
subordinate unto, not at all opposed against, much less the same with,
preaching: Not but that as Vision by the Prophets; so prophesying Prove. 29. 18.
may be sometimes use! by the Apostles, either by a Metanimy, or an abuse of
speech, for that, that is properly called preaching.



viz. That the ministry of preaching, by way of Office, did not expire with the
age of the Apostles, but rather it has use and place in the Church in the last
days, which we shall demonstrate from its transition, promises, and ends, as
they all are clearly recorded in scripture.

1. First, let us observe, the transition which the Gospel discovers, whereby
this Office is transmitted, or made over to posterity. As the Father, says
Christ, sent me, so (or upon that account) send I you: the Apostles sent by
Christ, say also, in effect, as Christ sent us, so we send others: Instanced
especially in Timothy and Titus God sent Christ into the World, not only Heb.
2. 3. 2 Timothy 1. 11. Tit. 1. 3.
to be a King, and Priest, but a Preacher or Prophet also Christ sent Paul and
the rest, not only to be Apostles but Preachers also; Paul, etc. sent Timothy
and Titus, not to be Evangelists, but preachers also; and withal let them know
their place, power, and duty. That they should send others and ordain Elders
and Bishops in every City: whence we may aptly observe two things, both the
Tit. 1. 5, 7.
truth and the manner of the succession of the Ministry of preaching from the
Apostles downward: The Father gave the Son, and the Son gave his Servants, the
ministers, power by and in their own mission, to ordain and send others
successively to the end of the World. Which by undeniable consequence must
needs follow, for the Bishops or Pastors ordained, or sent by Titus with the
Angels in the Revel. without question, lived and ruled after the Apostles. The
former of which, not being immediately ordained by Apostolical power (however
the later were) what then should hinder? but by the same the Ministry of
Preaching, may, and does pass to the end of the World.

2. But secondly, We may further demonstrate the succession and use of
preaching in the Church, even to, and after the days we live in, from the
promises belonging to it, viz. the promises of it and to it. First, There are
promises of Preachers, even to the last and purest times, to the purest times,
which show that the coming of the spirit is not the going away, of the
Ministry: And to the last days, witnessing, that there is a succession and
use of the same, even to, and with us. When the new Jerusalem shall come down
from Heaven, it shall be built upon the foundation of the twelve Apostles, that
is, their Doctrine, as laid down by the Ministry of it: But how do you prove
that? therefore compare therewith, Ezekiel. 47. 10. For even then the fishers (i.)
of men, shall stand and spread out their nets, etc. But let us also more
plainly add, that of, Jere. 3. 15. Where God speaking of the restitution of his
Church, or the building of the new Jerusalem by the conversion of the Jews,
promises thus, I will give you Pastors after mine own heart.

2. Again it is as clear, from the promises to it: Go teach, says our Savior,
and I am with you always, even to the end of the Mat. 28. ult.
World. If there be no succession of the Ministry to the end of the World, how
can Christ be faithful that has promised? and be with it to the end of the
World? Yet it is most certain, their Commission lasts so long as the promise
mentions, go teach and I am with you, while you teach, even to the end of the
World.





But those that employed themselves to teach you this, might have learned you
also, viz. That though that Original word, does more properly signify an Age,
yet it is very frequently used in Scripture for the World also: As is noted in
the Luke 18. 30. Heb. 11. 3. Act. 3. 21.
Margin, where you have several Scriptures, wherein the very same word is so
used that it cannot signify an Age, or any other thing but the World:
Therefore also (...), from (...), (the word disputed) Romans 16. 26.
does signify Eternal.

2. Again, the interpreted sense, being, as most agreeable to the sense and
Analogy of other Scriptures, so rendered to us by the most learned council of
many grave and Godly Divines, what reason or good end can move a change of it.

3. But if this ordinary translation of the words, viz. the end of the World be
questioned: Let their Interpreter speak for them, I mean the word, always,
that stands in the same verse, and for the very same use, viz. As the term of
Christ's presence with the Ministry of the word, let that resolve us: I will be
with you always, how long is that? even to the end of the Age; a poor short
always indeed. Christ cannot be always with us; and not at all times and in
all ages also: Therefore the comfort of the Ministry is, Lo, I am with you
always, even to the end of the World.

4. Lastly, but seeing that this Commission is strictly and immediately the
universal Commission of the Apostles, who were indeed to expire with that age;
suppose we should grant you this desired sense, yet what advantage would this
give you against the common preaching, the ordinary continued Ministry of the
word, especially considering, that there are so many undeniable Texts;
discovering, not only its continuance, but the way of its succession: Declaring
Gods promises, not only of, but (which is the end and use of the Text
discussed) to it also: For has not God said it, that in the last days, there
shall not be only Fishers, but those Fishers Ezekiel. 47. 10.
shall cast forth their Nets, and of Fish there shall be exceeding many; yea,
he will give us Pastors after his own heart, which shall Jer. 3. 15. 17.
feed you with Knowledge and understanding, and even then, when they shall call
Jerusalem the Throne of the Lord, etc. I will bless the Labors of my
faithful Shepherds among you, neither shall you walk anymore after the
Imagination of your evil Hearts. And again, I will set up Shepherds over them
which shall feed them, and the blessed effects thereof shall be, viz. they Ier.
23. 4.
shall fear no more nor be dismayed, neither shall they be lacking, says the
Lord.

3. We may in the third place argue the continued succession of the Ministry
from the ends thereof: Namely intrinsicall or extrinsicall, natural or
positive.

And first, from the end of the Ministry, that is intrinsically in the nature
of it; and what is that? namely Faith, for what does naturally answer or
receive a report (as the preaching of the Gospel is) our Isa. 53. 1.
Faith or a believing of it. And how do we obtain Faith or credit, but by a
report? therefore hear we the Prophet complaining Posito fine ponuntur omnia
media ad finem.
thus, who has believed our report? while there be any unbeleeving and
ignorant Creatures, that yet belong to God in the world, there is need of
preaching, and let us be assured that while there is any Sublata causa tollitur
effectus.
need of it, there is place, and use, for it also: For, as how shall they know
except they be taught? so how shall they believe except they have heard? and
how shall they Romans 10.
hear without a Preacher? and observe, the Apostle there argues it, a thing as
extraordinary for men to believe without hearing. As for men to hear without
speaking, without a Preacher.

Be not deceived, for as the word reveals Christ, so the Ministry of the word
reveals the word: As the word is the means of the knowledge of Christ, so
preaching is the means of the knowledge of the word. The word, is the word of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
and the word of Reconciliation is committed to us.

2. But secondly let us add hereto, the other end, viz. That that is more
extrinsicall to the nature of this ordinance, having its being in, and
dependence upon the will, intention, and appointment of the Ordainer himself:
And for that now let us examine that invincible Text, Ephe. 4. That plainly
resolves us, that when he ascended, Christ gave the World gifts, some Ephesians. 4.
11, 12, 13.
Apostles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers: The
question is, but how long did Christ intend, that those should remain in the
World or Church, only for that age, no verily, but even until the work of
their Ministry, we shall all come in the unity of Faith and knowledge, etc. To a
perfect man, now are some of these, (viz. The extraordinary officers) gone; yet
assuredly others shall remain in the Church, till their appointed end is come,
till we all come, not till a few, but till we all come, etc. Then indeed (but
let no wicked hand endeavor it before) Christ shall give up the Kingdom to
his Father.

viz. That though it be granted that the Ministry of preaching is an ordinance,
yet remaining in the Church of Christ, yet where may we find it? for as for
those that pretend unto it, they, all the World knows, were ordained by
Bishops, and the Bishops by the Pope, and therefore it is plain their call is
Antichristian.

viz. To answer the Objection, and to satisfy the scruple.

Rome, I propound these ensuing considerables.

Those that first broke the Ice of the Sea of Rome, I mean, those Ministers,
that first obeyed that call of God. Come out of her, etc. They undoubtedly had
both an outward call from men, because they were Preachers in Rome; and an
inward call from God, for that they came out of Babylon: Now it is most
unreasonable to judge, that they lost their inward call to teach, by leaving
Rome: and for their outward call unto it, either the Essentials of their
commission received from men be fore, remained; the Antichristian circumstances
being shaken off, like Eliahs mantle, when he went to Heaven (as it did their
Baptism) upon the old rule, Fieri non debuit, factum valet: or else their call
was extraordinary to them, their necessity giving a sufficincy of warrant
thereto.

2. The calling of such Ministers, being received many years before they left
Rome, might for any thing we know be received, when the Church of Rome was a
true Church, though extremely corrupted: For as soon as ever the Pope was the
man of sin, the Antichrist (i.) When his iniquity was ripe, may we not think,
that God would not suffer his People or Ministry, much less, any longer under
him, but both called and brought them from under him; and then there is no
difficulty left, but we have found and granted a succession of Persons in the
Ministry of Christ from the Apostles times.

But suppose that Rome was so far apostatized, as that she was undoubtedly
Babylon, before both these Ministers, ordination by her, and leaving of her,
yet what reason is there, that when they have left the Church of Rome, with her
Antichristianisme, that they should still be condemned for Antichristians? the
People leaving the Romish Church, were therefore honored as the true Church;
and why not the Ministry, upon the same account, as the true Ministry?

Rome; is is there not required a new Ordination? seeing their former was
Antichristian?

Rome, it seems, saw no reason for a new Ordination.

2. When God denies an ordinary way for things that he purposes to continue,
he himself supplieth extraordinarily: as he fed Elias, supplied the woman's Bagg
and Cruse, and might do here, viz. By the consent of the Church, having all
Vox popult, vox Dei.
power radically in her, that Officers should have even for Ordination, and in
such a case, the voice of the People is the voice of God: Again, it is granted
by the very doubt, that there is, and must be a true Ministry some where; and
urged by the Objection also, that the Ministry of Rome is Antichristian:
Therefore the true Ministry must needs be with us, that is, the discenting,
Reformed Churches: Let the way of Devolution, Derivation of it, be either
extraordinary or ordinary, or whatsoever.

2. But we shall add a few things more for satisfaction to the scruple, viz. To
prove that the Ministry, of the Reformed Churches, and perticularly of
England, is the Ministry of Christ. I mean not, every idle, blind, and corrupt
guide among us, but such as be in life, Godly, and honest, in Labors abundant
and faithful among us, such as these are truly sent by Jesus Christ.

1. Therefore consider, it being granted that there is, and has been still
since the days of the Apostles, a succession of the Ministry of Christ, where
should it be? before God called us out of Babylon, it must be either in the
Church of Rome, or among the Turks or Jews: The two later no Christian, none
will say that they had the Ministry of Christ, therefore it follows, the
Ministry of Christ, before the reformation, was in Rome (i.) under the Romish
power: But when we divided and abjured Rome as Antichristian: The true
Ministry must be either with Rome, or us, that did descent from Rome, it is
most unreasonable, and a contradiction to say, that the true Ministry is with
the false, and not with the true Church: Now if it be granted, (as it cannot
with any kind of color be denied) that when the people of God first came out
of Babylon, they brought the true Ministry out along with them, it is most
clear that the Ministry of England, has had a Succession most known and
visible from those that first brake off from Antichrist: Now the only
difficulty is, whether we or those that separate from us, have this Blessing
pleaded for; and it is clear from what has been just now said, that we once
had it, and it behoovs them to show when and how we lost it: But as for them
that separate from us, it is very unlikely that the true Ministry should be with
them, for first none of their Preachers, at least very few of them, in his
great Harvest, pretend unto it; And again, their own pretenses, or vain
imaginations, would not create their lawful call unto it: Which call consists
of two parts, viz. Qualification, and Tit. 1. 2 Cap.
Commission: The first they only presume they have, the last, they care not for.

2. Moreover we may prove the truth of our Ministry from the truth of its
fruit* and Effects.

First, Our Savior in giving us rules for the trial of Teachers, says, By
their Fruit ye shall know them.

Their Fruit, that is, their Doctrine: you shall know them, that is, whether
they be of God. If there be a Ministry of Christ in the World, where should it
be? but where the Doctrine and truth of Christ is taught? and though we cannot
clear a Succession of persons, yet doubtless a Succession of Doctrine, is in
this sense enough to clear the truth of our Ministry: We have the Doctrine of
Christ truly preached among us, I mean, the reformed Churches, above all other
Churches in the World, and upon evident consequence it follows, that we the
Reformed Churches, have a cleerer evidence of the truth of our ministry then
any other.

2. From the Effects thereof, wrought by preaching in the hearts of the
Hearers, cut off the Beams from the Sun, and they cease any longer to be
conveyances of light unto the World. And the Ministry cannot do the work of
Christ, but as depending upon Christ, who are only Ministers* by whom you
believe, as God gave to every man. Now if the Ministry do the work of Christ,
and this be only by the strength and help of Christ, surely it is Christ's
Ministry; and it may say with the Apostle to all the true Converts in England,
ye are the Seal and witness of our Apostleship, and call from Heaven, who have
been owned and used by the hand of Omnipotency, in your spiritual Creation,
Resurrection, and Regeneration: This reason may be by no means slighted: As to
say, there were never any truly converted among us by the Ministry of the word,
is against very sense, and most uncharitable; so to deny the mean to be of God,
is no less then Blasphemy: To conclude, remember, that the seven Stars are in
the hand of Christ, not only to be used, but kept by him: Rev. 2. 1.
and his presence is with us, not only to bless our faithful labors, but
also to Matthew. 28. ult.
blast and curse our Opposers and Enemies.

This gives me an occasion to shake hands with the first of these Objections
against the Ministry, and thereby I shall take my leave of this chapter, and
let no man think (as is most apt and agreeable to the dangerous Principles of
the error questioned) that the spirit and the Ministry of the word are a
(...), or Inconsistent. The Ministry of preaching is according to the Apostle,
and as has been already observed, a Co-worker with God, 2 Cor. 2. ult. 3 Cap.
pri.
the Ministry of righteousness, the savor of life unto life, yea and to
conclude, and put all out of doubt, expressly called the Ministry of the spirit.
The Ministry of the word and spirit do as peaceably agree in one and the same
Age and Work; as the Soul and the Body in one and the same person and action;
even so, as that he that despises Prophesiing, quenches the spirit.

Let us therefore fear, least a way being left us, and we not being willing to
walk therein, the Father of lights should withdraw his direction, and we loose
both our way and our selves too. Let us never discover our selves to be a
generation so foolish and unwise, yea so desperately wicked as eternally to
perish with the plague of our Hearers, while we trample under foot the sole
Remedy: As wilfully refusing our own mercies, most cruelly to murder our own
seals rather then to accept of recovery and life, which the hand of the
preaching of the word would administer to us. But,

Let us be wise, and rather repent of our former great abuses of the light
thereof, Rev. 2. 5.
least the Lord come quickly and remove his Candlesticks away from us, as a
wicked generation, most unworthy thereof, except we repent.

CHAP. XVI. We having sufficiently spoken, for the Word, it follows that we
make intercession for Prayer.
Prayer? Why Prayer is too poor and contemptable a practice, say they, for us:
The Miserable effect, and consequent of want, but we want nothing: The dejected
companion of impotency, weakness, and imperfection, etc. But we are strong,
entire and perfect: We wanting nothing, we have no need of prayer, for what
shall we pray for? we having attained perfection already, we are perfectly
above all means of supply and what shall we pray for?

base, and unworthy thing. But even in this, while they plead their perfection,
how do they in the interim discover their weakness and imperfection?

1. Do we not think that he that knew no sin, even the Lord from Heaven, was as
perfect as holy as these men are? yet how many several times do we find our
Savior himself upon his knees in Prayer? surely those then are none of the
followers of Christ, that cast off prayer, his so frequent practice.

2. Yea certainly Jesus Christ (if there a thing as perfection here) had
attained perfection just before his death, yet even then he finds occasion to
authorize the excellent practice of prayer by his own Joh. 17. 1.
example: Jesus spoke these words, and lift up his eyes to Heaven, and said,
Father, etc.



promises are so far from forstalling, preventing prayer, that they are the
only ground of encouragement, whereon it ascends to Heaven; God standing upon
Genesis 28.
the top of the Ladder, as the God of the promises.

2. As that all the promises are made unto, and are to be performed by the
motion of Prayer. As Ezekiel. 36. ult. Where God concludes his everlasting
Gospell-covenant, and all the better promises whereon it is established, with
this proviso, Yet for all these things will I be inquired of by the House of
Israel, to do it for them, says the Lord.

3. And as for Faith, prayer is so far from hindering, that it is the very
means of excercising Faith. Yea they agree so well together, that God to show
his likeing and encouragement thereof, has promised a Grant, even of
whatsoever we ask believing. As Math. 21. 22. Mark. 11. 24. Jam. 1. 5. 6.

But we shall have occasion more abundantly to clear these things, in the
positive proof of this Haevenly exercise, which we shall immediately
undertake; by confirming. 1. The warrantable. secondly, the useful and
necessary practice thereof.

1. We shall warrant the practice of prayer, even by all that live in this
World, by arguments taken, First,

1. From the nature of prayer: which is not temporary, but Eternal. Let us
therefore consider it a little as divided, distinguished into its two main
parts. Petition, and Thanksgiving: And now for the later of these, all join
hands to lift it to Heaven; by the acknowledgement of all, it must, yea is long
agon arrived the heavenly Canaan: And why must Petition, the Companion of
Praise, a part of the same Duty, Ordinance, die in the Wilderness? what is
there more inherent to praise then Petition, to make it more Eternal? or what
in petition, to make it more mortal then praise? have they not both the same
Subject, man? have not they both the same Object, God? and is not the matter
for which we pray, or give thanks one and the same also? only prayer stands
before, and praise after: in the want we praying Joh. 11. Compare 38. and 41.
in the enjoyment we praising, yet both with respect to the same thing? and why
then should the one be more immortal then the other? has God commanded,
Rejoice in the Lord always, and has he not said also, pray ever more?

Petition die on earth, while praise and Thanksgiving is alive, and tryumphant
in Heaven, for ever and ever?

live together in their root continually. Praise has its season and matter in
Heaven; and therefore it flourishes there: Its matter, I mean, not any
internal part or cause of Praise, but that, causa sine qua non, that occasion,
or subject matter of it, those heavenly enjoyments for which we praise or give
thanks to God; and therefore it, rather then petition has its work, business,
employment, and exercise there in Heaven.

And if Prayer or Petition fall short of this Honor and preferment, it is
because it wants only proper occasions, a fit, and hard season in Heaven: It is
dead in its use and matter only, things external to it, being as truly alive
and eternal in its root and nature, as thanksgiving. Imagine we but an
occasion of prayer in Heaven it self, viz. Never so short a winter of want or
misery there, and prayer, behold it hears the voice of cries and tears, and
will not die but live; and put up it self with strength of importunity, while
praise is silent. We have an instance of this in our blessed Savior, who, his
Heaven of glory and happiness being seemingly ecclipsed, in the days of his
flesh, with strong cries and tears petitioned heavily; My God my God, why have
thou forsaken me? Prayer it is an immortal spirit, most like unto fire, (not
in the Embers, but) in the flint, where it lives for ever in virtue, and power,
and any hard dealing will strike it forth into art and use; imagine it in
Heaven, or any where else. Prayer is no more dead in Heaven, then it is betwixt
its set hours, or upon a thanksgiving day in the World. Prayer, I mean, the
Petitionary part of Prayer, is eternal, after the same manner, with the heads
of Logic, the principles and conclusions of reason, all natural and moral
truths, which are produced into use and art, but by occasion only.

Petition, or the craving of things which we want, it is the natural effect of
a cause, viz. sense of want: The proper and rational means of an end: The
obtaining our desires (both witnessed, in their observed rise in children, and
their general use and practice among all People and Nations) and in both these
respects, eternal.

Yea, so far as is discovered any occasion thereof in Heaven (experience
testestifieth) Prayer lives and breaths there also.

1. Our Savior is there, and there lives, ever lives to make intercession, or
to pray Heb. 7. 25.
for us.

2. And John saw the souls of them that Rev. 6. 9, 10.
were slain, etc. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long O Lord,
holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them which dwell on
the Earth.

subject of prayer: Man.

And as Prayer is of an eternal nature and power; and is only suspended till
occasion acts it: So every man alive, a Tenant of this World, has continual
matter and occasion thereof; and therefore every man alive have their warrant
most ready for the practice of Prayer.

Now that every man alive has occasion and matter of prayer, will appear in
the truth of these two propositions.

1. That want or misery of any kind whatsoever, is the proper and natural
occasion and season of Prayer.

2. That the best and most perfect of men in this life, are the Subjects of
want or misery, of one kind or other, while they live in the World.

1. Now for the first of these, because the want of spiritual, Heavenly,
things, as it is an occasion of Prayer, is as less doubted, so less sensible
also; we shall therefore demonstrate that even earthly and temporal wants, are
a fit and seasonable occasion of prayer.

1. Even temporal blessings are promised, and therefore may, and must be
prayed for. Godliness having a Promise of, and therefore, a Prayer for this
life also. I will says God, multiply the fruit of the Eze. 36, 30. 37.
Tree, the increase of the Field, etc. Yet for this will I be inquired of by
the house of Israel to do it for them, says the Lord.

2. And therefore our Savior, that was free from sin, the most perfect of men,
he prays, notwithstanding, if it be possible let this Cup pass.

2. And as any misery is the occasion of prayer, so the best and perfectest of
men alive, are subjects of misery in one kind or other; and least men should
boast of perfection of Grace; though such boasting is vain, yet we may
infallibly convince them of outward sufferings, as liable to them as to any
others; and therefore affording to them an equal occasion and season of
Prayer, with others. They will not deny, that man that is born of a woman, let
him be who he will, our Savior, God himself, has but a short time to live and
is full of misery.

Yea and a man that is born of the spirit much more: For those that will live
Godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution: and here no argument will heal
and help the men of this error in this fruit, their rience visible all the
world over, discovers and proclaims their vanity and sufferings; they being
subject to greifs, sicknesses, wants, death, as well as other men. Now unless
they will maintain their Resurrection is past before their death, one of their
Paradoxes; how can they escape the dint of this argument, how can they put of
the impetious motion of their wants and miseries in their Friends, themselves,
their Souls, Bodies, Estates, Names, etc. And still resist, and quench the
spirit of Prayer.

3. Thirdly, We argue the warrant of this practice by all, from the principle
of it, the Efficiens adjuvans, the assisting, helping cause of prayer, the
Spirit of God.

For, that prayer depends upon its occasion and season; and man in this life
has continual occasion and season thereof; and man is foolish and weak, and
not able or wise of himself to improve this occasion for this end and purpose;
Gods Grace has provided him, the Help and assistance of his own spirit to
teach him Romans 8.
how to pray.

But, to make it as clear as the Sun, that the coming of the spirit, does not
put to silence, but rather raise and elevate the voice of prayer: we consider
him, 1. In his promise. 2. in his Office.

1. In his promise, and we read many pregnant promises of the spirit and of its
abundant powrings forth, especially at the famous conversion of the Jews
toward the later ages of the World: The great question is, what will be the
manner and effects of his coming? from some general discriptions thereof, some
men, as our Antagonists; imagine, that such shall be the pouring forth of the
spirit then, as that he shall drown and wash off from the earth all former
Ordinances of the Church, and this of prayer among the rest, but as we defended
the rest in their place, so here we shall read upon that promise in Zach. 12.
10. Which declares after this manner the spirit shall come, in the Zach. 12.
10.
plentifullest powrings forth thereof, even at his most glorious coming upon
the new Jerusalem. With relation to the duty in hand, Prayer: Let us read to be
satisfied, I will power upon the House of David and the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the spirit of Grace and Supplications: this will relieve some light
more, if compared with that of Eze. 36. where having first laid down a most
large description of the Covenant of Grace, which will not be expressly or fully
performed till the powrings of the spirit, upon this House of David and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem; all is concluded with this, yet the spirit I have
powered upon you, as a spirit of supplication, shall make you pray for what I
have promised; yet for all this will I be inquired of by the house of Israel,
etc. Not that we imagine that the Sun of this spirit is thus full risen upon
any among us, do we argue; but for the conviction of the folly of such, as upon
such a supposition, have denied themselves of the benefit and practice of
prayer. They have only the foolishness of casting away prayer, and not the
fulness of the coming of that Spirit that is even then in its fullness a
spirit of Grace and Supplication.

2. Secondly, Let us consider the spirit of God in its office also: And we
shall find that it is not sealed, to dissolve, but indeed appointed to uphold,
yea perform this duty of prayer, in us and for us; its Office is (answerable to
his name) expressly performed, in bearing up our Infirmities; Romans 8. 26.
teaching us what to ask, yea and by making intercession or praying in us. Is
the Host or the Kingdom of Heaven then, divided? is the spirit his coming,
to teach us what to ask and yet to put an end to the duty of prayer? help
Oedipus.

Romans 8. is said to pray in us which may bear an immediate intercession to God
for us, without the means or use of our hearts or mouths; I answer, that
according to, and in the very same Text, verse, there are two sufficient
Expressions to detect and prevent such a fond Evaision.

1. The spirit is said to help our infirmities, intimating, that we are the
Subjects or undertakers of Prayer, but indeed we being weak and insufficient
for it, the spirit is to help and assist us in it.

2. It is also said to make intercession in us with groans, etc. implying
thereby, that the spirit does not pray in us only, but by us also.

The spirit being no ways capable in it self of groaning, it intercedeth in
and by our groans: We being only capable of groans, that are capable of the
feeling of those heavy miseries that are prayed against.

It being high time I end, having set the Seal of the spirit to the warrant of
the duty of Prayer, my spirit also making Intercession both for the duty and
the Opposers thereof, with groans unutterable.

2. But as I have been large in warranting the practice, so might I be much
more large in pressing the duty of Prayer.

It being as good as true, as useful as lawful, yea most necessary (which I
shall only touch with that usual distinction of necessity and leave) and that.

1. With a necessity of command; We have not time, scarce Arethmetick, to
reckon up and set down how many several times, this exercise of prayer is
commanded in scripture; which, by the authority Phil. 4. 7. 1 These. 5. 17.
of one only, is made not only to be no sin, but a duty also. In every strait,
at all times, in all ages Pray; in every thing make known your request unto
God. And pray continually. Now does any man plead that this duty or command, is
of no force to him, I demand where, when, and of whom has he had a
dispensation therfrom? neither can the power or authority thereof be weakened by
extinction, for the want of occasion: Every man alive, having, while alive
here, some cross, some want, or other as has been largely demonstrated
before. And to want and the Cross, is prayer still nailed and joined, or
enjoined rather upon such as suffer them; if any man lack let him ask of God
Jam. 1. 5.
that gives liberally, and upbraideth not.

2. Prayer is necessary with a necessity of means also. And it is indeed both a
Rational and a Religious means of good to us: The first, we heretofore have
cleared, and the later appears, in that it is not only a Gospel command, but
such, as is still encouraged, and followed with the attendance of a gracious
Promise.

Prayer, it was the Ladder by which our Savior himself must clime, and ascend
to Psalm. 2. 8.
his Kingdom and Glory: Ask of me, says God unto him, and I will give thee
the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for thy
possession: It is the Rope whereby he also draws us up after him, that where
he is we may be also: So prays he that ever lives to make intercession for
us, Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me be with me where I
am, that they may behold the Glory which thou have given Joh. 17. 24
me.

Prayer is that whereby we also cry Abba Father; and receive from his hands,
both the general and particular blessings of Children.

In general, Prayer is the Sword in our hand that cutteth off the head of the
beast Babylon, being drowned in the Sea of tears, and the great Whore burnt in
the Zeal of cries. Prayer with the strength of its importunity breaks the
Heavens, so that the Glory of God may descend upon his Church, and make it the
praise and beauty of the World. Yea, and hastens the glorious marriage-day
betwixt the Lamb and the Lambs wife; as we prize those things, let us practice
Prayer, joining therein, with glorified Martyrs, Apostles, and Prophets, even
Heaven and Earth, and say, Rev. 6. 10. Isa. 62 1. 2.
How long, Lord, holy and true, will thou not judge and avenge our blood, etc.
For Sions will I not hold my peace and for Jerusalems Rev. 22. 20.
sake will I not rest, til the Gentiles see her Righteousness, and all Kings
her Glory; Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

And all particular private mercies are to be handed by prayer also; it being a
means, not only of our own but our neighbors good; not only of temporal, but
spiritual and Heavenly Mercies also.

It is the means of knowledge and Wisdom, Pro. 2. 3. 1 Kin. 3. 9.
as we may read, both in the wise man's Doctrine and experience: therefore if
any man lack Wisdom let him ask and Jam. 1. 5:
have it of God, who gives liberally, etc.

It is the means of Grace, both pardoning Psalm. 15. 1. 2. etc.
and healing Grace; therefore let us come with boldness to the Throne of Heb.
4. ult.
Grace (both to find Grace) and to obaine mercy, etc.

It is the means of comfort and consolation, therefore the Psalm: Restore unto
me Psa. 51. 12
the joy of my salvation: Let us make request by prayer, and the peace of God,
etc. Phill. 4. 6. 7.
shall keep our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

Of perseverance, I have prayed, says our Savior to Peter, that thy Faith
fail Luke 22. 32.
not.

And of all spiritual and heavenly blessings in one, of Salvation it self. For
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be Romans 10.
saved. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, Knowledge, Wisdom, Pardon, Grace,
Perseverance, Comfort, Salvation, Heaven. John 16. 23, 24.
And what more can you think of, whatsoever you ask in my name, the Father will
give it you, and it is but ask and have, O let us then ask and receive that our
joy may be full.

Prayer, O the divine prevailency of prayer! it shuts and boulteth up the
Dan. 6. 11 12.
mouths of Lions: It opens the doors of the Prison house: It opens when no
man shuts, and it shuts when no man Acts. 12. 5.
opens.

Prayer, administreth liberty to prisoners: Plenty to Famine, Health to
Sickness. Peace, Wisdom, Fulness, God, Christ, the spirit. All, are stored
in the promises; and Prayer is the key that opens this Ezekiel. 36. ult.
Cabinet; and has access unto this Treasure; and by the hand of Faith takes
all, appropriates all. By Prayer, our hearts are lifted up to our Treasure, we
have our conversation above, we have talk, intercourse, and Fellowship with
Heaven, and are by its glory misterious still, wrapped up John 17.
with God and Christ in one. O the excellency, prevalency, and Mystery of
Prayer.

But if the black and dark suit of prayer, petition (which must, by Heaven, as
darkness by light be done away) be glorious? How shall not the bright and
fair side of it: Thanksgiving and praise in the reflection, where both Saints,
and Angels, Christ, and God, shall be glorious for ever, exceed in Glory? O
the Riches, Grace, the Kingdom Power and Glory, of Prayer.

Who can declare the noble acts of prayer? who can show forth all its Praise?
blessed be that God that hears Prayer; and blessed be the Sons of Prayer.

CHAP. XVII. Of Experiences.
WE have hitherto indeavored, that the spirit might own his own effects,
Cause, word, and Ministry: And it follows lastly, that we reconcile him to
the knowledge and acknowledgment of his own former Seal and witness, viz. in
our Experiences. The error is, that all the experiences that we have had of
God Error.
in his deliverances of us, and that not only outward but inward also: these
(says my frequently quoted Author in his sixteenth false rest) are false rests
when we make them evidences of Gods Love, and matter enough, to conclude,
safety rest and happiness.

This same Author would prove this error with his old argument now applied,
viz. For, says he, some men's deliverances Ground.
are of God, some of themselves, and some of Page 90. lin. 25.
Satan; but none of these are to be rested upon seeing they may be true or
false.

such he especially instanceth in) as true and falls, in his sense here, must of
necessity be meant, not to be so in themselves, but with respect to our
knowledge and judgment of them. For as in themselves, they must be (and can be
but) one; either true or false: So in his argument are they supposed to be of
God or not of God, viz. of man or Satan. His meaning is, when he urges that
our deliverances may be either true or false, that for any thing we can know,
they may be either, or as well false as true; and therefore we can build no
infallible assurance of Gods Love thereupon; since the knowledge with respect
to the evidence thereof is fallible.

Again, hence then there will arise a double question. 1. With respect to the
matter of deliverance, is, whether we can know, whether we are truly delivered
or no; whether our deliverance be real. 2. To the Author of deliverance, and
is, whether we can possibly know, whether our deliverance be wrought by God, or
no; (i.) by Satan or our selves.

1. First, Then let us examine whether we may know the truth and reality of our
deliverance: And to this I answer, what should hinder us, if the spirit of God
assist us? can any thing be more knowable to the Soul then its own actions and
passions? if I know any thing, do not I know that I know it? if I love any
thing, do not I know that I love it? if I hate any thing do not I know that I
hate it? can there be any real change within me, especially more then
ordinary, any motion, alteration, conversion, more then ordinary, and I know it
not? but what is more sensible then the deliverance from under the bondage of
the Lordly power of corruption (to use one of his own instances. For this same
purpose) then the cutting off a right hand, plucking out of a right eye, the
mortification of a beloved lust; what is more knowable then the peace of God
passing all understanding, when delivered from a troubled, vexed and tormented
conscience? what more perceiveable then, then joy unspeakable and full of Glory
to me?

viz. that Hypocrites do think their deliverance as true and firm as the best.

make a true Christians evidence fallible: or the knowledge of his true
deliverance, weak and deceiveable. The Reason is plain, for though a man in the
dark, or blind, may easily be deceived, yet a man that has his eyes in his
head indubitably knows what he sees or feels. A man a sleep, may dream and
phansy to himself that he has full Barns, full Chests, full Tables, all the
ground and matter and occasion of joy imaginable: But though this man does but
dream, and is deceived, cannot another that has these things indeed be assured
thereof? shall another man's lie make my truth of none effect? because some
menare dead, are there none that know themselves alive? some blind, do none
see, and know they see? because the half recovered blind man in the Gospel,
saw men as Trees, should this make the standers by, question, whether they did
indeed see men or no? yea, could they not be assured thereof, because of his
doubting? we that are delivered out of the Powers of darkness, we have our
eyes opened and are in marvelous light; besides, and can we see no more then
such as are blind and in the dark? then Hypocrites? our eyes being opened and
we seeing in Gods light, having received the spirit to this end that we know
the things that are freely given to us of God, why may not we 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2.
know, and give thanks with St. Paul and Collossians; for that he has
delivered us Col. 1.
out of the powers of darkness into the kingdom of the Son of his love.

sevened from whom we can do nothing; so that we John 15.
must of necessity conclude that in the strength of the Lord we have done
valiantly, the Lord is our strength and our redeemer: Especially being
enlightened with the knowledge of the premises, and assisted to lay down the
conclusion, by the spirit of Christ, that is as fire that has not only heat to
consume our corruption, but light to manifest the World to be done, and by whom
it is done likewise. And did not the Prophets of old, without doubt believe
that their Dreams and Visions were from God? did not Paul know that his calling
and Apostleship, was of the Lord? and the primitive Christians? were they not
assured that they received the Holy Ghost? even so we, the Redeemed of the Lord
may infallibly know, that the Lord is our Rock and our Deliverer. And though
the whole World lies in wickedness, yet we are of God: And that the things,
we have received are freely given to us of God. And therefore this renewing of
this Argument here, has but offered an occasion, of discovering its
rottenness, more and more; and not in the least darkened the evidence of our
experiences.

Argument for the affirmative.
But let us examine what may positively be said for the farther clearing
thereof.

And first of all it is worth our remembrance, that the own experience of those
men has usually been their strongest argument in other points, though here
they dispute against experience, (...).

2. Yet what more cleerer and convincing way of arguing, then from experience
it is therefore called the Mistres of fools, it makes them understand and be
wise. It is not a natural Dictate, Maxim, viz. Experientia docet, yet
Christians may not observe or gather any thing from their experiences: How
unnatural, unreasonable is their Religion. Do we not, yea, according to the
Law of reason, must we not judge of men as we find them? we will first try,
and then trust, and is God more variable and man more constant? dare we venture
our credit upon the experience of men, and yet not of God? O let God be true
and every man a Liar: Let man be changeable, but God be God that changes not,
even the same yesterday to day and for ever. O let the Method and order of Gods
Creation and Government, the course of his daily providence, speak, and entreat
for him: And persuade us to believe that he is faithful to his own Rules, and
to his servants trust: that he is constant and the same, with whom is no
variablenes nor shadow of turning: and that what you found him hitherto, either
to his Friends or enemies, even such you will find him still, the Heavens
declare the Glory of God and the Firmament shows his handy works; but those
experiences that come in the Fathers name, that they may fare no better then
the Son, you will not believe, but Joh. 5. ult.
others that come in their own name, them ye will believe.

Do we not argue the love and good will of men by their gifts; especially in
want? from their help an assistance, espeally in straits? yet though God has
been a present help in time of trouble to us: though he has in the midst of
extremest want most constantly and seasonably still supplied us, though he
satisfied and conquered all our doubts and dangers for us: Yet we may not, we
must not believe that he did those things out of any love he bore to us; we may
not for future, put any trust and confidence in him, upon this encouragement:
Nor look upon our selves to be safe, under that protection, that has hitherto
been as Walls and Bulwarks to us. Most strange and ureasonable Doctrine, most
wickedly ungrateful practice! is his hand shortened that it cannot save still,
or his ear that was open, heavy, that it cannot hear?

3. And as the way of this error thwarts reason and experience, so it does
flatly contradict the authority of scripture in this particular; which speaks
it expressly, that experience works Hope. To. 5. 4. 5.
Experience and hope are mutually a moral cause, and effect, it being the
proper nature thereof, to produce and to be produced. He adds that Hope makes
not ashamed (i.) gives great boldness, because thereby the love of God is
shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost. Thus we see then that the holy
Ghost or the coming of the Spirit, does not make null the use of experience,
but rather makes use thereof, for the working of hope, that by hope he might
shed the love of God abroad in our hearts, and give us great boldness against
future sufferings.

In this very place, we may read the use of Experience now pleaded for, to be
the truth of scripture, seconded by reason, strengthened by the spirit; and all
set down as the Saints experience also.

2. Moreover no argument in scripture is more frequent and potent for the
raiseing up of the hopes and the hearts of Gods Children then this of
experience* we have the strength of David's Lion and bear, yea and of Pharaoh
and all his host over and over and over for it; it is no easy thing to reckon
up, how many several times, David makes mention of the wonderful deliverance
of the People of Israel, out of Egypt, besides the honor, the frequent
mention of our scriptures, give it, for the comfort of the Church in the time
of persecution; and are not we now in the Wilderness (your most frequent
Allegory?) then why may not we also remember the Fatherly Pity of God toward
us, when we groaned under the Egyptian Bondage; and rejoice in that goodness
and mercy, that has so graciously delivered us, out of the powers of
darkness, comforting our selves with this hope and confidence, that he that
has brought us out of Egypt will lead us into Canaan, that though we are
opposed with spiritual wickednesses, yet we shall be more then Conquerours
over them; and though through much tribulation, yet we shall enter into the
Kingdom of God, and see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living.

3. May not we say with one breath, that he is the Author and Finisher of our
Faith? that he that has begun a good work in us, will also finish it to the
day of Christ, that he that has given us his only Son to dye for us, so loved
us, yea since he has delivered and does deliver, we may surely gather,
conclude, and trust, that he will still deliver 2. Cor. 1. 10.
us: And because he has lead us as our most careful Shepherd, into green
Pastures, and by the still waters, restoring our Souls, etc. Though we walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, let us fear no evil; concluding
thence with the Psalmist, that surely goodness and mercy Psalm. 21
shall follow us all our days, and we shall dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever.

4. And to conclude, what is reckoned by God as a more heinous aggravation of
the sin of unbleife, or mistrust of providence, then this means and help of
experience? for which, to pass by many, let us fix our serious eye and
thought, upon that notable Testimony recorded by David against the People of
Israel; with whom, because they believed not in God, nor trusted in his
salvation, though he had commanded the Clouds from Heaven above, and given them
of the Corn of heaven, etc. Therefore Psa. 78. 21 22. 23. 24.
the Lord was wroth, and a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came
up against Israel: Which is aptly appliable to us in the days of the Gospel:
For if we slight the Experiences of mercy and deliverance, hardening our hearts
after Heb. 3. and 4. Ca.
this sinful similitude, according to the judgment of the Author to the
Hebrews, we shall also fall after the same example of unbeleife, chap. 4. 11.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the spirit of Christ as the Souls immediate Rest and Evidence.
WE have at length dispatched this Error, on the absolute consideration of it:
Wherein, as you have if very busy to oppose the spirit to its effects, cause,
word, Ministry, and witness; so you have us as careful, to make and keep an
answerable Peace and Concord betwixt them.

We are now ascended to the Bench, that having called this exorbitant spirit to
its last trial we might answerably pass a sinall judgment and sentence upon
it. But as before we have found it erroneous and and guilty in an absolute
capacity, so the trial of it here is, as it is respective, unto its special
end, as, a Rest and Evidence.

The end and conclusion of this Way and Error is, that since all the
fore-handled The Error.
particulers, are but false and unwarrantable means and helps, etc. The spirit
immediate and as alone, is the only all-sufficient means to the Soul for all
ends and purposes whatsoever; but especially fort its Rest and Evidence.

The specialty subjoyned, as being nearer to the shadow of scripture and
reason; and more dearly embraced and commended by my Antagonists, then any and
all other, of the uses of their spirit; I shall cheifely, and only question,
here: viz. Whether the spirit be alone and immediately the only all-sufficient
evidence of it self, or Gods favor to us.

Though the vanity hereof, has been discovered all along, while the right way
of means has been cleared and confirmed in every particular of it; yet my
present undertaking shall more directly demonstrate the same and condemn it,
first even out of the mouth of that very Medium and argument as Umpire betwixt
us, that this way it self has chosen and every False rest. Page 90. 30. and
many other places
where appealed to against us, viz. that is not to be rested upon, as an
infallible Evidence, that may be either true or false.

Which Medium, we grant, could the false and erroneous assumption, viz. that
the truth of our Evidence is not knowable, have been made good, would have
undeniably concluded against us, that the best of our Evidence is but fallible
and in their sense, a false Rest.

But as we have fully vindicated the truth of our, against the spite and power
of this, by them abused argument; so we shall by the light of the same,
reflected upon them, plainly manifest, the fallibility and weakness of this
their Evidence. The Argument may be thus framed.

That which, for ought we can possibly 1. Argument against the spirits
immediate witness.
gather, may be true or false, cannot be an infallible and undoubted Evidence.

But the spirit as alone and without the use of any means, and considered
abstractedly from its effects, for ought we can possibly know may be true or
false.

Therefore, the spirit as alone, without use of any means, etc. Cannot be
infallible and undoubted Evidence.

There is nothing here questionable, but the second proposition, viz. that the
spirit, as alone, without use of any means abstracted from all its effects, may
for ought we can possibly know, be true or false, which is also clear from
scripture, and reason according to scripture.

1. First, These direct and most visible inferences from, 1. John 4. 1. etc.
Might wholly satisfy; as 1. There are false as well as true spirits. 2. The
false as well as the as good and true spirit, has access to knock at the
hearts of Saints. 3. The Saints, may be apt to believe both the false as well
as the true spirit. 4. The Saints are forbidden to believe every spirit. 5. The
Saints and such as have the spirit of God cannot discern spirit from spirit,
but by Trial. 6. Therefore it is not commended only but commanded, as we see
even upon such, to try the spirits. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try
the spirits whether they be of God, for there are many false Prophets gone out
into the World. The Gleaning after the full Harvest we formerly have reaped
from this Text, may be gathered thus: Our Hearts lying open to the various
suggestions, both of the good and evil spirit, the great question is, how we
shall know which is the good and which is the evil, that we put not evil for
good, and good for evil? how we should discern, which is the coming of the
spirit of God, to make it to us an infallible Evidence: Moreover my great
Antagonist himself acknowledging, that indeed there is no form, though never so
glorious but Satan will transform himself into it, there is no working of the
spirit ((...) God) Page 127.
within man but he will resemble it: So that none shall be able to know*
whether it be true or false, until Christ come in, etc. how then shall we
know? in the light of Christ? this we grant: But how does Christ enlighten?
immediately without the use of means? then I should demand, why should not
Christ evidence the truth of his word, as well as the truth of his spirit
immediately to us? 2. Again why does not the spirit, while it evidenceth it
self, discover also every false and erroneous spirit immediately to us? (as he
says the true rest shows us the vanity of every false. Page 34. lin. 18.

3. And then, why does the spirit command us here not to believe every spirit?
much more, what need of trial of the spirits? or any marks or outward rules,
Ver. 1. 2. 3. 6.
whereby we might know the spirit of truth and the spirit of Error.

The Text is thus far most clear to all, that the spirit that dictates to, or
dweleth in us may be true or false, for ought we know until we try and examine
it by outward means. Is it answered that thus it is knowable? so is the work
thereof in our hearts, are they not known to be true or false but by the light
of the spirit through our examining? no more is the spirit himself. Which it
acknowledged, to be knowable to us in the use of means by his own light; we are
agreed, But this you may not allow, that deny and oppose by the same
(pretended) spirit, all means of trial; your error and misery.

2. Secondly, And does not right reason also set to its Seal that this is true?
for thus I argue.

1. Where the truth of the effect cancannot be discerned without light from the
cause, how shall the truth of the cause be discerned, without help from the
effect, now as to the case in hand, it is received by all hands, that the truth
of the effect, to wit Grace; cannot be known but by the light of the cause,
viz. the spirit.

And the consequence is clear from this common truth, the effect is more
knowable then the cause: The reason thereof is, for that the effect is more
obvious to sense then the cause, and things are conveyed by sense into the
understanding: for look how much the more, any thing has, de ratione objecti,
viz. of sense, it is so much the more easily discerned; again, that that is
farther off from our knowledge; is usually argued by that, that is nearer and
more known to us; as we usually gain acquaintance with strangers, by the means
of our knowledge and acquaintance before. Now according to these rules, since
the effects of the spirit are nearer to our knowledge, then the spirit it self,
and yet we are not able to discern the true effects of the spirit without the
spirits assistance; how can we then be possibly, at least probably able, to
make the truth of the spirit indubitable to us, without regard to its Effects,
without use of means?

Secondly, It seems to appear, that the The second way of arguing.
spirit as alone without the use of any means, and considered abstractedly from
its effects, cannot be known to be true or false, from the consideration of the
nature of spirits in general.

Spirits are knowable to men in their Essence, residence, and quality. With
respect indeed to the first of these, we may know them, both that they are, and
what they are, as by way of Negation, so by way of eminence; but with respect
to their place of residence and qualities, where they are, and what ones they
are, whether true or false, good or bad, we can know them only by way of
causality: or by their operations, symptoms, effects, etc.

Secondly, for in order hereunto, we can only judge of them, by sense or reason,
the only principles competent to man, of knowledge and discerning.

Now therefore let us examine, whether spirits either in their where, or kind,
are to be known by sense or reason immediately without some sign, effect, or
other.

2. For there where or place of abode, this certainly cannot be discerned
immediately by sense: Spirits being no sensible Objects, imagine what kind of
spirit you will, whether it be Angelical, rational, animal, much more
divine, and though things of a grosser substance, viz. Bodies may, yet the
spirit cannot Propter ejus excessum, or by reason of its excelling purity, be
thus discovered. We may take up a little of the knowledge of spirits, for our
present purpose, from the purest of Bodies, viz. Fire, though Fire as corrupted
may, and is, yet fire in its Element cannot be seen (and as some affirm) nor
felt, etc. Therefore our daily experience shows us, that the fire with us, so
soon as ever it has conquered and overcome its matter, gotten out of the cage,
the flame, that thickened it, it is immediately invisible, if not insensible; and
though it passes upward toward its center and Element before our eyes, yet
who can perceive it? now spirits, the grossest of spirits are superior to fire
not only in degree, but kind also. and that, that elevateth the purest fire,
to exceed our senses, viz. its purity, is far more eminently contained in
spirits and is the very thing that gives spirits their name, and the very name,
that puts a distinction betwixt them and bodies, the purest of Bodies, fire it
self. It is a thing most apparent to experience, that we cannot know whence any
spirit is immediately by sense, for wherein can they be sensible. They have no
color, therefore invisible: They are not Bodies therefore not audible: They
have no sensible qualities, not cold, hot, dry, moist, etc. Therefore they
cannot be smelt, felt, or tasted. Therefore we read that when Angels were sent
to accompany men, they still assumed bodies according to scripture.

Secondly now since the presence of spirits, is not knowable, discernable, by
sense there is no other way left for the knowledge thereof, but by reason:
Angels indeed see and know intuitive, but this way of knowledge, does not
Competere with us men: We are reasonable creatures and know and judge of
things, not obvious to sense, by our reasons only. But let us be our selves and
seriously consider and how is it possible, that we, that are reasonable
Creatures, should judge of the presence of any thing not obvious to our senses,
without an exercise of reason about some effects, signs, etc.

2. Moreover, if we cannot discern the presence of spirits either by our sense
or reason, how much less shall we ever be able to judge aright of their nature,
kind, or qualities, without regard to their Effects, without use and help of
some sign, mean, Companion or other thereof. As for example, how shall I know
whether the spirit in thee, be rational or animal only: But because it
acts a humane form or figure of Body in general? Because it discovers it
self, by rational discourse more special: Giving some sign or Effect or
other, what spirit it is?

Further, how shall I know whether the spirit in any, be weak, simple, or of
ripe understanding, but by some outward operations and fruits thereof? How do
we try a man's Person? whether good or bad but by his Actions? The Tree (as our
Sahath taught us) being known by his fruit, by their fruit ye shall know them:
Yea nearer yet, a man may most easily mistake, through self-conceit and
flattery in the knowledge and Judgment of his own spirit, imagining himself to
be informed, acted, and guided by a discreet wise and upright spirit, when
indeed there is no such matter: unless he be so wise as to take a true measure
for his knowledge of himself, by comparing himself with such rules and
patterns, as are fit and known, for a Fool may be wise in his own conceit.

But (to apply) if it be a thing so difficult to know our own, so impossible to
know another spirit, how improbable it is then that we should be able to
discern betwixt the spirit of God and the spirit of Satan without the help of
some Effect or sign or other, let a man of reason judge. 3. Things especially
do make this difficulty, more difficult, this impossibility more impossible
then the rest. The

First respects the nature of God himself, and is, its transcendent purity: In
comparison whereof all other spirits, are to be imagined even as Bodies. The
second proceeds from this, and is, the distance there is betwixt our capacity
and nature and this infinite purity, and the last is from the unconceivable
subtilty of Satan, changing himself into an Angel of light: who in his very
ministers, would deceive if possible the very Elect, and whose Ministers
themselves as our Savior warns cannot be discovered but by their fruits.

And let us be assured that if the good spirit will persuade us of the truth of
it self without trial, much more will the evil Truth seeks no Corners, but the
deceiver the Prince of the powers of darkness, he hates the light because his
deeds are evil. and dare not come to trial.

Sense and reason, yet we hope that the believer has an eye of Faith wherewith
he is able to see far above and beyond the gift and ability both of sense and
reason: as neither eye has seen, ear has heard, as never entered into the
heart of a (natural) Man to conceive of.

I answer; that Faith is not another power and faculty of knowing, distinct
from reason: It is but a higher and more noble act and exercise of reason;
being seated in and acted by the reasonable soul. Altior cognitio de Deo in hoc
vita habetur per gratiam, quam per naturalem rationem. Ut lumen natural
intellectus confortatur per, infusionem luminis gratuiti. Par. 1. Aquin. sum
quis. 13. art. 13.
There is indeed a higher knowledge of God in this life had by Grace, far above
what is attained by natural reason; yet this is not without but by the
heightning and improving of natural reason; Grace not destoying but perfecting
nature. is Grace, or the spirit the light, yet certainly reason is the eye of
Faith, it I, mean reason, being lightened by the spirit, and it only, does
discover the ground and receives and gives us the encouragements of Faith.

By Faith the understanding is always Tides cognitio quaedam est, in quantum
intellectus determinatur per sidem ad aliquod cognoscibile. Ibid.
determinated to that, that is knowable: And what ever we believe is known, and
the cause, why we believe it, is also known, by the understanding, a reasonable
Creature, as man is, as he cannot believe, he knows not what. So will he
never believe, and know not why. I will have some ground (if it may not be
called a reason) why I believe any thing: Though the matter of Faith is not
understandable to carnal reason, unsanctified nature, yet reason enlightened
nature changed; or according to the Gospel, that sound mind, renewed spirit,
is fully satisfied with, and sees reason enough to believe, even in the will
and power of God, and such as will not believe they err, they are guilty of this
error in their understandings not knowing the scriptures and the power of God.

Both which, to wit, the truth of God having said, and the power of God to do,
laying a Foundation sufficient, for a man most wedded to reason to believe
upon. And whatsoever we know by Faith, whether it be spirits, or God himself,
we know by reason: yea in our very knowledge of Faith, reason is, and wholly is
execised. Faith brings a higher but yet a regular knowledge, Faith gives a
cleerer and fuller knowledge of God, yet its still by Intellectus noster per
gratiam fidei Deo adhaeret, Ibid.
mending and widening the cundit pipe, Reason: not by forsaking or overflowing
it: For our understandings themselves adhere and cleave to God by the Grace of
Faith.

anointing can teach us the knowledge of spirits, a more excellent way then by
the use of our reason about their effects: Can it not think ye?

darken or eclipse the light of reason; that finger of God is not to put out,
but snuff this candle of the Lord in man: Or rather the understanding of a man,
or the reasonable faculty of a man, is the very Candle that receives, holds
out, the light of the spirit; and the eye, or Organ that uses it, and sees
with it. It is the office of the spirit at his coming, as the Sun to bring us
light, wherein we may see, and so show Objects to us, even the things of Christ
to see; but we see them with our own eyes. Therefore it gives us to know, it is
not said that it knows in us, but it gives us to know the things that are
freely given us of God: And as we see the Sun in, by, and through its own
light, yet with our eyes, Videlicet of sense, so we see the spirit only in its
own light, and yet without our eyes, to wit, of reason. The spirit is so far
from hurting, or shutting up the eyes of our reason, that they do not only
agree and shine together, but the spirit in his name, ab effectu, is called, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
not only the spirit of Wisdom but of a sound mind, whose Office is
answerable, he being sent to open the eyes of the blind, the spirit of wisdom
and revelation being given Ephesians. 1. 17, 18.
through the knowledge of Christ, on purpose to open the eyes of our
understandings, and that to this very end now in controversy, that we might
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of his glorious
inheritance in the Saints.

But we may further demonstrate the Third way of arguing.
same by the arguments followings: Which are taken from a state of perfection
to a state of imperfection.

And thus first from the perfection behind us, and afterward from the
perfection before us: Man in the state of innocence, and perfect recovery; now
if it appear that man in neither of these two conditions, wherein he has the
most perfect enjoyment of the spirit, did or shall attain to the discerning and
knowledge of spirits immediately (i.) without the use and help of their
Effects, I think we may safely conclude, that the imperfect condition of this
life that now is, while we enjoy but a small nothing of the spirit in
comparison here, shall not.

1. But in the first place there is not any thing more certain, then that the
soul of man in its state of innocence, did not see spirits per Essentiam, but
per effectum. which I shall briefly open. First, With respect to God. Secondly,
to Angels. Quamvis primus homo in statu innocentiae, alitori quadam cognitione
Deum cognoverit quam nos cognoscamus: non tamen Deum per essentiam videt, cum
peccaverit, Tho. Aqu. sum. Par. 6. quaes. 9. Art. 1.


1. Then, man in the state of innocence, did not see God in his Essence, but by
or in his effects. Adam saw God, per effectum Creatum, by or through the
Creation; which being a Medium: Tho. tells us that he saw God in Enigmate, or
in a Glass: the Creature being. Quid obscurum, if compared with the brightness
and purity of the Essence of God; yet that Glass of the Creature being far
more advantageous to Adam in innocence for the letting in the knowledge of God
then the mud wall of separation, that sin has made; we must needs conclude
that Adam had then a more clear and certain knowledge and sight of God, though
it was also by the word and effects of God, then we have Multo eminentius
videtur Deus per intelligibiles effectus quam per sensibiles and corporeas,
Ibid.
now. But if you ask wherein Aqui. answers, insomuch as Adam saw God through
the intelligible Effects of God; while we see him chiefly through Effects
corporeal and sensible; a far more inferior manner, a far more dark confused
and imperfect way. Adam being no way, but we every way hindered by these outward
thingss, from a clear and firm contemplation Non enim oportebat primum hominem
pervenire in Dei cognitionem per demonstrationem sumptamab aliquo effectu,
sicut nobis est necessarium: sed simul in effectibus ^recipue intilligibilibus
suo modo, Deum cognoscebat. Ibidem.
of intilligible Effects. And yet somewhat higher, Adam in that state did not
need to gather the Knowledge of God as we of necessity must, from some Effect;
but he saw and knew God together at once in the Effect especially intelligible.
Yet still he was beholding to the Effects of God for the knowledge of him; he
not being able to see God in his Essence, and consequently there being not a
third way left, he came to the knowledge of him by his effects only.

2. Moreover, as man in the state of innocence could not see God, so neither
had he then so near a society with Angels, as to see and know them, Per
essentiam; that near immediate and familiar way we now speak of. But to be
breife, the reason of both, is built upon the very Essence and form of man. We
read, that when God made man at first, he breathed into him the breath of Life;
which intimates to us that the reasonable soul, the form of man, is that, that
gives him an Genesis 2. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 45. 47.
animal life: Therefore it is also said, that the first man was made a living
Soul. (i.) A Soul giving life, and that life, and life animal: As Aquin.
glosseth, so that in Cum anima 1. Homims in statu innocentiae suerit
accommodata ad corporis gubernationem and perfectionem sicut and nunc atque ita
intelligere debuerit per phantasmata; non ponit in illo statum Angelos per
essentiam didere, Par. 1. Aquin. sum ques. 94. Arti. 2 Vide.
the state of innocence, the Soul of man was accommodated, fitted, to govern,
act, and inform the Body, even as it is now, and therefore it must needs have
had then the like way of understanding and knowledge that it has now (more and
less not differing the kind) which is by a conversion of Objects, to the
Phantasme, and thereby to convey them into the understanding, of which way
divine Essence, and the Essence of angels, are by no means capable.

And now to conclude, if a man in the state of perfection, yea in the state of
that perfection that did chiefly consist in an excellent admirable knowledge
of, and communion with God and Angels, could not see; or receive into his
knowledge either the spirit of God or the spirits of Angels, but by their
effects: then how shall he be able to do it? we that are fallen from that very
perfection by sin, whose discerning of spirits is by our Fall much more
obscured and dark then his; and the best among us in the life that now is,
being but, and that but in part the renewed restored, and prepared Adam: the
same image of God, being but in part repaired in us, by the spirit of the
Gospel, and that in the same respect, viz. according to knowledge as well as
holiness. And therefore as the first, even so the, in part received and
repaired Adam, sees God but in a Glass, beholding with open Face as Cor. 3.
ult.
in a Glass the glory of the Lord we are changed into the same Image.

2. Now let us turn our eyes to take a view of Canaan, and consider the height
of the perfection to come, in order hereunto: For we shall find it very
doubtful if not groundedly deniable that the perfection of Heaven it self
shall enable us to discern of spirits thus immediately, and not in or by their
Effects.

As there is very much reason against, so truly I know, no Text of scripture
invincible for it. First, reason seems to argue against it; and first.

1. Heaven is indeed the place of perfect and complete redemprion, and of the
most absolute recovery to us: but are not these Relative terms; having a
respect to our fall, as also to the former condition from which we fell? may we
not partly gather and guess, whither, and what our recovery shall be, by
remembering from whence we are fallen: Now we have cleared this before, Viz.
That the soul of Adam in the state of his innocence, could not possibly see,
either God or Angels, Per essentiam, but only Per effectus.

2. The perfection of man was this, viz. his body being every way subject; no
way an impediment to his soul; from this man fell by sin, and by grace, he is
to this Servato eodem modo essendi secundum naturam, Par. 1. Aquin. sum quaes.
94. Art. 2.
recovered; the same way of being in all estates, retained according to nature:
and also by consequence, the same way of knowing, Viz. By a conversion of
things to the Phantasme; to which, neither the divine, nor intelligent essences
can be subject: The soul of man in its threefold condition, Viz. of innocence,
Apostasy, and recovery, being still accommodated to inform the body, it cannot
be easily imagined to take knowledge of spirits, but by their effects in any of
them.

3. Therefore further we offer, that it is not necessary to the very form and
essence of man, to come to know this way, Viz. By a conversion of things to
fancy, by reason; and when man shall once arrive to this immediate knowledge
and sight of spirits, God and Angels, must he not cease to be man? If we shall
be, continue to be men, when in Heaven, I submit, but I cannot imagine, that
then we shall ever enjoy such a vision as this: Can a reasonable creature know,
or understand, and not by reason? And can reason discern of God and Angels,
and not by effects? We shall attain, we grant and desire, a far more high and
large degree and measure of knowledge and discerning in Heaven then we have
here, or then we had in Paradise; either our perfection there, by reason of
that world of experience, both with respect to our selves and God we have
gained by our fall: But shall not this be by the same faculty? Our light shall
be other, our objects other; but must our eyes be other also? Then must not we
be men, but some other creatures: But it is granted that we shall see with the
same eyes, we must also conclude that so long, we must not, we cannot discern
of spirits thus immediately.

This is therefore the conclusion of many, both learned Divines and
Philosophers, Intellectus noster impossibilis nunquam potest ad hoc provenire
ut intelligat sub stantias seperatas, as Alpharabius, and others. Theologi
posuerunt, intellectus Humanus nunquam potest ad hoc ut Deum per essentiam
videat, Aquin. in que. Invisibilis quidem Deus propter excellentem claritatem,
sed claritas eius sicut excedit intellectum hominis in via, ita excedit
intellectum hominis in patria, ergo sicut invisibilis est in via sic erit
invisibilis in patria, Dionil. Plut. distat Deus ab intellectu nostro quam
intelligibile creatum a sensu; sed sensus nullo modo pertingere ad creaturam
spiritualem videndum; ergo nec intellectus noster potucrit pertingere ad
videndum divinam essentiam
that our understanding (i) While ours, or humane, cannot possibly attain so
high, as to understand separated substances, that that moves them hereto, is
the distance betwixt our humane intellect and them, but especially, and God;
our understanding in act being one with that, that is in act understood
thereby: whence Crysos. scrupleth thus, Quomodo creabile videt in creabile?
Whence also Dionisius reasons: God is invisible because of his exceeding
brightness: But the brightness and splender of God as it does exceed the
understanding of man on earth, so also does it exceed the understanding of man
in heaven also, therefore as God is invisible here, so in Heaven also.

Again, there is a greater distance betwixt God and our intellect, then betwixt
a created intelligible Object and sense; but sense can no way attain to the
sight of a spiritual Creature, intelligible Object; therefore our
understanding cannot by any means attain to the sight of Divine Essence.

But Aquinas has a salve for every wound of his maintained affirmitive, viz.
by imbodying, the Sun into a Candle; he tells us that God (we being so nearly
united to him in Heaven) is even as it Proportio divinae essentiae ad nostram
intellectum est, ut proportio formae ad materiam, Aquin. in quaes.
were the form of our intellect; implying thereby that we in our selves cannot
see Gods Essence, yet God in us can see himself: He does not affirm that God is
really the form of the Soul, but says, that the proportion of the divine
Essence, is to our intellect, as the proportion of the form to the matter: To
which, if I may presume to answer) I say. that,

In this blessed vision, neither we see God our selves, or God does see himself
in us.

The first will not be strictly granted for then: himself has largely proved
that our reasonable souls as they are fitted to inform our Bodies, can only
see and know by a conversion of things to the Phantasme, which renders it
impossible Per nullam similitudinem receptam in intellectu creato potest Deus
intellegi ita quod essentia ejus videatur imediate. Aqi. upon the question.
Quia quacunque alia forma informaretur intellectus noster non posse per eam
duci inessentiam divinam. Claritas Dei non tamen excedit ipsam essentiam divina
que erit quasi forma intellectus in patria.
as to see the Essence of God or Angels; therefore he here does admit that God
cannot possibly be immediately seen in his Essence by any similitude, had or
received in a created intellect. and that whatsoever other form (except God
only) the understanding is informed, it cannot be possibly led thereby into
the divine Essence.

But therefore, it is said that God sees himself in us. And therefore though
it be purity of God does exceed the form of our understanding here; yet it will
not exceed the Divine Essence it self: Which shall be as the form of our
intellect in Heaven. Then I demand whether God shall see himself in us and with
us, or in us and without us: Whether he will make use of our principles or
Faculty, or not.

If the first of these be chosen, viz. That God in heaven will make use of our
Faculty, the eye of our reason and understanding, and only give us a cleerer
light, and a higher use of our selves by his immediate dwelling in us; for this
great blessed sight, Viz. Of his own Essence: I answer that as God does not
cannot compel the will: so neither can he wind upreason above reason, and make
reason continue to be reason still. The reasonable soul as so, can no more see
the divine essence, though never so much enlightened, extended; then the eye of
sense as so can see intelligible Objects, though it had all the help and light
in the world, imaginable.

2. Moreover, as God cannot make a sensitive Creature to be reasonable, and
accordingly to act, but the Creature must leave its former form, and become a
creature of another kind; even so how can we imagine that God should make man
to act above its kind, man whose form is reason, to see and know things by
inlightning and heightning his principles, that are not knowable by reason; yet
man be man, Deus operatur in quolibet operante: ut tamen and ipsa etiam agant
non ut and ipsa non operantur. Aqu. Par. ques. 105. arti. 5.
and a reasonable Creature still?

2. But if the later be owned, viz. that God in us and without the use of our
eyes does see himself in us: then Aquin. may seem to contradict himself, while
he other where teaches us, That though God indeed does work in every Creature,
yet so as the Creature it self does also act, and by no means so, as that the
Creature does not work also: Therefore in order to our present purpose in
another place, he tells us, that Deus ut prima causa movet intellectum
creatum, Viz. secundam causam, viz. Dando ei vertutem ad intelligendum, etc.
Aqui. Pr. Par. ques. 105. art. 3.
God does move our understanding; yet only so, as that he is the first, and it
is still the second cause.

Secondly, If God does see himself in us, and not by us; it must either be as
he is our form, or not our form. The later, (if he see himself in us, and not
by our eyes not through those faculties we had before, nor as he is a new form
as a new eye or new faculty to us) makes this his seeing of himself in us,
nothing to us.

That cannot be a beatificall vision to us, which is not our sight; thus God
sees himself in every, the most stupid, yea and most miserable Creature.

2. Again, if God be indeed our eye as well as light and Object; things very
different: so that as Aqui. expresses, the divine Essence, is both the thing
seen, and Essentia Divina ipsa est quod intelligitur and quo intelligitur. Aq.
upon the question.
the thing whereby we see, both the Object and the faculty: And thus truly a
new form of our understanding in Heaven; is not then the divine Essence ours?
is not our Essence divine? do we not only not cease to be men, but even arise
to be Gods? what now can hinder us, for Forma dat nomen and esse, according to
our form even such we are, and such we may be called.

But to conclude, and to speak all in a word, could we imagine such a thing, as
that the Essence of God should be the form of the Soul of man; does it
therefore inevitably follow, that the Soul of man must see and know God in his
Essence? The Soul of man is the form of the Body, yet does not the Body
therefore see the soul, yea nor yet the Soul see its own Essence.

The great Argument that (according to The argument for the affirmative.
Aqnin. and others, both Philosophers and Schoolmen and Divines) maintains and
necessitates our seeing of God in his Essence in Heaven, is, because our
happiness See Aqui. upon the question.
consists in the knowledge of God. But we may reply, that do not we know the
spirits of our friends, yea and our own souls, because we do not see them, Per
essentiam? again, was not Adam perfect? was not he happy? yet he confessedly
saw neither God nor Angels The scriptures for the affirmative considered.
in their essences.

And as reason seems to declare against: So neither, does scripture, for
ought that I yet perceive, do more then seem to speak for it, viz. Our seeing
the Essence of God in Heaven. The chiefest Texts are only these two.

1. The first is this, when he shall appear 1 John 3. 2.
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, (i) say they we shall see
the Essence of God. But to this, we oppose the exposition Beza, Camer, and
Villectus.
so frequent, which takes it for granted and undeniable, that this (Him) is
Cheifely Christ, in these words we shall be like the Son of God himself, and
shall enjoy his sight indeed, such as he is now.

This Exposition is strongly confirmed by that expression before, viz. When he
shall appear: who? why surely Christ, according to the whole Analogy of the
Gospel, Which speaks so much, for the exercise of Faith and hope, concerning
the appearance of Jesus Christ our Lord, even every where, as also by that
other* viz, We shall be like him, if compared especially with that of Saint
Paul; From Heaven, we look for a Savior even the Phil. 3. 20. 21.
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Body that it shall be fashioned
like un to his glorious body.

The other is, we now see through a 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Glass darkly, but then we shall see face to face, etc.

The exposition before mentioned, teaches us to construe all this by
comparison, (i.) in comparison of what we see now. There shall be as much
difference betwixt our knowledge of God in Heaven; and the knowledge we have of
him in this life, as there is betwixt our seeing a man in a Compare, Genesis 32.
30. with this, etc. Beza translateth it Coram.
glass, and out of a Glass, Face to Face,

But why may not this be understood of Christ also? God has not a face, Christ
has. If we will understand it in a strict sense, why not in a litterall sense
(i) so far as it will hold. The sense may then be this, we here have only some
letters of our beloveds, which do more mediately and darkly give us some hopes
and comforts, but this we expect, this shall be our happiness another day, we
shall come into the Shall see, is not in the greek Text. In seculo suturo tam
perfectam Dei cognitionem assequemur, quam humana men's capere potest, etc.
Morton in Lo.
presence of our Lord and Husband, seeing Face to face or being face to face.

We grant that in the World to come we shall attain to so perfect a knowledge
of God, as our humane mind can take, or can be made to take up: but as it is
finite it cannot comprehend that, that is infinite, nor see or discern that,
that is too pure and excellent for it, Divine Essence.

3. If any man add, that we in the resurrection, shall be as the Angels of
God, and that therefore we shall see God then in his Essence, I answer, that
that is to be restrained to the particular purpose, and case there spoken to.
We shall be as the Math. 22. 30.
Angels: not marrying or giving in marriage.

2. Crysostome concludes from this very Text, that we shall never see the
Essence of God. The Angels shall never see God in his Essence, and our Estate
in Heaven is promised to be but equal to the Angels, therefore we when in
Heaven shall never attain to see God in Essence so immediately.

Deum nemo vidit unquam: nec ipsae Caelestes Essentiae, ipsa dico Cherubim and
Seraphim, ipsum ut est, nunquam videre potuerunt: Sed hominibus non promittitur
nisi equalitas Angelorum. Chrysostom. Hom. 14. in Joh.

Now to bring these premises to a conclusion, as less in the same respect can
never be more then more: So cannot the Estate of Grace, our recovery inchoate
here, bring our Souls to a cleerer and more immediate discerning of God and
spirits then our recovery consummate in glory, in Heaven hereafter. If the
fullest enjoyment of the spirit of God in Heaven shall not give us to attain to
the knowledge of God in his Essence, how shall that partial assistance thereof
in this life make us so suparlatively perfect think ye? yea even a doubt of the
first does withal certainty deny the later the improbability, of that, reckons
and concludes this impossible.

2. And those very scriptures, that seem to take into favor the opinion
questioned, viz. that in Heaven we shall see God and Angels in their Essence:
does expressly reject the Error, viz. of our discerning of spirits immdiately in
this world. As for that of Ioh. 3. we shall not see him as he is till the time
of his appearance, and in the Text to the Cor. Paul professes, that though he
shall know as he is known, yet here, he himself knows but in part: and this
his knowledge here is by reflection in a glass darkly; though he promises to
himself to see more immediately, face to face, hereafter. Therefore I conclude
Si aliquis videns Deum intellexit, quod vidit non ipsum vidit sed aliquid
corumquae sunt eius. Dioni. in Episto. 1. Adcapiam Monacham.
and end this Argument with that saying of Dionis. If any man whoever have a
sight of God, and understands what he sees, let him know that he sees not
God himself, but only some effect or symptom of him.

We might further proceed, were it not too injurious to our design of have, to
discover the vanity of this delusion, to wit, that we may discern the truth or
falsehood of spirits immediately, without regard to their Effects, in the light
of these and such like Maxims.

Arg. 2, for the negative.
Nothing can act beyond its one kind and nature: Now it is infinitely beyond
the nature of our reason, the bounds of Nihil agit extra genus suum.
our intellect to discern of spirits, and not by their Effects: To know whether
or no they be true or falls, immediately (i) without the use of means about the
Effects or signs thereof. The Office and natural work of reason, as over and
again we have showed, is to judge of spirits by their works and symptoms, and
no otherwise, for men do not gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles?

Secondly, Philosophers affirm, that Deus ipse non potest supplere vicim causae
formalis
even God himself cannot supply the place of a formal cause (i) cannot make
on the one side, spirits to be Bodies and things intelligible, to become
visible, nor on the other side make us to see without eyes, to understand
without understanding, or to know but by our reason: All which God must do
before we can be able, and yet be men, to discern of spirits immediately; or to
know whether they be true or false, good or bad, without respect had unto their
signs or effects.

But many men are deceived with their Eccle, ca. 3. 24, 25.
own vain opinion: and an evil suspicion, viz. Of Qualifications, has
overthrown their judgments, yet without eyes thou shall want light; profess not
the knowledge therefore, that thou have not.

Dr. Sibs.
does sometimes immediately comfort us, then surely the knowledge of the truth
of the spirit, may be immediate also, which is the ground of comfort.

foundation thereby, for such a rejection of Marks and the means of trial as
we have in dispute: and therefore they immediately Dr. Sibbs in sealing of the
spirit.
subjoyning this question; but how shall we know the persuasion of the spirit
of God, from a delusion? they set down such rules of discerning, as may help
us, to know the spirit of truth and the spirit of Error; intimating to us,
that upon the least suspicion, or occasions of suspicion of spirits, we should
have ready and speedy recourse to the Trial thereof thereby.

But secondly, there is to be observed a considerable difference betwixt the
comforts the spirit gives us, and the assurance we give or gain to our selves
of the truth of the spirit; is the spirits ability the measure of ours? yea is
it not far more difficult, to work assurance out of doubting, then comfort from
assurance? Moreover, does it follow that because the spirit can and sometimes
does comfort us immediately, that therefore we must not use means for
assurance? for no man may imagine that we can as easily work upon the spirit
for assurance as the spirit upon us for comfort.

3. Yet farther, for my part (though I reverence the judgment of those Godly I
must conclude with Scotus in another case. Me magis propter autoritatatesquam
propter rations putare posse.
men yet) I cannot well see, how the spirit does comfort us immediately either:
the comforts of the spirit are most sollid, and consequently most rational, if
rational, not immediate because then they are convaid into the heart upon
reasonable grounds: Now the spirit cannot supply the stead of our reason, and
therefore does not give in comfort immediately. The spirit cannot inlighten our
hearts but by our reason, though he be a light, he can not be an eye or faculty
to us: And therefore cannot immediately comfort us. If we take suggestions upon
trust how shall our reason be sanctified? and if our reason be not, our
conscience can never be satisfied; and then how weak how superficial our
comfort, and how unworthy to be owned by the spirit of God our comforter? or to
be called that Peace of God which keeps Phil. 4
our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.

4. We are apt to imagine and mistake a flash of our own spirits, which may be
occasioned by many unknown and secret ways to be the unspeakable ravishing
comforts of the spirit of God: sensitive joy, to be spiritual comfort, but the
difference is as wide as Heaven and Hell: And we may be assured fully that what
revishments of spirit we know no account of, as they are not reasonable, so not
spiritual: the comforts of the spirit whose office it is as comforter, to show
us the things of Christ, and to give us to know the things that are freely
given us of God, being ever built upon grounds most rational, and such as are
known to us.

presence of a 20. Sibs
Friend.

materially and not Essentially, I undestand it well as the Apostle affirms,
hereby we know Joh. 3. ult.
that he abides in us, by the spirit that he has given us.

But secondly, Let us consider how the presence of our Friend does comfort us.
Either because he is present or because he is our Friend, both: how do we know
he is present but by the means of seeing him? and how do we know that he is our
friend but because of our experience in the Effects of his freindship, and
comforts immediate after this manner, we grant, are attainable, by the presence
of our friend, the spirit, viz. By assurance of its freindship, by true
experience of, as also of its presence by due reasoning about the Effects
thereof.

3. But now unless thou try, for ought either I or thy self can know, thy
spirit may be false as well as true; thy joy counterfeit as well as real?

Thy spirit may be of the Devil, and thy comfort no other then a flash of Hell:
Yea thou may be acted by no other then thine own deceitful and melencholly
spirit, and thy joy be but sparks of thine Isa 50. 11
own kindling, that shall go out in Sorrow.

Have not as incredible things as this been effected by melencholly? men having
been so far possessed, besotted by it, that they have imagined flesh, even the
flesh of their own Bodies to be glass, etc. And may not these happily bare
Analogy with thee? could not they discern of flesh nor thou of spirits? thy
phansy a little more sublime and lofty seems religious, theirs, as good and
true in it self, yet a a little lower, is plainly rediculous.

4. And furthermore does not he that hates Qui vult finem vult media ad finem.
the light most justly deserve to dwell in darkness? now he that has the means
of light hates the light it self, how great is our folly! it is the most
difficult thing in the world to discern betwixt spirits, and yet how wilfully
we fling away the very means, that God himself has appointed and afforded to
us, with a promise of a blessing to our use and endeavors, for this most
desirable and difficult end. And may we not expect a Judgment answerable? and
that not only to be given up to a reprobate sense, having our understanding
darkened here; but even that the God of this World (whom we would not discern
right by trial) having blinded our eyes, should lead us on, in our security in
this blind, confused, and non-discerning way of darkness, until he has
plunged and fettet'd us in utter darkness, and the powers thereof for ever and
ever. Therefore unto them, as unto Children, without the use of reason thou
did senda judgment Wisdom 12. 25.
to mock them.

But (to draw toward a general close of this Argument) you see that this your
A general conclusion of the argument.
supposed infallible Evidence, Viz. The immediate enjoyment of the spirit must
needs be fallible: The spirit what ever it be, being not capable to be known or
discerned whether true or false, and by consequence granted, not able to
evidence with any certainty, as both Scripture and reason have plainly proved,
immediately Brethren, one end of my labor, is Reconciliation and Union betwixt
us: and what does yet hinder it? may we not be happy both with peace and truth?
we would come over to you, but then we buy our Peace too too dear, viz. with
the loss of truth, besides the deceit and rottenness of the ground whereon you
stand detected, threatening, desperately threatening the loss of peace also, yea
with all our joy, our Souls, and God too, discourageth, deterreth. But how
great (and me thinks not gain-sayable encouragement, invitement, have ye (not
only from the proved, both falacy and weakness of your own, but also from the
tried, both strength and truth of ours, the ground whereon we stand) to come
over to us? have you not seen our ground, to bare up, both it self and us under
the very same weight, that shook and sunk yours, before your eyes? and has not
the very same beam of light, the same principle of truth, that discovered the
error and danger of the way you walk in, made it manifest to you, that the way
we plead for, is true, and safe; and even the very way of God?

Your principle, as a curse sent out, of a wicked man's mouth, it not being able
to ceaze on its Object, and returning home again; does its mischief and worst
in the bosom of him that sent it; it not being able to weaken or shake the
ground of our Evidence, has returned home again and ruined yours: And now my
hearty desire, and prayer, for you is, that God would open your eyes, and give
you to see the glorious resurrection of Jerusalem, truth coming out of the
smoke of the great Whore burnt, the rumors of Error: that the curse might not
ceaze or rest on you.

And to conclude, since this has been the rule and measure, the Law and Judge
of both, viz. That, that which may not be known whether true or false, is the
fallible Evidence: And while yours has been condemned, ours has escaped, and
been commended thereby; O that you would be wise at length, and lay down the
Buckler of a cause so desperate, and know the things that belong to your Peace,
both with God, and us: Ye know not how ready we are, to give the right hand of
fellowship to you; that, being agreed we may walk with God together, in the
good old way, for strong consolation, according to the scriptures.

Argu. 2. in ge. against the immediate witness of the Spirit.
Lastly, And we have but this one word more; every letter whereof is a
sentence, sufficient for ever to condenm the rest pretended, had there been
nothing yet, yea could there be nothing else said against it viz.

That, that is not true in it self, can never be a true rest to us.

But we trust we have sufficiently proved in this little treatise, that the
spirit that exalts us above and against, our Qualifications, Jesus Christ,
the word of God, the Gospel, ministry, and all former experiences of Gods
grace toward us, (in eevery particular, of which we have found this spirit
deeply guilty:) is no ways true but a grand impostor and a blaspheming lying
spirit. Therefore it can never be a true rest to us.

The breadth of this false wind, spirit, may seem for a while, to fill our
sails and (...).
to mount us up a loft as upon Eagles wings toward heaven it self: But when
you are soaring near to the Sun, will not the Sun think ye, scorch your plumes
that have slighted his beams? and then behold you fall, even from your highest
pitch of boasting, Heaven, to the lowest Earth, that I said not, Hell: And that
your unexpected fearful downfall (unless the undeserved abused hand of grace
interpose and save) will most certainly break and ruin you, without recovery.

Let us humbly ascend from the doubts and scruples, our Companions in the
flesh, to the Sun by his Beams, and who knows but that thus the gracious God of
heaven may eclipse and cool his overbright and scorching beams of Glory, and
condescend to bless us with some, and infallible to him, that he is our Father,
and that we are undoubtedly the Sons and Daughters With Phaeton.
of the Lord almighty.

But is not he a Theife that enters not into our Mr. his joy by the door?
and O how sadly will his expectations fail him, when the Lord shall say,
Friend, how came thou in hither? Bind him hand and foot and cast him into
uttter darkness where all his stolen, presumed joy shall be miserably turned
into weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth for ever.

Be not deceived dearly beloved, your boasting is vain and your rejoicing not
goood: Can your deceived Phansy indeed refresh you with the clusters of Canaan,
that never set foot upon the borders thereof? can you build a sure Castle of
happiness and bliss upon no foundation? or can aerie Notions that have no
ground at all. bare up the stresse of immortality? be not deceived, you cannot
gather Grapes of Thorns or figs of thistles.

If the foundation be strong and surely laid, the house that is built thereupon
may stand: But if the foundation be rotten or sandy, the house must fall. Your
ground is false, your rest cannot be true, O take your Babell down and build
your house, your souls, your rest, upon the sure foundation: Yea take it down
in time least worse, it fall, and great and lamentable the fall thereof, while
you are buried in its ruins.

Now, of the things which we have spoken concerning this immediate Evidence of
the spirit, this is the sum, 1. That which cannot be certainly known to be
true, cannot be a certain or infallible Evidence. 2. That which is not true in
it self, cannot be a true Evidence.


And we have found, that the spirit that refuses to be tried by any signs,
rules, effects, or relations whatsoever, cannot be certainly known to be true,
yea is in it self certainly untrue.

Therefore such a spirit cannot be a certain, nay cannot be a true, though
uncertain, evidence, of Heaven to us. And must be therefore concluded and added
for the eighteenth false REST.

A farewell to the Reader.
NOW at length, have I brought thee, (dear Christian Reader) to my Journies
end; and, since over paths, so rocky, high, and dangerous, with as much haste
(happily) as might be with good speed. It is said of Anger, that when unable to
do any more, if it Iratus si nihil aliud possit, cum molestus inimico fuerit,
atque animo morem gesserit multum promovisse putat.
can but a little satisfy it self, in molesting its enemy, it counts it has
atcheived some great matter: and, as I must readily profess my self, Zealously
affected against this Error; though, indeed, not so much mine as my Saviors
enemy, so it being now in its increase, I should deem my pen very happy in its
pains might they be blessed but with so much success, as but to stop it a
little in its course, and my very service I count would be too great a reward,
might I withmy labor, as Aaron with his Censer, stand betwixt the living, and
stay the Plague from spreading Number. 16. 48.
further.

Yet, did I hate the maintainers of this Error with a perfect hatred, I would
only renew the Atheneans return toward that impious ambious command of
Alexander, upon it; since he has Quonium vult Alexander Deus esse, Deus esto.
a desire to be a God, let him be a God,: or as Michaiah to Ahab go and
prosper. For thus I judge that were it but lawful to suffer it, to soar aloft
in its Aerie notion and Phansy a while without interruption, it will certainly
and suddenly fall down and setle upon the very dregs of Socinianisme or
Atheism with an interchangeable uncertain motion, she boweth and promises
herself to both. Though (for that with saddest eyes the Mother may behold and
bewail many of her Children, but lately deceased to the Error in question,
confusedly miscalling in their Grave of darkness, every thing God, but owning
none: Embracing The Ranters.
each other, ye serving themselves in stead of God: Not only not denying, but
professing ungodliness and worldly lusts, monstrum horrendum etc.) such
desperate experience of late has discovered her inclining, more to the later
to wit, Atheism.

The Serpent was wont to ly hid heretofore, under the herb in the way of God,
and thence to sting the World with delusion and Error: but has not his late
too great success, converted the Serpent into a Lion? and ah how bold and
impudent! while casting of and renting the divine Visard, the ways of God, he
roareth out defiance against the God of Israel the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.
The man of sin is charged with exalting himself above all that is called God or
is worshipped, 2 These. 2. 4.
in that he as God, sits in the Temple of God: but the way of this Error
razeth the very Temple, even with the Ground: and willnot suffer one stone
thereof to be left upon another, of how much higher presumption, shall it be
thought guilty? of how much sorer punishment shall it be thought worthy? the
Zeal of the house of the Lord has eaten me up.

"It was Archimedes his fond opinion that had he but a place to stand upon, and
he could raise the frame of the whole Earth, and if he could raise the Earth
out of the Center, then he could hang the Earth upon nothing, and if he might
hang the Earth, upon nothing then he might stand upon nothing. How right has
this Error attained Archimedes this vain boasting, having gotten its footing
in the spirit, it has overturned, overturned, overturned the whole World of
Religion: and by its witty contrivance having hung it as a Castle in the Air,
upon nothing, by miserable consequence, stands upon nothing. Its subtle
chemistry resolves and rarifies all into spirit which yet secretly Evaporates,
a spiritual wickedness. It construeth every thing into a Mystery, and there
loses it. the mystery of Iniquity, (...).

Yet, though as a Mystery it is difficult to reveil Sententias vestras prodidisse
superasse est. Prima front apparent blasphemi. e Jerome of the Palag. in Epis.
ad Tessa.
(...), hard to be interpreted, since by its discovery its iniquity appears,
and to know the opinion, is to know it an Error; especially with such as have
their (...), their intellectual faculties of relishing, their senses
exercised, this has been my resolution at least, as the light gave ability to
comprehend the darkness. Inventum tibi curare and metu adduclum.

My care (what ere I may moreover)
The truth of the Error does discover.
But to conclude, good Reader, least I should seem to infringe the Gospel
liberty, as this is thy privilege, so my advise, and yet not mine, but Paul's,
yea and the spirit of God in him: Try all things, etc. the Heathen Poet may add
the reason Nimium creduli saepe lactatur animus, he that is too apt to believe,
is too easily deceived: therefore good Reader, consider what is said, and
laying the same with an even, upright hand in the seal of a serious
consideration, the Balance of the Sanctuary exercise an act of impartial
judgment upon it, and as the end and blessing upon thy true endeavor, the Lord
make thee able to discern betwixt the cruelty of Error and the weight of truth
things that differ. Consider what is said, and the Lord give thee understanding
2 Timothy 2. 7.
in all things. Farewell.

(...). Gloria cuncta Deo.
FINIS.

