TWO LETTERS Of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, SENT To both Houses of
PARLIAMENT; With the humble Advice of the Council of War (held at St. Edmonds
Bury in Suffolk, Satterday 29. May, 1647.) upon the Votes of both Houses, sent
to the Army for their disbanding.

Also, the Petition of the private Souldierie of the Army, both Horse and Foot,
presented (to His Excellency at the same Council of War) by their several
Adjutators: With the names of the Officers that were then present.

Published at the instant desire of the Army, to prevent mis-understandings,
and to set forth their candid desire of the peace and welfare of the
Parliament, and this Kingdom; as also, concerning the relief of Ireland.

LONDON: Printed for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor in Cornhill, near
the Exchange, 1647.

A Copy of a Letter from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Right
Honorable, the Earl of Manchester.
My Lord,
YOur Lordships Letter of the 28. I received yesterday, with the Votes of both
Houses enclosed therein. Before the receipt thereof, I had called the Officers
unto a general Council of War, to aw^se concerning the better transaction of
the business, and prev^ntion of all inconveniences thereupon; and when they
were in consultation, I communicated your Lordships Letter, (and the Votes
therewith sent) unto them. After much time spent in debate thereof, this
enclosed was delivered unto me by the Officers, as the Result of the Council
of War; which being of very great concernment, I held it my duty to hasten unto
your Lordships. It is no small grief of heart unto me, that there should be
any dissatisfactions betwixt the Parliament and the Army, and that the late
V^^s did not give satisfaction. I beseech God to direct your Lordships to
proceed with wisdom, that things may be determined in love, and this poor
Kingdom free from further distraction; which is the earnest desire of

Your Lordships most humble servant T. FAIRFAX.
Bury May 30. 1647. For the ri^ht Honorable the Earl of Ma^c^ester, Speaker of
the House of Peers, pro tempore.



Mr. Speaker,
HAving called the Officers of the Army to St. Edmunds Bury, I communicated
unto them yesterday the Votes of both Houses, and a Letter of the House of
Peers sent therewith, concerning the disbanding of the Army; After long
consultation had thereof, this enclosed was delivered unto me, as the Result of
the Council of War (where the Officers were very many and unanimous) which
being of importance, I held it my duty to hasten the same unto you, being much
perplexed in my thoughts that dis-satisfactions betwixt the Parliament and the
Army should rather increase, then lessen; I entreat you, that there may be
ways of love and composure thought upon, I shall do my endeauours, though I
am forct to yield to something out of order, to keep the Army from disorder,
or worse inconveniences, I desire you to take some speedy resolution for the
composing of things, whereby the Kingdom may be happy in a timely deliverance
from further distraction: for the effecting whereof, I could be content to be
a sacrifice, as the last service you can have from

Your most faithful and humble servant, T. FAIRFAX.
Bury May 30. 1647. For the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire, Speaker of the
honorable House of Commons.



To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Commander in Chief of the
Parliaments Forces.
The Opinion and humble Advise of the Council of War, convened at Bury,
Saturday 29. May. 1647. In relation to the Votes of Parliament, communicated to
us by your Excellency and the desirs of our advice thereof.
Humbly Shows,
1. THat upon the reports come to all quarters of the Army concerning the Votes
and proceedings of the House May 21. As also of those on Tuesday, May 25. we
find the generallity of the Army (as we are our selves) much unsatisfied in the
one, and something amazed and startled at the ^ther, the first Votes (of
Friday) coming much short of satisfaction as to the grievances of the Army
then reported to the House and not taking any notice at all of some that were
most material, and the latter (of Tuesday) importing a resolution suddenly to
disband the Army by peace-meale, before equal satisfaction be given to the
whole in any of the grievances, or so much as any consideration had of some
others most material: And also before any effectual performance of that
satisfaction with the Votes of Friday seemed to promise as to some of the
grievances, all which we shall be ready (upon a little time given us) to
represent to your Excellency, more distinctly and in particular.

2. That the said distraction, and the iealousies occasioned upon the same
proceeding, as we fear, and some effects already appearing do find, may
unhappily produce dangerous disturbances and tumultuous actings amongst
several parts of the Army, as they now lie dispersed and remote from the Head
quarters, especially amongst those Regiments whose principal Officers, by
neglecting or disserting their Soldiers in in their necessary concernments or
just grievances, have disobleiged their Soldiers, and lost their interest with
them in so much as such Officers are in some sort forced to withdraw from their
charges, and can scarce with safety come at them, and to prevent the
inconveniences or ill consequences which such disturbed or tumultuous actings
might produce either to the countries where the Army quarters or to the kingdom,
We humbly advise your Excellency without delay, to draw the Arm (or at least
those parts thereof that are not fixed to certain Quarters upon particular du^y)
unto a closer posture of Quarters, so as each Regiment, Troop, and Company, may
lie under the view, and oversight of their respective Officers that are left
with them, and all of them under a near^r view of, and correspondencie wi^h the
Head-quarter, which may thus have a readier influence upon all, for the better
preserving of good Order, and prevention of inconvenienci^s, and in such
posture for the Countries ease, to remove and shift the whole Quarter one a
week at least, till upon further sa^isfaction, ^^e Army may be quie^ly, and
orderly disbanded.

3. That upon the same dissa^i^faction and jealousies we find an extreme
earnestn^l, and violent propers^^ among the soldiers to a general Randezvorz*
and we veril^ believe, that the first at^empt to d^b^nd any one Re^^ment,
before equal satisfaction to all, and assurance against th^se things they have
cause to fear, will (...) them all to draw together and Randezvouz of
themselves, as it were upon in Alarm. And to prevent the into ve^^^nc^s or il
consequences both to these Countries and (...) Kingdom, of any such tumultuous
or confused draw^ng to a Randezvouz without order, we humbly advise your
Excellency without delay, after the contracting of quarters, to order a g^n^ral
Randezvouze for those parts of the Army, whose quar^ers shall b^ so contracted:
And this we advise and desire the rather because of the scandalous suggestions
of some, importi^g as if the late discontents appearing in the Army, and the
representations of grievances from the Army, were not really in or from the
body of the Soldiery, but a m^ere delusion or appearance made by the
contrivance and artifice of some factious Officers, or other persons in the
Army, the truth and falsehood whereof, as also the true temper and disposition
of the Army, your Excellency, and all other, may most clearly discover ^^y
such a general Randezvouz (without the delay or trou^^e of going to every
Regimen a part as they now lie) the ^^my may more certainly understand what
they may expect from the Parliament, and both Parliament and Kingdom what to
judge and trust to, concerning the Army, and to that purpose at such a
Randezvouz, we shall (we hope through the grace of God) discharge our (...)
to the Parliament and Kingdom, as well as to your Excellency and the Army,
and demonstra^e that the good and quiet of the kingdom, is much dearer to us
then any particular concernment of our own. These two last things we humbly
advise and desire may be done without delay, or that otherwise me may be held
acquitted from all inconveniences that may ensue in our several charges.

4. Since (besides the d^ssatisfaction to the Army hitherto, in the points of
grievances, and the defect of assurance, as to seve^all of these things
promised for our satisfaction, and besides the jealousies occasioned upon the
Votes of Tuesday last and a^l held consequences which may follow in proceeding
thereupon) That course of disbanding the Army by piece^^^^e before the
satisfaction intended, be performed equally to the whole, seems something
strange and unusual (not practiced in disbanding of other Armies, as Major
Genesis Massies Brig^de, he Scots Army etc. or used that we have heard of, by any
States toward any Army that was ever accounted faithful; We humbly desire
your Excellency by an effectual Letter to move the Parliament for this, as
that which we humbly offer and do beg at the^, both for their own honor, in
rela^ion to wha^ future Armies they may have occasion to employ, for the
reputation of your Excellency, and this Army, as well as for its better
satisfaction, and as they render the good and assured quie^ of his Kingdom, or
the effectual relief and saving of Ireland, That they would be pleased to
resume the considera^ion of things voted on Tuesday last, and to suspend any
present proceeding thereupon; as also to resume the grievances of the Army,
together with the things proposed in the conclusion of the Narrative from the
Officer, and to give satisfaction, or at least some resolution to each of them,
and that they would not think it fit to put that temptation, those jealousies,
and that dishonor upon the Army*

Whereas, what we here desire your Excellency to move may be said, if admitted
into consideration, to tend to delay the relief of Ireland.

1. We find most clearly, that the great hopes suggested to the Parliament, of
the supply of that service in that way at present intended, will prove as to
any further expectation out of this Army, but vain and delusive, as the loud
noise of so many powerful Officers, with 50 Companies of Foot, and ten of
horse, so long since engaged for that service have already proved, and if
herein our judgment be not credited, we have yet discharged our duty to the
Parliament, and both Kingdoms in declaring it.

2. We cannot but for our own, and the Armies further discharge, and clearing,
declare, That if the Parliament had not been abused by many of those they have
employed, and entrusted for the promotion of that service, and had not been by
such men's false informations, or misrepresentations concerning the Army, or
otherwise diverted from the consideration of or from giving reasonable
satisfaction to the Army in these things proposed by the generality of the
Officers at the first meeting at Walden in March last, in order to that
service, and had not by like mischievous practices of such incendiaries been
since then moved and drawn to such things, and in such a series and succession,
as have conduced to multiply discontents, disobligations, and provocations upon
the Army, (we say had it not been for such persons and such things) we are
confident might have had (if they had pleased) an Army entire, and ready formed
under their old Officers, and Conduct, to have engaged for that service, having
found a just consideration for the services past, and assurance of pay and
subsistence in that to come.

Saturday the 29 of May 1647. At A Council of War held at St. Edmunds Bury,
there were present
Commissary General Ireton. Col. Whaley, Col. Rich. Coll. Sir Hardresse Waller
Col. Hughson. Col. Ok^y. Col. Lilburn Liev. Col. Jackson. Lieu. Colonel Pride,
Lieu. Col. Read. L. Col. Salm^n. L. C. Iubs, Major Di^borow. Major R^ad, Maj.
Huntington. Ma. Tomlinson. Maj. Swallow. Maj. Horton. Maj. Goodday. Maj. Smith.
Maj. Cow^^. Maj. Wade. Cap. Jenkin. Cap. Lilborn. Cap. Pretty. Cap. Morgan.
Cap. Grove Cap. Cannon. Cap. Piteford. Cap. Dale Cap. H(...) Cap. Hawes. Cap.
Bethel. Cap. Coleman. Cap. Laton. Cap. White. Cap. Highfield. Cap. Rainborow.
Cap. Lee, Cap. Rolph. Cap. Spooner. Cap. Orpin. Cap. Clark. Cap. Hoddin. Cap.
Stodder. Cap. Ask, Cap. Holmes. Cap. Tolhurst. Cap. Gougff. Cap. Grigson. Cap.
Lago. Cap. Davies. Cap. Toppington. Cap. Brafield. Cap. Lieu. Kirby. Cap. L.
W^^^ington. Cap. L. A(...). Cap. L. Howes. Cap. L. Knight. Cap. L. Arnop. Liev.
Scotton. L. Cowel. L. Sh(...). L. Enser. L. Barton, L. Hooker. L. Miller. L.
White. L. Heydon. L. Phillips. L. Wheeler. L. Singleton. L. Gough L. Morgan L.
Topping L. Erwood L. Hawes L. Axiell L. Baber, Cornet Moore. C. Southwood C.
Baker C. Iennings C. Bush C. Warren C. Gr(...)e C. Essex. Ensign Pearth* ^.
Wright E. Gregory E. Campfield E. ^^wlins E. Nicolas. Quartermaster Savage, Q.
Warren Q. Hunt Q. Sanders Quartermaster Arch^.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight, Captain, General of the forces
raised by the Authority of Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Soldiers of the Army, presented to his Excellency
at a Council of War, held at St. Edmunsburye on Saturday 29 May 1647,
Humbly Shows,

THat we your Petitioners considering the late Orders for disbanding the Army
without redresing our grievances, vindicating the Army, or calling to account
such persons who have been intenders contrivers, and promoters of our
destruction which (being but reasonable) we humbly conceive we may justly
expect and should not be denied before our disbanding, considering also the
strange unheard of, and unusual way of disbanding us a part one Regiment from
another contrary to the examples of other Armies, disbanding in this kingdom:
which posture renders us suspisious to the kingdom to whom for some of our
Accounts (though humble and just) we have already been declared enemies, and to
whom (for ought we know) the rest of our doing, may be presented with the same
constiructions.

We your Petitioners humbly beseech your Excellency, you would be pleased to
appoint a Randezvouze speedily for the Army, and also to use your utmost
en^eavours that it be not disbanded, before our ^ad and pressing grievances be
heard and fully redressed; which if not done before disbanding* we humbly
conceive we shall be enforced upon many inconvenienc(...), which will (of
necessity) arise, when we (though unwilling) shall be necessitated (for
avoiding of destruction like to fall or the whole Army, if not prevented) to do
such things our selves which if your Excellency (out of your wisdom and
prudence) shall prevent, by granting our just desires in a way of Order we
shall abundantly ^^joyce in it, and be (with cheerfulness) enabled by it to
subscribe our selves,

Your Excellencies and the Kingdoms innocent and faithful servants, whose
names are hereunto annexed, being Agitators in behalf of the several
Regiments. Edward Sexby. Adjutators of the Generals Regime of Horse. Edward
Tailor. Adjutators of the Generals Regime of Horse. William Allen Lieutenant
Generals Regiment, Sam: whiting. Lieutenant Generals Regiment, Tho: Shepherd,
Commissary Generals Regiment. Anth. Nickson, Commissary Generals Regiment.
Edward Twig, Colonel Fleetwoods Regiment. Thomas Jones, Colonel Fleetwoods
Regiment. Thomas Kendall, Colonel Whaleyes Regiment. William Young, Colonel
Whaleyes Regiment. Edward Star, Colonel Sheffields Regiment, Edward Gethings
Colonel Sheffields Regiment, John Willoughby, Colonel Butlers Regiment,
Tobias Box, Colonel Butlers Regiment, Thomas Brown, Colonel Sir Robert Pyes
Regiment, Barth W^llock. Colonel Sir Robert Pyes Regiment, George Steuson,
Colonel Graves his Regiment. Richard Salter. Colonel Graves his Regiment.
Nicholas Lockyer, Colonel Riches Regiment. John Braman, Colonel Riches
Regiment. Edward Vaughan, Of the Generels Regiment of Foot. John Newson, Of the
Generels Regiment of Foot. Robert Mason, Colonel Wallers Regiment, Henry
Anderton, Colonel Wallers Regiment, Nicholas Andrews Colonel Harlowes
Regiment. Ralph Prentice, Colonel Harlowes Regiment. Herbert Field Colonel
Lilburnes Regiment. Thomas Walston, Colonel Lilburnes Regiment. Edward Garn,
Colonel Hewsons Regiment. Daniel Hincksman Colonel Hewsons Regiment. William
Baker, Colonel Lambarts Regiment.


Courteous Reader,
IN the behalf of the Army, I have some things to say to thee: There has been
many false reports made of them, concerning the Money and Commissioners that
were sent to Chel(...)ford to disband them, how that they had seized on the
money and kept the Commissioners prisoners and used them coursely: But how
false this is, the Commissioners themselves can testify, and the city of
London, that with their own eyes have seen the (...) and Commissioners safely
returned again; and I hope that the just and honest dealing of this Army, not
only in this, but in all other of there actions, will in time open all the
Kingdoms Eyes, to see the reality of their intentions, that they mind not
themselves, but the good of the Parliament and Kingdom, which will be
sufficient to stop the wide (...) of Envy it self that has cost so many
false aspersions on them.

So I rest, thine and the Kingdoms servant, E, C. Lieutenant.


