Life out of Death. A SERMON Preached at CHELSEY, ON The recovery of an
honorable Person.

By Thomas Fuller. B. D.

Printed for John Williams, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

TO THE Virtuous and worthy Gentlewoman, Mris ANNE DANVERS, all increase of
grace and happiness.
YOu are the first Virgin of your sex (and probably may be the last) to whom my
pen has addressed it self by way of Dedication, and indeed you may challenge a
just interest in this Sermon.

First you heard it preached with that exemplarie attention you always use in
Gods house. Secondly, you shared deeply in the welcome occasion thereof, the
recoverie of your worthy Father. Thirdly, I am confident you have digested it
in your meditations, and will bring forth the fruits thereof in your godly life.

Remember your Name imports Grace in the language of Israel, and Scripture
affords you two worthy Namesakes, one the Mother of a Prophet, the other her
self a Prophetess: The former frequently repaired to the Tabernacle, the latter
never went out of the Temple. The assiduitie of your daily Devotion to God,
Dutifulness to your Parents, and general Goodness to all, raises me to a great
assurance you will imitate such worthy Presidents.

Dr. Alexander Nowel, when taxed by some Courtiers for flattering Queen
Elisabeth in his Preaching, was wont to plead for himself he had no other way
to instruct the Queen what she should be, but by commending her.

In like manner, I pray interpret my praising of you, a teaching of you; suffer
not the brand of falsehood to fall upon my Credit. Yea, I am sure you will
endeavor to justify and exceed this your Character here presented; for the
performance whereof, you shall never want the prayers of him who is an Indebted
Servant to the root and branches of your Honorable Extraction,

THOMAS FULLER.

Life out of Death.
ISAIAH 38.9. The writing of Hezekiah King of Juda, when he had bin sick, and
was recovered of his sickness.


IN the first verse of this Chapter, Isaiah is dispatched to King Hezekiah,
with a sad message, which he thus expresses in these short, but sharp words.
Thus says the Lord. Set thy house in order, for thou shall die and not live.

At the hearing hereat, see the demeanor of King Hezekiah. He turned his face
to the wall and prayed unto the Lord.

O the difference betwixt Hypocrites and Gods servants in their devotions: the
former desire Mat. 6.5. to pray in the corners of the streets, that is (as the
Greek word imports) in the meeting where two streets decuss or thwart one
another, where four Angles come together, so that the hypocrite has in effect
the advantage of four streets, (two going one way, and two another) to be seen
of men, and hard is his happ, if he prove invisible to have none take notice of
his Religion.

Clean contrary Hezekiah turns his face to the wall, none but God and himself
shall be witness of what is transacted betwixt them, no attendance standing by
shall pry into his behavior, if any posture or passage less Courtly chance to
fall from him in the height of his passion, only God shall see it, who will
pity and pardon it.

Here is hearty prayer. Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight.

How is the same thing not the same thing, when spoken by two several men? Had
that proud Pharisee in St. Lukes Gospel, for whose pride the whole Temple was
not large enough, except he justled the poor Publican, had he who in his
Confession acknowledged all his own virtues, and the Publicans faults: I say,
had he uttered these words of Hezekiah, he might justly have been conceived
therein, to savor rankly of the leaven of the Pharisees spiritual pride and
hypocrisy: whereas our Hezekiah pronouncing these words, not self-praysing,
but self-purging in the sincerity of his heart, from an upright soul to an all
seeing God, they resented not of pride, but whole humility, and were acceptable
in the eyes of Heaven.

And Hezekiah wept sore. Strange, what made him take on so bitterly at the
tidings of death. I had thought he would have embraced both message and
Messenger, if not for their own, for their senders sake, I had though he would
have rewarded him that brought him the first news of his desired dissolution.
Was not Hezekiah assured that the setting of his Sun here in a mortal life,
should be the rising thereof in a blessed immortality. How ill then does those
tears become those cheeks, those sobs and sighs, that heart, those moans and
complaints, that tongue, wherein rather we should have expected smiles and
joyful acclamations.

Answ. Double the reason of Hezekiahs grief. First, because though he was a
good man, yet he was a man, and therefore we wonder if unwilling to die, our
souls and bodies have bin loving playmates for many years together, and loath
to depart, will be their tune at their separation. Many through pain may be
discontented to live, though notwithstanding to die, such a love of life is
naturally implanted in every man.

Secondly, Hezekiah was unwilling to die, because as yet issueless. He had no
Son to succeed him in the Throne. We all know what a great curse barrenness was
amongst the Children of Israel, though under the Gospel the malediction is so
far removed, that wombs which bear not, and paps which suckled not, are
pronounced blessed in time of persecution. But besides, the general desire of
Children, common to all Jews. A greater longing for issue might be allowed to
Hezekiah, because descended from David. He stood in fair probability to have
the Messiah, according to the flesh spring from his loins, the greatest outward
happiness (and which might be improved to spiritual comfort) that humanity in
that age was capable of, besides dying without an Heir, a door was open to
ambitious competitors to pretend to the Crown. So that the Land might be rent a
sunder by civil wars betwixt several claims and titles about succession.

Now that Hezekiah hitherto was without a Child plainly appears by the age of
Manasseth his eldest Son, 2 Chronicles. 33.1. Manasseth was twelve years old when
he began to reign. Seeing therefore God after this time added 15. years to
Hezekiahs life, by computation it plainly appears, that Manasseth was born
three years after Hezekiahs recovery, and so he childlesse at this present time.

Well the Prophet Isaiah is sent with a welcome Counter Message, that Hezekiahs
prayer was heard, and a longer lease of life indulged unto him, confirmed with
miracle from Heaven of the going back of the Sun.

Hezekiah thus restored to health, thought it was too low and little thanks,
only to speak thanks, Litera scripta manet, whereas words quickly vanish away,
and therefore for the better perpetuation, confirmation, and propagation of the
memory of his recovery to make it the longer, the broader, the deeper to all
posterity, he enters the same upon record, and puts it on the Calendar of
eternity. The writing of Hezekiah King of Judah, when he had been sick, and was
recovered of his sickness.

The words present us with Hezekiah in a double condition, Hezekiah sick,
Hezekiah sound, Hezekiah dying, Hezekiah living. We will follow the method of
the Text, and begin with his first and worst estate, Hezekiah sick.

Before I go further, I am encountered with a shrewd objection, and have no
mind to meddle with it, but it will meddle with me, so importunate the nature
thereof, and that is this. Does not this argue some mutability in God to recede
from his former, and take up a new resolution? are not those Princes or States
branded with levity and inconstancy, who in one breath order and disorder, act
and repeal unconsistent with themselves in their proceedings? and does not this
at least fix some aspersion of sickleness on that infinite power, with whom
there is no shadow of change? First, to conclude Hezekiahs death, then to issue
out a Command to the contrary for his longer life.

I could answer, let not our eye be evil, because Gods is good. Let not his
extraordinary mercies make us question and quarrel at his proceedings. If any
Prince or State make a perfective alteration to the best, by pitying and
pardoning the condemned: such a commendable change makes them not unlike
themselves, but most like him who is the best of beings, God himself in my
Text, turning Hezekiahs doleful message of death into comfort and consolation
by reversing thereof.

But more plainly two answers may be shaped, this objection and it shall be
left to the Readers. Christian liberty which to prefer, or if he please to
twist them both together. First, when God said in his message of Hezekiah, thou
shall die and not live, the meaning is, Thy disease whereof now thou lie
sick, is deadly and mortal in the very nature thereof; as if he had said,
Hezekiah I acquaint thee with the true state and condition of thy body, deceive
not thy self by expecting life through any natural means: such is the
malignity of thy present malady, it is pestiferous and deadly in it self (and
indeed some take it to be the plague sore) place therefore no confidence in
physic or attendance, thereby to recover thy health, which is possible no
other way then immediate miracle from Heaven.

Others distinguish betwixt Gods comminatory and definitive sentence; A
definitive sentence is absolute like the Acts of the Medes and Persians,
admitting of no revocation; but a comminatory or threatening sentence done in
Terrorem, always carries with it a clause or condition of revocation, in case
a just cause thereof appear to divine providence in the interval, betwixt the
pronouncing and executing of the sentence. This clause is not always expressed,
but sometimes concealed in Gods bosom, like that threatening Jonah 3.4. Yet
forty days, and Niniveh shall be overthrown. Always provided, if in that
space they compound not with God by unfeigned repentance, parallel whereunto was
this decree in the Text, including upon Hezekiahs petitioning, a reversion
thereof without the least aspersion of levity on divine immutability.

The main Doctrine in the Text is this. Neither grace nor greatness can
privilege any from sickness, and by consequence, from death. Hezekiah had a
double Title to make him sickness-free, death-proof. First, he was one of
signal sanctity, a non sicut., like unto him was none before him, neither
afterward arose there any in Israel like unto him. Secondly, he was a King,
had his piety improved by power. Yet sickness was no whit afraid of the
greatness of his Porter, of the grimness of his Guard, at the gallantry of his
Pentioners, at the greatness, at the goodness of his Person; but boldly seized
upon him, whereof this the Reason, The statute of death is above the
prerogative Royal. It is appointed of all men once to die.

Seeing then it were madness in meaner persons, to flatter themselves with
hopes of constant health and life. Here let us lay down some Rules, how persons
should demean themselves in the time of sickness, providing to entertain what
is impossible to avoid. These lessons must be learned now, and practiced
hereafter. Sickness is a time to suffer, not to do in; Patients are like Bees
in winter, no flying abroad to find fresh flowers, either they must starve, or
live on that stock of honey which they have provided in the summer time. Let us
not have our Oil to buy, when we should have it to burn; but treasure up good
counsels whilst we are at ease and health, to be put in use when Gods prisoners
on our beds of sickness. And first I lay down this proposition.

It is lawful for a sick person to desire longer life, if in a right manner,
and to a good end. Right manner; namely, if conditionally, submitting himself
to Gods will and pleasure. Christ has taught us this piece of spiritual
manners, Mat. 26.39. Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. The Text
is a good end. Not to act over again our youthful vanities, and to be more
perfect critics in unlawful pleasure then we have been before; but for one of
these four following ends.

First, to get a greater stock of grace and assurance of salvation: to obtain
livelier faith, quicker hope, hotter charity, clearer knowledge, stronger
patience, longer perseverance.

Secondly, as to receive more grace from God. So to return more thanks to him
by serving him in our vocation. Now the more eminent a man's calling is in
Church or Commonwealth, the more may he justify his importunity with God for
a longer life, that he may be more effectually serviceable in his place. O may
the Magistrate say, spare a little, that I may recover my strength, that I may
once again go up upon the bench to check vice, and countenance virtue, and
rescue the poor from the paws of the oppressor. Once again may the Minister
say, let me go up into the Pulpit, that I may propagate thy truth, and
suppress the spawning errors, and spreading vices of our age.

Know also, that this Argument for longer life, may properly and pathetically
be pressed on God, from them who by their own pains and parents cost, have
furnished themselves for abilities in Church or State, and being young, have
not yet had the opportunity to vent them for Gods glory, and the good of their
Country; such I say, may zealously petition God, that their Sun may not set
before it be fully risen, nor their stream dammed up as it were in the
Fountain; but as they have brewed and prepared, so they may broach and set
forth their indowments and acquired accomplishments, to the glory of God, and
good of his Saints and Servants.

Here it will not be amiss, to inquire into the meaning of David's words, when
desiring longer life, shall the dust praise thee O Lord? whereof under
correction, I humbly conceive this, the natural sense whilst a man is alive,
not only his soul but his dust prayseth God, I mean his body made thereof,
concurreth in divine service, and has together with his soul a competent share
in Gods worship. His eyes lifted up, his hands held up his knees bowed, his
tongue moved, his moiety of dust has its counterpart in the praising of God;
but in a dead man, his soul indeed prayseth God in Heaven, but his dust (till
glorified and united after the Resurrection) has no portion at all in praising
God. David therefore alleges this as an Argument to be continued in the Land
of the living, shall the dust praise thee O Lord, that Gods service might still
be preserved so in him, that his body might not be altogether useless, as in
dead folk, but have a portion of praising of God, conjoined with his soul (as
the opposite part of the Quire) in lauding the Lord.

Thirdly, a sick man may desire longer life, to see an establishment in the
Church of God, of these fluctuating times, to behold the same fixed to his
honor, and the advantage of true Religion.

Lastly, He may desire life to see the posterity which God has given him
bread, and brought up in holy nurture and instruction, and provided for in
outward maintenance, not to be left to the charity of the world, which waxes
cold in this age; but chiefly that their souls may be ballasted with saving
knowledge, not to be carried away with every wind of Doctrine, whilst they
are catechized in the fundamentalls of Religion.

But as these Reasons may justly make one desirous to live, so ought they not
to prevail so far as to make any overfond thereof. If therefore thou perceivest
in thy self, that death has seized thee, let not the foresaid Reasons breed
in thee an unwillingness to depart, seeing they may be unreasoned again, I mean
so far satisfied, as to make thee submit willingly to be disposed of by Gods
pleasure.

First, thou would willingly live to get more grace, but let this comfort
thee, that little grace thou have, if true and sincere, shall through Gods
goodness be accepted to thy salvation, whereof if thou have no assurance (as
many Servants of God have not) yet a casting of thy self on Christ will
without that assurance, though not so comfortably, yet as certainly carry thy
soul to Heaven.

Secondly, thou would live longer to do God more service in thy Calling; but
if thou perceivest the day of thy dissolution to approach, know thou have done
all that God has designed to be performed by thee. The witnesses when they had
finished their Testimony, Rev. 11.7. then the Beasts out of the bottomless pit
made war against them, overcame and killed them. Whilst any part, portion,
parcel, or particle of their testimony was unfinished, were it to the least
jota thereof, they were unconquerable by death, and secure from the darts
thereof. Know in like manner whilst thou have any thing to do, thou shall not
die, and if death seizes on thee, it is an evident sign thou have finished
what God intended to be acted by thee in this world.

Venerable Bede had almost finished the translation of the Gospel of St. John
into English, when he swounded away, which his Secretary seeing, who wrote for
him (as Baruch for Jeremiah) cried out, O master, there wants yet two or
three verses to be translated, hereat the old man revived, recruited his
spirits, and mustered in all the force of his mind together, held out to the
finishing of the same, and so expired. Assure thy self, thou shall in like
manner be immortal so long as there remains any part of thy Testimony
unperformed by thee.

Thirdly, thou would live to see a happy establishment of all differences in
Church and State: yet be not dejected if death prevent thy beholding thereof;
but be assured, all things at last shall conclude to Gods honor, and the good
of the Church. What if thou be like those Patriarks, Heb. 11.39. These all
having obtained a good report through faith, received not the promise. Though
thou see not this particular promise performed, it will be no prejudice to
thy happiness; but breath out thy soul in certain expectation thereof, and
earnest praying for the same. Nor let old Borzillai be so envious, if
superannuated himself, 2 Samuel 37. to see such things in his age, I say, let him
not repine at Chimham his Son to behold them, yea let us be so far from
grudging our posterity their enjoying of that which is denied to us, that let
us rather enjoin them to rejoice a double share at the performance thereof one
in their own capacity, the other as Heirs of their Fathers hopes and
expectations now brought to pass.

Lastly, let not thy desire to provide for thy Children make thee impatient to
die, but bequeath them to his providence who bestowed them upon thee: if thou
can say with Jacob, Genesis 33.5. they are the Children which God has
graciously given thee. And can clear thy conscience that thou have done thy
duty whilst living: in their education, doubt not but God in due time will
answer thy desires in the rest.

Come we now to lay down some motives to patience, and O that it were as easy
to practice them as to preach them; How facile is it for us here by Gods
goodness in perfect health, magisterially to dictate to others what they
should do; but God knows how hard we should find it to practice these
precepts if in sickness our selves. Truly, as careful Mothers and Nurses taste
themselves first what they give to their Children, that it may not be too hot
to burn their mouths. so we Ministers ought to try upon our own selves, those
Doctrines which we impose on others, which should make us more to sympathise
with the weakness of our people, if our consciences accuse us that we find
them too hot for our own mouths, which notwithstanding we will thrust down the
throats of others. In all humility therefore, and self consciousness of our
own infirmities, we commend to sick people these following motives to patience.

First, know that thy soul carries in it the seeds of all sins, and therefore
thy body has in it the seeds of all sickness. If therefore thy pain be not so
great as humane nature is capable of. If thy disease be not so acute as some
have been visited with, let this move thee to patience, that thou art not
tortured to that extremity which some have endured. The disease of Illiaca
passio in the height thereof, when the excrements of the body are countermanded
an unnatural way, is conceived one of the highest pains: therefore termed
Miserere mei Deus, Lord have mercy upon me: the Lord keep us and all good
People, in the happy ignorance of that pain, and let this increase both our
patience under, and our thankfulness to God, that it is mercy that that
intolerable torture is not inflicted upon us.

Secondly, consider that thy disease is far gentler and painless then what thou
have deserved, what is thy disease, a Consumption? Indeed a certain messenger
of death; but know that of all the Bailiffs, sent to arrest us for the debt of
nature, none uses his prisoners with more civility and courtesy then the
Consumption, though too often an ill use is made thereof, for the prisoners to
flatter themselves into a possibility of an escape; but what a Consumption have
thou deserved: Correct us O Lord, and yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury,
lest we be consumed and brought to nothing. A Consumption of annihilation is
our desert.

What is thy disease, the Toothache? indeed a grievous one of all that are not
mortal; but blessed be God, it has raised many from their beds, it has sent
few to their graves, often hindered sleep, seldom caused death; but know, if we
had our due, it is not the a king of the teeth, but gnashing of the teeth which
we deserve. It is a burning Fever? know that Hellfire is the just reward of
our sins, and all is mercy which is on the side thereof.

Third motive to patience. Consider, that which thou indurest, is nothing to
that which Christ has endured for thee. Is thy taste taken away from thee, so
that thy pallat takes no pleasure in what thou drinkest? yea, any liquor is so
far from pleasing thy Gust, it is nauseous and offensive unto thee; what is
that to the bitter portion of vinegar and gall which Christ tasted of for thy
sake, Mat. 26.34. yet made no mouths or wrie faces thereat. Do thou swim in a
bath of thy own sweat, in the sharpness of thy sits, so that thou art odious
unto thy self; what is this to the sweat of our Savior in his agony, Luke
22.44. when sweat as it were drops of blood fell from him so violent, that
invisible contusion, and we see the stripes, though behold not the hand that
strick him.

So much for Hezekiah sick, come we now to consider Hezekiah sound in a more
welcome condition. And here two things I shall commend to the consideration of
those whom God has restored from their beds of sickness, whereof the first.

1. Carefully perform those promises which thou did make to God in the time
of thy affliction, excellent the behavior of the Mariners, Jonah 1.15,16. and
the Sea ceased from her raging, then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and
offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows. Then when the Sea ceased,
here is the wonder, what more usual then for Seamen to storm in a calm, and to
be calm in a storm, had they made vows in the midst of the tempest, the matter
had not been great, such Religion might be accounted but a fit of the wind,
and the effect of foul weather; but now when the tempest was overpast,
tranquillity on the Sea, serenity in the air, then to make vows is worthy of
our observation, and worthy of our imitation. One vow made and kept after the
tempest, is worth a thousand promised in the same. Now the storm of sickness
is allayed in thy body, now make vows, now keep those which thou made
before, and it will be acceptable to God.

Secondly, mistake not thy reprieve for a pardon. Our English plain Proverb
says, The Pitcher goes not so often to the Fountain, but it is broken at
last. Let no Critics condemn this for a homely expression, finding it a
Scripture phrase used by Solomon in his description of old age and death,
Eccles. 12.6. before the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain. Expounded by some
to be the liver, wherein the blood, life's liquor, is contained, remember thy
self to be but a pitcher of frail and feeble constitution.

Yet is there difference, even amongst Pitchers, whereof some last longer then
others. First, that Pitcher that is made of stiff and tough Clay, not of bad
and brittle, and well baked in the Oven, is the strongest, and will abide most
knocks before broken. Secondly, that Pitcher which is charily kept, and seldom
used, put as we say to no stresse, may be of longer continuance, however,
neither the firm matter, nor sound baking, nor chary keeping thereof, can
advance the Pitcher into a Marble Urn, or pot of brass, but the fragility
thereof still remains, and it is but a Pitcher at the best.

Some men as succeed to strong bodies from their nativity, not enervated with
hereditary diseases (the badges of their Parents intemperance) are Pitchers of
the firmest Clay, and best making, such as improve this their temper with
temperance, not exposing themselves by exorbitant courses and casualties, are
Pitchers charily kept, however they still retain their breakableness, and can
never alter their property into a firmer consistence; and therefore let none
recovering from sickness misinterpret their reprieve for a pardon.

There is a Person honorably extracted, present in this place, to whom I may
joyfully and comfortably say (as Nathan to David in a different case) Thou art
the man. God has dealt with him as with Hezekiah, and has made his recovery a
comment upon my Text, so that this day this Scripture is fulfilled in our
ears, who hear and behold it, and I hope in his heart, who is thankfully
sensible thereof, he was visited with a long and dangerous sickness, meeting
with his declined age past possibility of recovery in the expectation of his
nearest friends, had this Shepherd bin smitten, how soon had the sheep of his
relations, and many of us who taste of his bounty, bin scattered abroad; but
blessed be God, who has restored him far above our hopes, and according to our
desires; yet in the recovery of Hezekiah, means according to Gods Command, did
concur with miracle, the receipt of a Fig was prescribed by God, which by his
blessing performed the cure; so here God has crowned the endeavors of a most
loving and careful consort, and the directions of a most able and knowing
Physician, as instrumental to the accomplishing of this his great mercy, to
this his revived Servant, who here tendereth the first fruits of his
Resurrection to God in his Church, to receive the Eucharist, that is, the
thanksgiving: as for all other mercies in Christ bestowed upon him; so for this
the last and freshest in his memory conferred on him, who has bin sick, and is
recovered of his sickness.

Amen.
FINIS.

