A SVMMONS From His EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax TO Sir RALPH HOPTON And his
Forces now in CORNVVAL.

A Copy whereof was sent to the Honorable Committee of Lords and Commons for
the Army, and Appointed to be Printed.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
March 11. 1645.

A Summons from His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax to Sir Ralph Hopton and his
Forces now in Cornwall.
SIR,
THrough the goodness of God to his people, and his just hand against their
enemies, your forces being reduced to such condition, as (to my sense the same
good hand of God continuing with us, wherein alone we trust) they are not like
either to have subsistence or shelter long where they are, or to escape thence;
nor (if they could) have they whither to go for better. I have thought good
(for prevention of more bloodshed, or of further hardship or extremity to any,
but such whose hearts God shall harden to their own destruction) to send you
this Summons for your Self and them to lay down Arms, and withal a tender of
such conditions (upon a present surrender and engagement, never more to bear
Arms against the Parliament) as may be better then any thing they can
rationally expect by further standing out.

First therefore, to the Soldiery in general (English and Foreigners) I shall
grant liberty, either to go beyond sea, or to their homes in England as they
please; and to such English as shall choose to live at home, my Protection for
the liberty of their persons, and for the immunity of their Estates from all
plunder or violence of Soldiers, and all to go their ways with what they
have, saving horses and arms.

But for Officers in Commission, and Gentlemen of quality, I shall allow them
to go with horses for themselves and one servant or more, suitable to their
quality, and with arms befitting Gentlemen in a condition of peace, and such
Officers as would go beyond sea for other service, to take with them their arms
and full number of horses answerable to their Offices.

To all Troopers and the inferior sort of Horse. Officers (bringing in and
delivering up their horses and arms) twenty shillings a man (in lieu of their
horses) to carry them home.

To English Gentlemen of considerable Estates, my Pass and Recommendation to
the Parliament for their moderate composition.

Lastly, for your Self (besides what is before employed to you in common with
others) you may be assured of such mediation to the Parliament in your behalf,
both from my Self and others, as for one, whom (for personal worth and many
virtues, but especially for your care of, and moderation toward the country)
we honor and esteem above any other of your party, whose Error (supposing you
more swayed with Principles of Honor and Conscience then others) we most pity,
and whose happiness (so far as consistent with the public welfare) we should
delight in more then in your least suffering.

These things (not from any need or other ends then Humane, and Christian)
having offered, I leave to your consideration and theirs whom they concern,
desiring your and their speedy resolving, which I pray may be such, as shall be
most for the honor of God, the peace and welfare of this poor Kingdom, and for
your and their good so far as may stand therewith.

And having herein discharged (as I conceive) the duty of an honest man, a
Soldier and a Christian, if God shall see it good to let your hearts be hardened
against your own peace, I shall (though with some regret for that ill which
shall ensue to any, yet with cheerfulness and rejoicing at the righteous
Judgments of God) pursue my charge and trust for the Public in another way,
not doubting of the same presence and blessing which God has hitherto
vouchsafed in the same Cause, to the weak endeavors of

T. F.
March 5. 1645.
FINIS.

