A FAITHFUL SUBJECT'S SIGH, ON The universally-lamented Death, and Tragical
End, of that Virtuous and Pious PRINCE, our most Gracious Sovereign, CHARLES I.

King of Great Britain, most Barbarously Butchered by His Rebellious Subjects.

By a Gentleman now resident in the Court of Spain.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

CAROLVS STVARTVS, Scotus, Magnae Britanniae, REX.

Anagramma.

AGNVS CANIBVS Esus, Corona exaltatur, Martyr est.

Chronogramma.
Charles 150 the trVe 5 PICtVre 106 of ChrIst 101 CrVCIfI'D 707,

Great BrIttaIn's 2 Virtuous 15 KIng 1 Now 10 Glorified 552.

A Faithful Subjects Sigh, etc.
FAme speak it softly, in thy lowest tone,
Else say He lives still; though (alas!) he is gone.
Our King has changed His Court for Heavens White Hall,
There He Reigns free, but here He lived in Thrall.
To th'upper-house of Heaven for all His wrongs
He now appeals, where no Tumultuous throngs
Of Commons may Intrude for Justice calling;
Which comes with vengeance on ye (Leave your bawling)
And will commit you all to her Black-rod,
Then Vote'gainst the Star Chamber of your God;
Bold, matchless villains, as ye have pulled down
His Throne on Earth, and stamped upon His Crown.
Old Time! I challenge thee to match but this
Most horrid Treason, and from thy Abisse
Of Monuments, and dark Lethaean Cell
Where Monsters sleep, draw one to Parallel
The English Rebel; rake Hell and extract
From thy worme-eaten blind Records, an Act
So black, so Hellish; as, when Charles now slain,
Was past by Subjects on a Sovereign:
Time draw the Curtains of Antiquity,
Show such a cruel bold impiety.
But yet re-draw them, and strive to conceal
Our shame, our wretched shame; oh don't reveal,
How much our Gyant-Traytors have out-went
And overgrown thy Pigmy-President.
Oh for poor Englands honor, let it not
Be said the English should exceed the Scot
In Treason and Disloyalty! that she,
Who was Heavens Condidate, should branded be,
And stigmatized with such foul Infamy;
That she, who for the lap of Gregory,
Was Great with Angels once, should now disgrace
Her former Births, thus with a spurious race
Of Devils; Now what will be answered
To those that ask me for thy Churches Head?
Poor England! Now thy Head is Triumphant,
Whilst that thy Church is truly Militant.
Thou for thy Lucius, that were so renowned,
Mother to the First baptized Monarch Crowned;
Who forth' First Christian were Glorified,
Un-Christian-like, thy King first Crucified.
Thou to whose pious womb (like a rich mine)
Teemed Christ's first Ensigne-bearer, Constantine,
The eldest Christian Caesar, should now lie
Impregnated within this cursed progeny
Of Vipers; most true Vipers, that do know
Their way to life through their poor Mothers maw:
Nay, base unnatural worms, when borne, these sucked
Her breast Heart-bloud out; left not till they plucked
Their Mothers Head off. Where Is St George? Appear
For England now with thy victorious Spear,
Against a Dragon ready to devour
Thy bleeding Lady, quickly from its power;
Redeem thy England, like her Champion,
And kill this Hydra, nursed in Alcoran;
That has an hundred Heads, and from each spets
Against God himself, its loathsome venomed threats,
Has his Vicegerent slain, whom Innocent
Of th'subtile windings of a Parliament;
Which (like this monstrous Serpent's Tail) Him caught,
Involved within its poisonous wreaths, and wrought
By those false Treacherous foldings, and made-Laws
Within the reach of those cursed Devils-claws,
That now have Butchered Him. Oh with what face
Could they impeach the sacred divine Grace
Of so great Majesty, and not struck Blind
With the bright rays thereof! as once we find
Those Sodomitick troops were just so bent
Against those two Heavenly Courtiers to Lot sent;
As now against this Angelick Hero, those
Base Buggerers of Freedom, Heavens foes!
How chance there flew not Fire-bals from those Eyes
(Those dread Celestial Torches) such vile Flies,
Such swarms of Waspes and Beetles to reduce
And scorch to Atoms, that durst to Accuse
So Good, So Great a King? but what Damned Slave
What Stygian Rascal was it the SENTENCE gave,
And could condemn his PRINCE; nay, and to dye
By th'Fatall Axe of Traitors, Publicly?
Wonder ye Heavens, the Earth clave not asunder
To swallow such a Judge! and through him under
The Bench of Radamanthus, there to feel
The vulture, Furies whip, Ixion's wheel,
Whilst all the Hissing Convent of Hell prye,
Amazed to see so strange a Prodigy;
And blush, a Modern Rogue to come Behind.
But could Three-headed Cerberus, that black Fiend,
That snarling Curre of Pluto's Kitchen, get
On one of the Three snakie Sisters, yet
So foul a Monster, as could dare to be
The Actor of so dire a Tragedy:
And put in Execution that Black Deed,
Making his Gracious, Sacred Sovereign Bleed!
O Yron-heart! O Rockie Soul! not reele
With a Repentant Palsy, when the Steel
He brandisht over That Head! O cruel stroke
That has cut down Druina's Royal Oak;
When the hard Axe wept Tears of Blood, and He
That held it, Flinty-breasted unmoved See
Never stagg'ring at the Act! And could the Sun
Still hold his journey, and not frighted run
Behind the Clouds, there put on sable weeds,
And from the East dispatch his Fiery steeds
Back ward unto the West; withdraw his light,
And in that Morn bid this dark World Goodnight!
Or could Dame nature unrelenting keep
Her constant course! It Is true she made Heaven weep
In an abundant manner; for the Skies
In Tears seemed to dissolve at's Obsequies.
But no more show of Sorrow? It Is most strange
Nature infringed thus, made no greater change;
Shifting her weeke-dayes Garments for His sake
To put on mourning Robes; would she not take
No Livery of Luto, nor vouchsafe to wear
No badge of Grief, nor anger to cause fear
In those remorslesse villains, and to shake
Their cruel Hearts with Terror, by Earthquake
Or Blazing-Star, and Comet fiery red,
To make those Dogs know whom they murdered?
True, Grandame Nature, thou did well resent
Thy God our Saviors Passion, thou did rent
The Temples vale asunder, and did split
The vaults ofth' Earth, which such an Ague fit
Lay trembling in, that therewithal she waked
The sleeping Ghosts, out of their dark Tombs shak'd,
To stand and wonder at that darker Night
When thou had spread black curtains over the Light,
To solemnize Christ's funer all rights; but know
A Truer Symbol of our Christ then now
Never suffered since; then surely for His sake
Some lamentable change thou ought to make,
Over our most Gracious Sovereign now dead,
By His own People (base Jews) Martyred:
And 'twixt two Thieves too, Crucified, which were
The INDEPENDENT and the PRESBYTER.
And as the Chief Priests and the Pharisees
Held Council against our Savior, so these
Of our Sanhedrim with the Libertine,
In such a Parliament did now combine
Against Christ's Anointed; where in vain they sought
Him to surprise, 'till they Him also Bought,
And Covenanted with the Scot for Gold,
Who Judas-like, his Native Master sold.
Then as the Dove in the Talons of the Kite,
Secured by's Rebels in the Isle of Wight:
Where (as Christ in the Garden was) for Prayer
Secluded, and devoted to prepare
Himself, for th'houre He knew was drawing nigh
To apprehend Him, they a Company
Of Treacherous villains sent Him to betray,
And by that Kiss of Treaty lead the way
For them to gripe Him; then hired the loud cry
Of the Multitude, that should say, Crucify.
Yet some of the Jewish Jury could confess
(Like Pilate) that they found their Lord Guiltless;
Washing their hands, not hearts, saying they saw
No fault in Him; but ye have made a Law
(Said those dissenting Lords) whereby it is fit,
We to your Swords, Him (and our selves) submit:
So His life He laid down, for th'sins of's Foes
(Like Christ) for the peculiar faults of those
That shed His Blood; who their good King accused
Of th'salfe-same Crimes, wherewith they Him abused.
In all things Christ's true Picture, and who dies
So like's Redeemer, I dare Canonize.
And for that Earthly Crown which here He bare
(That Crown of Thorns so full of prickling Care,
And sharp Afflictions) I dare aver this,
He wears Martyrs one in Paradise.
FINIS.

