SOME Necessary and Seasonable Cases of CONSCIENCE About Things Indifferent in
Matters of Religion, Briefly, yet faithfully stated and resolved: wherein the
the just bounds of Imposing on one hand, and of Obeying on the other, are truly
Fixed,

By an Indifferent Hand.

Romans 14. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.

Bernard. Pacem contemnentes and Gloriam quaerentes, pacem perdunt and gloriam.
London, Printed, and are to be sold at the Sign of the George in Fleetstreet,
and the first Shop in Westminster Hall. 1661.

A

The Preface.
SAd experience in every Age, especially in ours, has taught us, that the
Interessed Wits of men, on every side, having found so much to be said for
their own Opinions, and against another, have widened differences to so vast a
distance, that the Wit of man may even despair of a perfect closure. Indeed,
the Wisdom from above, that is pure and peaceable, and the Grace of
Self-denial and Brotherly love can only do it.

Yet, methinks, where there are two great Bodies divided and engaged in a
Church or Kingdom, even Moral wisdom should foresee the evil, and make timely
Application of preventing Remedies.

For which, there seem but three ways open to us: Conversion or Subversion of
one of the parties, or a Concession of both. The first is hardly to be
expected; the second is not to be desired; but, how happy were England, if the
last were obtained!

But yet I humbly crave leave to distinguish, betwixt that Cause and Party
which the Law owneth, and that which it does not; neither, do I ask such a
Concession from the present Law, as would maintain and uphold both these
parties, as they are parties; only, this I apprehend as a thing desirable,
that the way might be made so fair, or at least (considering the Temptation)
passable, that the dissenting party might come over to the other, and remain
no longer a distinct body from it. So that the persons that uphold that which
is called the illegal party, or at least the main body of them (for some will
be unreasonable) might be preserved, though the party be lost; and upon a fair
compliance, and as it were, adding or adjoining themselves to the Church, may
be united and embodied with it, and have the same protection and kindeness of
the Law.

If one of the parties should be contented thus to sacrifice it self to the
peace of the Church, and the honor of the other; it is pity, but that the
surviving party, that enjoyes the Inheritance, should cover the nakedness of
its Iudaicam Synagogam cum honor fuisse sepeliendam.
brother deceased; and, as St Augustine speaks of the Jewish Church, allow him
a hansome and honorable burial.

Herein, I humbly conceive, consists the INTEREST of the Church of England;
which also I have made my design and labor in this small Treatise, by making
the Rule of Imposi^ion as low and narrow, and the Rule of Obedience as high and
large as the Scriptures, the measure of both, would allow me.

And it is happy that Our Interest is also our Duty; for, if, on the one side,
nothing be required, but what is expedient in ^ts due latitude; and on the
other, nothing be refused that is not unlawful according to Scripture,
doubtless the way of Peace would not be so much unknown unto us.

I do much Revere that grave saying of Seneca; Non expedit concutere felicem
Statum; it is not safe to shake a happy State: yet, by the same line of reason
we are all led to use the best of our Counsels for the settlement of the State,
and making it happy.

The Sentence of St Augustine is also weighty; Ipsa mutatio Consuetudinis,
etiam quae adjuvat utilitate, novitate perturbat, the very change of a Custom
may sometimes spoil any other good that may accrue by it, even by its Novelty;
but, I think, none will affirm the Rule to be universal, and to extend to all
customs, and to all seasons and exigents of the Church; and if that be
acknowledged, what remains, but that the conveniences and inconveniences of
some small alterations for the gaining of some, yea many brethren, and the
establishment of the Church in quietness, be equally considered, and then the
conclusion be made and not before?

I acknowledge, there is much of Wisdom, much of Peace in that notable Adage;
Malum been positum non est movendum, an Evil that is only so, because
inconvenient, being placed well, is not to be removed; lest by plucking out a
Rusty nail the whole Fabric fall about your ears: yet its possible, a malum, a
little inconvenience ill placed may be the cause of a great mischief, as the
smallest error in a curious Watch may happen to check the whole Motion.

Yet, I am absolutely averse from that ancient Petition, Toll Legem and fiet
certamen, take away the Law and we will dispute: that were, indeed, to begin in
confusion, and most likely to end in devouring and consuming one another: but,
I humbly offer, Whether something of the Rigor of Law might not be abated, or
some small matters un-injoined; not, that we might fight, but that we might
agree, and rejoice together, as the sons of Peace, in Sions prosperity. I mean,
not in two distinct bodies, and parties in the Church; but, thus united, and of
two made one; that under one and the same Prince and Law; one and the same
Ecclesiastical Government; professing one and the same Doctrine and Liturgy, we
might all as one man jointly prosecute one and the same glorious ends, the
defense of the Gospel, and the saving of Souls.

But it may not be unseasonable, to put the Case, that the Supreme Authority
will not admit of any alteration of that which is already established by Law,
or at least not so much as is desired: if it should be so, I humbly crave leave
to offer my Advice to my Reverend Brethren in the Ministry, in a few words,
and I have done.

1. That, as they fear the God of heaven, and love the Lord Jesus Christ, and
have any bowels of compassion toward this poor people; and as they would
obtain the ends of their Calling, and advance the peace and settlement, the
safety and salvation of the Church of God committed to their charge, and of
which they must one day give an account, that they would instantly (seeing
their contests and heats of Altercation may sooner inflame the Nation, then
alter the Laws, when once established) that they would instantly throw away
their envyings, hatred, malice, and variance, their evil surmisings and
animosities, their evil speaking and reproaching one another, and fall heartily
to their great business the work of the Gospel, abounding therein with love and
peace one toward another, and amidst their people, that the God of Love and
Peace may be with them, and bless their endeavors for the common salvation;
for why should it be said to their eternal obloquie, That the Church of England
was destroyed by the Builders, or died of the Doctors?

My Dear Brethren, let me breathe out my soul in St Augustines words: Ut
moneor, ut doleo, ut timeo; procederem ad pedes vestros, flerem quantum
valerem, rogarem quantum amarem; nunc unumquemque pro seipso, nunc utrumque pro
altero; and pro aliis, and maxim infirmis pro quibus Christus mortuus est, qui
vos tanquam in Theatro vitae hujus cum magno sui periculo spectant; ne de vobis
ea conscribendo spargatis, quae quandoque concordantes delere non poteritis,
qui nunc concordare nolitis.

2. To my dissenting Brethren, my humble and solemn Request is, that if the
case be like to be thus, they would in season think it advisable, seriously to
consider what they have to do; to study that which is likely to be enjoined,
with all severity and impartiality, as they would do or suffer with knowledge
and comfort.

The great Case will be, Upon what grounds you may warrantably lay down your
ministry; and, upon what, Not? or how far you may lawfully obey the
Imposition of Authority? For your more ample satisfaction herein, give me leave
to say, That after the Scriptures, Bucer, Calvin, Melancthon, Zanchy, Polanus,
Beza, etc. are of undoubted credit in such a case as this, and worthy to be
conferred with; as also St Augustine his 118, 119. Epist. ad Janu.

If this poor Piece shall have the honor of your perusal, I beseech you
remember, that by two Errors we are very apt to weigh things amiss:

1. When we take up the scales and weigh overhastily.

2. When one end of the balance is heavier then the other; perhaps by
prejudice, or something else that should not be there.

Do the Book no wrong, do the Church no wrong, do your selves no wrong.

For your own preservation, your peoples edification, the Churches peace,
prosperity and salvation, be not averse to any just satisfaction.

Let no Society, no Condition, no Temptation with error and suffering be more
dear and pleasant with you then the Church of God, the discharge of your trust,
the fulfilling of your Ministry, with duty and liberty, truth and felicity.

Farewell.
Twenty Four Necessary and Seasonable CASES of CONSCIENCE about things
Indifferent in Matters of Religion.
CASE I. What are Things Indifferent?
Resol.
THINGS Indifferent have their place in the middle, betwixt things Necessary
and things Sinful; things that ought, and things that ought not to be done: For
as to their Simple and common Nature, i. e. Considered nakedly without respect
to such Circumstances as change their property, and denominale them good or
evil; they are such things as may be done or left undone without sin.

They are of a Middle, not a Mixed Nature, not both good and bad; that is Medium
abnegationis.
a Contradiction: not partly good and partly bad; then the good can never
expiate the bad; (for the least degree of evil renders the Action evil:) but
neither good nor bad.

As they are Morally neither good nor bad; so, they are not made such by
Scripture, being neither commanded nor forbidden.

They are of an Indifferent Nature, and may be Indifferently Used: Yet very
apt, by reason of Circumstances, to tend unto, to swerve toward, to become, or
appear, either good or evil.

CASE II. Whether there is any thing Indifferent in the Exercise of Religion?
Resol.
FOR Our cleerer satisfaction herein, let us consider Actions and Circumstances.

1. Touching Actions, I assert, First, That no one Action in Religious
Exercises is of its own nature so Indifferent, but that by its circumstances it
easily becomes good or evil.

2. No Action, that is deliberate, and has an order to a certain end
(distinguished from Actions of fancy, usually so called, which are unobserved
by the Agents) Individually considered, and as performed about the Worship of
God, can be truly Indifferent; but by reason of its circumstances is good or
evil.

3. No Action, considered as a part of Divine Worship, can possibly be
Indifferent; for either it is such as God himself has appointed, and therefore
necessary; or invented by men and superstitious.

4. Yet Fourthly, There are diverse Actions that are no part, but circumstances
of worship (though Actions in themselves) before they are exerted and clothed
with their circumstances that are properly Indifferent, both as to their
Nature, neither good nor bad, as to the Scripture, neither commanded or
forbidden; and consequently: as to our use neither necessary nor unlawful: and
lastly, in comparison with other Actions, that might as lawfully serve in the
same stead, of neither more or less necessity: as I might instance in lifting
up, or casting down our eyes, in lifting up or spreading abroad our hands in
prayer, etc. But thus much for Actions.

2. As for Circumstances properly so called, It is not doubted, I think, by
any, but there are some, viz. time, place, habit, that are purely indifferent:
I mean, before they are determined, and in a general consideration, abstracted
from convenience, and not complicated with other accidents that may vary the
Case.

I shall not burden this unexceptionable Point with needless Authority, which
were very easy, if not needless. I shall only instance the reasonableness of
it, under one part of Divine Worship, viz. the Sacrament, in the judgment of
Mr. Calvin, So Calv. I^sti. lib 1. Sect. 43.
much (says he) as concerns the outward form of Ministering the Sacrament, viz.
Whether the faithful receive into their hand, or not: Whether they divide it,
or every one eat that which is given him: Whether they put the Cup into the
hand of the Deacon, or deliver it to the hand of the next: Whether the Bread be
Leavened or unleavened: Whether the Wine be red or white; it makes no matter;
these things be Indifferent, and left to the liberty of the Church. Thus he:
and we might add almost so many more of the like nature, about every other
Ordinance, if occasion required.

CASE III. Whether may things Indifferent be Imposed and required by Authority?
Resol.
DOubtless they may: For,

1. The Word of God has not particularly taught us, what that decency and
order is that is required: Yet the Ruling part of the Church ought not only to
require, but to take care and see (according to the Apostles example) that all
things be done decently and in order.

2. Then, plain Reason demonstrates, that if it be the duty of Rulers, to see
That all things be done decently and in order; they must also by their own
discretion, or advice with others, judge and prescribe what is such.

3. The Great Apostle, therefore, took upon him, not only to press the general
command of decency 1. Cor. 14. 34. and 11. 4. 17. 1 Timothy 2. 8. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 12.
1 Cor. 7. 10.
and order; but to reprove particular disorders, and to direct unto and command
particular parts of order and comeliness in the Churches.

4. Yea, that Famous Synod, and truly Apostolical, in Acts 15. did by their
power also limit the use of Indifferent things; which they concluded for the
present necessary, Both to be ordered and to be observed, for the Peace of the
Church.

5 And, that this power of ordering the Church in things indifferent, was not
peculiar to the times of the Apostles, but resides in the Rulers of the Church,
to be exerted upon the same Moral and reasonable occasions, might easily be
made to appear to have the suffrage of the Learned of all ages, if any need
required.

6. Ames himself having ventured to say, That nothing ought to be commanded but
that which is good, or forbidden but which is Ames, Gas. de Adiaphoris.
evil, seems presently to check, and so to limit, as almost to recant what he
had said; adding, Quod Adiaphorum est, non potest simpliciter, absolu^e, and in
perpetuum, vel prohiberi vel imperari; Whereby one would think he yielded,
that, for some respects, and for some time, things indifferent in their own
Nature may be commanded or forbidden.

7. I shall conclude this also with Calvin's Authority; in 1 Cor. 11. 2.
We know, (says he) that every Church is left free to appoint a form of
polity and government fit and profitable for it self, because the Lord has
prescribed nothing certain: to whom we might add the pertinent (if alike
weighty) Testimony of Philip Melancton; who tells us, That because the Ministry
divinely ordained ought to be public and external, there is need of some
humane In Com. Loc.
Ordinances.

Vid etiam Danae. Judic. etc.

CASE IV. Whether may things Indifferent conduce any thing to the order and
decency of Gods Worship?
Resol.
THings indifferent, absolutely so, or considered as such, cannot: For things
indifferent, as such, do equally respect the order and disorder of the Church
or service thereof, otherwise they were not media or indifferent things, but
partial. So far true is that of Ames, Those things which make for order in
their own Nature are not indifferent.

However, there are diverse things in their own common nature indifferent, that
yet in some respects are of more expediency in the Worship of God then others:
which happens, either from their better readiness and aptness for order, as
applied; or because they may have more repute or show of goodness reflected
from the temper of the place where they are used; and consequently, are more
eligible then those that approach to vice or superstition, or are blemished
with appearance or repute of evil, or are aliene and unapt for the present
service.

Again, diverse Accidents that are equally indifferent in their nature, and left
so by the Scripture, may also be equally accommodated, so far as we may judge,
for order and decency, and consequently both indifferent and expedient; for
although they all of them be decent and comely enough, yet neither the
worshippers nor the worship may be capable of admitting or using them all, at
least at one and the same service.

Lastly, the Custom of the Churches is a standing Rule in these Matters,
according to which that which is decent in one Church as well as lawful in it
self, may be most uncomely, and consequent^y most inexpedient in another; which
adds no little cleerness to the demonstration, that things indifferent in
themselves, may, as they are applied, conduce something, yea and very much, to
the order and comeliness of Divine worship.

CASE V. What are those things indifferent that are to be determined by the
power of the Church?
Resol.
THese things indifferent are apparently reducible to that General 1 Cor. 14.
ult.
Rule of the Apostle, Let all things be done decently and in order: this Calvin
calls that general conclusion which briefly takes in not only the whole state,
but even all the particular parts of outward order; Yea, says he, it is that
Rule to which all things which respect external polity are to be reduced.

1. The ruling part of the Church has power to set things IN ORDER in the
Church of Christ: [The rest will I set in order when I come.] which power may
show it self in three great Instances. The forming of a Government, of a
Liturgy, and the ordering of the Manner of public Worship.

1. I must (though with all respect and condescension to any means of
Conviction to the contrary) I must yet acknowledge, that I find so little of
the form and frame of Church Government* delineated in Scripture, and so much
encouragement for my present opinion in judicious, sober and learned Authors,
that I am very apt to think that much of the Modelling of the Government of the
Church is left by God to the prudence, and wisdom, and power of the Church.

I most readily subscribe, that there is a Government of the Church, that this
Government is fixed in the Officers of the Church, that the General Rules of
this Government are plainly revealed in Scripture; yea, that there was
Episcopal Jurisdiction (in the common acceptance of it) exercised by the
Apostles, and Timothy and Titus, upon such common and Moral Reason as may bear
it up, and commend its use to the end of the world.

Yet the Frame, Fashion, and special subjects of it are so obscure in
Scripture, and so little entitled to it, that, methinks, even all of all
persuasions amongst us are forced to prudence at last in the practice, though
in their disputes they fetch fire from Heaven Jure Divine.

Very many moderate Episcopal Divines are sufficiently known to content
themselves with St. Hierom's Basis of Episcopal Government, and to defend it
only as a prudential and occasional (though yet Apostolical) Institution, ad
tollenda schismata, whereon I think it may stand as Mount Sion, and never be
moved.

The Presbyterians if they well consider their subordination of classes they
must needs appeal to prudence and reason for its defense, while they find this
at least as much a stranger to the Word of God as a subordination of persons.
Indeed this they of late seemed plainly to acknowledge, when upon the same
grounds with their moderate brethren of the Episcopal Concessions and Desires.
persuasion, they conceded to a Regulate Episcopacy; desiring also at the hands
of the King that their grand grievance of too large Diocesses might be healed
by Suffragan-Bishops; which some think are not obscurely answered already in
the jurisdiction of Archdeacons, at least, as to the assistance of the Bishop,
and the satisfying the desires and complaints of our brethren aforesaid.

Yea, the very Congregation it self called Independents acknowledge their
devolving the exercise of Government upon their Elders to be only for Orders
sake, and their Church Covenant to be only necessary for its ends; and at
length their great Champion S. M.
has found no other foundation for the whole Fabric of Congregational
Discipline, but Mutual Confederacy and Prudential Agreement among themselves.

2. The second thing attributed to the Care and power of the Church is the
forming and establishing of a public Liturgy.

Though we find not any such form in Scripture either imposed, framed or
directed, yet the grounds and matter thereof are plainly there, and seen and
acknowledged to be there well nigh by all the Churches of Christ in the world.

I do not find but that at the Episcopal Divines plead the Necessity, so most
of the moderate Presbyterians allow the lawfulness and the usefulness, yea and
the Imposition of forms of public Prayers, of Administering the Sacraments, of
Catechism, Confirmation, and of reading of the Scriptures; as also of
reprehending offenders, etc. All which (as Mart. Bucer. enumerates them, and
concludes) Vid. M. ^. lib. 1. de reg. Christ. c. 13.
are reserved for the care and power of the Church.

3. Thirdly, thereunto also belongs the Ordering and managing of the public
Worship, as to the time, manner, and parts of it; when to begin, how to
proceed, when to end in the ordinary course of Divine Service; as also to
appoint extraordinary times of fasting and thanksgiving; all which, seeing
Scripture has left them to the Churches liberty, in reason they ought to be
ruled and fixed by prudent Authority, as we would avoid Confusion and Ataxie in
the Church of Christ.

2. Secondly, things serving to the Comeliness and Beauty of Worship are also
to be put to the same account; the decency of the place of Worship; the gravity
of the habit of Ministers; the fitness of the Vessels for both Sacraments; the
kind of bread and wine; the places and gestures of Administration and
Communion, and such like, which the Scripture has taken no notice of, and yet
all sober men are fully convinced that very high and almost indispensable
convenience exacts a settlement and prudent Regulation of them; and in all
which, methinks, Uniformity with Decency should offend no body.

CASE VI. Whether may the Ruling part of the Church impose upon the Church
things indifferent, quatenus Indifferent, or merely because they are such?
Resol.
I Humbly conceive they have no such power, no such Arbitrary and strangely
unlimited power, which, if exercised with any extent, is not likely to edify,
but to destroy the Church.

For,

1. If we should grant that the Governors of the Church have power to impose
things as they are indifferent, or because they are indifferent, we grant they
have power to impose any thing indifferent, and consequently what indifferent
things they please, upon the Church: and thus we make the Will of Men the
Principle and Rule of decency and order in the Service of God, and not the Will
of God, or reason and prudence in the choice of things fittest according to his
Word. Then they have power to clog Gods Worship with things altogether
incongruous to it, provided they be indifferent in general, (as Dancing,
Bowling, etc.) and to render it instead of a reasonable Service, absurd and
ridiculous. Then may they add Ceremony upon Ceremony, until the number is so
many, and the weight so great, that the work will be burdensome and indeed
intolerable to God and Man. Thus may they improve their Dominion over our
Faith, until they have worn out the beauty of holiness, the power of Devotion,
and have rendered the Christian Liberty worse As Aug. complained
then the Jewish or Popish Bondage.

This Power, as God did never entrust them with it, so I never heard of that
man, or sort of men, that pretended unto it, or to the exercise of it; every
one in Authority still granting that there ought to be Reason for their
Impositions, acting therein as Men, as well as Governors.

And though many are too apt to give Flattering Titles to men in Authority, I
have not met with any that Write highest for Conformity, and obedience to
Authority in things Indifferent, that allowed such a Power to men in Authority,
to require what indifferent things they pleased, without any respects to the
fitness and usefulness of them in the Worship of God.

For, as Thomas Rogers, Against Seffray: Obi. 4.
(that notable Adversary to Nonconformity) in this Case said, Authority in
making Laws must always respect the Common Good. And though Church-Governors,
says Francis Mason, Authority of the Church, etc. p. 8 9.
(of the same spirit with the former) may make Church-Laws, yet they may not
establish what they list. God has inrailed their Authority with certain bounds
and limits, which they may not pass: Agreeing with Calvin, who has also taught
us, That God has not left us effraenem licentiam, such an unbridled liberty;
Sed cancellos circundedit, in Cor. 14. ult.

CASE VII. What then does render things indifferent fit to be imposed?
Resol.
INDIFFERENT things though they be not commanded or forbidden particularly, but
left undecided in Scripture, yet must they be Reducible to, and Agreeable with
some general Rules in Scripture, to make the Imposition of them fit or
warrantable.

This Resolution becoms Christianity, neither can it be inimicous to Christian
Discipline; it has the suffrage of highest conformity, which affords its
liberty still to challenge great consideration in all impositions of things
Indifferent. Clapham, an earnest and Learned Opposer of Nonconformity, has
thus stated it, Such things, says Chronol. Discourse of the Church, cap. 9.
he, we say to be of an indifferent nature; as for the doing or not doing
thereof we have no express Word of God in particular, only by some general Rule
we are led to use our Christian Reason. Francis Mason Authority of the Church,
p. 8. 9.
also allows, That all (Ecclesiastical) Canons must be framed according to the
general Canons of the holy Scripture. In a word, I never read a denial of it.

CASE VIII. What are those general Rules of Scripture that li^it the Imposition
of things Ind^fferent?
Resol.
POlanus gives us a brief Syntag. Tom. 2. p., 70.
and sound, though a general satisfaction to this Case; Things indifferent
(says he) ought to be reduced to that general equity (which the Scriptures
appoint to be the rule and measure of all our actions) the Lex respicit ordine^
ad bonum commune. Aquinas.
good of our Neighbor. Quatenus ad Dei Gloriam, and proximi salutem faciunt:
or the Common good, as Rogers shortens it.

Marlorate does more In 1 Cor. 14. ult.
fully explicate himself, saying, that the Apostle confirms his Traditions by
the Word of God, Reason, Edification, the Example of Churches, Decency and
Order; and he adds, With which same Arguments we ^^ght to examine our
Ecclesiastical Traditions.

But let us a little consider some more special Rules, as we easily find them
in the surface of the Scripture.

1. The first shall be that Catholic Rule of Expediency. All things, (says 1
Cor. 6. 12
the Apostle) are Lawful for me; but all things are not expedient. Some lawful
things, it seems, are not expedient. Things not expedient to be done, ought not
to be done; and things not expedient to be commanded, ought not to be commanded.

Thus there falls before us a double lawfulness; a thing may be lawful and
expedient; a thing may be lawful, and not expedient; or a thing may be lawful,
and yet we ought not to do it, because not expedient; and a thing may be
lawful, and we ought to do it because expedient: And thus a thing may be lawful
and not lawful.

More plainly, there is a lawfulness more remote from us, which is fixed in the
general nature of the thing; this is meant in the first expression of the
Apostle, All things are lawful for me. 2. There is a lawfulness that is more
immediate and nearer to us, which depends not upon the common essence of the
thing, but upon some extrinsick circumstances, of Time, Place, Occasion, etc.
whereby the thing is fitted to the present service; this the Apostle means by
Expediency, All things are not expedient.

Now where you speak of this latter lawfulness of expediency, the former, viz.
of Indifferency is shut out: so that though in one sense, all things that are
indifferent are lawful, yet in this latter sense, all things that are
indifferent and not expedient, are not lawful, but sinful: And it being against
the Rule of the Aposte, and indeed against common reason; it is not warrantable
for Church-Governors to impose any thing about Gods Worship, that is only
indifferent and lawful in it self, but not expedient.

Thus that great Defender of our Church and the Ceremonies of it extends and
limits her power; Church-Governors (says he) have liberty to establish
whatsoever being in it self Authority of the Church, p. 13.
indifferent shall to their Wisdom seem most expedi^nt.

2. The second special Ru^e is the public Peace. God is the God of Peace and
Order; of Peace as well as Order; and as the Order, so the Peace of the Church,
without which there is no Order, is precious with him, and with all that have
the Spirit of God, and any care of his Church.

Should any thing give way to Peace, and should not things Indifferent? are not
these Indifferent? is not Peace necessary? is it not necessary by command? Yea,
it is necessary as a means; as a means of preventing our fears, of obtaining
our hopes, our hopes of settlement, our hopes of unity, our hopes of plenty, of
prosperity and glory in Church and State.

Who can think it wisdom (without some other greater inconvenience urge to it)
to force any thing that is but indifferent, to the endangering so necessary a
thing as Peace, or the dividing the Church of God, or provoking any
considerable part thereof to separate from us? Let us rather with the
Apostolical Synod, weigh the present necessity in this regard; and as the
Apostle exhorts in the like case, Follow the things that make for Peace, Romans
14. 19.

3. The third special Rule in Scripture is, the offense of weak brethren, who
though weak are not to be thrown to the walls without any regard.

Yea, the Scripture reasons Vid. Romans 14. 1 Cor. 7, 9, 10. cap.
us to a greater tenderness to the weaker part of the Church; and more care of
that: and in this very case has given us diverse and weighty Considerations,
that we wilfully offend not our weak Brethren by the use of our liberty in
things indifferent.

Indeed, when things indifferent are once commanded, the case is altered, as to
private Christians, (as at large hereafter) but otherwise, where the reason of
the Apostle's Example and Commands is found, the obligation of both will hardly
be escaped.

As Polanus says, That Syntag. tom. 2. p 376.
Ceremonies may be observed for peace sake, and the avoiding of the offense of
the weak: so, I humbly conceive, that the rigor of imposition may be
warrantably abated for the same causes.

Mr Rogers is more peremptory Against Seffray. Object. 4.
(though, as I noted before, a sufficient Defender of Ceremonies) He that in
things indifferent (meaning, before they are commanded) has not a tender care
of weak Christians in his doing, shows, that there is not that charity in
him, nor regard of his brethren which God requires.

Upon this ground, no doubt, the Learned Doctor Gardner stood, when he said, If
the Laws in these cases, viz. of Ceremonies, had not been already made, I
should never for my own part wish to have them made. Dialogue about Ceremonies.

Neither, can we referr to any other Topic the care and pains that Queen
Elizabeth and King James used for the just satisfaction of Non-conformists in
the ages before us: To the 1 Cor. 9. 22, 13.
weak, became I as weak, that I might gain the weak -- and this I do (says the
great Apostle) for the Gospels sake.

4. The fourth special Rule may be Edification, the grand Level of all Church
power: the Edification of the Church, and not its destruction in the whole, or
(if possible to avoid it) in any part.

Therefore, the great Romans 14. 15. In quo Charitas moderatrix est, Calv. Romans
14. 10.
principle of all such impositions must be charity and love to our Brethren;
not envy at, or desire of revenge upon any person or party otherwise minded:
not to show victory over them, or dominion over their faith or actions; things,
I doubt not, sincerely abhorred by our present Governors as well as by our
former; but forbearing one another in love, and forgiving one another, as
Christ also has given us example, showing all bowels and tenderness in all
ways and means of an happy accord and accommodation.

5. Fifthly, the most noted Rule of all is that of the Apostle, Let all things
be done decently and in order: a standing Rule never to be crossed by any
Authority under heaven; yea, the God of heaven, being the God of Order, will
never reverse it. Then nothing that is either indecent or disorderly in Gods
Worship can warrantably be imposed upon his Church. The contrary whereof, I
think, had never hitherto the honor to be asserted.

Clapham, speaking of things indifferent, touching Chron. c. 9.
which (says he) the Apostle shows, that decency and order must be observed;
but for particulars, he has no particular injunction from the Lord. Chron.
cap. 9.

Provided always, says Mr Mason, that all things page 13.
be done honestly and in order.

6. The sixth Rule is Custom: of very great use to indicate what is decent and
orderly; seeing by the force of Custom, that is comely in one Country, that is
plainly absurd in another.

Custom is the Umpire 1 Cor. 11. 26.
in indifferent things: If any man seem to be contentious (says the Apostle)
we have no such Custom. No doubt, it is dangerous to introduce innovations, and
by new impositions to force against the Usages and Customs of the place where
we live: It Is well known, how much weight Ambrose, Augustine, and the rest of
the Fathers laid upon this both for themselves, and their advice to others.

We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God. Doubtless, the more
extensive a Usage is, the more ancient, the more universal, the longer and
farther a thing has been practiced in the Churches of God, the more it ought
to be regarded, both by the governing and governed parts of the Church,
according to the Rule of the Fathers.

7. The last Rule is Gospel liberty: this must not be invaded by any
imposition, though it must not be mistaken.

Gospel liberry can hardly be infringed if these Rules be heeded in the
imposition of things indifferent.

1. That nothing indifferent be imposed that any way checketh with the former
Rules of expediency, peace, offense of the weak, edification, decency, order,
and the custom of the Churches.

2. That things indifferent be not imposed as if they were in themselves
necessary; which Divines assert to be Superstition.

3. That things indifferent be not required with equal severity as things
necessary.

4. That such things when imposed be declared by the Imposers to be mutable in
their nature, and to be altered upon just occasion.

5. That things indifferent be not imposed in so great a number as is really
burdensome to the Church of God; which was much in the care of our first
Reformers.

Concerning the multitude of Ceremonies of idle and vain nature (says Bishop
In Apol.
Jewel) we know that St Augustine did much complain of them in his time; and
therefore we have greatly diminished the number of them, because we know, that
they were troublesome to good consciences and burdensome to the Church: yet we
retain and have likeing, not only of those Ceremonies which we are sure were
delivered us from the Apostles; but some others too besides, which we thought
might be suffered without hurt to the Church of God: because we affected that
all things in the Congregation might (according to the will of the Apostle) be
done with comeliness and good order. But all such things which we perceived to
lean to Superstition, or to be of no use, or bald, or toyish, or against the
sacred Scriptures, or else unmeet for sober and wise people, whereof there is a
confused Chaos in the Romish Synagogue, all these we have utterly renounced and
cast off, because we would not have the Worship of God confounded and combred
with such follies. Thus that most excellent Man. The sum of whose words here
recited, does in effect contain and confirm all that I have said upon this
Case; viz. That the Ceremonies of the Church ought to be expedient, decent and
orderly, not hurtful to the Church, not troublesome to good consciences, not
burdensome: And he adds, that our own Church in the first Reformation had
regard to the said Rules.

Let me conclude with an humble Petition, that I be not mis-interpreted to
prescribe to Authority in what I have said: I have only marked the general
Rules in Scripture, leaving particulars to the liberty and wisdom of
Superiors; to whom I only take boldness to offer, that they ought to walk by
these Rules, and settle the Church and Worship of God in peace and order, with
all comeliness and expediency.

CASE IX. How are private persons to demean themselves under such impositions
of Authority in religious Exercises?
Resol.
WE have hitherto, rather, labored to discover the reason of Imposing, and the
due extent of Ecclesiastical Authority in things indifferent; endeavoring also
to draw that as narrow and straight, and as much to Rule as may be; yet, I
hope, without just offense to the same.

We are now descending to take a view of the reason of obedience; and to
consider the extent of their duty, who are under command. Where, that I may
appear impartial and for peace indeed, I must be consonant to my Design, and
labor to dis-intangle and enlarge the consciences of private persons, with as
much freedom toward conformity as lawfully I may; that, having brought the
Injunction as low and narrow, and the Obedience as high and large as we may,
the commanders and the commanded may be happily found nearer together, and in
sweeter communion one with another.

Charity, surely, will not be displeased at this harmless project, but will be
ready with a pardon, though I fail of success, or too imprudently manage the
Attempt; especially, while my Aim is levelled at so desirable an end, the
peace of the Church and the common good; and use no other Engine to draw down
the one, and raise the other, but that from heaven, the holy Scripture.

And to the Case in general, which is this [How are private persons to demean
themselves under the commands of Authority or Ecclesiastical Laws, in Religious
Exercises?] I shall now (the Lord assisting me) betake my self, with all
conscience and fidelity, to answer, breaking it into several particular cases,
according as the Object of humane Injunctions may be distinguished.

The Object of humane Injunction, or that which is enjoined or commanded, may
be proceeded upon, by a gradation or descent of five stepps: for that which is
enjoined, is either necessary, expedient, purely indifferent, inexpedient, or
unlawful. Accordingly, there may be offered five Cases, viz. what a private
person ought to do, when things necessary, or things expedient, or things
purely indifferent, or things inexpedient, or things unlawful are required by
Authority in the exercises of Religion: to all which we address our selves to
apply a several and particular satisfaction.

CASE X. What ought a private Christian to do, when things necessary in
themselves are required by Authority?
Resol.
BOth for the Intention of the present Discourse (we treating properly about
things indifferent) as also, for the very nature of the thing it self, this
need not be put to the Question.

For though some have thought they have seen reason enough, not so far to
countenance an Usurpation, as to do their duties when commanded thereunto by
unlawful powers; from the liberty of that trite Rule, Affirmative Precepts do
not bind to every particular instance of time: yet, it were a strange
perverseness in any, not to do that which God requires, because his Vicegerent,
lawful Authority requires it also, even in the things of Gods Worship.

Optatus reckoned it a madness in Donatus, that broke forth in that question of
his, Quid Imperatori cum Ecclesia, What has the KING to do with the Church?
But Optatus wisely answered, The Commonwealth is not in the Church, but the
Church is in the Commonwealth; and consequently, he that is Governor of the
Commonwealth is so of the Church; and the Rule is, The Gospel takes Non tollit
praecepta naturae and legis, sed perficit, Romans 3. ult.
not away the Precepts of Nature, and the Moral Law, but establishes and
perfects them, and rather enlarges and confirms, then any way weakens
Obedience to Authority.

Therefore are we to pray for Kings, that under their pious and religious
governance, we may not live in peace, and honestly only, but in godliness, in
all godliness, as the Apostle directs us:

St Augustine, upon those Contra Crescon. lib. 3. cap. 51.
words in the second Psalm says, Kings (not only as men, but as they are
Kings) serve the Lord, if in their Kingdoms they command that which is good, and
prohibit that which is evil; not only in those things which appertain to
humane Society, verum etiam in iis quae ad divinam Religionem, but also in
matters concerning Religion and divine Worship.

Who dare offer to name the Time since the World began (the Times of
persecution which rendered it impossible only excepted) wherein God did not
allow, and Governors both Temporal and Ecclesiastical did not assume the power
of governing and giving Laws to the Church, for the discharge of their duties
in matters of Religion?

As soon as the black and bloody cloud was dispelled, by the favor and power
of glorious Constantine, he assumed this Supremacy; he put down Idolatry, he
established the Truth; he composed differences among Bishops, suppressed
Heresy and Schism, called Councils, and gave his suffrage in them; he heard
and judged Causes in Religion, and made Ecclesiastical Laws and Edicts; and all
this, (as Eusebius says) tanquam communis Episcopus a Deo Eusebius. de vita
Constan. lib. ^. cap. 37.
constitutus, as a common Overseer or Bishop ordained of God; and I may add,
as an excellent Example to all Christian Princes to the end of the world.

Doubtless, if he that resists a lawful power shall receive to himself
damnation, he shall hardly escape that resists his command in lawful, yea, in
necessary things; wherein (if in any thing) he ought to obey, for the Lords
sake, and to submit in conscience of his duty to God as well as Man; for, as
Augustine, Hoc jubent Imperatores, quod jubet and Christus; quia cum bonum
jubent, per illos non Christus nisi jubet: so that when Kings command, what
Christ has first commanded, Christ commands by them, and we are called to obey
not only them but Christ in them.

CASE XI. What private persons are to do, when things expedient are required of
them?
Resol.
THE second sort of things enjoined in the exercise of Religion, we have
proposed to be things expedient for their present and special use, though not
necessary in their common nature, or particularly commanded by God. And the
Question is, When such things are required by lawful Authority, whether
private persons are bound in duty to obey or not?

Some persons, I believe, like not, that any such thing should be imposed upon
them; but would rather have the Decent ordering of Gods Worship left to their
own private discretion: yet I hope better of my Brethren, then that they should
refuse the exercise of any thing which themselves allow, because it is also
approved by others and commanded by Authority; and therefore, to be disorderly
in the Church of God, because they are enjoined to do things in order:

Such things as we know to be fitted for the decency and order of Gods Worship
if enjoined by a lawful Authority, though they be not necessary in their
common nature, or particularly commanded by God; and thus, though they want a
primary necessity; yet they seem, in the judgment of all sober men; to contract
a treble secundary necessity, to oblige us to obedience; viz. from the general
commands of Scripture, from the particular injunction of Authority; and the
urging direction of our own conscience; where God, indeed, seems to speak
thrice at once unto us; by the Rule of the Apostle, the Law of the Land, and
the voice of our own convicted Consciences.

Such Constitutions (says Bullinger) as are expedient Dec. 2. Sect. 1.
and drawn from general Scripture, and are for edification, I call not Humane
Traditions.

Yea, one of the Reformed Churches have put it Confess. Suev. in Harm. Confess.
8. 17. page 290.
into their very Confession, That they deserve to be esteemed Divine rather
then Humane Constitutions.

For, says Mr Calvin, such are not to be reckoned for Calv. in 1 Cor. 14.
humane Traditions, since they are founded in the general precept, and have the
Zanch. in com. loc. 16.
liquid approbation, as it were, of Christ's own mouth.

Beza, therefore, concludes, Beza Epist. 24.
That things that make for order, being commanded by Authority, do so far bind
the conscience, that no man can wilfully transgress them without sin.

CASE XII. What are private persons to do, when things that are purely
Indifferent are required in Religious Exercises?
Resol.
THat thing I here call purely Indifferent, which impartially retains a midd
place betwixt things necessary and things sinful, and betwixt things
inexpedient and things expedient; more plainly, we take a thing to be purely
indifferent, here, that is neither necessary or sinful in its nature, or by
the Word of God; nor yet expedient or inexpedient, as to the use for which it
is appointed, but in all regards purely Indifferent, being neither necessary
with a primary or with a secundary necessity, as we lately distinguished; nor
yet respectively sinful or unlawful, viz. either with a primary or secundary
sinfulness.

Now the Question is not whether there be any such things, or not; but, hoc
supposito, supposing there are, and that they are commanded by lawful
Authority; the Question is, What private Christians are to do in such a case?

For my part, though (as I have said) such things ought not to be enjoined by
Authority; yet, if the Scales be even before, the command of Authority must (I
think) of necessity turn them.

So that here we must observe a third kind of Necessity, where the two former
are wanting: so that, where a thing is not necessary properly, or occasionally,
as expedient, yet, it may become necessary by the addition of a humane Law;
which also circulates into the first necessity of a divine command; Submit your
selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: though it be but a mere
humane Ordinance, yet, (as such) if not sinful or forbidden by God, you seem
commanded to submit unto it.

Consequently, we have discovered a third kind of sinfulness, where the
primary and secundary is wanting: so that, where a thing is not sinful in it
self, or by any inconvenience in its use, yet it may become so, by disobedience
to lawful Authority: Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves:

It Is necessary we observe a difference in the reason of imposing and of
obeying; For, before a thing is imposed, there is no obligation upon Authority
to require it, if it be not fit; yea, rather there is a pre-obligation to
impose nothing but what is expedient in the Worship of God; but now, when a
thing is once required, though not expedient, as we could desire, we are under
in obligation; and we must not consult our liberty but our duty: or if our
liberty, not so much our liberty to forbear, as our liberty to obey; and to
enquire whether the thing be lawful or not, whether God will allow us to do it
or not; and if so, Whether it be not our duty; and whether, though we would not
do it for the things sake, we must not do it for the commands sake; the command
of Man, and the command of God.

Wherefore Beza (to whom I might add the Learned of most ranks and ages, if
need required) is so express, Res Alioqui per se medioe, etc. Things of middle
and indifferent nature do after a certain manner change their nature, when by
lawful Authority they are either commanded or forbidden, because it is not
lawful to omit against the Precept when it is commanded, or to act against the
prohibition, when it is forbidden. Thus Beza: an undoubted Testimony in the
Case.

But we need no more, seeing the thing has been granted long agon by a
numerous body of Non-conformists; Their Reply to Mr. Powel, p. 2l
In things (say they) truly indifferent, it is always justified, and shall be
farther justified if need require, that we attribute no less to the
Magistrates, then o^r Adversaries (meaning the Conformists) do.

CASE XIII. What are private Christians to do when things Inexpedient are
required of them?
Resol.
IN the fourth place, things enjoined about the Worship of God may be supposed
to be inexpedient when they are properly unlawful.

Here we have also asserted, there is a farther abuse of Authority that ought
always to be limited by the Sacred Canons of Decency and Order, and things
expedient; but admitting such an unwarrantable exerting of power, in requiring
things that are lawful, but inexpedient; we are now to inquire how a private
conscience may preserve it self and the public Peace, and whether it should
obey such injunctions, or not.

This is indeed the burden; but how to remove it, hic labor, hoc opus est.

This, in the first place, seems to call us to another point of weighty moment,
viz. Who is the proper Judge of expediency in the circumstances of Gods Worship?

There are but two that can bid for it; the public prudence of lawful
Authority, or our own private discretion: in things necessary, the Word of God
is our Rule; in things expedient, Prudence: the Question is, Whether private or
public? that is, (pardon my plainness) where God has left the matter to men,
whether the People or the Governors should Rule? or, if you had rather,
Whether they that are called to obey, are not bound to submit themselves, where
God himself interposeth not, to those that have the Rule over them?

All, I know, will acknowledge, that when St Paul had determined the decency
and order of particular things in the Church, that it would have been very
Tumultuary for the people to have said, These things seem strange to us, and
inexpedient: And the like censure would have passed upon those, Act. 15. had
they returned the like remora to the Synodical Sentence. Forgive me the wrong,
Dear Reader, if I remember that of the Poet, Mutato nomine, etc.

It may farther challenge a sober debate, Whether the Ax^ is not thus laid at
the root of all polity and Government in the world, if once we grant the final
Judgment of what is fit and orderly to private persons, and that this ought to
be the Rule of every ones practice.

I must beg leave of the people to judge with Plato, Nullun sensus privatus
rerum mensura est. I mean no more, but that every one is to judge what is
necessary according to God; but public Authority only what is expedient; and I
think we have reason to advise, before we either give the things that are Gods,
viz. necessary things, to Caesar, or the things that are Caesar's, that is,
things expedient, to the people.

I do acknowledge the people a Judgment of Discretion, the guide and measure of
every ones actions, viz. to discern what God says in things necessary, and
what humane Authority says in things expedient, and to obey both; but for the
people to be wise above what is written in the Bible, to judge what is
necessary, and what is required by the Laws of the Land, to judge what is
expedient, I fear is folly, and tends to confusion in the Church and State.

Where God commands and Man forbids; or where God forbids, and Man commands, we
are bound by the Covenant of Nature and Grace to acknowledge the supremacy of
heaven, and to obey God rather then Man: But where God is sile^t, and Man
commands, Obedience to our Governors is far better (having more of Religion
and Order in it) then sacrificeing to the net of our private Reason for things
more expedient.

Jesus Christ having fixed by his own appointment all the Essentials of his
Fathers Worship, left the Circumstances of Decency and Order in the manner of
performance, as things too small to engage the Wisdom of Heaven to the
Church, as if there were some thing in this regard in that common saying, Non
vacat exiguis rebus, etc. Hereupon Calvin concludes, Haec indifferentia Inst
it. lib. 4, 7, 43.
sunt, and in Ecclesiae liberate posita. Indifferent things, things not
decided by God, are left in the liberty of the Church: Not in the liberty of
every Member; 'twere easy to show, that was not Calvin's meaning, no more then
it was the Apostles, who denied that liberty to the people, and gave them
particular Orders himself, then which there is nothing more evident in
Scripture.

Consulte agit qui praecepto legis obtemperat, says the Civilian: And no doubt
when it is not sin, it is wisdom to obey the Law: It is seasonable to call to
mind and to practice too: Leges hominum, non homines legum dominos esse
oportet: It is fitter that Laws should govern Men, then that Men, private men,
every private man should govern the Laws: still I must be understood in things
not determined by God, for then we are preobliged by a higher Law, which
supersedes the lower; and not we, but God contradicts such Laws of Men as are
against his own: But when the matter is left to Men, and they command us; for
us out of a pretended Judgment of discretion, to object inconvenience and
inexpedience, and to resist the power, savours but little of either Judgment or
Discretion.

But, that I may offer all fair satisfaction to this great scruple, I crave
leave to admit the private Conscience into the Chair, and then the Case stands
thus.

CASE. Whether any thing that in our private judgment is unfit and inconvenient
to be used in the exercise of Religion, may be warrantably practiced by us when
commanded thereunto by Authority?
Resol.
I Would be very far from the guilt of winding the conscience of the plain
Reader into any needless intricacy in this practical Case; yet I must presume a
little upon him, to make way for my Answer hereunto, by a few plain
distinctions.

1. There is a fitness or expedience with respect to Governors or private
persons; their command or our obedience: whence arise two great Cases, that
must be distinguished and not confounded; 1. What is fit for Authority to
require? 2. What is fit for us to do?

No question, our Rulers may possibly require that which is not fit to be
required; and consequently, that which they ought not to require: and such
their impositions may be sinful as to them; which yet I doubt not may be
lawful and fit for us.

Whether Rulers exert their power in things Indifferent as they ought, or not,
I judge, more immediately concerns the conscience of Rulers, rather then of us
private persons: with us, the great and next and most concerning Case is this;
Not so much what Rulers may require; as what we may do; or rather, not so much
what it is fit for them to impose, as what is fit for us to do.

2. There is again a fitness or expediency quoad rem, and quoad nos: Or more
plainly, fitness is considerable in a more large and general sense, as applied
to its subject, that is, to the Service that is to be performed, without any
farther considering of any other circumstances of it; as the fitness of
kneeling, standing or sitting at the Sacrament: or in a more strict and
qualified application to my particular action of kneeling, standing or sitting,
etc. as it is accompanied with all the circumstances and intanglements of my
private Case.

And thus we discover two Cases more: Whether in general and quoadrem, or
according to the nature of the thing to do this or that; e. g. to receive the
Sacrament kneeling, or sitting, or standing? or 2dly, What is fittest for us to
do, a^l the circumstances and obligations of our private and particular Cases
first duly pondered? for I little doubt, but that at length it will
sufficiently appear, that that which is not so fit in it self, may yet be
expedient for us to do: And therefore give me leave once again to state you the
Question thus.

CASE. Whether, if Authority require that which is lawful in it self, but not
expedient, all things considered, it may not be both lawful and expedient to
obey and do it?
Resol.
THere is nothing more plain and certain, then that the same lawful things, at
diverse times and to diverse persons, were judged by the Apostle to be both
expedient and inexpedient, both in his doctrine and practice; who became a Jew
to the Jews, and a Grecian to the Grecians; and even all things to all men,
that he might win some.

Upon the like ground Ambrose, Augustine, etc. held that expedient for
themselves and others to practice in one Church, which they judged altogether
unfit in another of a different usage.

Now what should be the reason of this mutability of Indifferent things? This
well pursued will carry us far toward a solution of this great difficulty.

No doubt Polanus hit upon it, whose words are weighty and justly worthy of all
acceptance by such as desire satisfaction about the nature and use, the
fitness or unfitness of things Indifferent.

Adiaphorae res sunt licitae Polan. tom. 2. page 376.
vel illicitae pro circumstantiarum ratione: Things Indifferent (says he) are
lawful or unlawful, by reason of their circumstances; for which he cites Romans
14. 20, 21. 1 Cor. 8. 13. But, put case that circumstances allow or dissuade on
both sides; that there are either inconveniences to deterr, or advantages to
invite on both sides; What is to be done in such a case? Polanus therefore
adds, Hic autem in Circumstantiarum pugna and contrarietate; minoris momenti,
iis quae major is momenti, pauciores pluribus cedant: i. e. Where there is a
contest and contrariety of circumstances, those that are less in weight and
fewer in number must give way to those that are greater and more, Romans 14. 21.

So that, would you know, whether it be fit to obey Authority in things that
are lawful be inexpedient, bring the Case to the Test. Where is the
overbalance of expedience and fitness? Consider and weigh the Circumstances
on both sides, and examine whether to follow our own judgment and disobey
Authority in an inconvenience, or to do that which is inconvenient in obedience
to Authority, be really attended with the more or fewer, the greater or less
inconveniences. I speak as unto wise men, judge ye what I say, and answer your
selves.

Yet, that I may minister all my assistance to my Readers Conscience, let us in
earnest put the question, Whether the Conveniences of Obedience in such a case
may not greatly over-bear the expediency of the thing required?

Truly, in my most serious pondering of this weighty matter, there are three
things of so great concern, and even indispensable convenience, if I may so
undervalue them that offer their attendance to such an Obedience, that the
ordinary inconvenience of any lawful thing injoined seems very light and
inconsiderable to them; the very mention of them, one would think, is of weight
sufficient to sway the balance: they are Peace, Duty, Safety; in the behalf of
each of these, we shall venture to engage a particular comparison.

Sect. 1. Of Peace.
When we must either conform to an inexpedient indifferent thing; or by our
nonconformity break or but hazard the peace, let such as have been scorch't in
the flames of contention, or carry about them the skarrs of War, or have any
way learned to value peace, judge what is to be done.

PEACE (as the Naturalists say of the Radical Moisture) is the Root of
althings; but by the heats of trouble and public contention, (alas!) how soon
does our glory and goodliness wither, and all prosperity die away? Who trembles
not ^^at the thought, yea at the very motion toward a thought, of being guilty
of throwing the least brand into this fire; lest (as a Reverend Divine adds)
he should be made a firebrand in hell? Say not, Thy particular, or thy party
is inconsiderable; a spark unthought of, unseen, and almost invisible, turns a
City into ashes: How great a matter a little fire kindles!

Therefore says one, Sicut vita in homine, ita pax Aqui. in Mat. 12.
in regno, etc. Peace in a Kingdom is as life in a man: and as health is
nothing but a temper of the humors, so there is Peace where every thing keeps
its own Order; and as when health fails, the man tends to death; so when Peace
departs, a Kingdom tends to desolation; whence the great and last intention,
is, to keep the Peace.

O that men would a little consider; what do they lose by doing that which they
judge inexpedient, if it be lawful? Not Peace with God, he has not forbidden
it; not Peace of Conscience, that allows it; not Peace with Authority, that
commands it. What then? A little pleasing of our selves, a small portion of
private satisfaction, and the enjoyment of our liberty in a thing indifferent,
because we judge it not to be expedient.

Again, Oh that it were well considered, what is lost with the Peace of the
Church, what we hazard when we hazard this.

Ah! what convenience is offered to balance the necessity of Peace? what can
satisfy the loss of Peace? where is our liberty when Peace is gone? how
dreadful are the fruits of Contentions? who sails to the Indies in hopes of a
people; or would venture all in the hazard of so necessary a thing as Peace,
for so small a matter as his private content in a bare expediency? Can this
expediency that we desire warrant us against all the Precepts, persuasions,
beseechings of the God of Peace, to pray for, study, seek, pursue, and follow
after peace? Can this defend us from the threatenings denounced against the
troublers of Israel? or make up the loss of all the comforts of the sons of
Peace, and the blessedness promised to peacemakers?

Yea, let it be considered, whether in things Indifferent, if there be any
hazard of the peace of the Church one way or other; the question must not be so
much, What is expedient, and what not; but What makes for peace, and what not:
And if this be the case indeed with us, let that weighty advice of the blessed
Apostle sink deep into our conscience, and decide the Controversy; which if
sincerely heeded, it being so thoroughly fitted to this very case, I dare be
bold to say, must needs do it. Let us follow after the things that make Romans
14. 13
for peace; q. d. in these indifferent things (of which he was treating)
trouble not your selves overmuch: some may think this expedient, some that; but
in these things, let me persuade you to make peace your Rule; and while others,
with too much hea^, inflame their contentions, about what is fittest, to the
breach of the peace, and the trouble of the Church; be you sure, to mark those
things that make for peace, and follow them. Fly contention, and too much
scrupilosity in such things, and follow after things which make for peace.

Upon the like grounds, no doubt, St Augustine received that grave advice of St
Ambrose, as if it had been an Oracle, To conform to the Usages of every Church
where he came, as he would neither take nor give offense. St Augustine Epist.
118.
also gives the like advice upon somewhat the like reason; for the sake of the
Society of those, with whom we live.

That which Beza reports of Calvin is very remarkable. In Calvin's Bez. in vi^.
Calv.
absence, it seems, the Wafer-cake was brought into the Sacrament at Geneva:
now, though Calvin judged it very inconvenient, yet he judged the peace more
needful, and did earnestly admonish them not to be contentious about a thing
indifferent. And in so good a temper his words took them, that they, both
Ministers and People, so lowed his Counsel.

This was nothing but the Application of that General Rule which Calvin
commended to Christians in his own writings, with which we shall seal up this
particular: Though Calv. Epist 379.
a thing (says he) be imposed, should bring offense, and draw ill consequences
with it, (that is, be inexpedient) yet if in it self it be not repugnant to
Gods Word, it may be yielded unto, especially where the greater part
prevails; in which he is but a member of that body, and can proceed no
farther: and by consequence* nonconformity would hazard peace.

Sect. 2. Of Duty.
THe second thing that lies in scale against the Inexpediency of things
imposed, is that weighty thing called DVTY.

Here there seems to be so much odds, that the Question is no longer what we
may do, or what is fit for us to do, but what we must: So that may is
over-weighed by must, fit by just, liberty and expediency by duty and
necessity, with respect to God and to the Magistrate.

1. There is a must from God; a necessity laid upon us from heaven, and woe be
to Ministers if they preach not the Gospel; and woe be to the people if they
attend not the Ordinances; besides, the necessity of obedience to Magistrates
on both.

But now there is no must not perform such Indifferent things, as we scruple at
for their inexpediency; yet, we fear, that so it may happen, that refusing to
obey Authority in such indifferent things, may incapacitate us for the
discharge of those necessary duties, necessary with respect to Gods command,
and the great salvation of immortal souls:

This very consideration turned the scale in that old but most Eminent
Nonconformist T. C. his judgment Third Book.
long agon about the Surplice. The truth is, faith he, (though in another Book
of his before he had called the Surplice a Mark and Sacrament of Popish
Abomination) I dare not be Author to any to forsake his Pastoral Charge for the
inconvenience; and gives this very Reason, Because Preaching is the absolute
command of God, and therefore ought not to be laid aside for a simple
inconvenience or uncomliness of a thing which in its nature is indifferent.

2. There is a must also from man. Our Rulers, under God, do also give us our
Care of Souls, which we accept from them; they command us to Preach, and feed
the Flock: they lastly enjoin us to dispense our duty with such and such
circumstances, which they judge most convenient: God also adds his command,
that we should for conscience sake, yea, for his own sake (Magistrates being
his Vicegerents) submit our selves to every Ordinance of man, that is not
contrary to the Ordinance of God.

Now this is the very Case: and surely it must be a very great inconvenience,
attending a circumstance of our duty, that can outweigh our duty; our duty to
God, to our Prince, to our Places, to our Consciences, and to the souls of the
people.

Let me humbly enter this caveat, take heed of resisting the Ordinance of God
while you contemn a humane Institution. The Ordinance of Man may be
inconvenient; but resisting the Ordinance of God is plainly sinful, and sadly
attended.

I shall therefore commend the fatherly Counsel of Augustine unto you, and
therewith also seal up this Particular. In those Aug. Ep. 86.
things (says he) in which the holy Scripture has made no certain
appointment, let the custom of the people of God, or instituta majorum, the
injunctions of Governors, be held for a Law.

Sect. 3. Of Safety.
THe last great convenience that I shall leave in the balance against the
expediency desired and stuck upon, is that of Safety and Preservation.

Besides our own, which happily we little regard, the safety of our party, which
we may too much value, the safety of the people, their great salvation, yea,
the very concern of Religion, and the power of Godliness; these, no doubt, are
things of weight with all prudent and good men.

But I humbly request, my discontented Brethren, May not such things as these,
these very things, yea, all these things be hazarded by checking at obedience
in things inexpedient, barely inexpedient?

Do not you fear? do not you say that you certainly fore see, that you already
begin to feel the loss of your interest in a gracious KING, in the Laws of the
Land, the laying down of the Ministry, and the committing of the precious souls
of your poor people to the care, or rather neglect of a blind and sottish,
careless and scandalous Ministry? Is there nothing in these, in all of these,
can recompense the loss of a bare expediency, or the trouble of the contrary?
God forbid.

Do not you fear, (forgive my plainness) do you not say you fear that your
Nonconformity may tempt the Conformists to lean to Popery for support? If so,
my Brethren, (though others fear it not) may not this endanger the Church of
God among us, yea, all the Reformed Churches in the world, (which may somewhat
depend upon ours) to be swallowed up by the Common Enemy? Is this the case, my
brethren? do you indeed judge it so? and will you be at no trouble to save
them? will you part with no convenience, to preserve them? is your own content
and private liberty, in so small a matter, of greater moment then all the
Churches? Alas! had our LORD vallued them at no higher rate, they Certum e^^,
omnia licere pro Patria Quintill.
had hardly been the purchase of his Precious BLOOD.

What hope of expediency can repair the danger? yea, what expediency, if
obtained? which yet is but our aim, and can hardly be secured in the accident,
if the substance miscarry; our admired expediency being equally hazarded by our
Nonconformity with all the rest, viz. the Peace of the Church, our duty to God
and Man, the favor of the King, the Gospel of Christ, the service of the
Church, the salvation of souls, the safety of the Kingdom, and the Protestant
Cause in the World.

Who can so fondly imagine that the God of all these can have any regard to the
loan Sacrifice of our expediency, with so much prodigality, so little regard to
mercy and charity, and such dreadful hazards?

But to bring it closer to our selves; I doubt not to affirm, that our own
private safety, the safety of our persons, our families and estates, may justly
challenge some influence, when concerned, upon our conformity in lawful things,
though somewhat inexpedient. But seeing so many are preparing themselves to
glory in such kind of sufferings, though attended with all the hazards lately
named, we shall put the Case.

CASE. Whether is it fit or lawful to expose our selves and ours to sufferings,
rather then conform in things lawful but inexpedient?
Resol.
TRuly to me it seems a strange prodigality, neither fit nor lawful, but
more, far more unfit and inexpedient then the very things that are scrupled at,
be they very inexpedient, as some conceive, if they be but lawful.

In such kind of sufferings to me appears little or no good, but much evil.

1. I see but little good in them, because I can find no call unto them.

We are indeed invited to hazard, yea, to suffer the loss and pain of a^l
things for Christ his sake, and the Gospels, and for Righteousness sake; this
is, for the Testimony of Jesus; this is the one thing necessary; all other
things are not necessary in comparison, in competition with this: Alas! this is
far from a bare expediency; it is the substance, and more then the Accidents and
Circumstances that God calls us to suffer for.

If we suffer for things expedient, we suffer for our own apprehension of what
is so, and not for the Word of God, that has left it undecided what is so; and
consequently, what ever we tempt our selves withal, such Suffering is far from
Martyrdom, which lies in the Cause, as well as the Occasion and Intention.

We find no command requiring, no example of Christ, his Prophets of Apostles
foregoing, no Promises encouraging us in such kind of suffering; and how then
can we expect any comfort in them, support under them, or reward for them?

Yea, do not we meet with a check to the contrary, for such zeal and
forwardness, from a prudent person? Be not righteous overmuch; why should
thou destroy thy self before thy time?

2. As little good, so, much evil appears in them: for such causless call-less
sufferings injure God, the Church, our selves.

1. God, on whom we father our private opinions for which we suffer, as if they
were his Cause; usurping also the honor and dignity of suffering for Christ,
which he has not yet given us.

2. The Church, thus denying her our Ministry, putting our candle under a
bushel, or being thieves to her light; sempting the weak that understand not
our Reasons, to suffer with us without a cause; and doing our part to make such
breaches, and to raise such a storm as may shipwreck all.

3. Our Selves; from whom, as one says, God calls for the calves of our lips,
but we offer him our lives, our liberties, our wives, our children, etc. before
he requi^es them at our hands; wherein I tremble to put it to a question,
Whether there be more of Martyrdom or Murder.

If my advice be any thing to be regarded, rather obey as far as God and
Conscience will permit; and when they check you, suffer, and suffer cheerfully;
suffer for God, suffer for Conscience, and suffer comfortably; but if you stop
your course of obedience before God call and conscience checks, be your private
reasons what they can, I think there is cause to fear lest such hasty
sufferings are of your selves, and rather punishments of your inconsiderateness
and disobedience, then any degree of Martyrdom.

Give me leave to end in plainness, as dealing with Conscience, and aiming at
the safety of my Brethren. If we throw away the Talents that God has lent us,
and pay him in Coin he will not own, he may justly send us, for our wages, to
those we have served, our evil surmises (I speak it soberly) and the jealousies
and fears of our brethren.

It Is plain, that a promise of outward prosperity gives just encouragement for
obedience to Authority; Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be
long upon the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.

CASE XIV. What are private persons to do, when things sinful are imposed?
Resol.
I Would not be mistaken, I have not hitherto in, and I trust never shall be an
Advocate for sin or sinful impositions; I have only pleaded for a just and
peaceable self-denial, and submission to the Laws of the Place where we live,
in lawful things: We are descending to the lowest step from things Necessary,
Expedient, purely Indifferent, and Inexpedient, (all which have had their
particular debate) to the last object of imposition proposed, viz. Things
unlawful; to consider what we are to do, should Authority require conformity in
things unlawful.

That I may speak fully, and as I humbly desire, satisfactorily, to this doubt,
I shall take the liberty of distinction.

Things are sinful, either,

1. In themselves, viz. such as God prohibits.

2. Or, To us, such as we judge to be forbidden of God. Or,

3. Unto others, such as others judge to be sinful, when they are neither so in
themselves, nor judged so by us that are to use them; according to which
distribution we are further invited to the consideration of three Cases.

1. What we are to do when things sinful in themselves are required. Or,

2. When such things are required as appear sinful to our selves. Or,

3. If not to our selves, to others that will be offended at our obedience.

CASE I. What are we to do when things of themselves and materially evil are
commanded by Authority?
Resol.
ST Augustine delivered much in those few words, There can be no Law that is
not just. St Bernard gives us a smart explication and account of it; What man
commands, in such a case, God forbids, and so repeals and nuls it; or rather by
a pre-declaring his Will against it, by whom Kings Reign, it is void of it self
ipso facto.

Hereupon the conclusion is drawn home to our present Case in the other words
of Bernard; Pura Ber. Ep. 7.
mala ut nunquam just juberi, sic nec licite possunt feri; Things of
themselves and materially evil, as they cannot be justly commanded, so they may
not be lawfully done.

Shall we be deaf to God (as Bernard reasons) and hear Men? or with the
Apostle, shall we hearken to men rather then God? We must not obey a Constable
in opposition to the King; nor the King in opposition to God, the King of
Kings, as well as Subjects, and the King of Subjects as well as Kings, whose
Sovereign Authority both Kings and Subjects and all must acknowledge, lest he
vindicate it with his power.

CASE II. What are we to do when such things 'are required, as, if not sinful
in themselves, yet we judge to be so?
Resol.
IT is past denial, that as some things may seem lawful to one that seem sinful
to another; so, some things may seem either lawful when they are sinful, or
sinful when they are lawful, to persons misinformed.

Therefore, where a thing seems lawful to our Rulers, and fit to be imposed,
and yet we judge it sinful, and not to be performed. The advice I should tender
in such a case, is,

First, Be not over-confident of the certainty of thine own opinion,
considering others, especially men in Authority, that with advice and
assistances, which private persons cannot obtain, have judged it not only
lawful, but fit to be imposed and practiced: and perhaps if thou have used any
due diligence for the discovery of the truth herein, thou have seen reason to
be more favorable in thy censure then formerly.

2. Therefore, with self-diffidence search farther, search impartially, read on
both sides; if any thing bias thee, let it be thy mistrust of thy self, thy
esteeming of others, thy inclination to peace, thy love of the Church, thy
obedience to superiors; ever remembering, that ignorance and prejudice make
snares sometimes, and Zeal without Knowledge sets the Church on fire.

3. When thou have thoroughly searched, the matter must needs appear unto thee
either lawful, or doubtful, or sinful still.

1. If God shall bless thy endeavors with conviction, and bring thee to see
thine own error, and the lawfulness of that which before thou condemnedst, the
ground of the doubt is removed, and consequently Obedience is justly expected
from thee.

2. If thy labors for satisfaction have only brought thee into some farther
suspicion of thy opinion, so that now it does not seem to be directly sinful
which is required, but of a doubtful nature, so that thou art in a doubt
whether thou may obey or not, I commend thee for thy further satisfaction, to
that excellent Casuist the Reverend Bishop of Lincoln his Lectures, p. 216. and
217.

He concludes, If because of some probable reasons, appearing on both sides,
the subject cannot easily determine with himself whether the Law be right or
not, insomuch that his mind is in a great incertainty, and knows not which way
to incline; he is bound in this case actually to obey it; so that he sins if
he obeys it not, and does not sin if he obeys. For which he gives several
Reasons.

In general, the Reason seems to be this; That whereof a man doubts holds the
beam, as it were, even; there is equal weight in each scale: so we say, A man
doubting is one in bivio, in aequilibrio; but if the command of Authority be
thrown into the scale, it must needs turn it, if even before: this may not draw
me to think it more lawful, but yet more necessary; not more lawful with
respect to God, yet more lawful with respect to us, and more practicable; upon
that known rule, In re dubia, etc. In a doubtful case the safer part is to be
chosen.

3. But if the thing required appear sinful to thee still, thou art bound by
the Law, thou art bound to the peace of thine own conscience, Gods Vicegerent
within thee, and thou may not obey.

Yet it may be worth thy pains to search again; thou can not suffer upon too
sure grounds; and perchance, yet, thou may be in an error, and God may at
length reveal it to thee. And that I may offer all my service, both to thy
conscience and the peace of the Church, let me beseech you thoroughly to examine,
and satisfy your self in these four Cases.

1 Wherein Real Superstition, or the show and appearance of it lies?

2 Whether such things are still to be reckoned Superstitious, as have been
formerly used to Superstition?

3 Whether the significancy of things imposed render the things Superst^tious
or sinful?

4 Whether it be a sinful betraying the Christian Liberty to obey the Law in
things indifferent in the Worship of God?

I know nothing that makes impositions of this kind seem sinful to any, but it
may be reduced to these four heads: give me but a little liberty to speak my
mind briefly upon each of them, and I hasten to a Conclusion.

CASE I. Wherein does Superstition or the appearance of it consist?
Resol.
THis Case has visibly two Branches.

1 Touching the reality, 2 The appearance of Superstition.
1 For the reality of Superstition; all Divines conclude, that it sticks not in
the natures of the things used or required, but in the persons that
superstitiously require or use them. Superstition therefore is rightly said by
Divines to be grounded in that false Doctrine or superstitious opinion* that
superstitious persons have of them.

Polanus, with many others of unquestionable credit in this particular, has
reduced those errors that constitute circumstances of Worship truly and really
superstitious, to four heads.

1 Meriti: When we think God is bound to reward our inventions, and that by
our purses or labors therein we purchase his favor. This is Superstition.

2 Cultus Dei: When things are required as parts, or of the essence of Divine
Worship, or so used. This is Superstition.

3 Perfectionis: When we conceive that the true beauty and excellency of the
Church, and the perfection of Christianity consists in things of humane
invention. This is Superstition.

4. Necessitatis: When such things are required as simply necessary in their
nature, and so used, when they are but things indifferent. This is also
Superstition.

Quest. But when may a thing be said to appear Superstitious, or to have the
appearance of Superstition; for that also must be avoided?
Answ. We must distinguish: There is an evil surmise, and an evil appearance;
and the first is condemned as well as the latter. Many may judge that to be
superstition that is not; their error does not make it to be so indeed, or in
appearance; for then what should escape when you have tried it by the measure
of all men?

Therefore we must conclude, that a thing may appear to me to be superstitious,
that has not the appearance of superstition or evil, properly so called.

Indeed, when upon evident and undeniable grounds of general practice, it
appears to the sober and unbiassed sort of Christians, that a thing is used
superstitiously, that is, as before, with a superstitious conceit either of
merit, worship, perfection, or necessity, then no doubt there is an appearance
of Superstition.

But I say, grounds of general practice; for it is not the superstitious use of
some few particular private persons among us (much less of other Countries)
that makes a thing appear superstitious; the practice must be general with us.

Or rather, would you have an undoubted Rule in this Case? Look to the Doctrine
of the Church, whence the grounds of imposition and practice are drawn; if
that, as I have said, be false and superstitious, and it appears that upon
those false and superstitious grounds the imposition was raised, then there is
an appearance of evil to be avoided; but if you find otherwise, you must
otherwise judge.

If it should be possible that private Christians have reason to reply, We know
not the minds of our Rulers; for ought we know they may require those things
which we scruple, upon some superstitious ground unknown to us.

To this it is easy to answer,

1. If the Doctrine of the Church declars the grounds of such imposition in
general, that is visible, and that must be your rule in judging the grounds of
particular things imposed, till the contrary is declared, or till you have some
unquestionable reason to suspect the designs of your Governors to betray the
Church to superstition and Idolatry, contrary to the known Doctrine of it.

In the mean while, if nothing savouring of superstition aforesaid be declared
in the imposition, as Augustine says, Quod neque Epist. 118. ad Januar.
contra fidem, etc: That which is neither against faith or holiness ought to be
held indifferent; and for the society of those among whom we live, to be
conformed unto.

Suppose you do not know the minds of your Rulers, yet you owe them charity as
well as obedience, and that thinks no harm, but welcoms every thing, especially
from Superiors, with the best interpretation. There are (says Augustine, full
to our purpose) Aug. l. 2. de Sermon. in Mont.
certain middle or indifferent actions, which we are ignorant with what mind
they are done (because they may be done either with a good or evil intent); de
quibus temerarium est judicare, maxim ut condemnemus; which things it is a
rashness to judge, much more to condemn.

CASE II. Whether such things as have been used superstitiously must be
reckoned Superstitious still.
Resol.
THis doubt is also resolved upon the former grounds. For,

1 If Superstition consists not in the nature of the thing, but in the
superstitious conceit and use of it, then superstition cleaves no longer to any
thing, when the thing is purged and freed from the superstitious doctrine and
use, opinion and practice aforesaid.

2 None can reasonably doubt but that upon this ground Superstition is
separable from a thing that has been thus abused; as one says well, Nothing
can be so far gone into the devils power, but may be reduced to Gods Glory.

3. Therefore, as has been said, we must still have recourse to the reason of
the usage at present, and the present grounds of the imposition; would you
judge righteous in this weighty particular.

Superstition is reformable two ways; either by abolishing the thing, or
removing the abuse: Now which is the best and most effectual course to be
taken, must be left to the wisdom and zeal of Governors; yet Reason judges so
far, Frustra fit per plura, etc. If the end can be attained without more ado,
i. e. if by instruction and injunctions the thing may be reduced to a lawful
and laudable use, what need of the abolition of it?

Ad eundem finem multis mediis pervenitur; We may arrive at the same end by
diverse means; the means are of no moment, as such, further then they advance
the end. If superstition be removed, no great matter which way, as appears in
the practice of good Hezekias; he took away the High places, brake the Images,
cut down the Groves, brake the Brazen Serpent; thus he endeavored with all
pious zeal to reform by the first course, the abolition of the things abused;
yet he spared the Chapel which Solomon built for Ashtoreth the Idol of the
Sydonians, and for the Chemosh the Idol of the Moabites, and for Milcom the
abomination of the children of Ammon, in hopes, no doubt, to sever the Idolatry
from the Places, and by a milder course of Government, Vid. Greg. l. 10. Ep. 71.
to reduce these by his wisdom to the use and service of the true God.

Yet upon supposition that the Idolatry or superstition cannot be severed from
the use of the thing, or very hardly done, Idolatry and superstition must have
no indulgence; the Serpent it self in such a case must be broken in pieces.
Here that famous Rule of Pope Stephen is appproved by all; Per hoc, Magna
Authoritas, etc. For this cause that Authority is esteemed great in the Church,
that if some of our Predecessors have done some things which at that time might
be without fault, and afterward are turned into error and superstition,
without any delay, and with great authority, they may be destroyed by Posterity.

Yet to this rule we must oppose that excellent observation Ad publi. Col. 154.
of St Augustine, Cum Templa, Idola, Luci, etc. When Temples, Idols, Groves, or
any thing of like qualily, by lawful Authority are ruinated, if they be
translated into common (not proper) uses, and converted to the honor of the
true God, that falls out in them which happens also in men, when as of
sacriledgious and ungodly, they are converted to the true Religion. -- So God
(says he) commanded, that the Wood which grew in the Groves of strange gods
should be used in the Holocaust; and that all the gold and silver of Jericho
should be brought into the Lords Treasury. De (...) Vest. ad Nop.


Because (as the Learned Bucer teaches) to be a legal or Antichristian Rite,
sticks in no creature of God, in no Garment, in no Figure, in no color; or in
any work of God, but in the mind and profession of those that abuse the good
creatures of God, ad impias significationes, to wicked or ungodly purposes.

Hereupon, Scio (inquit Beza) nonnullos sublata crucis Adoratione, aliquem
signi crucis usum retinnisse; utuntur igitur ipsi, sicut par est, sua liberate.

But lastly, Admit that our Rulers ought to abolish the thing that has been so
used to superstition, but do not think fit to do it; and enjoin us by their
commands to leave the superstitious use, and to use it as we lawfully may; it
need not enter into a Question, Whether we ought not to forsake the
superstition, and also to obey Authority in the lawful use of that thing
without fear of superstition.

CASE III. Whether the imputing of significancy to things imposed render them
Superstitious?
Resol.
TRuly some Reverend and Learned men seem so affrighted at the very mention of
sacred mystical Ceremonies, significant symbolical Rites of humane Institution,
that I cannot but fear, rhat they have apprehended some very great danger in
them.

Should we once grant, that Ceremonies of humane Institution might be appointed
to signify the favor of God, or the grace of the Sacraments; or to be a means
of receiving any blessing from God; no doubt, there is so much danger in it,
that if corrupt and superstitious men should at any time rule the Church, we
may quickly have not only Seven but Seventy times seven, if not entire, yet,
Semi-Sacraments; the Church and service of God being thereby obnoxious to all
the antic and conceited crotchers that the vain imaginations of overcurious
men can cumber them with, until they become stench in the nostrils of all
sober and staid men, and of God himself with the Church of Rome.

But, if by Rites and Ceremonies we mean only the Circumstances of Divine
Worship; by Scripture left to the liberty and prudence of the Church: and by
the significancy of them, we intend nothing, but that they are fitted to
commend the exercise, with order and decency, to express the gravity and
devotion of the Worshippers; tending also (as such things are capable) to unity
and edification: if this be all, truly I cannot discover so much danger.

Yea, give me leave to add, that to quarrel with them, because they are such,
seems to be angry with these Ceremonies which are better, and because they are
better then others; and to quarrel with their very fitness, and their
conformity to the general Rules of Scripture, by which alone they ought to be
measured.

Again, if nothing that is so purely Indifferent, as to be of no use or
service; and not to be more expedient then inexpedient, ought to be imposed, as
all moderate men allow; and, according to the opinion in hand, Nothing that
has its use or significancy may be required: who sees not but the Church is
crucified between two Opinions, that openly rob her of all power about things
indifferent.

Some very wise and unsuspected persons have freely declared themselves not to
discover any such danger in the bare significancy of the Rites of the Church,
as others are affrighted with. It is not lawful (says Peter Martyr to Hooper)
to deprive the Church of that liberty, that she should not by her actions and
Rites of the Church, aliquid significare, signify something. Yea, (further
says he) the very Apostle himself used that liberty, when he taught, ut illis
signis, that with those signs they should be admonished of their duty. Again,
Rerum significationes, etc. the significations of things call to our minds,
quid nos deceat, what is expedient. Ministri magis memores sint sui officii.
[Vid. Aret. in 1 Cor. 10. 10. and 16. 16. Pet. Mart. in 1 Cor. 16. 26. Geneva
Annotations in 1 Cor. 16. 20. Perkins Case. Consci. cap. 3. Sect. 3.]

Calvin also is nothing Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 10. 28, 29.
fearful to de iver his mind in the point: There are (says he) Rites which
draw Veneration to holy things, etc. with such little helps we are provoked to
piety. -- They are adapted to the reverence of holy Mysteries; thereby the
exercise is suited to holin^ss. -- They are not without fruit. -- Thereby the
faithful are admonished with what modesty and religion they are to worship God.

Kneeling (says Beza) when we receive the Signs, has a show of Godly and
Christian Veneration.

CASE IV. Whether it be a sinful betraying our Christian liberty to obey the
Law in things Indifferent in the Worship of God.
Resol.
THis Question seems to engage God and Caesar; and to cause a quarrel betwixt
Duty and Liberty, which neither God or Caesar, Duty or Liber^y will own or
defend.

The doubt apparently results out of a too gross mistake of the nature of true
Gospel-Liberty; the Internal part whereof, though it indeed free us from Inward
Bondage, yet binds us the faster in Service to God: so the external part
thereof does also deliver us from outward slavery to the lusts of men; yet it
the more obliges us in duty to Superiors.

Polanus places External Christian Liberty (which indeed is properly Christian,
as it may be distinguished from Gospel-Liberty) in two things. A Liberty from
the Law of Moses; 2. A Liberty in the use of Indifferent things. Now, though
the first branch may not be touched, yet, he doubts not in the least, but that
the latter may be determined, upon just occasion of the Churches order, by
lawful Authority.

Libertas Christiana est duplex; a Legibus Mosis, and in Adiaphoris, quales
sunt Ceremoniae humana autoritate institutae, boni ordinis causa. Christian
liberty (says Polanus) is twofold; from the Laws of Moses, and in things
indifferent: of which sort (meaning things Indifferent) are Ceremonies
appointed by humane Authority for orders sake.

Now neither of these branches of Christian Liberty can be soberly thought to
make void the Law, as Moral or Natural, in any one jot or tittle of it, which
our Savior came to fulfill, Matthew. 5. and establish, Romans 3. ult. but to
assert, that Rulers have no power in things Indifferent, because of Christian
liberty, seems to weaken he arm of Authority Ecclesiastical, Civil, Political,
Oeconomical, and even to raze out the fifth Commandment of the Moral Law; yea,
what unnatural consequences of all disorder are like to ensue, in Church, in
State, in Families, and all Societies in the world? the beauty and comeliness of
all which lies not a little in the due order of things Indifferent.

Yea, how often is the Apostle himself the great Assert of Christian Liberty,
thus made an Invader of it? how Injuriously did that famous Synod, Act. 15.
bind the Church to those indifferent things? What Council, Father, Scholman,
Church, nay, what wise man was ever of this opinion? or who is that solid
Writer, in any age almost, that has not declared the contrary?

Give me leave, therefore, to repeat it, the nature of Christian Liberty is
much mistaken: It is not only consistent with, but it even consists in the
determination of things indifferent by lawful Authority. It is one part of this
liberty (as Calvin asserts) Libertas aufertur, ablato Jure and Legibus.
that the Church has power to regulate the Circumstantes of Worship, for peace
and unity, order and decency; and it is, no doubt, another great part of the
said Liberty, that the members of the same may, without sin, obey their Rulers
in such determinations.

It is most worthily observed by the Apostle, that is a part of our Freedom, as
Christians, that we may be the Lords freemen in our 1 Cor. 7. 20, 22.
public capacity, and yet servants in our private; our Christian liberty being
not infringed by our outward duty.

Moreover, that for the good of Society, the preservation of our selves from
legal penalties, for our maintenance and livelihood, we may be subject to the
commands and laws of men, I take to be a very valuable part of our liberty
also; provided nothing be required or acted against the Supremacy of our Lord
Paramount in Heaven.

But let us a little more 1 Cor. 7. 20, 21, 23.
distinctly consider the Apostle, Let every one abide in the same calling
(private) wherein he is called; that is, to be a Christian: Art thou called a
servant, etc. Whence briefly note,

1. Are not all that are called to be Christians, called to the liberty of
Christians?

2. Does not the Text assure us, that this liberty to which we are called is
truly consistent with the Condition in which we are called? otherwise why
should we abide in it?

3. Is not the state of all persons, called to be Christians, (except supreme
Magistrates) a state of subjection and servitude?

4. Does it not then most clearly follow, that Christian liberty consists
with, and obliges unto all, kind of duty to all kind of Governors, to
Fathers, Masters, Husbands, (as the very Quakers acknowledge) Pastors, Kings,
and to God himself (as all good Christians have cause to glory) and that upon
the firmest bonds and ties imaginable, of Wrath, of Conscience, and the Lords
sake.

Nam etsi conscientias proprie solus Deus ^ig^^, etc.

For (says Beza) although Bez. ep. 20.
God alone can properly bind the conscience; yet so fat as the Church, with
respect to Order and Decency, and thereby to Edification, does rightly enjoin,
or make Laws concerning things Indifferent, those same Laws are to be observed
by all pious Persons; and they do so far bind the conscience as that no man
[Sciens and prudens and rebellandi animo] wittingly and willingly with a
purpose to disobey, can either do what is so forbidden, or omit what is so
commanded, absque peccato, without sin.

CASE III. What are we to do in case such things are commanded us, as though we
judge them lawful, yet others judge them sinful, and will be offended at our
doing of them?
Resol.
WE have already considered what is to be done, if things sinful in
themselves, or judged so by us, be enjoined: We are arrived to the ultimate
scruple, touching the offense that others may be likely to take at our
practice, who conceive those things which are enjoined to be unlawful, and that
we shall sin if we do them. And the Question is, What is to be done in this
Case?

The scruple is evidently grounded in the Apostles Directions about scandal;
the sum of which is, that we must not use our liberty in indifferent things to
the offense of our weak brother.

For satisfaction to this great and present doubt, we must have liberty a
little to distinguish.

1. We must distinguish of the object of scandal; it may be such as offends
only one way; and it may be such as offends both ways; that is, first the doing
of a thing may offend some, when the not doing of it offends none: This was the
Case in the Apostles time; the taking of meat offered to Idols was apt to
offend the weak brethren; but the not eating of such meat was not likely to
offend any body: In such a Case it is evident, we ought not to eat to the
offense of our brother.

But in some Cases there is a necessity of offense, whether we do the thing, or
whether we do it not; as in case of Conformity, our very case, some, you say,
that are weak will be offended if we do conform; and you cannot say but that
some whom you judge weak also, will be offended if we do not.

Now in this case there is no remedy, seeing I must do one or other, conform,
or not; but to fly to that excellent Rule of Polanus, and to consider the
persons offended on both sides, and to weigh the nature of the offense.

Hereupon we must rest satisfied in this issue; where most, and of most
consideration are offended; and where the nature of the offense is most
heinous, there we must forbear to use our liberty, and either do or not do the
thing in question; and so on the contrary.

Let us then apply, and faithfully answer our selves whether the doing a lawful
thing enjoined by Authority, that will offend our weak brethren be likely to
offend more persons and persons of more consideration, and give offense of a
more heinous nature, than the not doing of that lawful thing against the
command of Authority.

Here seem to be three branches of the Comparison: 1. Where more are likely to
be offended. 2. Where more considerable persons. 3. Where the nature of the
offense is foulest.

Truly, I soberly think, that Conformity in such lawful things need not fear
to compare with Non conformity, in any one of these three.

1. If the Question be, Whether Conformity or Nonconformity be likely to
offend most individual persons in the Nation, it will not be difficult to
answer. Its possible, the imposing of such things (...) offend many more then
t^^ not practicing; but when things are once imposed, so wise a Nation will, I
conceive, leave little room for the comparison betwixt the extent of scandal by
Obedience and by Disobedience.

2. And much more, if the Question be touching the considerableness of the
persons offended on both sides. It Is too true, that Obedience in such a case is
likely to stir up trouble, envy, discontent and murmuring in the minds of
many of the ordinary sort of people; but whether, as to the great ends of the
peace and good of the Church, the ordinary sort be the more consi^^^able, will
hardly brook (...) inquiry. Whereas, our Disobedience, besides the offense of
ordinary people, is too likely to offend the King, the Court, the Council, the
Parliament, the Bishops, the Lawyers, the Nobility, the Gentry, or beyond
controversy the greater part of them all; but even thus far the Argument is
invincible (a Minore ad Majus): If we must forbear our liberty in case of
offense to our weak brother, much more in case of offense to Authority.

3. Especially, if we consider the nature of the offense also on both sides.
Where, first, we may compare the offense on both sides with the offense the
Apostle mentions, and then weigh them one against another.

1. First, comparing the scandal likely to happen upon our obedience, with the
scandal of the weak mentioned by the Apostle, there seems to be this great
difference: the scandal mentioned by the Apostle, was, chiefly, if not (as an
eminent person asserts) only, unto sin. And the great reason the Apostle
gives, why we must not use our liberty to the offense of our weak brother, is,
lest we lay a stumbling block Romans 14. 13, 15, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12,
13.
before him, whereat he may fall: that is, least he presume after our example,
to do something against his Conscience, and so sin against Christ, and be
likely to perish or to be destroyed; the danger, therefore the Apostle tells
us, lies not so much in offending our brother in the English sense, as in one
making him by our evil example to offend. Wherefore, the Apostle concludes, If
meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh, etc. 1 Cor. 8. 13.

But now the offense that is most likely to ensue upon our conformity, is quite
of another nature, there is little fear of drawing our offended brethren to like
the ways of Conformity by the practice of Conformists; but rather they will
like Conformity and the persons conforming so much the worse, and grow the more
bitter against them.

The reason of this difference, I conceive, lies thus; In the time of the
Apostle, those were genera^ly looked upon as the strongest disciples that knew
their liberty best; and the others, that were weak, were aptest to be offended;
but now, those that pretend offense are the strongest in their own opinion; and
they judge it a weakness in those that do conform: and no doubt, if any be
likely to follow our examples in conformity, out of an opinion of our ability
to judge better then themselves; they will as easily follow our Judgment too, if
we first use due means of satisfaction to them; and then all the scruple is
vanished and gone.

2. Secondly, let us weigh them one against another; and compare the offense
received by our weak brethren upon our obedience, with that received by
Authority upon our disobedience.

If we only do that which we may lawfully do, and which we are commanded to
do, we do not give our weak brother any offense, though he take it: there is
not that per^se, or naturally flowing out of the use of my liberty, or the
doing of my duty, that would hurt my brother, or tempt him to sin; he takes
occasion of himself, not at all given by me.

But now, by disobedience, (if the thing be lawful that is injoined) we give
offense to Authority, directly and properly so; and, as we have showed, we can
hardly escape sin herein against the fifth Commandment; which, in every iota,
as well as all the rest, our very liberty it self establishes.

The sum is this; by refusing to conform in such a lawful case, lest we should
offend our weak brother, seems directly to sin our selves, to avoid an occasion
of sin to him; to offend God, the King, the Law, the Church, and conscience
too, by not doing our duty, lest we should offend our brother by doing it.

Therefore, we must distinguish betwixt things Indifferent, that are not under
the actual command of Authority; and such as are, before they are commanded,
things Indifferent, are in our liberty: and then, the Apostles Rule holds, we
must not use our liberty to the offense of our brethren; but what is required
by Authority, if it be no longer in our liberty, we must mind our duty.

This Rule therefore greatly concerns Magistrates in their Impositions, who
ought still to follow the weighty advice of Mr Calvin: Let Charity submit to
Faith, and Liberty to Charity; but Subjects must not sin, that they may please
their Prince, much less their brother.

Besides, we may distinguish of offense, with respect to our brother offended;
if we offend him by doing our duty, we one^y tempt him to do his duty, though
against his conscience; on the other side, if we omit our duty, lest we offend
our brother, do not we offend him more in the Apostles sense, by tempting him
to continue in sin, and to embolden himself in sin with a worse conscience?

CASE. The Apostle has laid down a Rule, how we are to use our liberty in
things Indifferent, toward our weak brother: can Man by his commands alter
this Rule, or take off the force of it?
Resol.
THe Apostles Rule is absolutely unalterable, where the reason of it holds; and
the object is the same that is where the matter is still indifferent.

2. Man cannot make things Indifferent to become necessary in their nature; yet
lawful Authority may and ought to judge when the exigencies of the Church make
any thing necessary, as to its present use, or forbearance. These necessary
things (says that Council, Act. 15.) though v. 28.
they were not all necessary in their nature, yet the Council judged them
necessary as to the present good of the Church.

3. In such Cases, for the public good of the Church, Governors may and ought
to determine the use of Indifferent things by their prudent impositions; It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us 28.
to lay upon you no other burden then these necessary things.

And no less remarkably we find St Paul's power put forth, in 1 Cor. 11. and
other places, in determining many Indifferent things, for order and decency in
the Church of God.

4. But what does all this signify, if these Apostolical Injunctions have no
force, when a discontented person shall say he is offended?

Put case that after the decree of the Synod in Act. 15. a particular member
should have been offended, that his brother refused to eat meat offered to
Idols, pleading that it was superstition in him, or a losing or betraying the
Christian Liberty: Or that others had been offended at those particulars of
Decency and Order injoined by the Apostle to the Church of Corinth; urging that
they were not commanded of the Lord, that therefore they were Humane
Inventions, New Ordinances, Additions to Gods Word, and Will Worship. Can any
imagine, that the rest of the people had been discharged of their duty, either
to that famous Synod, or that excellent Governor the Apostle Paul, or that
they were bound to suspend their Obedience, lest they should offend such
scrapulous persons? I cannot think it.

We must not oppose Liberty to Necessity; Charity to Duty; or the Offense of
the Weak, to the Higher Powers.

CASE I. But it is vehemently urged by my brethren in the* Ministry, that even
their credit and reputation will not suffer them to conform; they shall thus
become vile to the people, as men that will do any thing to save their
Liveings; and then their Ministry will be fruitless, and do no good among them;
What is to be done in such a Case?
Resol.
1. THis Case seems to arise from prudence and not conscience: Herein we not
pretend to fly from sin to suffering, but from one sort of suffering to
another, that is judged rather to be chosen; from suffering in our Reputation
by Conformity, to the Penalties of the Law for disobedience; which, when all
things are cons^dered, will be found to savor more of the stoutness and
Magnanimity of an Heathen, then of the meekness, humility, and selfdenial of a
Christian, or a Minister of Christ.

2. A good name indeed is a very precious thing; and to blot and stain it with
any thing that is sinful is to be abhorred more then death; for a good name is
better then life; but to suffer therein without a cause, or in a good cause; to
suffer therein for well doing, as the Apostle speaks, the more precious it is,
the more thank-worthy are such sufferings, and the more like Martyrdom.

3. But if the things be lawful that are required, and the Authority be lawful
that requires them, and God commands you to obey them that rule over you, in
things that are lawful; if the public Peace, the good of souls, the safety of
the Church, as well as your own prosperity, do truly depend upon your
conformity; and upon these, or like respects of Peaaee, Duty, and safety, you
do conform, and are therefore reproached and wounded in your Names, I see not
but that you suffer in a very good cause, and your Names are Martyrs of the
Church of God, and the souls of the people; in such a case doubt not to commit
your souls and names into the hands of your God in well-doing, as into the
hands of a faithful Creator, who will find a time and a way to wipe off the
dirt from his Jewels, and make your Righteousness shine as the light, and your
innocence as the noonday: When all men speak evil of you (such a time there
may be) for Christ's sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in heaven.

4. But let us take a more steady view of the danger which your reputation is
really in, by conformity in lawful things. In order thereunto let us weigh the
state and temper of the people with whom your credit and reputation lies, and
whom you fear; they are usually divided into three sorts, two extremes, and a
middle more staid and sober sort of people; the two extrams are the profane and
the giddy, i. e. such as are zealous, but without knowledge.

5. Now let it be seriously reckoned what our reputation with these two
extremes is worrh, further then it may help us to save their souls. Again, How
difficult and almost impossible it is to have and keep a good Name, and a good
Conscience, with either of these: If we be faithful to their souls in reproof
of sin, and pressing the power of godliness, will not the profane hate us and
speak evil of us? And let one put it home to you, What considerable part of
Reputation have you left (if you have indeed been thus faithful) with them, to
hazard or lose by your conformity? Yea, Whether you are not more certain to
contract the reproach and revi^ing of such persons by your Nonconformity? and
whether your Conformity may not afford you more opportunity. (by being a means
of your continuing in your places) and also more advantage (bringing your
practice nearer to their principles and desires) of winning, reforming, and
saving the souls of the profaner sort of your people, then your Nonconformity,
throwing you out of the Ministry, and farther from the way and affections of
those people, is likely to do.

6. As for the zealous part, I mean such whose knowledge is but small, and their
zeal much; I confess your interest in them is deservedly prized, because they
mean well, and in the main are many of them truly pious; yet I judge it very
unreasonable to prize your interest in their favor and affection above the
interest of their souls, the interest of the Gospel, and of God himself; which
is to set their good opinion of us (falssy taken too) above our Ministry and
the public Peace, above our duty to God and man. It is possible we may suffer
from good people, not on^y for well doing, but for doing, or endeavoring to do
them good; and a Peter through ignorance may act Satan's part, toward Christ
himself; but our Savior has encouraged us with his own example, to sacrifice
not only our Names, but our Lives, to save, if possible, the very persons that
would take them from us.

7. Besides, when the Law for Conformity extends to the People, as well as to
the Ministry, perhaps, by their own necessity, they may learn more modesty and
charity toward us.

And in the mean while these censures are far more obnoxious to the censure and
reproof of their Ministers, and all sober people, for their rashness and
uncharitableness, then their Ministers* can so much as seem to be, by doing
their duty in a just Conformity: and, if merely to gratify them, we suspend
obedience to our superiors, we seem to sacrifice Church, and State, our
selves, and all, as far as in us lies, to the very humors of our people.

8. Our own experience (many of us I am sure) has sufficienly reproached us
already, for our being so much lead by the foolish fire of the strange zeal of
such kind of people; we have seen that there is no measure in their
principles, no bounds in their practices, and many of us have once already, by
making them our guides, lost our way, our selves, and our credits, and
reputation, as well with our selves, as with all sober and well tempered
persons; and shall we now take sanctuary there to save our credits, where our
reputation has bled, and our Names have suffered even to death already? Is not
the good of the Church, the service of Souls, the protection of the Laws, and
just obedience to God and the King, a better refuge, and of better reputation,
then the opinion of a few inconsiderate censorious persons? Let it be wisely
considered.

9. Let us ponder a little the sentence of Calvin, passed long agon upon such
Galv. Advers. Anabapt. Art. 2.
kind of people, the truth of which much late experience has sealed unto; Cum
sub specie studii perfectionis imperfectionem nullam tolerare possumus, aut in
corpore, aut in membris Ecclesiae, tunc Diabolum nos Tumefacere Superbia, and
Hypocrisi seducere moneamur; in which words he plainly fathers such blind,
rash; and censorious zeal upon the Devil, and upon the works of the Devil,
Seduction, Pride, and Hypocrisy.

10. Now if we do indeed so highly value the love of such people, have we not
reason to answer their Love? And how can this be better effected then by
endeavoring to recover them out of the snare of the Devil, both by Doctrine or
good example; I mean the rather for their sakes, to yield obedience to those
things that our people ought to know we judge to be lawful; and that they may
also be truly satisfied how ready we are to do any thing that is not sinful,
rather then to lay down the Ministry and service of their Souls; a far better
way, I think, to express our hearty affection to them, then by indulging their
prejudices, gratifying their vices, or out of a senseless tenderness of our
interest in them, to suffer our selves by the power of the Tempter to be
seduced with them into a state of wretched separation.

If all that has been said cannot satisfy, let it also be seriously
considered, how often our Savior hazarded his Name with the People, that he
might fulfill his Ministry, until he had gotten the slander of a friend of
Publicans and sinners; that his Apostle Peter ventured his credit even with the
Church, the purest of the Church, that he might answer his call from heaven,
and dispense the Gospel to his new charge the Gentiles: And lastly; How does
Paul also run the venture of a scandalous reputation, of time, and company
serving, of men-pleasing, etc. When to the Jew he becomes a Jew, and to those
without Law, as if without Law; even all things (lawful) to all men; which yet
he sticks not at, as himself glories, for the Gospels sake, and that he might
obtain opportunity and advantage to win souls.

But besides these two extremes, 11.
there is a middle sort of people, that are sixed upon sober and staid Principles
of a better reputation by far then either or both of the former; indeed if our
Conformity should forfeit our credit with these; I should much suspect it.

12. But here you must not understand by this sober sort of people, only the
sober people of your own Parishes, that is too narrow and short a measure of
them; but the sober and moderate part of the Kingdom, as you may find them in
all ranks and qualities, degrees and callings of men, as has been before more
largely observed.

13. Now, I think, I may say with confidence, that these you will find either
professedly for Conformity themselves, or else so wise, so just, and charitable
to you, as (unless you have formerly forfeited your credit and reputation with
them, by some notorious appearances of your time-serving) to put a better
interpretation upon your humble and peaceable submission to Authority, then you
seem to hope for.

Yea, though your name and esteem should seem to 14.
be consumed in the zeal and rage of the giddy and profane sort of the people
(with whom it cannot long live) yet despair not, but by your wise and sober
conversations, your diligence and labors in the service of the Gospel, your
peaceable demeanor in obedience to the Laws, there will arise, as it were, out
of the ashes of the old, a New Name, and better reputation to you, in the good
opinion of this better generation, the wise and sober sort of the people.

15. However cast the worst; thou have thus sacrificed thy Name for the
discharge of thy duty to God and the King, to the Church and thy Charge, and no
doubt to thi^e own conscience, if this be all thy scruple; for I cannot believe
that he that so much values the good opinion of the vulgar, can ever have a
good opinion of himself; or he that dare hazard the peace of the Church for his
credit with the people, can have much quiet in his own breast; or one that has
more confidence in the esteem of the multi^ude than in the favor of his
Prince, or the protection of the Laws, can easily satisfy his own conscience.

For I must needs confess 16.
with that famous Church, Civilibus legibus, quae cum Confess. Suev. c. 14.
pietate non pugnant eo quisque Christianus paret promptius, quo fide Christi
est imbutus before; That every Christian, by how much the more he savours of
the faith of Christ, by so much the more prompt and ready he is to conform to
the Laws of men, which are not contrary to the Laws of God.

FINIS.
The Table.
I. WHAT are things Indifferent? page 1. II. Whether is any thing Indifferent
in the exercise of Religion? p. 3. III. Whether may things Indifferent be
imposed? 8. IV. Whether may they conduce to order in Gods worship? 13. V. What
are those things Indifferent that may be imposed? 16. VI. Whether may things
Indifferent be imposed quatenus such? page 25 VII. What does render things
indifferent fit to be imposed? 30 VIII. What are those General Rules of
Scripture that limit the imposition of things indifferent? 32 IX. How are
private persons to demean themselves under such impositions of things
indifferent in the worship of God? 51 X. What are we do, when things in
themselves necessary are required by Authority? page 55 XI. What are we to do,
when things expedient are required? 61 XII. What, when things purely
Indifferent? 65 XIII. What, when things inexpedient? 72 Where it is enquired,
1. Whether a thing that we judge inexpedient may be done in obedience to
Authority? 81 2. Whether it may not be expedient, as well as lawful, sometimes
to obey in things lawful but inexpedient? p. 85 3. Whether the consideration
of Peace, Duty, and Safety, may not render such Obedience both lawful and
expedient? 91, 99, 104 XIV. What are we to do, when things sinful are
imposed? 116 Where enquire, I. When things materially and really sinful? 119
II. What are we to do, when things are required which we judge sinful? page
121 Where enquire, I. Wherein the reality and appearance of Superstition
consists? 129 II. Whether things formerly used with superstition, are to be
accounted superstitious still? 137 III. Whether the significancy of things
imposed render them superstitious? 144 IV. Whether to obey the Laws of men in
things Indifferent, be to betray our Christian Liberty? page 151 III. What we
are to do, when we conceive the thing required to be lawful, but others judge
it to be sinful, and will be offended at our obedience? 160 2. Whether a
humane Law can take off the Force of the Scripture-Rule, not to use our Liberty
to the offense of the weak? 174

FINIS.

