The JUST MAN'S FUNERAL. Lately delivered in a Sermon at CHELSEY, before several
Persons of Honor and Worship. By THOMAS FULLER.

depiction of a crown

Printed by WILLIAM BENTLEY, for John Williams at the Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1649.

The JUST MAN'S FUNERAL.
ECCLES. 7. verse. 15. All things have I seen in the days of my vanity; there
is a just man that perishes in his righteousness; and there is a wicked man
that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.
Act. 18. 17.
Gallio the secure deputy of Achaia, They care for none of these things.
Secondly, Such as observe nothing observable. These may be said to weed the
world; If any passage happens which deserves to be forgotten their jet
memories (only attracting straws and chaff unto them) registereth and
retains them, fond fashions and foolish speeches is all that they charge on
their account, and only empty ciphers swell the vote-books of their
discoveries. Lastly, Such who make good observations, but no applications. With
Mary they do not ponder things in their heart, but only brew them in their
heads, and presently breath them out of their mouth, having only a rational
understanding thereof, (which renders them acceptable in company for their
discourse) but never suffering them to sink into their souls, or make any
effectual impression on their lives.

Solomon's observations were every way complete, he marked what happened, and
well he might, who advantaged with matchless wealth might make matchless
discoveries, and could afford to dig out important Truths with mattocks of gold
and silver; what he marked was remarkable, and what was remarkable, he not
only applied to the good of his private person, but endeavored it might be
propagated to all posterity in the words of my text, All things have I seen in
the days of my vanity; there is a just man that perishes in his
righteousness; and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his
wickedness.

Solomon's observation herein, we will insist upon these four parts, to show,

1. That it is so. 2. Why it is so. 3. What abuses wicked men do make because
it is so. 4. What uses good men should make because it is so.
First that it is so; believe Solomon's eyes who professed that he saw it: But
here it will be demanded, How came he to behold a righteous man? with what care
and new eye salve had he anointed his eyes to see that which his father David
(having a more holy, though not so large a heart) could never discern? Psalm.
143. 2
Enter not into judgment with thy servants O Lord: for no flesh is righteous
in thy sight.

juxta propositum just vivendi, is so intentionally, desiring and endeavoring
after righteousness with all the might of his soul. Secondly, who is so
comparatively, in reference to wicked men, appearing righteous in regard of
those, who have no goodness at all in their hearts. Thirdly, righteous
imputatively, having the righteousness of God in Christ imputed unto him.
Lastly, Righteous inhesively, having many heavenly graces, and holy endowments,
sincere, though not perfect, or evangelically perfect pro hoc statu, bestowed
upon, and remaining within him. Such a righteous man as this, Solomon saw
perishing in his righteousness.

Solomon patiently behold a righteous man perish in his righteousness, and not
rescue him out of the paws of oppression? Could he see it, and could he suffer
it, and be only an idle spectator at so sad a tragedy? Did his hand sway the
scepter, and was his head invested with the crown, contentedly to look on so
sorrowful a sight? Could he only as in the * case of the 1. Kings 3.
harlots call for a sword to kill a child, and not call for it here to defend a
righteous man? He that is not with us (says our Savior) is against us. If it
hold in private persons, much more in public officers? They persecute who do
not protect; destroy who do not defend; slay who do not save the righteous man,
who have power and place to do it.

Solomon's observations were not all confined to his own country and kingdom;
though staying at home in his person, his mind traveled into foreign parts,
and in the neighboring countries of Egypt, Edom, Syria, Assyria, etc. might
behold the perishing of the righteous and long flourishing of the wicked.
Secondly, his expression, I have seen, relates not only to his ocular but
experimental discoveries. What Solomon got by the help of History, Study and
perusal of Chronicles. He that was skilled in natural Philosophy from the Cedar
to the Shrub, was (no doubt) well versed in all civil occurrences from the
Prince to the Peasant, from Adam to the present age wherein he lived, so much
as by any extant records could be collected. To set humane writers aside, the
Scripture alone afforded him plentiful presidents herein. Open the Bible and
we shall find (almost in the first leaf) just Abel perishing in his
righteousness, and wicked Cain prolonging his life in his iniquity. To omit
other instances, Solomon, by relation from his father, might sadly remember,
how Abimelech the High priest perished in his righteousness with all the
Priests, inhabitants of the city of Nob, whilst Saul who condemned, and Doeg
who executed them flourished long in their iniquity. So much for the proof
that it is so: Come we now to the reasons why it is so. These reasons are of a
double nature, some fetched from nature, others from religion. For the present
we insist only on the former, reserving the rest till we shall encounter the
Atheists in the sequels of our discourse.

Paul says of himself, Phil. 3. 14.
I press toward the mark. And the same is the endeavor of every good man. Now
as in a race the foremost man who is nearest the mark, is envied of all those
which come after him, who commonly use all foul play toward him, (justling him
on the side, seeking to trip up his heels; yea, sometimes thrusting him forward
on the back, that so he might fall headlong by his own weight and their
violence) so often comes it to pass betwixt rivals in the race of honor and
virtue. Ill-minded men perceiving themselves quite out stripped by some eminent
person who has got the speed of them, and dispairing fairly to overtake Him,
resolve foully to overturn Him, by all means possible contriving his
destruction.



Divert him from his righteousness. or Destroy him in his righteousness.
If the first takes no effect, and if his constancy appears such as without
regreet he will persist in piety, leaving them no hope to bias him to base
ends, then dispairing to bow him from, they contrive to break him in his
righteousness. Thus whilst he has many enemies which conspire his
destruction, seeking with power to suppress, or policy to supplant him. The
wicked man on the other side, has the generality of men (the most being bad
as himself) to befriend him, a main cause of his prolonging himself successful
in his wickedness.

Righteous men perish in their righteousness, because not so wary, and
watchful to defend themselves in danger, being deaf to all jealousies and
suspicions, over-confident of other men, measuring all others by the integrity
of their own intentions. This makes them lie at an open guard, not fencing, and
fortifying themselves against any sudden surprisal, but presuming, that
deserving no hurt, none shall be done unto them. Thus Gedaliah, governor of the
remnant of the Jews after the captivity, twice received he express
intelligence of a conspiracy to kill him, yet was so far from giving credit,
that he gave a sharp reproof to the first discoverer thereof. Yea, when Johanan
the son of Kareah, tendered his service to kill Ishmael, (sent, as he said,
from Baalis king of Ammon to slay Gedaliah) Gedaliah rejoyned, Jer. 40. 16.
Thou shall not do this thing, for thou speak falsely of Ishmael. His noble
nature gave no entertainment to the report, till he found it too late to
prevent it. Whilst wicked men, partly out of policy, more out of guiltiness,
sleep like Hercules with their club in their hand, stand always on their guard,
are jealous of their very shadows and appearances of danger, a great cause of
their safety and success, prolonging themselves in their wickedness.

Thirdly, They perish because of a lazy principle which has possessed the
heads and hearts even of the best men, (who are unexcusable herein) namely,
that God in due time will defend their innocence, which makes them more
negligent and remiss in defending themselves; as the Prophet makes mention of
Dan. 2. 34.
a stone cut out without hands, they conceive their cause will without man's
help hew its own way through the rocks of all resistance; as if their cause
would stand Sentinel for them, though they slept themselves; as if their cause
would (fix their Muskets) though they did it not themselves. Thus the
Christians in their battles against the Turks, having won the day by their
valor, have lost the night by their negligence, which principally proceeded
from their confidence, that God interested as a Second in every just cause, was
in that quarrel concerned as a Principle, and it could not stand in his justice
to suffer it to miscarrie.

they are wiser in their generation than the children of light.

the wife and the harlot, many wives (though herein they cannot be defended)
knowing their husbands obliged in conscience to love them by virtue of their
solemn promise made before God and the congregation at their marriage, are
therefore the less careful to study compliance to their husbands desires;
they know their husbands if wronging them wrong themselves therein, and
presuming themselves to deserve love as due unto them for their honesty and
loyalty of affections, are the less sollicitous to gain that which they count
their own already. Whilst the harlot conscious to her self of her usurpation,
that she has no lawful right to the embraces of her parramour, tunes her self
to the criticalness of all complacencie to humor him in all his desires. And
thus always those men whose cause have the weakest foundation in piety,
gets the strongest buttress in policy to support it.

righteous man, by the principles of his profession, is tied up, and confined
only to the use of such means for his preservation, as are consonant to Gods
will, conformable to his word, preferring rather to die many times, than to
save himself once by unwarrantable ways. Propound unto him a project for his
safety, and as Solomon promised to favor Adonijah, so long as he 1 kings 1.
52.
showed himself worthy, otherwise if wickedness were found in him he should
surely die. So our righteous man only accepts and embraces such plots to
secure himself thereby, as acquit themselves honest and honorable, such as
appear otherwise, he presently dispatches with detestation, destroying the very
motion and mention thereof, from entering into his heart. On the otherside, the
wicked man is left at large allowing himself liberty and latitude, to do any
thing in his own defense, making a constant practice of doing evil, that good
may come thereof.

Gods cause. Much was the substance in the very shadow of S. Peter, which made
the people so desirous thereof as he passed by the streets. And the very
umbrage of Religion has a sovereign virtue in it. No better cordial for a
dying cause, than to overshadow it with the pretense that it is Gods cause; for
first this is the way to make and keep a great and strong party: No sooner the
watchword is given out For Gods cause, but instantly GAD, Behold a troop
comes of many honest, but ignorant men, who press to be listed in so pious an
employment. These may be killed, but cannot be conquered, for till their
judgments be otherwise informed, they will triumph in being overcome, as
confident, the deeper their wounds got in Gods cause gape in their bodies, the
wider the gates of heaven stand open to receive their souls. Besides, the
pretending their cause is Gods cause will, in a manner, legitimate the basest
means, in pursuance and prosecution thereof; for though it be against Gods
word, to do evil that good may come thereof, yet this old error will hardly be
beaten out of the heads and hearts of many men, that crooked ways are made
direct, by being directed to a straight end; and the luster of a bright cause
will reflect a seeming light on very deeds of darkness used in tendencie
thereunto.

Rabshakeh pretended a Commission from God, for all the wickedness he
committed, and complements blasphemy, 2. Kings 18. 25.
Am I now come up without the Lord, against this place to destroy it? the Lord
said to me, Go up against this place to destroy it. The Priests of Bell were
but bunglers, which could not steal the meat of their Idol, but they must be
discovered by the print of their footsteps. Men are grown more cunning thieves
now adays; first they will put on the shoes of him they intend to rob, and then
steal, that so their treadings may tell no tales to their disadvantage. They
will not stride a pace, nor go a step, nor stir a foot, but all for Gods
cause, all for the good and glory of God. Thus Christ himself was served from
his cradle to his cross; Herod who sought to kill him, pretended to worship
him, and Judas kissed him, who betrayed him.

Zimri indeed continued 1. Kings 16. 15.
but seven days, that was not long: wicked Jehojachin reigned but three 2.
Kings 24. 8.
months in Jerusalem, that was not long: ungodly Amon reigned two 2. Kings 2.
19.
years in Jerusalem, that was not long: idolatrous Ahab reigned in Samaria
twenty 1. Kings 16. 29.
and two years, that was indifferent long: cruel Herod the King who sought to
kill Christ, reigned in Judea wel-nigh forty years, that was long indeed; he
prolonged himself to purpose in his iniquity.

righteous man perishes in his righteousness, and the wicked prolongeth his
life in his wickedness.

Atheists come in with a full cry, (oh that there were no more of them on
earth, than there are in hell, where torture makes them all speak truth)
spending their wicked breath against God and his attributes. Some bark at his
Providence, as if he perceived not these things, Psalm 73. 11.
How does God know, and is there knowledge in the most high? Others cavil at
his justice, that he has no mind; others carp at his strength that he has no
power to rectify and redress these innormities. This world (say they) is a
ship without a pilot, steered only with the winds and waves of casualtie, it
is a mere lotterie, wherein the best men daily draw the blanks, and the worst
run away with the prizes. And, as 2. Samuel 15. 4.
Absalom boasted, if he were king of Israel, how far he would outdo David in
right managing of all matters: so these impudent wretches conceive with
themselves, the Platform of the world had been more perfect, might they have
been admitted to the making thereof. The moon would have shined without any
spots, roses grown without any prickles, fair weather should have never done
harm, because rain should only fall in the night, neither to hinder the
pleasure of the rich, or hurt the profit of the poor. Merit should be made the
only standard of preferment, no perishing of the righteous man in his
righteousness, when success should only be entailed on desert. In a word, such
Atheists presume all things by them should be so prudently disposed, that
nothing, no doubt, in the whole world should be out of order, save themselves.

the righteous man to perish in his righteousness, because allow him righteous
justicia causae, he is not so justicia personae, the best man standing guilty
of many faults and failings in his sight. God needs not pick a quarrel with any
man, having at all times matter of a just controversy against him. And seeing
God has oftentimes connived at him being faulty, he may condemn him being
faultless; for nullum tempus occurrit Regi, the King of heaven is not limited
to any time, but at his own pleasure and leisure may take an opportunity to
punish an offender.

righteous man was just in the primitive constitution thereof, yet if it branch
it self forth into numerous circumstances appendant thereunto, (many whereof
may be intricate and perplexed) if it be of so spacious and ponderous a nature
that it requires many heads and hands as subordinate instruments in several
places for the managing thereof. Lastly, if the cause be so prolix and tedious,
that many years must be spent in the prosecution thereof, the original
righteousness of the cause may be altered with the handling of it, and much
injustice annexed thereunto; for which God may justly cause it finally to
miscarrie. For it is impossible that a cause consisting of such verietie of
limbs retaining thereunto, should be carried on without many grand errors and
mistakes committed therein; and the righteousness of the best man will not
spread so broad without shrinking, stretch so long without tireing, apply it
self so exactly to each circumstance without some swerving therein. Especially,
when all the faults of the inferior officers employed under him, are chargeable
on the righteous man's account, the matter of whose cause may justly perish, by
Gods just anger on the unjust managerie thereof.

perish in his righteousness, because in the midst of their sufferings his
mercy supports them with the inward comfort of a clear conscience. In the time
of persecution a woman being big with child was imprisoned and condemned to
die, which the night before her execution, was (I cannot say brought to bed)
delivered of a child, when her pain (wanting the help of a midwife) must be
presumed exceeding great. The Jailor hearing her cry out in her pangs. If you
cry (said he) to day, I will make you shreek worse to morrow, when you are to
be burnt at a stake. The woman replied, Not so, to morrow my pain will be
abated: for to day I suffer as an offender, for the punnishment justly imposed
by God on our sex, for our disobedience and breach of his law; but to morrow I
shall die for the testimony of the truth in the defense of Gods glory and his
true Religion. Thus it is strange to see, what alacrity a good cause infuseth
into a righteous man deriving comfort into his heart by insensible conveiances,
so that he embraces even death it self with a smiling countenance, feeding his
soul on the continual feast of a clear conscience.

perishing temporally in his righteousness, that his Cause shall be heard over
again, and rejudged in an other world. If one conceive himself wronged in the
Hundred, or any inferior Court, he may by a certiorari, or an accedas ad
curiam, remove it to the King's Bench or Common Pleas, as he is advised best for
his own advantage. If he apprehends himself injured in these Courts, he may
with a Writ of Error remove it to have it argued by all the Judges in the
Exchequer-chamber. If here also he conceives himself to find no justice, he
may with an Injunction, out of the Chancery stop their proceedings. But if in
the Chancery he reputeth himself agreeved, he may thence appeal to the God of
heaven and earth, who in another world, will vindicate his right, and severely
punish such as have wilfully offered wrong unto him. And so much to assert Gods
justice in suffering the righteous man to perish in his righteousness.

a Rev. 2. 21.
space to repent, if they would but make use thereof. Indeed David says, Psalm.
140. 11.
Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him; But God is a fair hunter, he
might in the rigor of his justice knock wicked men down as he finds them
sitting in their forms. But God will give them fair law, they shall for a time
run, yea sport themselves before his judgments, ere they are pleased to
overtake them.

Mat. 8. 19
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go; what is promised by him,
is performed by a guilty conscience, that Squire of the body, always
officious to attend a malefactor. Fast, and I will follow thee, and thy empty
body shall not be so full of wind, as thy mind of dismal apprehensions: feast,
and I will follow thee; and as the Dan. 5. 5.
hand on the wall, bring in the sad reckoning, for thy large bill of fare; stay
at home, and I will follow thee; ride abroad, and I will follow thee, or else
meet thee in the way with my naked sword, as the Angel did Number. 22. 23.
Balaam: wake, and I will follow thee: sleep, and I will follow thee, and
affright thee with hideous fancies, and terrible dreams, as I did King Richard
the third, the night before his death.

and wounds commonly smart, ache and throb most, the nearer it is to night, so
the anguish and torture of a guilty conscience increases, the nearer men
apprehend themselves to the day of their death.

of the righteous man's perishing in his righteousness; These may be divided
into three ranks:

1. Such as fret at Gods proceedings herein. 2. Such as droop under Gods
proceedings herein. 3. Such as argue with Gods proceedings herein.
The first are the fretters; for if the perishing of the righteous comes to
the serious observation of a high-spirited man, one of a stout and valiant
heart, he will scarce brook it without some anger, and indignation, fuming and
chafing thereat. Thus David, we know, was a man of valor, of a martial and
warlike spirit, and he confesses of himself, that, beholding the prosperity
of the wicked, Psalm. 73. 21.
his heart was grived, and he was pricked in his reins. Nor was it mere grief
possessed him, but a mixture of much impatience, as appears by that counsel
which in like case, in one Psalm, he gave himself three several times, Psalm.
37. 1, 7, 8.
Fret not thy self because of evil doers; and again, fret not thy self because
of him who prospers in his way; and the third time, fret not thy self in any
wise.

cast out, save Matt. 17. 21.
by fasting and prayer. But this humor of fretting and repining at Gods
proceedings herein, which he understood not, could not be ejected out of David,
but by prayer no doubt, and that very solemnly, not at home, but in Gods
temple, Psalm. 73. 16.
When I thought to know all, this it was too painful for me, until I went into
the Sanctuary of God, there understood I their end. O let men of high spirits
and stout hearts, not lavish their valor, and misspend their courage, to chafe
and fume at such accidents, venting good spirits the wrong way, but rather
reserve their magnanimous resolutions for better services, and (besides their
private devotions) address themselves with David, to Gods public worship in
his house, who in his due time will unriddle unto him the equity of his
proceedings.

perishing of the righteous, they give all over for lost, concluding there is
no hope; they rather languish than live, walking up and down disconsolate, with
soft paces, sad looks, and sorrowful hearts: all their children they are ready
to call and christen 1 Samuel 4. 21.
Ichobods, the glory is departed from Israel, being affected like the Citizens
of Jerusalem, besieged by Senacherib, their hearts are like the trees of the
wood, Isaiah 7. 2.
moved with the wind; But let such droopers know, that herein they offend God
and wrong themselves, and let them gird up their loins, and tie up their
spirits, at the serious consideration that God in due time will raise them out
of the dust, maintain his own cause, and confound his enemies.

Jeremie, who thus addresseth himself unto the Lord, Jer. 12. 1.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee
of thy judgments; wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are
they happy that deal very treacherously? The good man could not conceive Gods
proceedings, and although he kept to the conclusion, Righteous art thou, O
Lord, yet his heart was hot within him, and he would fain be exchanging an
argument with God, that all was not right according to his humane capacity. Job
also was one of these Arguers in the agony of his passion, Job. 16. 21.
Oh that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleads for his
neighbor.

But let flesh and blood take heed of entering the lists by way of challenge
with God himself, Acts 6. 9, 10.
If the synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of
them of Silicia, and of Asia, disputing with Stephen, were not able to resist
the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke; much less can frail flesh hope to
make good a bad cause, by way of opposition against God, the best and wisest
Answerer. Remember the Apostles question, 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Where is the disputer? But if we should be so bold, in humility, to examine
Gods proceedings, let us take heed lest whilst we dispute with God, Satan
insensible prompts us such reasons as are seemingly unanswerable in our
apprehensions, so that in stead of being too hard for God (which is impossible)
men become too hard for themselves, raising such spirits which they cannot
quell, and starting such doubts which they cannot satisfy. Wherefore let not
our ignorance be counted Gods injustice, let not the dimness of our eyes be
esteemed the durtiness of his actions, being all purity and cleanness in
themselves: Let us, if beaten from our outworks, make a safe retreat to this
impregnable castle, Jeremie his conclusion, Righteous art thou, O Lord, etc.

righteous man's perishing in his righteousness: And first, when he finds such
an one in a swoun, he ought with all speed to bring him a cordial, and with the
good Luke 10. 34.
Samaritane, to pour oil and wine into his wounds, endeavoring his recoverie
to his utmost power, whilst there is any hope thereof. I must confess it is
only Gods prerogative, Psalm. 79. 11.
according to the greatness of his power, to preserve those that are appointed
to die. However it is also the boundant duty of all pious people, in their
several distances and degrees, to improve their utmost for the preservation of
dying innocence, from the cruelty of such as would murder it.

open, they must be close Mourners at so sorrowful an accident: O let the most
cunning Chyrurgeon not begrutch their skill to unbowel, the richest Merchants
not think much of their choicest spices to embalm, the most exquisite Joyner
make the coffin, most reverend Divine the Funeral Sermon, the most accurate
Marbler erect the Monument, and most renowned Poet invent the Epitaph to be
inscribed on the tomb of Perishing Righteousness. Whilst all others,
wel-wishers to goodness in their several places, contribute to their sorrow at
the solemn Obsequies thereof; yea as in the case of Josiah his death, let there
be an Anniversarie of Mourning kept in remembrance thereof. However, let them
not mourn like men without hope, but let them behave themselves at the
interment of his righteousness, as confident of the resurrection thereof, which
God in his due time shall raise out of the ashes; It is sown in weakness, it
shall be raised in power; it is sown in disgrace, it shall be raised in glory.

Romans 2. 5.
The day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God: Five things there
are (besides many other) in the primitive part of Gods justice, which are very
hard for men to conceive.

First, How the sin of Adam, to which we did never personally consent, can
justly be imputed to us his posterity?

Secondly, How Infants, who never committed actual sin, are subject to death,
and which is more to damnation it self?

Thirdly, How God can actually harden the hearts of some, as he did Exodus 14. 4.
Pharaohs, and yet not be in the least degree accessarie to sin, and the
author thereof?

Fourthly, How the Americans can justly be condemned, to whom the sound of the
Gospel was never trumpeted forth, and they by their invincible ignorance
incapable of Gods will in his word?

righteous men to perish in their righteousness, and wicked men to flourish in
their iniquity?

In all these, a thin veil may seem to hang before them, so that we have not a
full and free view of the reasons of Gods proceedings herein; yet so, as that
under and through this veil, we discover enough, in modesty and sobriety, to
satisfy our selves, though (perchance unable to utter what in part we
apprehend) we cannot effectually remove all the scruples which the pious, nor
all the cavils which the profane man brings against us. But at the day of
judgment, at the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, this veil shall
be turned back, or rather totally taken away, so all shall plainly and
perspicuously perceive the justice of Gods dealing in the cases aforesaid. Not
that then or there, any new essential addition or accession shall accrue to
Gods justice, to mend or make up, any former default or defect therein, but his
proceedings (which before wanted not clearness in themselves, but clearing to
our eyes) shall then be pronounced, declared, and adjudged just, in the
presence of devils, men, and Angels; so that ignorance shall not doubt, nor
impudence dare to deny the truth thereof.

I have seen the righteous man perish in his righteousness, that is, I have
seen a good man, continuing in goodness, and snatched away in the prime of his
years, whilst wicked men, persisting in their profaness, have prolonged their
lives to the utmost possibility of nature. I confess S. Paul will in no case
allow the word perishing, to be applied to the Death of the godly, but startles
at the expression, as containing some Pagan impiety therein, pointing at it,
as an Atheistical position, Then 1. Cor. 15. 18.
they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished. However in a qualified
sense (not for a total extinction, but temporal suspension of them in this
world) the Prophet pronounces it of a just man's death. Isaiah 57. 1.
The righteous perishes and no man lays it to his heart. Yet as if
suspecting some ill use might be made of that term perishing, in the next
words, he mollifieth the harshness thereof, and (who best might) expounds his
own meaning, The righteous man is taken away from the evil to come.

Genesis 25. 8.
Abraham, in a good old age, he is not properly said to be taken away, but
Scripture phrase, to tarry till God comes. Thus when Peter was very
inquisitive to know, how John should be disposed of, Christ answered him, If I
John 21. 22.
will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? John of all the Jurie
of the Apostles died in his bed, a through old man, of temper and temperance, of
a strong and healthful natural constitution, moderate in diet, passions and
recreations, ( 1. Kings 14. 13.
Abijah, and Josiah may be instances) are cut off by an untimely death, such
are properly said to be taken away.

perish: Or if that be too harsh a term, may take them away from the evil to
come. And that in three several Acceptions.

First, To keep him from that Evil of sin which God in his wisdom foresees the
good man would commit, if living longer and left to those manifold tempations
which future times (growing daily worse and worse) would present to, and press
on him. True it is, God could by his restraining and effectual Grace keep him,
though surviving in sinful times, from being polluted therewith: But being a
free Agent, he will vary the ways of his working, sometimes keeping men in the
hour of temptation, sometimes from the Rev. 3. 10.
hour of temptation. The latter he does, sometimes by keeping the hour from
coming to them, or rather from coming to the hour; making them to fall short
thereof, and preventing their approach thereunto, by taking them away in a
speedy death. Thus mothers and nursses suspecting their children would too
much play the wantons, disgrace them, and wrong themselves; when much company
is expected at their houses, haste them to bed betimes, even before their
ordinary hour.

Secondly, From the evils to sin, which other men would commit, and he behold,
to the great grief and anguish of his heart, 2. Pet. 2. 8.
Lot-like, for that Righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds.

The righteous perishes and no man lays it to his heart. Surely his wife or
children will (or else the more unworthy) happily he has none when dying. His
kindred will, except (which is impossible) with Melchisedech, he be without
father, without * Hebr. 7. 3.
mother, without descent. His friends will, though rather the rich than the
righteous have friends whilst living, and leave them when dying. But to
satisfy all objections at once. By none, are meant very few, inconsiderable in
respect of those multitudes that pass the righteous man's death unrespected.
Parallel to that place in the Proverbs, Prove. 2. 19
None that go to her return again, neither take they hold of the path of life.
Not that adultery is the sin against the holy Ghost, unpardonable; but
vestigia pauca retrorsum. Be thou, by an holy Riddle, One among that None. I
mean a mourner in Sion for the righteous man's death, amongst those very very
few, who lay it to their hearts.

Secondly, Men from hence are seriously to collect and apply to themselves the
doctrine of their mortalities, when they see the righteous man perish in his
righteousness. There is a bird peculiar to Ireland, called the Cock of the
Wood, remarkable for the fine flesh and folly thereof: All the difficulty to
kill them, is to find them out, otherwise a mean marksman may easily kill them.
They fly in woods in flocks, and if one of them be shot, the rest remove not
but to the next bow or tree at the farthest, and there stand staring at the
shooter, till the whole covie be destroyed. As foolish as the bird is, it is
wise enough to be the emblem of the wisest men in point of mortality. Death
sweeps away one, and one, and one, and the rest remain no whit moved at, or
minding of it, till at last a whole generation is consumed.

It fares with the most men's lives as with the sand in this hypocritical
hourglass: behold it in outward appearance, and it seems far more than it
is, because rising up upon the sides, whilst the sand is empty and hollow in
the midst thereof; so that when it sinks down in an instant, a quarter of an
hour is gone in a moment. Thus many men are mistaken in their own account,
reckoning upon threescore and ten years the age of man: because their bodies
appear outwardly strong and lusty. Alas! their health may be hollow, there
may be some inward infirmity and imperfection unknown unto them, so that death
may surprise them on a sudden.

Thirdly, They are to take notice of Gods anger, with that place from which the
righteous man is taken away. Solomon, speaking of the * Eccl. 7. 2.
death of an ordinary man, says, The living will lay it to heart: But when a
righteous man is taken away, the living ought to lay it to the very Heart of
their heart, especially if he be a Magistrate or Minister of eminent note. When
the eye-strings break, the heart strings hold not out long after: and when the
seers are taken away, it is a sad symtome of a languishing Church or
Commonwealth.

Lastly, Men ought to imitate the virtuous examples of such as are dead. Exodus
14. 20.
The cloud and pillar at the Red Sea, was bright toward the Israelites to guide
and direct them with the light thereof: but the reverse or back-part thereof,
was dark toward the Egyptians. In the best men there is such a mixture of
light and darkness, who with their virtues have many faults, failings and
infirmities. Well, let the Egyptian walk by his dark side, follow his faults,
whilst the Israel of God, all pious people, endeavor to imitate his virtues,
directed in their conversations, by the luster of his godly examples. That so
as Herod hearing of the fame of Christ, conceived Matthew. 14. 2.
that John Baptist was risen again from the dead: so let us labor that our
virtuous lives may give just cause for others to conceive, that those righteous
men which have perished in their righteousness, those champions of
Christianity, and worthy Heroes of holiness long since deceased, are revived
again, and have in us a miraculous resurrection.

FINIS.

