A Faithful Account Of the Late DREADFUL FIRE in SOVTHVVARK.

Begun on Friday the 26th. of May, 1676. At three of the Clock in the morning,
and in the space of twenty hours destroyed near Five Hundred Houses, several
People, and Goods, to an inestimable Value.

The Names of the most Considerable Places, are as follows.

Shattered and Defaced.
St. Mary Overy's Church St. Thomas Hospital
Burnt and Demolished.
From Chain-Gate in the Borough, to the Counter on St. Margarets-Hill, on both
sides of the way The Market-house Angel-Court Three-Crown-Court Fow'l-Lane
Counter-Lane Backside of the Counter Part of St. Thomas, etc.

Licensed,

May 29. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.



Printed for Thomas Pierce.

A Faithful Account of the late Dreadful Fire in Southvvark, etc.
SOuthwark was lately known to be a spacious Borough, and a place of a great
trade, full of Houses and Inhabitants, and those for the most part wealthy,
which I recite to make the Reader the more apprehensive of the great Desolation
made there by the late Dreadful Fire, and of the Damage many of the now really
poor Inhabitants have sustained thereby.

It began on Friday the 26. of this instant May, about three of the Clock in
the Morning at an Oyl-shop over against the Counter, upon St. Margarets-hill;
which is as it were the very heart of the Borough, the Wind Southerly, and
blowing very fresh, so that it burnt not very considerably to Wind-ward, but
burnt its chief fury down the Street toward the Bridge, and notwithstanding a
present alarm given, and a great concourse of people, with an imaginable
expedition in bringing of Engines, in very little time it got a considerable
head on both sides of the way, insomuch that the Engines being overpowered and
able to do but little good, they were forced to betake themselves to blowing up
of Houses, which they did for some time with pretty good success, but as the
morning came on, such an innumerable company of Spectators were flocked
together, that instead of assistance, they proved a very great hinderance to
the Engineers, who durst not blow up the Houses they designed, for fear of
doing mischief to those crowds of People that were about them. Notwithstanding
which care of theirs, many were so resolute or heedless as to run into the
mouth of danger by which means many suffered in their lives and limb's, besides
others supposed to be burned in their beds, to a number not yet to be computed.

This hurry and distraction continuing all the day the Fire encres'd, the
houses being for the most part old and timber built, with the violence of the
Wind, contributing to its fury, insomuch that about noon it had reached the
Market-house, and endangered the Hospital of St. Thomas, and St. Mary Overy's
Church, whereupon the people began to blow up houses at a great distance, and
to play their Engines more violently against the Hospital and Houses adjacent;
so that by four or five in the Afternoon, it was brought into a narrower
compass, and the fury of it seemed to be somewhat abated, and toward the
Evening, as the company began to draw homewards, some persons of Eminence
undertaking to give the Engineers instructions, and encouragement by Rewards,
and their own personal hazards, they at last conquered this cruel Tyrant, and
by eleven at night got so much the masterdom that there appeared no further
danger.

But for the satisfaction of such as live more remote, and in regard of their
own or their Relations concerns expect a more particular account the fire
destroyed as follows.

From the Cock and Heart yard near the Spur-Inn, down to St. Thomas's Hospital,
Viz. The Talbot, the George, the White-Hart, the King's Head, the Queens-head,
Inns; Together with their Back-houses, Stables, Barns, and Warehouses all
burned down to the ground; The Hospital very much defaced, and the houses
backward burned as far as St. Thomas's Churchyard, and the fronting-houses of
that side of the way much shattered for a considerable way; from within a house
or two of Pepper-Alley, on the other side many houses toward the Market
likewise much shattered, and from below Chain-gate up to the Counter, upon St.
Margrets-hill, burned down to the ground; The lane on the backside of the
Counter leading toward St. Mary Overy's stairs burned and shattered on both
sides of the way as far as St. Mary Overy's Church, which was with much
difficulty preserved after the fire had taken hold of the Chancel, and damaged
it considerably, Chain-gate, The Market-house, Fowl-lane, Angel-Court,
Three-Crown-Court, the Counter and Counter-Lane, etc. all burned to the ground,
only one house preserved as it were in the midst of the Fire.

It is a difficult matter by surveying the ruins to compute the number of
houses burned and demolished, but by a general estimate they are imagined to be
near a thousand, though I confess I cannot guess them to be above five or six
hundred, the vacancy of ground being as I conceive about three hundred paces in
length and near half that in breadth, on most of which ground the houses stood
very thick.

Thus in the space of twenty hours has this fierce and terrible fire
impoverished some hundreds of families, who had all their substance swept away
in a moment, and many of them exposed to the kindness of their friends or the
charity of strangers; but how it began remains as yet doubtful; the very next
neighbors knowing nothing of it, and though the Reader may expect to have his
curiosity satisfied in this particular, I shall not attempt to traduce one man
to pleasure another; howsoever it came about, I am sure it was an Omnipotent
hand that suffered it, and therefore as those poor souls that are undone by it,
cannot but find pity from the good, so I hope they will meet with relief from
the wealthy, whom nevertheless I caution to beware of Vagabonds, that wander
the country under the pretense of being ruined thereby, though no way
concerned therein.

FINIS.

