A DISCOURSE OF THE Visible Church.

In a large Debate of this famous Question, viz. Whether the visible Church may
be considered to be truly a Church of Christ without respect to saving grace?
Affirm.

Whereunto is added a brief discussion of these three Questions. viz. 1. What
does constitute visible Church Membership. 2. What does distinguish it, or
render it visible. 3. What does destroy it, or render it Null?


Together with a large application of the whole, by way of Inference to our
Churches, Sacraments, and Censures.

Also an Appendix touching Confirmation, occasioned by the Reverend Mr. Hanmore
his pious and learned Exercitation of Confirmation.

By FRANCIS FULWOOD Minister of the Gospel at West-Alvington in DEVON.

I said I will also answer my part, I also will show mine opinion, Job 32. 17.

For many be called, but few chosen, Mat. 20. 16. and 22. 14.

Rejicimus Catharos, Navatianos, Pelagianos, and Anabaptistas, qui peccatoribus
nullum, ne in visibli quidem ecclesia, locum relinquunt. Alst. comp. Theol.
part. 5. loc. 8. Christians truly regenerate are the members of the invisible
Church. It is the duty of the members of the visible Church to be truly
regenerate: Such -- are members of the visible that are destitute of saving
grace. Mr. Cotton of N. E. holiness of Church members. page 1. LONDON, Printed
by Tho. Ratcliffe, for Abel Roper at the Sun in Fleetstreet, over against St.
Dunstans Church. 1658.

To the HIGHLY RENOWNED EDWARD CRESSET Esquire:

Master of that most famous Hospital called the CHARTER-HOVSE; and one of the
Honorable Trustees for maintenance of MINISTERS;

FRANCIS FULWOOD, Formerly a Plant in that Excellent NURSERY;

Being earnestly pressed thereunto, by many Obligations of duty and gratitude;

Does with all Humility, and due respectfulnesse DEVOTE and DEDICATE this
Polemical DISCOURSE of the CHURCH, etc.

TO THE READER.
OUR Reverend brother Mr. Francis Fulwood having taken great pains upon this
question, viz. whether the visible Church may be considered to be truly a
Church of Christ without respect to saving grace;] which we conceive to be a
subject both weighty and seasonable: We the Ministers of that part of the
second division of the County of Devon, who are appointed to meet at
Kings-bridge, do earnestly desire him to make these his worthy labors public;
we being fully persuaded that they will prove very useful and acceptable to the
Churches of God in this Nation, now so much troubled with this great
Controversy.

Kingsbridge in Devon. Jan. 5. 1657. Signed by, Robert Carry, Moderator. John
Buckley, Scribe.
In the Name and by the Appointment of the Rest.

TO THE REVEREND MY FATHERS and BRETHREN, The Associated Ministers in the
County of DEVON.
Reverend and Worthy Sirs,
YOu well know that the Reformed Churches, have ever since they deserved that
name, been militant on both hands; with the Papist on the one, and with the
Brownist, Anabaptist, etc. on the other. Against whom their first and maine
scope was, indeed, to defend themselves to be the Churches of Christ; yet, in
pursuit of Argument, it is very evident they were still driven to contend for
the very being and nature of the Church Rejicimus catharos, novatianos,
Pelagianos, and Anabaptistas qui peccatoribus nullum, ne invisibili quidem
ecclesia, locum Relinqunt. Alst Comp. Theae. par. 5. loc. 1^
in general, chiefly as invisible against the Papist; and as visible against
the Brownist etc.

The Brownist, I humbly conceive, assaulted the Reformed Churches, with these
two Positions. 1. That a Church wherein there is a mixture of wicked persons,
at least tolerated, cannot be a true Church. 2. That none but the Elect or the
truly godly are members of the visible Church.

It Is confessed, this leaven was laid in the Church long agon, Andiani p^opter
hominum vitia, coetum Orthodoxae ecclesiae deseruit, quod donatistarum erroris
postoa suit seminarium Dan. in Aug. de Her. p. 976
even in the time of Cyprian, as Augustine observes, and afterward kneaded in
the lump by Donatus, and its sournesse diffused very far by the heat of his
followers; yet it was timely and effectually purged out by the learned and
elaborate industry, and wonderful success of Augustine,

But this ulcer broke sadly out again upon the Reformation, and notwithstanding
as to hic and nunc, to time and place. The Church has been hitherto
competently healed of it, through the zealous, instant, and effectual
endeavors of many of her champions; yet grievous experience has still found
that at other times, or in other places the botch has risen and broke afresh
with a more noisome stench, and a more spreading and infecting nature, then
ever it had done before; how evident and notorious is this in our calamitous
Churches in England at this day? how does this disease range, and its
corruption spread over us, having gotten its throne in the very heart of the
people.

Wherefore, I having also been formerly called forth, both to a vocal and
Scriptural defense of our Churches against A Sermon and dispute had at
Wiviliscome in Somerset, and Printed: 1654
the first of these errors; and there being some special occasion, arising
from some late scruples among my neighboring brethren, inviting me to deal
with this latter of them; this also being looked upon, not by my self alone,
but by diverse godly and Learned Divines, to be the very core and root of most
of our Controversies, both about our Churches, Sacraments and Censures, I
desire that this may be accepted to you, my Reverend Brethren, as all the
public Apology, I thought fit to set before this my great and bold, yet humble
undertaking.

However I shall crave your patience a little longer, while I shall labor to
prevent mistake and unjust prejudices against the Treatise, by setting down my
mind as clearly as I can in a few following particulars.

1. And first, I am fully persuaded, that such as have for their scandal of the
brethren been justly excommunicated by the Church, ought not to be received
into communion again, without the evidence of such repentance as is in the
judgment of rational charity, saving for the end of the censure is, that the
flesh (of the offender) may be destroyed, and the spirit saved; and in reason,
the means should remain applied, till the cure be in likelihood done.

2. Again, I fully consent with that Reverend man Master James Wood, that such
as have notorious marks of impenitency or unregeneracy upon them, ought not,
while such, notwithstanding the profession, to be admitted or received into the
communion of the Church, at first; though, I dare not determine, what is the
true and next reason of their repulsion. Mr. Wood says, the reason is not,
because they appear unregenerate, but because a scandalous life is contrary to
the very outward profession of the faith.

But may I have leave to demand, how contrary? certainly not so contrary to it,
but that it is consistent with it; otherwise a scandalous Professor of the
faith, would be a contradiction, and the very ground of the question is gone.
Indeed here is practice contrary to profession, but not profession contrary to
profession; and practice contrary to profession may consist with profession,
for they profess to know God, though in works they deny him.

If it be replied, that a scandalous life is contrary to the faith professed,
and so the profession appears counterfeit; I crave leave to ask once more,
whether faith here be taken objective, or subjective; if objective, for the
doctrine professed, or the Will of God revealed to be believed; then it may
still be affirmed that the profession of the Scripture, or an outward owning of
the Will and Word of God is not inconsistent with a conversation contrary
thereunto; then why may not such whose practice is contrary either to their
profession, or to the Scripture, which they yet profess be received by the
Church, if no other reason but this be assignable?

If it be said that a scandalous life is contrary to the faith, in sensu
formali, vel subjectivo; and that a wicked conversation declares that the
Professor does not believe as he professes, and is to be rejected therefore,
as a counterfeit: Once more, I demand, whether this faith professed, be
considered as saving, or as common? if as saving, then Mr. Wood his cause is
yielded, who is now opposing Reverend Master Baxter with this assertion, that
wicked men are not to be rejected formally, because their wickedness is a
sign of unregeneracy, but materially, because it is contrary to the profession
of the faith; if as common, or as other historical or dogmatical; then, though
I grant that all those whose wickedness is such as cannot consist with a real,
common, or historical faith, ought not to be admitted: yet* I deny the
hypothesis, that all wickedness is such as is inconsistent with such a real
common faith; that common faith is in its kind a true faith, and that this
true common faith is consistent with a wicked heart and life; are two
Propositions as little doubted by most Divines, as much confirmed by sad
experience; and largely discoursed in the Treatise following; Sunt in eo coetu
(viz. ecclesiae visibilis) multi electi and alii non Sancti, sed tamen de vera
doctrina consentientes. Phil. Melanct. part. Sept. p. 33.

Others may have leave to think that such scandalous persons ought not to be
admitted into the Church, because of the scandal that would come to Religion
thereby; and because that in this sense scandal is contrary to the profession
of the faith; the Church thus drawing a blot and disparagement upon her self,
as if she was ready to open her bosom to any vile, unclean, unreformed
persons; and truly, I humbly conceive there is very much in this; for if the
Church ought to have a care that those already within, cause not the ways of
God to be evil spoken of, why ought she not to have the like care touching
those, she is about to let in? or why should those be admitted into the
community, that now appear to be such as are presently to be cast out of
communion? but I presume this is not all. For,

3. From the premises, it seems at least probable to me that the Church is to
have some kind of respect unto the saving condition of the person she is about
to admit into communion; though I donbt not to assert with our brethren N. E.
and Reverend Master Baxter that a sober and humble profession of faith and
repentance with a desire of Baptism, is as much evidence of this saving
condition as the Church is bound to expect; without any farther positive proofs
of conversion.

4. Yet, I humbly conceive, that more then a bare outward profession is
requisite to give real interest in the visible Church, and the previledges
thereof, before God; though no more is requisite to give visible interest
before men; and that there is sufficient ground for the trite distinction of
right, here, Coram Deo, and eccl^sia; for the Churches judgment of men's right
must pass with her administrations upon visible or appearing signs, by their
outward profession; but Gods upon real; for the visible Church is really a
Church with God, as well as the invisible; though the Church is bound to
believe a profession that is made upon design, as the Jews at New Castle was;
yet God knows his wickedness, and count him a dog eating the childrens bread
out of the hand of Church; deceived by his falsnesse, but not erring, because
profession is her only rule in the case.

If it be demanded, what is more required, besides profession to give real
interest in the visible Church, I Multi enim sunt non rena^i vel hypocritae,
consentientes, tamen de doctrina and ritibus extcrnis, sen est coetus
consentientium de doctrina, habens multa membra mortua sen non regeneratos,
Man. 7. 21. Mat. 13. 24. par. in Urs. cat. 343.
have at large answered in the Treatise, that in Adult persons about to be
admitted a real, actual, and not fained consent; but in persons borne in the
Church, and baptized in their Infancy, and now at the adult estate, a
non-dissent, a not dissenting from, or a not rejecting of the truth, and ways
of the Lord, at least; for all that are of the visible Church must be one of
these ways, either negatively or positively consentientes to true doctrine, as
Melancton before, as well as outward professors of it.

4. Yet I must still hold my maine Proposition, till I see more reason to let
it go, that unregenerate persons once received into the Church, are
notwithstanding their unregeneracy or their want of evidences of saving grace,
really or truly members of the visible Church, till they cut themselves off by
Heresy, Schism, or the perfection of both, Apostasy, or at least are cast
out by Church-censure; what reasons, what authorities from the Scriptures and
the Church, I show for it, and what absurdities I allege against the contrary
opinion, must be left to your censure in the reading of the Treatise. Only
that it may pass here a little the more freely, I cannot but add the
remembrance of one or two late most eminent and full Testimonies; Mr. Hooker of
New England says Survey of Church discipline. p. 36.
that externally those are within the Covenant (and consequently, the Church)
who expressing their repentance with their profession of the truth, engage
themselves to walk in the ways of God, and the truth of his worship, though
they have not for the present that sound work of faith in their hearts, and may
be never shall have it wrought by Gods Spirit in them. Master Norton also a
Minister of N. E. to this very question whether truth Against Apol. p. 3.
of grace be required to visible Church Membership -- answers, one may be
admitted into the Church Communion of the external (or visible) Church that is
not endowed with the real inward holiness of regeneration and justifying faith
in Christ; or that upon a strict examination shall not give signs of true
faith, and inward holiness, which may convince the conscience, touching the
sincerity of their faith, etc.

Master Cobbet also of N. E. more plainly says, that albeit a man's own
personal faith uniteth to Christ, in respect Hisbook of Infant baptism. p. 57.
of saving and invisible union; yet the profession of faith before a visible
Church, uniteth to Christ as Head of the visible Church, whether the party be
sincere or not; and those that are so admitted being unregenerate or destitute
of saving grace continue so to be, viz. members of the visible Church,
notwitstanding until they justly deprive Cottons holiness of Church Members. p.
1.
themselves of the privilege of that fellowship, as Mr. Cotton affirms.

I know not why I may not here add those penitent words of our most Reverend
and Learned Master Baxter, This, says he, is the other cause of the
Schismatical Disputations. p. 38, 39.
inclination of some godly people, viz. the great mistake of too many, in
confining all the fruits of Christ's dead; and the mercies and graces of God to
the Elect; and so not considering the difference that ever was and will be
between the visible Church of Professors, and the invisible Church of true
believers. Now if there be indeed a difference, the visible Church of
Professors is larger then the invisible Church of true believers, and
consequently there are some in the visible, that are not in the invisible, i.
e. the unregenerate, to whom those fruits of Christ, death, and the mercies and
grace of God belong, that are not to be confined to the Elect.

5. Therefore it follows that to be truly regenerate is only a necessary duty
of Church Members, but Though we acknowledge such only to be sincere
Christians who serve God with upright hearts yet those are not to be denied to
be Christians, who make so much as a general profession of Christ. Mr. Ho.
Catech. p. 75. Holiness of members. p. 1.
not a condition of their membership. I mean, visible; that is, all
Church Members ought to be inwardly holy, but yet men may be, and doubtless
thousands are, truly members of the visible Church, that are destitute of such
holiness; this is so happily and fully expressed by Mr. Cotton, that I shall
make bold to give you my full sense of it, in his most clear and excellent
words.

Christians (says he) truly regenerete are the members of the invisible
Church; it is the duty of the members of the visible Church to be truly
regenerate; such -- are members of the visible, that are destitute of spiritual
grace; plainly intending that to be regenerate is the condition without which
men cannot be members of the Church in invisible. 2. To be regenerate is the
duty of all the members of the visible Church also. 3. But to be regenerate is
only the duty and not the condition of visible Church Members, for they may be
such without it.

And truly those that do affirm these two Propositions. 1. That we ought to
expect a profession of saving faith in all we admit. 2. That the visible Church
has some hypocrites, that are its members; must needs allow the distinction,
viz. that saving grace is the duty, because themselves require the profession
of it; but not the necessary condition of visible membership, seeing they also
acknowledge that persons may be members thereof without it.

6. Further, I affirm that no person being once Holiness of the Churches of N.
E. p. 89
admitted, is to be ejected or cast out for any thing but scandal; for we
(says Master Cotton) proceed not to censure, but in case of known offense, and
such offense as cannot be healed without censure. Yea, scandal, qua tale, or as
it is offense to others, and not as it is a sign of unregeneracy; therefore
Ametius says, proprium and adequatum objectum de consc. p. 252
hujus censurae est scandalum, viz. fratris; from Matthew. 18. 15. Si peccaverit
in te frater; it is the sin that offends, not unregeneracy, it is the offense
that is admonished for, and not unregeneracy; satisfaction is required for the
offense and not for unregeneracy; the offense indulged is the leaven that would
spread and sour the lump of the Church; and lastly, it is the offense that is
only to be known and proved, and not the want of grace or unregeneracy; for,
as Reverend Master Baxter, It Is a matter of such exceeding difficulty Disp. 3.
340, 341
to conclude another to be certainly graceless, that it is not one of the
multitudes, nay, it is but few of the commonly scandalous gross sinners that we
should be able to prove it by. Yet, 1. We must censure all the scandalous; if
scandal be the adequate object of censure. 2. We must censure for none but
known and proved scandal, for the other is not properly or legally scandal.
Known offense, as Master Cotton before. 3. Therefore we are not to censure for
unregeneracy, which we can prove or know by, but very few of the scandalous and
grossest sinners, as Master Baxter notes; for how unreasonable is it to punish
men with so great and certain a penalty for an uncertain and presumed crime; or
as the same Reverend man has it, be so heavily Disp p. 34, 35
punished before they be judged and heard. I shall put an end to this, in those
apt and full words of Reverend Master Hooker of N. E. If any (says he) Survey.
p. 42.
after they be received, shall be found not to be added of God, because they be
not regenerated, yet we are not to cast them out for non-regeneration even
known.

7. But with your favor, I must now needs note, that all that has been said,
has not punctually expressed our own case, our common concernment in England,
who generally come into the Church in our Infancy, and are not admitted
thereinto upon our personal profession at years of discretion, as Heathens are
to be; and of which most of our controversies about the way of admission, now
are. For my part, I humbly conceive there are but two maine questions about
Church Membership that need much trouble us. 1. Whether the Infants of
Church Members are borne in the Church, and to be baptized? 2. What is that
which unchurcheth them afterterwards? It cannot but be heartily wished, that
any heat that is or may be spent about the conditions of admitting Heathens
into the Church, might be saved till a practical occasion requires it, viz.
till such a Heathen shall sue for baptism, whose profession or right is truly
disputable. I must freely profess, I cannot like that way of reasoning [The
parent, if he were not baptized should not be baptized himself, therefore his
child should not be baptized;] for in all cases that will keep out, that
cannot cast out; whether Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastical. Positive consent
is required upon admission, but a negative, (a non-rejecting the Gospel) is
sufficient to retain in the Church; distraction of one that was borne in the
Church will not cast him out; yet who would admit a distracted Heathen, while
such, a person known to be unregenerate would hardly be received while such;
yet known unregeneracy is not sufficient to cast a man out; As Mr. Hooker
before.
a scandalous person may be a Churchmember, and is so doubtless, till he be
excommunicate, and while so, he is in the Covenant within, and his child is
born in the Church, and has right to baptism; but I shall crave leave to
signify my mind a little more clearly herein by a few steps further.

8. To draw a little nearer to our selves and our own common case, I therefore
add, that children borne of Church members, and baptized in infancy, are borne
and baptized Church Members; and though our case require it not, yet, I doubt
not to say, that the childs right in the Church and Baptism, does not
necessarily depend upon a vocal profession (on purpose) of its parents, who yet
abide in the faith, and state of profession (as is hereafter largely
discussed;) for in Infants, their being borne in the Church, is instead of an
outward profession, as Bishop Usher affirms. His sum of religion about
Baptism.


Yet, I verily believe the childs actual possession of Baptism (not of the
Church, or Church Membership) depends with the highest convenience upon the
parents claiming it, and express owning the faith into which he desires his
child may be baptized, and his public undertaking to bring it it up in the
fear of the Lord according to that, now, most general and laudable custom of
the Churches of Christ amongst us; which usage carries in my opinion, as
clear a tendency to Reformation and order, as any one practice not express in
Scripture now exercised; and truly such as seems to me a great deal liklier
to prevail with our people to a public owning their obligations to God, then
any other course whereupon we happily fix greater expectations; as (to my
observation) less obnoxious to the jealousies and murmurs of a disturbed
distracted and discontented generation.

9. Again, those that were borne in the Church and baptized in their infancy
continue in their right and possession of Church Membership (as well as those
admitted upon personal profession at the adult estate) until they are justly
divested thereof by themselves or the Church as before; or (in Master Cottens
plain and pertinent words the suffrage of N. E.) Such as are borne of
Christian parents, and baptized in their His holiness of members. p. 1
infancy, into the fellowship of the Church, are initiated members of the same
Church, though destitute of spiritual grace, until they justly deprive
themselves of the privilege of that fellowship; yea, that such are not to be
censured, much less dismembered but His way of the Churches. p. 89 with p. 51.
upon known scandal; and that they may claim the Supper also in the same
Church wherein they were baptized, if no exception lie against them; which
Learned Master Baxter has sealed also, for, says he, no Church member ought
to be kept from Church Communion, Disp. 3. p. 294 with p. 104. of his Rest.
(much less cut off from the community,) but upon some just accusation of a
crime which he was since guilty of, more then he was at his admittance.

Consequently the children of these ought also to be reckoned members of the
Church, and to be Baptized, to succeed in their parents profession, who live
and die in a state of profession from one generation to another, without
exacting any positive proofs or evidence of conversion, or saving grace in the
parents; for they stand in possession, and it is not just for any to question
their Title, much less to void it, without a positive disproving of it; which
can by no way be done without the censure of the Church upon evidence of
obstinacy in known scandal; which I confirm and conclude with those excellent
words of worthy Master Baxter. Those Disp. p. 34: 34.
therefore that will any man's child kept back from Baptism for their parents
unholinesse, or persons kept from the Supper, must not expect that men bring
proof to them of their holiness, beyond their profession of it, but must deal
by them as by other notorious offenders, even admonish them of their unholy
miscarriages; and he may not be so heavily punished before he be judged or
heard.

10. Thus we are at length arrived at our very case (which I desire may be
seriously considered;) who after our fathers, and our fathers fathers; time out
of mind, did generally come into the Church, when we came into the world,
being borne of Christian parents, and such as lived and died in a state of
profession, and do continue the succession of the same unto this day, without
rejecting the faith or the Church into which we were baptized, or yet being
rejected or censured by the Church for obstinate continuing in any know scandal.

Wherefore give me leave (my Worthy brethren) to intimate again, that if any
question yet remain about our membership; it is not to be resolved by debating
what qualifications we ought to require in adult persons who desire admission
or baptism, a case that hardly happens once in an age; but what it is that
nulls the membership of persons at age, that were borne Christians, and
baptized in their infancy; as we generally were in England.

This is the center where all the lines drawn like swords about most of our
controversies must point at last; a sound and effectual discussion of this
would doubtless be a happy means of charming the great noise amongst us;
according to the determination of this, most of our opinions and practices
would easily be enforced one way or other; thought, if without offense, I may
so complain, this is the thing that is least thought on.

I have venture in the Treatise upon one great and most special question under
this: whither, I conceive, we must needs be driven upon the debating of the
means of unchurching, viz. whether the want of saving grace be inconsistent
with visible Church Membership, and have afterward, though more briefly
considered, the general question, what does not, and what does unchurch more
distinctly; as also what does constitute and evidence visible
Church Membership. Many other things are likewise occasionally discussed, some
more briefly; and some more largely, according as I thought them more or less
serviceable to my maine design; and at last, have added a large application of
the whole to our Churches, and to our administrations; wherein some happily may
judge me too large, and others too strict measuring me (as most men are wont to
do the books they read) by the model and idea of things that prepossesseth
them; though (Reverend Sirs) I cannot but hope better of you, and do hereby
cheerfully, (yet in true humility) first cast my self upon your candor, and
then upon your censure and due admonition in any thing you shall find amiss.

In the mean while, truly this is a comfort to me, that though some, whose
principles seem strictest, may suspect that mine may favor wickedness, or not
promote the reformation of the people; I am most fully persuaded, that there is
no other lawful or possible way of a sound reformation, of shaming sin, and
encouraging holiness, but that which leads from these principles, which I
defend. I should humbly beseech some abler pen to make trial (if there be any
doubt at all of it) whether, keeping to this maine principle [the truth of our
Churches] he can possibly go in any other course, or further in the same course
toward their ends, then I have done; the truth is I rather fear the
exceptions of those who judge me too strict, then of those that censure me too
large.

Only one thing more I most earnestly beg, not for my own, but for Sions
sake, I earnestly beg, though we cannot be in ever thing of one mind, yet
let us have but one heart, and walk together in one way, until we must needs
part, resting upon the promise, Phil. 3. 15.

But (O my dear brethren) wherein so ver we must differ, what urging, crying,
reason is there that we should unite as one man, to maintain our Churches in
England, that great dipositum put into our hands by our ancestors, our very
Birthright, and the greatest inheritance we can possibly leave our posterity
after us! what heed is requisite to keep out all disputes as well as
principles, that may but seem to question them? how are they struck at on
every side, how undermined? how does division and Heresy daily moulder them?
what a deluge of Popery is ready to overwhelme them?

The Sects which daily increase and spread upon us (as a Learned man from
beyond the Seas complains) Notum est quot Sectae in Europa a reformatione
surrexerint and in dies surgunt, suis commentis pernitiosae, and sua variotate
notabiles immo nec non alicubi suis ausibus formidabiles. Hot. tol. Christ. p.
119. Impossible est ut vel per seculum serventur, etc. p. 118
How pernicious are they in their Heresies, how notable in their variety, and
how formidable in their attempts! The same Author observes, that after the
manner of man's judging, It is impossible that the Protestant Churches should be
preserved one age longer against so great and so united a force, against such
depths of device and policy of the Sea of Rome, unless they grow wiser, and at
length think more seriously of uniting among themselves; and who knows but that
this force may fall, and the plot take first on England? yea, what fear should
strike us, what trembling should take hold upon us, to think how we, even we in
the Ministry, to whom the care of the Church is committed, stand guilty of
provoking our God to give us up to the cruelty of such as have rent themselves
from us, for our causing, affecting, indulging, or suffering parties for our
own undiscerned, sehismatical inclinations; or else to remove his Candlesticks
from us who have had so little care of his Church; or to resign us in wrath to
the lust and tyranny of bloody Popery, who have almost lost our Protestantisme
for a Reformation. As, my dear Brethren, should our neglect of charity, unity,
purity; should our vanity, oscitancy, or any other kind of folly, indeed
prevail with God to let in a deluge of Popery upon England, and by England
upon all the Reformation, should I say (which the God of truth for ever avert)
the ruins of all Protestantism lie on us, how sad would the weight, yea, how
dreadful may the thought thereof be? Quantum quaeso scandalum? vae autem illi
per quem evenit and per quem stat ut non tollatur.

The Lord humble us, the Lord awaken us, show us our danger, strike us
together, that as one man, of one head, one heart, one hand, we may at length
think of saving our selves, our Gospel, our Churches from that immanent danger,
which though every one speak of, yet how few feel, or lay to heart; anaeternum
(as the Author above admires) adeousque incauti per manebimus, ut videre, nec
quidem sentire possimus, illos prorsus irreconciliabiles adversarios ex aequo
partis ruinam, per-utriusque schissuram a se invicem Meditari?

But I fear least some may be apt to censure this my undertaking, as likely to
make more breaches and divisions amongst us, but the Lord knows how I have
labored to avoid any such thing; and that had I not thought that the way
wherein I stand was a middle way, wherein I might easily shake hands with my
brethren on both sides, and labor to draw them nearer together, I had never
been so public upon this subject; this censure may happily be cast unjustly upon
me by those that do not read me, it cannot be justly by such as do Yea, my
Reverend Brethren, let me conclude with this free and bold assertion, that one
of the greatest motives, inducing me at first to study, and now to publish this
discourse, was some good hopes, that if this point of the visible Church and
its membership was but once laid in its just latitude, it might (through mercy)
prove a happy means of bring us to see many of our errors and causeless
differences in the circumference, while we are agreed and meet in the center,
and to draw more direct and closer lines therefrom hereafter; the hearty,
earnest, humble, desire, begging, and prayer of

Dearest Brethren, Your unworthy brother and co-worker in the service of Christ
and his Gospel, FRANCIS FULWOOD.

AN ALPHABETICAL Table.
A
TWenty Absurdities following this position, that saving grace is of the
essence of the visible Caurch. p. 165. to p. 171. That which partaketh of the
accidental f^rme of a thing, must needs partake also of the substantial form
of that thing, proved. 68. and 112, 113, 114 Believing is Virtual, or Actual.
29 Some do not actually believe, others renounce the faith. 29, 30, 31 Persons
may be passively bound, when they do not actively bind themselves 97. The
largest acceptance not always the less proper. 111 The difference betwixt the
infant state and the adult. 134. to 142 Adult persons become Christians, how?
177, to 181 Admonition distinguished, and pressed. page-285, 286. a Church
censure. ibid. A discourse of the terms Equivocum, Univocum, Axalogum, as
applicable to the Church. 21, 22, 23. the eager dispute about it is unworthy
Divines. 22. Logicians differ about the application of them. 22. The desire of
the Reverend brethren is that we lay aside these distinctions, and solely
adhere to the term in the question, viz. truly a Church of Christ. 21 Titles
equivalent to Churchmember given by God himself in Scripture to wicked men.
126. to 134 The Church is totum aggregativum, discussed, the nature of
aggregatives. 7, 8. Rational aggregative bodies differ from inanimate heaps.
114. yet the form of such lies in aggregation. 115 The Anabaptists objection
against our Churches Answered. p. 207, 298 Apostasy unchurcheth men as it is a
genus or a compositum of Heresy and Schism. 203, 204 The only ebjection
Artificially framed against my main conclusion answered. 105, etc. Augustines
judgment about the point, discovered. 151, 152 Author of the Church, viz. God
may be so considered without the bestowing of saving grace. p. 43. Amesius
asserts both the Catholic and particular Church to be integral. p. 6. his
difference 'twixt ecclesia in genere, and ecclesia Catholica. 5
B
Baptism the right of some graceless parents, children, p. 212, 213. as also
of the openly profane. p. 213, to 217. as also of the excommunicate, and such
as receive not the Supper. 217. Baptism enters into some kind of right unto
all other Ordinances proved. 257, 258, 259 Believing is Virtual. Actual. p. 29,
30 Bound, some are passively, whom they do not actively bind themselves. 97.
The Brownists held that saving grace was essential to the visible Church, which
our Church adjudged an error in them. 156, 157 The Brownist objection against
our Churches answered. p. 208, 209, 210
C
What Censures are. 284 Censure are two, Admonition, and Excommunication. 285
Before Censures are past, we may not account the scandalous to be without. 289,
290 We are bound to proceed against the scandalous in a way of Censure. 291,
292 Members are froward to censure. 292 The great hindrance of reformation. 293
The Called and the Church are of equal latitude. The Elect are members of the
Church only as called. 36 Some non-Elect, yet called in Christ's account. 36,
and 38 Calling is Active direct. Passive, reflex. Partialis. this Totalis. 65
How the common call is effectual, with an Apology for the term. 36, 37, 38 The
common call a true call, proved. 38 The Causes of the Church have no necessary
respect to saving grace. 42, etc. The sum of the Argument from the causes. 97
The Church is an individual integrum, p. 4. and totum aggregativum. The
Churches being consists not in consideration only. 20 The only true Church
the reformed sense about it. 105, etc. The excommunicate are of the Church, and
have both habitual and actual communion with it. 194 Communion in Ordinances
fitter to define the Church by, then personal qualifications. 87, to 92. shown
by seven considerations. Community, yet more necessary. 93, 94, 95, 96. proved
by six Reasons. Conference why desired with all our people. 279. and why before
the Sacrament rather then at any other time. 280. why not before every
administration. 280 Consent is given by seeming dissenters that the command to
receive is mediate. 236, 237 Consent how far necessary to ones being in
Covenant. 187 Consent negative keeps men in Covenant. 188 What is constitutive
of visible membership, Mr. Cottons, and Mr. Hudsons answer to this considered.
The Covenant of the Church considered. 96, 97, 98. little reason to dispute
much about it. 98 Covenant is implicit or actual; an actual Covenant is
mental, or v^cal called express. 98 Knowledge dark and general, consistent
with being in Covenant. 188, 189 Church is taken strictly, largely; the Church
largely taken is so comparative and absolute, by the Reformed Divines. 109, 111
Confirmation not used as a new admission into the Church. 138 Ours are true
Churches, and rightly constitute. 204, etc. In what Court is self-examination
to be held. Our Churches are made up of three sorts of people, a middle and two
extremes. 296
D
Denying the Supper to some, the negative and positive grounds of it. 259, to
271 Definitions of the visible Church given us by the reformed Divines, take
not in saving grace. 100, etc. One definition may be given to the Church as
largely taken, and another as strictly taken; and yet there may be but one
Church. 116, 117, 118 Divorce is given by God to men; either mediately, or
immediately, and both two ways. 196, 197 (...), in 1 Cor. 11. 28. largely
examined. 241, to 249 Dogmatical faith merely is not sufficient to entitle to
membership. 118 Dogmatical faith is the proper principle of profession of
faith; yet none ever really professed the Doctrine of faith, but he has
something of an Applicative faith, common or saving. 62 We may not proceed
against wicked members but by discipline. 283
E
Ecclesia aequivoca shut out of this controversy. 21, 22 The Efficient of the
visible Church may be considered without respect to saving grace. 42, etc. The
proper end of the Visible Church, is cultus gloriae Dei, and is attainably
without saving grace. 46, 47, 48, 49 Evidence of Church Membership, what gives
it to others. 181, 182, 226 Evidence of saving grace not necessary upon the
examining our selves, to warrant our coming to the Supper, proved. 245, to 249
The Excommunicate are members, more then potentia, or conditionaliter. 192.
they have both habitual and actual communion with the Church. 194 They may be
known to be Church Members. 182, 183 Self-Examination, what it is not. p. 240,
241. What it is. p. 241 In what court it is held. p. 242, 243, 244, 245. What
is the necessary issue of it. p. 246, 247, 248 Who are to be judged not to
examine themselves. 268, 269, 270 Saving grace not of the Essence, yet of the
excellency of the visible Church. 32, 33
F
Faith is True and saving. True and not saving. p. 28 Faith true and not
saving, proved. 81, to 86 Faith is Virtual. Actual. p. 29 Some do not actually
believe, others renounce the faith. 29, 30 Some do formally, and some only by
consequence deny the faith. 31, 32 Faith is Relative Qualitative. p. 83
Relative or foederal faith is seated in the child, and not in the parent. 83,
84 The visible Church has a real constitutive form, not depending upon saving
grace. 65 1. This form is not external vocation. 65, 66. 2. Nor external
profession. page 66, 67 3. Nor faith. 70 But community respecting communion in
Gods worship. 70, to 74 That which partakes of the accidental Form of any
thing, must needs partake also of the essential form of that thing. 68, 69
G
God himself is pleased to give many titles to wicked men equivalent to
Churchmember. 126, to 133 God the Author of the Church may be considered to
be so; without the bestowing of saving grace. 43, 44
H
Heresy cutteth off from the Church, and when. 198, 199, 200 Heresy, how it
differs from Apostasy. 200, 201 Hildershams Reasons pretended against the
Baptizing of the children of wicked men, examined; and he found to hold that
such children have a right to baptism. 214, 215, 216 The Head of the visible
Church, viz. Christ may be considered to be such without respect to saving
influence, proved. 45, etc. and explained; and Objections to it answered. 51,
52, 53, 54 Hypocrite; what he is. 32 We may not say that wicked men are
hypocrites further then they are so. 33 No Hypocrite as such can be a member of
the Church, either visible and invisible. 33 Holiness of life is a separable
accidental note of a true visible Church. 78 Foederal holiness,
notwithstanding ignorance, or wickedness of heart and life, does proceed into,
and continue men members of the visible Church even in the adult estate. 135,
136, etc.
I
Idolatry, how consistent with a true Church. 202 Jews Abraham's seed, and yet
the Devils children. 1. How. 142, 143, 144 The Jewe outwardly; what. 144, 145
Individuum and integrum, the Church is both. 4, 5 1 John 2. 19. Examined. 148,
to 151 The ignorant how to be discovered. 364 No one means absolutely
necessary. 36 Ignorance not inconsistent with Church Membership proved. 184,
185. Objections answered. 185, etc. Infants, what constitutes their
Church Membership. 173 Infants borne members, not de jure only, but de facto,
and sealed such by baptism. 175 Infants perfectly members, though not perfect
members proved. p. 175, 176 Infants may be known to be members. 182 Infants
right in the Church seated in themselves, and not in their parents explained
and proved. p. 185, 186, 187
K
Knowledge not necessary to membership. 184, 185, 186 Knowledge dark and
general is sufficient for such consent as is necessary to keep adult persons
in Covenant. 188, 189
L
The largest acceptance not always the less proper. 111
M
Matter of the visible Church, both in its parts and subject may be considered
without respect to saving grace. 60, etc. Means necessary to the attaining the
end, is allowed by the text, which commands the end. 277 No one Means of
discovering the ignorant absolutely necessary. 278 The matter of the visible
Church as Professors of the faith, not properly the grace, but the doctrine. 61
The Church is denominated visible and invisible, from its Members. p. 5, 6 The
Moral Law is to be applied to Gospel worship by two Rules. 230, 231.
N
Niddui, whether persons under it, might come into to the Temple or Synagogue.
195 The one only true Note of the true Church is the truth of the Word to
which truth of Sacraments is inseparably annezed. 76
O
Outward calling has inward effects; the reason why said to be outward. 85,
The Jew outwardly, what. 144 The only considerable Objection, artificially
framed against my maine conclusion largely answered. 105, etc. Objections
against particular arguments. See the Arguments. Objections from Scripture are
subjoyned to Scripture Arguments. So are Objections from humane Testimony.
P
A Particular Church without any savingly believing in it, is at least ens
reale potentia, and for ought we know, actum. 26, 27 Excommunicate persons
members more then potentia. 192 Ecclesiastical power, wherein it consists; it is
separable from a true Church. 77 Power of the Church to deny the Sament to the
ignorant, not founded on reason, prudence, mutual confederation, or on Matthew.
7. 6. or 1 Cor. 5. but in our ministerial authority, given us for edification,
largely proved. 272, to 277 The great prohibition of unworthy receivers is 1 Corinthians 11. 28. p. 237, to 240. Preaching how far necessary to the first
constitution of true Churches. 208, to 212 Ecclesia presumptiva shut out of the
Controversy. 21 Preparations to duties are either merely such, as preparations
to prayer, etc. or also conditions, without which the duty is not to be done;
such is self-examination before the Sacrament. 233 Preparations are necessary
to hearing, ad been esse, i. e. utiliter esse, to the Sacrament, ad been esse,
i. e. honest vel legaliter esse, largely explained. 334 Profession is properly
of fides quae, not qua proved. 61, 62 Profession of the true faith, the
chiefest note of a true Church. 74. This is personal, and so a note of a true
member, or ecclesiastical, and so a note of the Church. 75 What Ames by
profession as a note. 75, 76 Profession of faith, as a note of the true Church
is not to be distinguished from the Word and Sacraments. 76 Whether the
visible, or the invisible Church be most properly a Church, largely debated. p.
13. to 19. this is not a question properly betwixt us and the Papist, but
amongst our selves. 111 The Protestant judgment is that saving grace is not of
essence of the visible Church, or visible Church Membership. p. 153, to 157.
further proved to be so, by seven Arguments. 158, to 165
Q
Argument from the quality of the Church. 80, 81, 82 The Question analised and
and stated chap. 1, etc.
R
Whether if none are to receive, but the worthy the Sacrament essentially
depend upon worthiness. Reasons for the negative. 231, 232, 233 All kind of
right will not infer present possession; several distinctions of right. 251,
252, 253. the distinction of right into its first and second act, grounded on
the Laws of Reason, Nations, Scripture, Churches. 254, 255 The Church of Rome,
and the reformed Churches differ rather about the truth of the invisible
Church, then about the nature of the visible Church, 118, 119 The reformed
Divines true meaning of the only true Church largely examined. 105, to 120 The
respect we owe to saving grace in the consideration of the visible Church. 30,
etc. The reformed Divines give definitions specifically differing to the Church
as strictly and as largely taken, yet held but one Church. 117, 118; 119 140
Schism from Rome destroyed, not our Churches. 206
S
Saving grace, what respect we owe to it in the consideration of the visible
Church. 33, etc. it is not of the essence, but of the excellency of the visible
Church. 36 Sardis acknowledged to be a Church, though said to be dead. 146
There are in the Church such as Seem and are not. Are and seem not. Are, and
seem, and are not seen. Are, seem, and are seen also. 31
The same persons in diverse respects seem to be what they are, and what they
are not: 32 Schism cutteth off from the Church, and when. 200, 201 Schism from
Rome has not destroyed our Churches. 206 The Supper is immediately forbidden
to some Church Members, therefore but mediately required of all, proved by many
arguments 219, etc. Objections hereunto answered. 225, etc. The grounds of
denying the Supper to some Church members largely examined. 259, to 271
Self-examination is the great condition of a private persons coming to the
Supper. 237, etc. Who may be suspected of ignorance. 278, 279 None but the
suspected may be tried. 277 Suspension for scandal it is excommunication in
part. 287, 288, 289 Awicked man not excused from, though not permitted to
receive the Supper. If he receive not, he sins twice; if he do receive he sins
thrice. 226
T
Temporary faith is that faith whereby we profess the true Religion, nor
savingly. 62. it is true faith, through not saving. 84, 85 Titles equivalent to
Churchmember given by God in Scripture to wicked men, in number twenty three.
126, to 134 Truth as applicable to the Church is genere entis, vel genere
moris. 19. the usual distinction of a true Church, and truly a Church
questiond. 20. the Chur. is true respectu naturali vel entitatis and moralis,
i. e. vel status, vel finis. 107 vel simpliciter, vel secundum quid. 108.the
truth of the Church consists not in consideration only. 20 Mr. Timpsons abuse
of Mr. Humphrys distinction, of do not and cannot examine our selves, and his
own distinction of natural and rational incapacity, etc. examined. 239 Truth of
Word and Sacraments is the one only true note of the true Church. 77
V
Visibility opposed to reality and to invisibility. 2. but given to the Church
in the question, as opposed to invisibility only, and not reality, and that by
a metaphor. 2, 3 To assert a visible Church, does not suppose a Church
invisible. 3, 4. three exceptions against the distinction of the Church into
visible and invisible. 10, 11 Visible Church most properly the Church of
Christ, argued, p. 12 to 19. though the stresse of the controversy rests not
here. 18 The grounds of the distinction of the Church into visible and
invisible enquired for. 8 It Is not properly distinctio, but discrimen inter
totum and partem. 9, 10
W
God calls and ownes a wicked people for his. p. 120, etc. and gives many
titles equivalent to Church Members to wicked men. 126, to 134 Wicked men not
excused from, though not permitted to receive, the Supper, as Church Members
they are obliged, as wicked they are prohibited; if they receive not, they sin
twice; if they do receive they sin thrice. 226 We may proceed against wicked
members but by discipline. 373. viz. first admonition, and then
excommunication. ibid. Truth of the Word revealed and communicated is the only
true note of the true Church, to which truth of Sacraments are inseparably
annexed. 76 The World is the term from which the Church is called. 40, 41.
this may be considered without respect to saving grace. 40
The Reader is desired to excuse some litteral errors not noted, and to correct
these following.
BEfore the Epistle to the Ministers, and over the head of it, for Dedicatory,
read Presatory. Ep. ^. 7. l. antipen. penitent r. pertinent.

Book. Page 7. Line 1. for constitue and by read constitute by, p 9. l 5.
Church visible r: was visible, and l 22 p 10 l 24 other r. otherwise, p 22 l 4
longer r. larger, p 25. l 27 word r. work. p 28. l. 20. object believing r.
believed, and l. ult, on r. or, and l 20. passions r. professions. p 31. l 25.
none, visi, r. non visi. and l 30 (add only to) after (not) p 37. l. ult.
c^lled r. calling, and l. 18. add (God) before (does) p 46 l 20. leave r. have,
p. 59, l. 19, we r. who p. 60, l. 18, add (Church) after (visible) p. 61, l. 8,
blot out (should) p. 65 l 11. add (Church) after (visible) p. 69, blot out from
(these) to same, in l. 7, 8, 9, 10, p 78 l. 14, blot out (not) and add (grace)
after the first (saving) p 80, l. 7, definition r. definitum, p. 82, l* 17,
(...) r. (...), and l. penult add Faith after in the, p. 86, l. 22, and r. as,
p 105, l. 28. visible r. true. p. 107 l ansep. thought r. though. p. 111. l.
25. their r. this. p. 122. l. 18. change r. charge and add [this] before [for]
p. 140. l. 3. add [ou^] after [with] p. 209. l. 5. Rabble r. rubble and l. 9.
the first for r. forth, p, 217, l. 11. add not before upon, p. 267, l. 12. or,
r. but, p. 289, l. 25. deserve r. desire. for Mr. Morris, always r. Mr.
Morris. Note that by Copula in the Analisis of the question, is not intended
for an exact Logical Copula, but only that which fitly serves to join the
subject, and the main thing questioned, together in the question; and if the
Reader would be more accurate, he may take [may be considered] in to the
predicate questioned, and if he had rather, the words (abstractly and
concr^^^^^. p. 2, l. 15, 16. may change places, though as it is, it best likes
the Author.


CHAP. I.
Of the subject of the question the visible Church.
SECT. I.
The Analasis of the question.
WE must have leave to speak something largely of the terms, before we venture
to resolve this intricate and famous question.

The terms are three. First, the subject of the question. Secondly, the
predicate questioned. Thirdly, the copula, or that which joyneth the subject
and the predicate in this question, together.

The subject of the question, is the visible Church, the predicate questioned,
is contained in the words [truely a Church of Christ without respect to saving
grace] wherein, we may further observe, the thing which is more directly
questioned, in these words [truely a Church of Christ] together with the
condition or limitation thereof in the words annexed [without respect to saving
grace.] Lastly, that which coupleth this predicate questioned, with this
subject of the question, is to be noted in the words, [may be considered to be,
etc.]

SECT. II.
Visibility explained and distinguished.
The subject of the question, then, is the Church, as it is specified with the
quality of visiblensse; for we do not consider it, here, in any other capacity,
either an entitive or organical, as catholic or institute, as
universal-visible or particular-visible; nor yet abstractly as a Church, or
concretely as visible, but in a conjunct, compounded and united sense, as it is
the visible Church, or the Church which is visible.

For the better opening of this term, three things may be undertaken. First,
to explain the attribute [visible]. Secondly, to apply it to the Church, and
then to make my Notion of this visible Church, as plain as I can, so far as may
concern the question in general.

To begin with the first. Visibility seems familiarly to be used Visible is,
1. that which seems what it is not.
in two distinct significations.

1. Visibility is sometimes taken for that ^ffection of a thing, whe^by the
thing seems to be what indeed it is not, as one that seems to be a sincere
member of Christ; when in truth he is not so, may yet be said to be so visibly,
or as we more ordinarily use to say, to seem to be so. Thus Visibility stands
opposed to Reality.

2. Visibility is also sometimes taken for that affection of a thing 2. What it
is.
whereby the thing seems to be what indeed it is, and shows it self ad extra
to be such. Now here visible is nothing else but that which may be seen.
Whether it be actually visum, seen, or not; as a regenerate person, evidencing
the truth of his grace by a sound profession, is truly said to be so visibly.
i. e. appearingly, or a visible Saint.

Thus visible stands opposed not to real, but to invisible; that is that which
may not, or cannot be seen; a man is said to be visible, not because he seems
to be a man and is not, but because he may be seen; thus, likewise, God is
said to be invisible, not because he is really a God, but because he may not,
or cannot be seen, i. e. with mortal eyes.

SECT. III.
Visibility applied to the Church.
We may apply this distinction of visibility briefly in three particulars.

1. In the latter sense only visibility is given to the Church in the subject
of the question, viz. as it seems to be what indeed and truth it is; otherwise
there appears contradictio in terminis; I means in the terms of the
question; for then the question would be, whether that Church which only
seems to be, and is not really so, may be considered to be really a Church of
Christ; therefore the form of the question, heeded, supposes this, viz. that
the visible Church is truly and really a Church of Christ, and only
questioneth whether it may be considered to be so, without respect to saving
grace; indeed a member or part of the visible Church, may be such, either
really, or only in show and seemingly; but this cannot be said of the whole.

2. Visibility is usually given to the Church (by divines) by Prop. 2.
a Metaphor, from sense to Reason. The sight of the Church (as they conceive)
being rather rational then sensitive; and it is rather termed visible, quia
rationabilis, because it may be known and discerned, it not being seen so much
by the eye, quam intellectu, mente, ratione, as Divines speak. Though, I humbly
conceive that this must rather be understood of the Church as true, or of God,
or Christ, then as a Church; for as it is a Church, or a Congregation of men
professing religion, so it is also evident to sense, visibilis, (as Ames) visu
scilicet, vel sensu externo. Medul. p. 165.


Though visibility be opposed to invisibility, it follows not that because
the question specified a Church visible, therefore Prop. 3.
we grant a Church invisible also, properly so called, no more, then because
there is a white swan therefore there is a black. Yet I intend not to deny the
Church invisible, only the subject of my question is not this, but the
Church-visible.

SECT. IV.
The nature of the Church.
I shall now, as briefly as I can, offer my notion of this visible Church, so
far as I conceive the present debate requires, viz. touching the nature, and
the common distribution of it, into visible and invisible.

1. The nature of the Church, I conceive, to be, 1. Integral. 2. Aggregative.

This distinction, together with the application of both parts of Medul. p.
167. sect. 5.
it, to the Church, may be easily collected from Ames himself; and Trelcatius
also teaches, that the Church both as visible and invisible, has integral
parts, and is consequently totum integrale, Instit. p. 214 ^um p. 220.
and yet that the Church is in the number of those things which Logicians call
aggregative.

1. Then, first, the Church is an integrum, and consequently The Church is an
Integrum.
of an individual and singular, and not an universal nature, it containing
plura (membra) constituentia ipsum realiter, whereby it does actually exist,
extra animam, or in it self.

The Church is integral, for it has a plurality of parts, these parts are
integral, and these parts are united, and consequently it is singular, for by a
union of integral parts, it is unum, and does really exist, and omne quod est
vel existit, eo ipso quia est, singular est; and consequently, it is not
universal in a Metaphisical or logical sense; for universale, does not exist,
as such, out of the mind, and totum universale, is distinct in kind from
totum integrale; therefore the universal Church is not properly a genus, nor
particular Churches the species thereof; but rather as Ames Ibid.
has clearly taught us, members of the Catholic, quae habet rationem integri.

Indeed, Ames says, that a particular Church is species ecclesiae Ibid.
in genere; but let us, first, note the difference he there puts betwixt
ecclesia in genere, and ecclesia catholica; and, secondly, the Ames his
difference twixt ecclesia in genere, and ecclesia catholica.
ground or reason assigned by himself of this assertion; and my position will
be still found to stand firm.

1. His difference betwixt ecclesia in genere, and ecclesia catholica, is most
apparent in his own words, says he, a particular Church is species ecclesiae
in genere; but respectu ecclesiae catholicae, it is membrum, etc. so that
nothing can be gathered from these words, to conclude the Catholic Church to
be a genus, or a totum universale, but indeed the contrary, that it is not so,
but that as before was noted, the Catholic Church, habet rationem integri.

2. The reason, upon which, Ames asserts a particular Church to be species
ecclesiae in genere, is, that common nature which is found in all particular
Churches; but is this reason sufficient to denominate the Church a genus, or
particular Churches species thereof? I humbly conceive, not; for then all those
things which partake of the same common nature, must specifically differ; and
every drop of water partaking of the common nature, that is in all other drops
of water, must be species aquae.

Indeed, everything which partaks of the common nature or genus Things may
partake of the common nature of one another, only then they specifically
differ; or of their differences also; and then numerically only.
only, of another thing, does differ specifically from that other thing, and
is species of that common nature or genus; but if a thing partaketh not only
of the common nature of another, but also of its difference, it is granted,
thereby to have both its genus, and differentia; and consequently, the same
definition; which cannot competere with things specifically differing. Thus, I
conceive, a particular Church partaking not only of the common nature of all
other particular Churches, but also of their differentia, they ought to have
the same definition, and having the same matter and the same form too, they
are the same essentially, and differ only (as Logicians speak) Numerically.

But, so far as I understand this controversy, it is wholly spent about the
true meaning of logical terms; and wholly issues in this notion, whether Ramus
does well to assert, homo, to be genus or not worthy of any (much less an
eager) contest in Divinity, unless we could descry some more dangerous
consequences attending upon either conclusion, then are yet discovered.

For my part, while Ames maintains this difference 'twixt Ames asserteth both
the Catholic and particular Church to be Integrum. ibid.
ecclesia in genere, and ecclesia catholica, as before was noted, and grants,
that ecclesia catholica has rationem integri, and a particular Church, est
etiam integrum, I am sure my position stands, that the nature of the Church is
integral; and then, whether the notion [Church] be a genus or not, is hardly
worth a dispute, seeing that it existeth not out of the integral, i. e.
universal or particular Church.

Yea, might we thus understand Ames to intend genus and species in a
grammatical sense, and not a logical, in this place I think any one might say
after him, that ecclesia particularis est species ecclesiae in genere, that is,
the word or notion [Church] is generally predicable of all Churches; this way
also the Church may be said to be universal, as well as respectu loci, and
temporis, as ursine, or personarum, and partium, as Trelcatius adds, but not
naturae; the Church is a totum, and universalis, but not a totum universale;
it is a totum integrale, and universal in the respects specified, but not
universal qua totum.

But any further scrutiny into this matter, may be pardonably waved, seeing our
maine question considers not the Church, either as universal or particular, or
as universal-visible or particular-visible, but only as it is the visible
Church, as at first was noted. Now, all, so far as they own the visible
Church to be really a Church, make no question of its integrality that ever I
yet heard of; and therefore, those that deny the universal visible Church, to
be an integrum, do equally deny it to be really a Church, who do also
acknowledge the particular visible, which they allow to be a Church really, to
be also totum integrale.

2. The Church is, also, in its nature, Aggregative, that is, it is The Church
is Aggregative.
of the number of those things which are constitute and by aggregation, or
collection; this is applicable to the Church, I conceive, as it is that species
of integrum, that has its parts united per modum colligationis; but this bond,
by which such parts are held together, may not be thought to be real, as sticks
are bound together in a faggot; but metaphorical, or political, as Companies, or
bodies, or societies of men, are bound together, by some tie, or bond; so the
Church has her joints and bands, whereby it is held, and knit together, as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 16. only with this difference, that civil
societies are under civil, and the Church is under spiritual bonds. What these
spiritual bonds of the Church are, is largely enquired hereafter.

Aggregative bodies are so familiar, that indeed we find them in every classis
of the creatures, and accordingly, they are either inanimate, as piles of wood,
heaps of stone, etc. or animate, and these are either irrational, as a flock of
sheep, a shole of fish, etc. or rational, and these again are either civil, as
a family, a corporation, a Commonwealth, etc, or ecclesiastical, as the Church.

Aggregative bodies are either occasional, as many times flights Aggregatives
are inanimate and animate, these irrational and rational, these civil and
ecclesiastical; these occasional and fixed. Their essential state.
of birds are, and that rout we read of, Acts 19. was: or fixed and settled, as
the Church of God is.

Aggregative bodies, are distributed secundum statum essentialem, vel
integralem, according to their essential state they are distributed into their
matter and form, as Trelcatius intimates Tales quae non sunt eo nunquid
absolute sed continent in se duo: quonum alterum est simile maltitudini and
materiae dispersae, altorum vero unitati ordine and collectioni. Instit. therl.
p. 214. Professio visibilis. Communio visibilis. Am. Medul. p. 165. s. 28.
Integral state.
; they are such, says he, a^ ^ontaine in them two; one of which is like to
multitude and dispersed matter, (which is as it were the matter;) the other to
unity, order and collection which is the form. Now such are the essential
parts of the Church; the matter whereof is persons professing Religion, or
called; and the form, the collection, or Congregation order, unity, society or
community of persons, as at large hereafter.

By the way give me leave to hang two queries upon this observation. 1. Whether
an aggregative body, and consequently the visible Church, which is such, have
not its essential form, as well as every other thing that has an essence. 2.
Whether an aggregative bodn made up of visible parts, and consequently the
visible Church, which is such, have not an essential form which is visible? if
the matter or parts be visible, why is it not the union or aggregation of this
visible matter, or parts visible also? if the persons and the profession of the
persons be visible, what hinders the society or fellowship of them to be
visible also? or what should render it invisible? but of this also more largely
anon.

According to their Integral state, aggregative bodies, are distributed into
their parts qua integral, and according to the nature of them; which are
sometimes similar, sometimes dissimilar. 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29, 30.
Now the parts of the visible Church, I conceive, are both; similar, in that
all are called, dissimilar, in that some are Elected, and some not; similar, in
that all are professors, dissimilar, in that some are also officers, and some
not.

But we are, now, I humbly conceive, very near unto the ground of the common
distribution of the Church into visible and invisible, which was proposed to
be, next, considered.

SECT. V.
The ground and meaning of the distinction of the Church into visible and
invisible.
This aggregative body, the Church, is usually distinguished, into visible and
invisible. I shall briefly show, how I understand it, and wherein I except
against it; and thus my notion of the Church visible, will further appear.

1. I conceive, it cannot be a distinction of the essential totality of the
Church, as if the visible were the matter, and the invisible were the form of
the Church; then the invisible Church, being also visible; (visible in
profession, as invisible in faith) should be both form and part of the matter
of the same Church, which is absurd. Wherefore, I dislike that distinction,
that hypocrites are materialy, but not formally of the visible Church; for
indeed, if hypocrites be not formally of the visible Church, they are not of it
at all, if forma dat esse; nor may be said to be so, if forma dat nomen.

2. Neither can it be distinctio generis in species (as Ames observes) as if
there were one Church visible, and another invisible, specififically differing;
for properly, there is but one Church, as all consent; and that one Church is,
therefore, not a genus, for then its species would make more then one.

3. Neither, again, can it be distinctio integri in membra (as Ames also
teaches) as if one part of the Church visible, and another part invisible:
seeing the whole is, in its profession, visible; but this, I humbly conceive,
is nearest to it.

4. Therefore, lastly, I conceive it to be, distinctio integri (non Una numero,
duplicem mododicunt pro condition membrorum ipsius.
in parts, sed a part; and to result, not from the totality of the integrum,
as such, but from a diverse consideration of the nature or disposition of the
parts of it, as similar and dissimilar, as before was hinted; for the Church,
as Junius, is but one in number, and two in manner, because of the disposition
of the members thereof.

For the whole professing, is the visible Church, and a part of this Paraeus.
whole also savingly believing, is called the Church invisible; the whole is
visible, as men called, a part of these are invisible, as men elect and
regenerate. Whence that common, but most useful distinction, ecclesia
vocatorum, and electorum.

Therefore, says Pareus between the visible and invisible Church, there is
even the same difference, as is between the whole and the part; for invisible
lies hid in the visible; which appears from that of Paul, whom he has
chosen, them he has also called, Exp. Urs. cat. p. 283, 284.

Polanus confirms it with his authority and reason too; the invisible Polanus.
Church (says he) lies hid in the visible, ut pars in toto, as a part in the
whole. If we consider both, as the company of the called, by external vocation,
which is common both to the invisible and visible Church, Synt. c. 9. l. 7.

Osiander has the same words also, in coetu visibili, ecclesia latet Osciander.
invisibili. Encherid. contra. p. 126.. which, indeed, is no other then that
which in other words, is asserted by, even, all our reformed Divines, in their
most common and known distinction of the Church as stricte and late, strictly
and largely considered, who intend, generally, by the Church strictly taken the
Church invisible, or the elect or elect regenerate, and by the Church largely
taken, the Church visible, or of the called, comprehending good and bad, the
elect and reprobate, as they do still explain themselves, giving very differing
definitions of them, as will more fully appear anon.

Yea, one greater then all these, our Savior, teaches that the wheat, the
corn, the good fish, and the elect, are but part, of the Church or the
Kingdom of God; which has tares, chaff, bad fish, and such as are not
elected, in it. Whence Paraeus has well collected, ecclesia electorum, in
coetu vocatorum est.

SECT. VI.
Exceptions against this distinction of the Church.
Having showed the ground of the distinction of the Church into visible, and
invisible, and how I conceive it should be understood. I shall now crave leave
to show my exceptions against it.

1. My first exception will shroud it self under those words of Field of the
Church. p. 14.
Doctor Field. We say, says he, there is a visible and an invisible Church,
not meaning to make two distinct Churches, though the form of words may serve
to insinuate some such thing. Certainly that form of words is not very
commendable, that may serve to insinuate that which we mean not by them; if we
change the instance, happily this may be more notorious; if one should say, there
is a heap of precious stones, and an heap of common stones; would not the
hearer of these words rather imagine, that there are two heaps, one of precious
stones, and another of common stones; then, that there is but one heap of
stones in all, of which some are common, and some precious; and in the present
case who would understand Bullinger other, if he were not prepossessed with a
better meaning then his words should insinuate; his words are non sine causa
gravi dixerunt alii, ecclesiam Dei aliam quidem esse visibilem, Bull. Decad. p.
355.
aliam vero insibilem; who can well make aliam and aliam ecclesiam to be but
one Church.

2. I am afraid also, that the ill uncertain sound of this distinction in the
ears of the world, has been a means of troubling us with those many
intricacies wherewith the doctrine about the Church is still cumber'd; we find
this distinction not of so frequent use, either in Scripture, or in the Church,
before the reformation from Rome, and then, how quiet was the Church about this
point! all concluding, that there is but one Church, how natural is it from
this distinction of a Church invisible and visible, for the Papist to reject
the invisible to maintain his visible; and for the Brownist to maintain his
invisible, by rejecting the visible; while, if we look on the Church, as one
entire totum, or the Church of the called, wherein the elect, as part are
contained, without any more distinction, we might enjoy with less controversy.

3. It Is indeed a difference without distinction, it is no true distribution;
for whereas (as Master Hudson has well observed) all distributions should have
their parts distinct and different, and the more opposite the members are, the
better the distribution is, it is nothing at all so here; for either the one
part, viz. the visible, comprehends the other, viz. the invisible, and thus the
one part becomes the whole, as indeed it is, or else this one part, viz. the
visible being distinguished from the invisible, as of necessity it must be, in
this d^stribution, has no being at all, and so the distribution has lost a
member, and, consequently, it self, for nothing can be distributed into one
part.

SECT. VII.
Three other lawful senses of this distribution of the Church, yielded to.
But least I be thought to reflect too much upon this distinction of the
Church, I cannot let pass three other ancient uses of it, which, I cheerfully
allow.

1. By the visible Church has been sometimes meant, the Church united in
outward and actual communion together; and by the invisible, such as though
gracious, yet were not in actual fellowship with any particular Church.

Thus the Papists urging, that none could be members of the Church, but such as
were in fellowship with the Church of Rome, our Divines answer them, that we
must distinguish; some, say they, are in actual communion with the Church,
these are members of the visible, and some though not in fellowship outwardly
with the Church, yet if gracious, they are members of the invisible Church,
among whom they usually ranked the Catechumeni, and the Excommunicati if truly
gracious; accordingly Trelcatius says, Inst. theol. p. 231.
Catechumini s^cundum externam ecclesiae formam, ad quam quia non pertinent
proprie, de ecclesia non esse censentur, licet ecclesiae in visibilis sunt.

2. Again, by the visible Church has been usually meant, as before, the
Church, as professing; by the invisible, as sincerely, or Vid. par. in Ursin.
cat. p. 475. and pet. du Moul. Buck. p. 264. and Exp. of Eng. Art. 39. p. 67.
savingly believing, or regenerate. We may know who profess, they therefore,
are visible. We cannot know who are regenerate, therefore they are invisible,
as Jewel, God has always a Church invisible, i. e. known only to himself. God
knew them, but Elias knew them not, to the judgment of men they were
invisible, Defen. p. 361.

Lastly, the Church is frequently said to be visible when its profession is
prosperous pompous and glorious in the eyes of the world; and invisible, when
it is not seen by the world in its wonted splendour and glory, by reason either
of a cloud of persecution from without, as the Church mentioned, Romans 11. 4.
was; or of a cloud of confusion, thtough the spreading of error, and the rents
and breaches of schism within, whence many take occasion to pretend that they
cannot tell where the true Church is, as we have sad experience this day in
England. Hence Doctor Fulk on the Rhemist Testament Dr. Fulk ^n Rhet. Test.
Romans 11. 4.
grants, that we do conclude the true Church may for a time be hid or secret
which our Divines do sometimes render by the term invisible. Yea, Beza says,
that the Church is oft-times brought to that estate, that even the most Beza in
Romans 11, 2.
watchful and sharp-sighted Pastors think it to be clean extinct and put out.

The second of these senses of this distinction, is the most usual in Authors,
and that wherein the visible Church is generally meant in this Treatise.

SECT. VIII.
The visible Church most properly a Church.
Once more, if I may have leave to digress a little, I shall humbly add, that
it is my present opinion, that the visible Church is most properly the Church
of Christ; though I dare not assert it with much confidence, knowing that some
later eminent Divines seem at least of another mind.

Yet I desire it may be heeded, that I do not say, that the visible Church is
more truly, much less more soundly, and savingly a Church of Christ, then the
Church invisible; but only that the visible Church is (without comparison or)
in it self, most properly a Church of Christ.

And thus I hope to escape the challenge of the reformed Writers; Of which at
large hereafter, chap. 16.
Indeed, they sometimes say, that the invisible, is the only true Church; but
first they never questioned, but that this only true invisible Church, was
also visible in our sense; and again we may hear them explain their position,
in Doctor Fields Field of the Church. p. 12, 13, 14.
expression, When we say, none but the Elect are of the Church, we mean not
that no others are, not at all, nor in any sort of the Church; but that they
are not principally fully, and absolutely.

I presume, therefore I may present my reasons for this my opinion, without
just offense to my Reader; which are these.

Arg. 1. The Church of Christ is most properly visible, therefore the visible
Church is most properly the Church of Christ.

That the Church of Christ is most properly visible, appears thus.

1. Such as the parts of an Aggregative body are most properly, such the whole
is most properly; as if the stones be precious, so is the heap; if they be
vile, so is the heap; if they be black, so is the heap; if they be visible, so
is the heap; and if they be most properly visible, so is the heap; for if the
parts be so in themselves, how can they be less visible in the whole?

2. Now the Church is confessed to be an Aggregative body, and yet the parts or
members, are doubtless visible, in most proper speaking, whether we consider
them as Men, or as men Called.

1. The members of the Church are Men; and who can doubt but that men are
visible in the highest propriety of speech, that runs not against his own
sense? yea, should we yield that saving grace alone does unite men to the
Church, yet seeing it is not the grace (which is invisible) that is the member,
but the man (who is invisible) the members of the Church are visible still. For
(as Peter du Moulin says) those that are of this [invisible] Church are
visible as they are men, but not as they are His Buckler. p. 264.
elected.

2. The members of the Church are as truly and properly visible, as they are
men called; for,

1. All the members of the Church, whether they be elect or reprobate, fall
under the called: Yea, as Ames has excellently noted, the very elect, are
members of the Church, not qua electi, Medul p. 161
but qua vocati, as they are called; yea, the very elect are not members of the
Church invisible, but as they are called, the Church of the elect lying hid in
the Church of the called, as before was noted.

2. Now all that are called are as such most properly visible for in their very
state of calling, the called stand most visibly distinguished from all other
societies of men, viz. in their profession of the name and worship of Christ
before all the wo^ld, wherein the elect-regenerate, or called, are doubtless
as eminent and open actors, as the reprobate can be, and consequently do as
truly help to constitute and render the Church to be visible as they.

Therefore if that part of the Church which in one regard bears the name of
invisible, be as properly visible, as the other which is only visible, who can
doubt but that the Church in general is most properly visible. But as Doctor
Field says, it cannot be, but they that are of the true Church, must by the
profession of the Field of the Church. p. 14, 15
truth make themselves known in such sort, that by they profession and practice
they may be discerned from other men. And again, the persons of them of whom
the Church consists are visible; their profession known even to the prosane
and wicked of the world; and in this sort cannot be invisible; neither did any
of our men teach, that it is or may be.

Arg. 2. The whole Church does most properly deserve the name [Church]; for
though both the visible and the invisible Church should be truly and properly
a Church of Christ, yet if in a strict consideration, one of these is but a
part, and the other, as the whole, contains that part, that which contains
the other as its part must needs be the whole, and best deserve the name of the
whole.

Now the invisible Church has been found to be the part of the visible, and
the visible to be the whole containing that part, seeing all that savingly
believe do equally share in the Churches profession and visibility with the
externally called; Yea, and they, that is, the sincere believers, as Master
Baxter asserts, are His Rest. p. 137
a part of the externally called, who are the visible Church; therefore, as
Master Blake reasons, the invisible is only one part, and so His scals. p. 157
not the Church in its most proper signification.

Arg. 3. The Church of Christ never cease to be visible, therefore the
visible Church is most properly the Church of Christ; for,

1. The Church of Christ must needs import his Church in its most proper
signification; for he that speaks of [the Church] must either mean the only
Church, or the Church emphatically so called; in either of these senses [the
Church] signifies the Church properly so called.

2 Again, that which never cease to be visible, must needs be visible, and
indeed most properly so; but, though the Church may be sometimes obscured, it
never loses its visibility or cease to be visible. So Ames, ecclesia nunquam
plane desinit esse visibilis, Med. p. 166. 39
quamvis enim aliquando viz usquam appareat ecclesia tam pura, etc. ecclesia
tamen aliquo modo visibilis exist it, in illa ipsa impuritate cultus and
professionis; which we may take in English in those pertinent words of Master
Fox, the right His protestation before his Acts and Monuments
Church, says he, is not so invisible in the world, as none can see it.

The Scripture-Church, is most properly the Church of Christ, this none can
well deny.

But now the visible Church is the Scripture-Church, as appears from the
Doctrine of Scripture about the Church, the examples, the parts, the
Ordinances, and number of Scripture-Churches.

First, the Doctrine of the Scripture about the Church, is generally such as
agrees only with the Church-visible, viz. as made up of tares and wheat, good
and bad, Elect and reprobate, etc.

Yea, the very word [Church] in Scripture as some affirm, is not more then
once taken for the Church-invisible, which is Heb. 12. 23. though that very
place is by some Reverend Divines understood of the Church-visible also, for it
was already come into, by persons then alive [ye are come;] therefore the
Church on earth, and it was a Church that had Ordinances in it, v. 25.
therefore the visible.

But if it should be granted, as Master Blake observes, that in this place and
in two or three more, the Scripture means the Church invisible, which is as
much as can be pretended unto, -- yet doubtless that which is the ordinary
language of the holy Ghost, which he uses most often, and almost always, is
that which is most proper.

2. It also appears from the examples of Scripture-Churches, De qua sola
ecclefia praesumptiva, etc. Dav. Detern. p. 218. ex spalatensi.
for have not even all these a mixture of corrupt and wicked members? and is
such a mixture compatible with the Church invisible? or what Churches can such
be, but visible? therefore says Davenant, all such Scriptures, and assertions
of the fathers as speak of this mixture of good and bad in the Church, are to
be understood of the presumptive or visible Church.

3. It further appears by the parts of the Scripture-Church, which are
generally such as are only to be found in the visile Church, that the
Scripture-Church is the visible Church. The parts of the Scripture-Church are
generally Priest and people, Pastors and flock, the Rulers and the ruled, the
Catechisers and the catechized, and the like, as both the Old and New Testament
abundantly testify. Now in the Church invisible there are no such parts, no
such relations, no such officers, but all are members, but Christ the head;
therefore the Scripture-Church wherein these parts and officers, as such are,
viz. Priests, Prophets, Apostles, Bishops, Pastors, Elders, Deacons, Rulers,
Cetechizers, etc. must needs be the visible Church.

Fourthly, that the Scripture-churche is the visible Church, appears moreover
by the dispensation of Ordinances fixed therein, which is proper and peculiar
to the visible Church, in all the Scripture-Churches we find a dispensation of
the Word, Sacraments, discipline; the dispensation whereof is in the hands of
men; who are only capable of dealing with the Church as visible; yea, the
dispensation it self is visible; and all will readily grant that these
Ordinances are all of them peculiar to the visible Church; the attendance of
the Church upon them being the most eminent and remarkable means of rendering
the Church her self to be visible.

Lastly, this yet farther appears from the number of the Scripture-churches,
they are many, the Church at Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Colosse,
Philippi, Thessalonica, Pergamus, Thyatira, etc. Whereas the invisible Church
is also indivisible, it is but one, and not to be divided into any more;
therefore the Scripture-church which is thus actually divided must needs be the
visible Church.

Arg. 5. My last Argument is taken from the Name [Church], and may be this. The
visible Church in its nature does not properly answer to the name [Church],
therefore it is most properly the Church; for that thing which does in its
nature most properly answer to such a name, must needs be the thing most
properly which that name does signify.

Now the nature of the visible Church may be observed to answer to the name,
Church, in a most proper signification, both in English, Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew.

1. In English, the word [Church] does in a true and direct propriety of speech
signify nothing but that which is the Lords; and may be conceived to imply the
Lords people, or the Lords house; Die Kyrchen nuxcupant, and ipsum Dei populum
and Domum, in quo hic congregatur ad cultum Dei. Vid. Bull. Dec. p. 135.
it seems to be taken from the German word [Kurch], which also alludeth, happily
to the Greek word (...), dominica; which, as Bullinger observes, they used to
understand both of the people, and the house of the Lord, where the people of
the Lord used to assemble; and indeed of both, as they have relation one to the
other. Now if the name [Church] intend the people of the Lord, meeting together
in one place, to attend on the worship of God, we need not much trouble our
selves for its proper application, to the visible Church.

2. In Lattine the Church is called [Congregatio] the Congregation, or the
people gathered together, answering happily to the Hebrew (which may also be here
taken notice of) Katial, (...)
Congregavit. Now does not this name also most properly agree with the nature
and reason of the visible Church? is it not a local gathering together that
most properly constitutes a Congregation? and is not this most proper to the
particular, and consequently to the visisible Church? therefore is she also
called an Assembly, a body, a City, a Kingdom, none of which, but most properly
resemble the Church, as visible.

3. Lastly, the Church in Greek is [(...)] which most directly imports a people
called out of the world, (as anon, more largely.) Indeed, the term from, or out
of which, the Church is called, is not expressed in the word (...), yet all
agree, that it is as necessarily implied in it.

Now this sense of the word, Church, most properly and exactly intends the
Church-visible, this being most apparently and properly called out of the
world; as easily appears.

For the world, here, must be understood to be either the world of the ungodly,
or the world of infidels; but it cannot be understood of the world of the
ungodly, because there is still a mixture of the Church and the world in this
sense (according to that of our Savior, I pray not that thou should take
them out of the world;) then if the world out of which the Church is called be
the world of Infidels, viz. of such as live without the pale of the Christian
profession, I think it will be easily granted, first, that such as own the said
Christian profession are most properly opposed to, and called out of the world
in this sense; and secondly, that such are most properly the visible Church.

But enough, if not too much of this; it is time to take up with this item, that
though happily this discourse may tend to some insensible advantage in the main
question, yet the stresse of it rests not upon this point; For we may prove
that the visible Church is truly a Church of Christ, without respect to saving
grace, whether the visible Church be found in the issue to be most properly a
Church, or not; therefore the sense of this word [truely] in the question, we
shall now make bold to enquire into.

CHAP. II.
Of the term [truely] or the Church truly so called.
WE now proceed to the predicate in question, or that which is questioned of
this subject, the visible Church; contained in these words of the question
[truely a Church of Christ, without respect to saving grace.]

Wherein we have before observed; First, that which is more directly
questioned, in these words [truely a Church of Christ.] Secondly, the condition
or limitation thereof, in the words annexed [without respect to saving grace.]

To begin with the first, I humbly conceive that a good and clear
understanding of this term [truely], or how the Church may be said to be
truly so, may have a strong subserviency to a happy decision of the main
controversy; wherefore, I shall take the liberty to enlarge my sense and
notion thereof, to as much plainness as I am able.

1. Truth as predicable of the visible Church, is sometimes expressed by vera,
and sometimes by vere.

By vera ecclesia is usually meant the Church, not only endued Ecclesia vera.
with the truth of being, but endowed also with the truth of goodness, or the
goodness of well-being, and under some excellency of doctrine or manners, or
both.

By vere ecclesia is usually intended the being of the Church Vere.
alone, and not the quality, unless so far it intend the evil qualities of
any Church, as to secure its being against them.

Accordingly Divines use to say, that such a Church as is very corrupt, and yet
retains the essence or being of a Church of Christ, is, vere, or truly a
Church of Christ, but not vera ecclesia, or a true Church, that is a pure or an
holy Church: as an honest man is said to be verus homo, a true man, and a thief
who is not properly said to be a true man, is doubtless vere homo, and as
truly a man as any other; vere serving to express truth as natural, and vera,
as moral.

Yet, with leave, though this distinction may serve to explain The distinction
excepted against.
our meanings, I add, that it is well-known to all that are scholars that both
these terms [vera and vere] may be lawfully applied to the Church, or any
thing, while the physical being thereof is not wholly perished, though the
defects in morals be never so notorious; if we speak of the subject under that
notion, and of truth as attributed thereunto in its physical acceptance. A
thief is doubtless a true man, as well as truly a man; if we speak of a thief
quatenus homo, as a man, and not as a good or bad man, morally true or false.
Thus also the Church may be said to be as well a true, as truly a Church of
Christ, while its essentials remain in it, and it has not yet lost its
natural being, be it never so corrupt in moral concernments, or never so much
to be censured or condemned in any such respects; for if the Church has its
Ens, it must be allowed its verum also.

3. But it appears that the question carries the weaker term (viz. truly,)
as that which is likeliest to be yielded unto, by such as are likeliest to
dissent upon the whole; whereby it easily The term applied to the question.
appears to the Reader what is enquired after in the question, namely, not
whether the visible Church may be considered to be a pure or a perfect Church,
or a true Church in a moral capacity? but whether it may be considered to be
truly a Church, that is to have all the essentials of a visible Church, or its
natural being without respect to saving grace? or whether the beiing of the
visible Church, have a necessary dependence upon saving qualifications?

4. It may be also heeded, that though the question run [whether it may be so
considered] (the reason whereof may appear hereafter) yet the question is not
whether the truth of the Church consist only in consideration; for the weight
of our question rests upon the truth of the Churches being in it self, and
not in our minds or conception, only this nature and truth of the Church
without our minds cannot be so, quoad nos, without an act of our mind, viz.
consideration; but the question properly is de veritate, ecclesiae visibilis
(as the Metaphysics speak) in essendo; Veritatem in Rebus ipsis, quae ab illa
denominantur verae. Suar. disp. 8.
which is defined, truth in the things themselves by virtue of which truth, the
things themselves are said to be true, which is such a truth as agrees with the
Church without the operation of the mind, and therefore such as states the
Church a real thing thing; seeing competere alicui atra mentis operationem, is
the known definition of Reale esse.

Lastly, this common expression [truely a Church] is desired to be kept unto,
to keep out those troublesome and disputable terms, of ecclesia aequivoca, and
ecclesia presumptiva, which are wont to perplex this controversy; to both of
which this vere ecclesia, or the truth of the Churches being in it self stands
in as evident as direct opposition; for the aequivocal Church, in the sense of
most of those that dissent from me, has no truth of being at all; and the
presumed Church depends upon the charity of the mind of those that consider
it, and has not that being that is to be certainly known and considered by
us, as it is here in question; but more plainly.

1. The evasion of ecclesia presumptiva is thus anticipated, whether it import
the visible or invisible Church.

1. If by this presumed Church be meant the visible, which in favor and
charity we presume to be a Church (as Spalatensis, and after him Davenant
seems to some to imply) though we know not who are true members thereof,
because we know not who among them have saving grace; then, who sees not, that
this presumption begs the question; it being evidently built upon that
supposition, which is mainly in controversy, viz. that one cannot be a true
member of the visible Church without saving grace; this acceptance of the
Church takes up that respect to saving grace which is questioned, and
therefore can claim no place in the controversy.

2. But if by this presumed Church be meant the invisible Church, or the Church
of the saved, which seems more proper, seeing we can only presume and
conjecture, (as Insibili credimus esse electos aliquos, etiamsi qui illi sint
non novimus scientia perfecta, sed conjecturali duntaxat. Col. Theo. p. 4.
disp. 13. These. 7,
Maccovius says) who are the true members thereof. Yet thus it concerns not
us at all, who are now debating a question about the visible, and not the
invisible Church.

2. In like manner the term aequivocum is struck out of this controversy; for
if the question be, as ours is, whether the Church be truly so without respect
to saving grace? and the answer be this, that such are only members of the
Church aequivoce, that have no saving grace, the thing in question is evidently
begged, if aequivece be opposed to truly, as usually herein it is.

6. But there being so much noise at present about the terms univocum
aequivocum and analogum about this thing, I think my Reader will look for some
longer account of my mind therein, which though I am loath to do, yet I humbly
offer in a few particulars.

1. If we shall be able to prove that the truth of the visible Church does not
necessarily suppose saving grace, and that such as have no saving grace may
truly be said to be of the Church: I humbly conceive we need not trouble our
selves at all, whether they be so univoce, equivoce or analogice.

2. Yet, although I presume it might safely be asserted, that wicked men may be
members of the visible Church univocally, I should for peace and quiet sake be
very well satisfied with this, that they are most properly so per analogiam;
wherein, I humbly conceive we may almost meet with both those Reverend and
eminent men, Mr. Blake and Mr. Baxter, as appears under both their hands in
print. Vid. Br. Apol. p. 99. and Blakes seals p. 150, 151.


3. However, if I may make my own choice, I had rather reduce the membership of
hypocrites unto that branch of Analogy which Bueerwood calls, Dignitatis
solius; which truly, methinks, (if I may be plain,) should fit the notion of
most men that trouble themselves in the point, and are loath to be Brownists.

4. The analogy of dignity only, says he, is, when one member of it, is more
worthy then the other: and instances, thus homo, and Brutum. are Analogous of
the name Animal; though (to satisfy us how unworthy this is of an eager
dispute with Divines, when we see such a difference among Logicians themselves)
Stierius, and other Logicians bring us, the very same instance of univoca; but
if we keep our selves to this branch of analogy, on which we have pitched, it
may help me to explain my meaning, thus*

1. Both man and beast are animal; so both the hypocrite, and the Elect;
regenerate, are Church Members. 2. The beast is as truly and properly animal,
as well as the man; so the hypocrite is truly and properly a Churchmember, as
well as the Elect regenerate. 3. the man, however, is the more noble animal, so
the elect regenerate is the more noble Churchmember. 4. Lastly, therefore the
man and the beast are analogous of the name animal; and the hypocrite and the
Elect regenerate of the name Churchmember.

5. I might subjoyne, if it be worth the pains, that if we would speak
logically in logical terms, as we speak of one member of the division, so we
must speak of the other, and not as some affect to do, to say that true
believers are univocal members, and hypocrites aequivocal; for they are both
membra dividentia of the same head; and if the one be univocal, so is the
other, and if the one be aequivocal so is the other; as the living dog and the
dog star, are both aequivoca, with respect to the name Canis; and man and
beast, are either both analoga or univoca, of the name animal.

CHAP. III.
Of the respect we owe to saving grace in the consideration of the visible
Church.
HAving hitherto labored in the Explication of the subject of the question,
viz. the visible Church, and of its attribute directly in question, viz. truly
a Church of Christ; we proceed to the condition or limitation thereof,
contained in the words annexed, without respect to saving grace; which for the
sake of dispatch, we shall look upon together with the Copula, which serves to
join the subject and the attribute in the question together, contain in these
words [may be considered to be;] which that we may the easier receive our
explication of, we shall sent the question at full once more before us, viz.

Whether the visible Church may be considered to be truly a Church of Christ
without respect to saving grace.

Where, that we may further observe the reason, as well as the sense of the
terms, I humbly beg my readers patience yet carefully to heed,

1. That it is not questioned, whether the visible Church may be without
respect to saving grace; but whether it may be considered, etc. that would have
sounded very improperly.

For respect does not flow a principio essendi, but a principio cognoscendi;
and naturally answers only thereunto: Respect is but a looking upon, or unto,
which requires an eye, either real, viz. bodily, if the discourse be of
sensible objects; or metaphorically, viz. of the mind; if the discourse be of
intellectual or rational objects, as this that is before us here; viz. saving
grace, is.

Here we have a rational object, viz, saving grace, and a rational sight, or a
looking upon or unto it, viz. in the word respect; and therein, therein is
plainly rational eye and act supposed as fit to be expressed, which here is
done by this term in the question; Consideration.

Had the question been of the truth of the visible Church in general, without
respect; it might have been thus expressed, viz. whether the visible be truly
a Church, and no more.

Or had the question been only and simply of the Churches dependency upon
saving grace, and not of our respect thereunto; it might have been expressed
thus. Whether the visible Church be truly a Church without saving grace, and
no more.

But seeing, as we shall presently find, that there is a necessity of the
latter words, [without respect to saving grace,] there is also a manifest
necessity of such a kind of copula, as here we have [viz. may be considered] or
conceived, or thought, or imagined to be, or the like; and the meaning thereof
is briefly but thus.

Whether we may take a true apprehension, conception, or consideration of the
visible Church, in the being or nature thereof, without an eye or respect unto
saving grace; or whether we must necessarily take saving grace into our
thoughts, to a right and true understanding of the visible Church to be truly
a Church of Christ.

2. That the question is not whether the visible Church may be considered to be
truly a Church of Christ without saving grace; but without respect to saving
grace.

For if the Church neither ever were, nor yet is, nor ever shall be, or exist,
without this (i. e.) true saving grace; it will not help, or profit us much to
find, whether it be so in our Consideration, or not; yet if it shall be proved
that saving grace is verily, Quarto modo.
neither of the essence or property of the Church, it will thence, easily
follow, that there is no contradiction in considering a Church to be truly
such without it; yea, I suppose, it will further follow, that this visible
Church, so considered without saving grace, has not its being only in reason
or consideration, but has some foundation of being in re, and is at least ens
rationis ratiocinatae, and so considered conceptu objectivo, as the
Metaphysics speak. Yea, I know not but that happily it may claim one step
further, and be termed ens reale, if we mean ens real potentia, non actu; but,

3. The question, lastly, is not whether the visible Church may be (i. e.
actually) without saving grace; but whether it may be considered to be truly a
Church without respect to saving grace; that is, whether saving grace be either
of the essence or property of the Church, or so near unto the nature and being
of it, as that it cannot be conceived to be, but respect must be had to saving
grace, this is the very sense of the question before us; yet concerning this
which is denied to be our question, viz. the actual being of the Church without
saving grace, I shall crave leave to express my self in a few particulars,
which I humbly conceive, may have, yet some further and direct subserviency to
the cheering of my mind, touching the question, with which I shall conclude
that word.

I readily grant, that though saving grace be not of the essence, or property
of the visible Church, yet saving grace is of the excellency and been esse of
it; but even therefore saving grace is denied to be necessary in our
consideration of the nature and being of the visible Church.

A symmetry of part, strength of body, lively color, consistency of brain,
quickness of fancy, soundness of mind, retention of memory, and good
discourse, all these are of the excellency and glory of a man, yet not one of
them require a necessary place in one consideration, when we would conceive, of
his nature and property, quatenus homo, as he is a man; for he may be a man
without all these, and therefore he may doubtless be conceived a man and
truly, without respect to any of them; the application hereof to our present
discourse is easily left to my Reader.

2. I further grant that as it cannot be, but that many individual men among
the rest of the kind, will be thus excellently qualified, as before, so
neither can it ever be, but that many individual members of the visible Church,
shall be endued with saving grace, according to that of Vrsin, in ecclesia
semper sunt aliqui Catech. p. 408
(non omnes) electi, and sancti.

3. Yet I humble offer whether the cause of this impossibility may not be
thought to lie rather in the will of God so determining, and consequently be a
thing extrinsecal to the being of the Church; then in the nature of the Church,
or any thing intrinsecal thereunto? and whether the visible Church might not,
for any thing in the nature thereof to the contrary, be truly a Church of
Christ, though there should not be one member in it for a time savingly
qualified? though it be still granted, that for the glory of grace, the Lord
has so ordained, that it never shall be actually so.

Even as (to follow my present similitude) it is impossible, but there should
be many wise and judicious men in the world: yet this necessity lies not in
the nature of man, but rather in the will of God, that has so ordained for the
glory of his own name, and the good of society in the world.

And if at last it issue thus, I see not but that we may safely conclude the
visible Church without saving grace; to be in the former sense Ens reale, id
est, potentia; if he define ens reale well, that says it is, quod habet esse
ex part Rei, actu vel potentia; seeing such a Church has its being, ex part
rei, potentia; and the only reason why it has not the same actualiter, is not
ex part rei, sed ex part Dei.

4. Yet once more, I humbly offer, that seeing there may be a Corporation of
men, without one wise or learned man amongst them, why may not there be a
particular Church in the world, without one member savingly qualified, at least
for some certain space of time, etc?

Indeed Ames concludes, (and doubtless soundly) maxim probabile esse nullam
dar^, etc. that it is most probable, that there is no particular Church where
the profession of the true faith Medul. de ecclesia.
flourishes, but that there are some therein that are true believers; yet none
can construe maxim probabile, impossible to be otherwise, and if it be most
probable, it is not necessary, and then the being of the Church depends not
thereon, but it may be without it; for he that says any thing is most likely
to be, even thereby intimates that that thing is not certain to be, and then
it may not be; and that is all I querie for.

Neither can those words of God to Paul, for I have much people in this City,
enforce any such thing, though we grant that much people to be the Elect; for

1. These words carried extraordinary encouragement against the Vid. Act. 18. 9
10
extraordinary trials which that City had for Paul; and therefore will conclude
only, that in the like case, where a Minister is called to much suffering, he
shall be an instrument of grace to much people.

2. However much people might have been first wrought upon to an outward
profession, before this much people had been savingly converted, and yet have
been a true particular visible Church, though it is very unlikely that it was so.

SECT. II.
What grace is necessary to visible Church Membership.
There now seems but one intimation more requisite for the due explication of
this last term, viz. that it is not questioned whether the visible Church may
be so considered without respect to any grace, but without respect to saving
grace, for it rather seems to imply some kind of grace is necessary, and
questioneth only of that kind which is saving.

The question then, here, is how far any kind of grace may be thought
necessare to visible Church Membership, or with what cautions we exclude that
kind of grace which is saving therefrom; wherein I shall now betake my self to
expliate my mind, as plainly as I can, in the following distinctions, and
conclude that work.

There is a True saving faith. True faith not saving.


This distinction may be grounded on those words of Bolton; Boltons deceit of
the heart. p. 73. Vid. p. 94 ad p. p. 100. in this Treatise of common faith.
they have indeed (says he, speaking of temporary believers) true faith in
their kind, namely a joyful assent to the truths of the Gospel; but not the
justifying faith of the Elect which they think they have; Neither did I ever
know any Writer of note to deny the temporary common, or hystorical, to be a
true faith in its kind; therefore when we read our Divines asserting the
saving or justifying Mark, says Mr. Perkins, here is a true says wrought by
the holy Ghost, yet not saving faith Epist. to his declaration of a man's estate.
faith to be the only true faith, we are, I humbly conceive, to understand
them cautiously: as meaning, not to exclude the other common faith from being
true also in its kind, but not true to its full profession, as to justify and
save; to which this kind of common faith does also pretend.

To apply. I conceive the true saving faith is the necessary condition of the
Church of the elect; but only of the excellency and not of the essence of the
called or the visible Church.

This true faith does respect the Subject believing. Object believing.


1. When men do truly believe what they profess, their faith is said to be
true subjectively. 2. When men do believe that which is truth, their faith is
said to be true objectively; therefore the Gospel is called the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, viz. is sensu objectivo. The first may be termed fides
formalis, and stands opposed to hypocrisy: the last fides objectiva, and stand
opposed to Heresy. The last, viz. a believing the truth is necessary to the
Churches being a Church of Christ; and the first, viz. a believing truly, to
its being truly so, and therefore both necessary to render the visible Church
truly a Church of Christ.

For though she should believe never so truly, any thing else but God and
Christ, etc. this its faith, not fixed on God, or Christ for its object, could
never constitute a Church of God on Christ. Again, though the Church should
profess all faith and truth with the greatest show imaginable, if she do not
truly believe what she thus professes, i. e. with a common or historical faith
she would only seem to men, that which indeed God knows she is not, viz.
truly a Church of Christ.

We must consider of the Church In general In some particular members. and of
their truly believing Actually. Virtually.



Accordingly, I add, that a truly believing actually, is necessarily required
to the true being of the visible Church in general: she being the pillar and
ground of truth; unless some of her members did actually know, believe, and
maintain the truth, I can hardly imagine how she could be called a true visible
Church of Christ.

Yet, I doubt not but that a virtual believing (which in a great measure may
bethought to consist, in our relation to our parents, and the Church, who do
actually believe; and in that good profession to which we are borne, and which
we still own as far as we are capable) is sufficient to render very many
particular members, truly members of the visible Church; which to deny, is to
shut the Church door upon all our children, and all that are ignorant, seeing
knowledge is necessary to actual believing. Whose right in the Church, I shall
yet largely defend hereafter. But farther

There are which Do only, not actually believe. Deny or renounce the faith.


Such as do only, not actually believe, as children, idiots, etc. may
doubtless be members of the visible Church; but I deny this privilege to all
that deny or renounce the faith, advisedly, and in fundamentals, as one not
only condemned of God, the Church, but also of himself; and if by profession,
upon design he deceives men; he gets only the name, and nothing at all of
thing, or truth of a Church member; and though men, who can only judge (...),
must admit him to the Ordinances and privileges of the Church, yet, he is but
a dog eating the childrens bread, to which he only seems to have a right,
but indeed, and truly have none.

Therefore, I grant, that men may not only live within the bounds of the
Church, but may also proceed to make profession of the faith, and seem to be
members of the visible Church, and yet be no members truly thereof, viz. when
it is in pretense or design as aforesaid, and the subject of such a profession
deny or renounce the faith, if not with their mouth, yet in the purpose and
intent of their hearts.

Yet some do Formally and directly deny the faith. Consequently and undirectly
only.


Such as do directly and formally deny the faith, or Christ, are those which in
the opinion of their mind do immediately hold quite contrary thereunto, or in
the rebellious action of their wills do directly reject and defy the same; and
both these are persons that (whatsoever their passions be) cannot be allowed,
to be truly members of the Church of Christ; as more at large hereafter.
Because of that weakness which the Philosopher neteth in men's capacities, when
he says that the common sort cannot see things which follow in in reason; an
Heretic may directly grant, and yet consequently deny the foundation of faith.
Hookers eccles. pol. p. 515. Tit. 1. 16.


But there are others* that may be said to deny the faith, or Christ, though
not so directly, yet, by consequence and indirectly; and that either in opinion
or practice; in opinion, which (as it is possible) though in it self it seem
to have no great danger in it, yet it draws in the consequences of it, some
great error in fundamentals; as the opinion of the necessity of being
circumcised in the primitive times, did, in the consequence of it, deny Christ
to be come in the flesh; in practice, which the Apostle affirms, when speaking
of wicked men, he says, They profess they know God, but in works they deny
him, being abominable and disobedient, (i. e.) though they did not deny God to
be God, or reject him as their God, in a direct and proper sense, yet, they
did, as those do, that do not know or own him, and by consequence, they did
deny him, though they directly professed him, and professed to know and own
him, as profane professors use to do in every age.

Now I humbly conceive that neither of these two latter branches are by such a
denial of the faith or of God, presently cut off from the Church thereby; or
thereby declared to be truly no Church Members; for, as it would seem a hard
censure, to reckon Aliud est fidem violare, aliud abjurare and ab r^nunciare.
such as deny the faith, only in the consequence of their opinions, with those
that directly and in very terms renounce it; so neither savours it of much
charity or indeed justice, that wicked men that directly profess the faith,
both vocally with their mouth, and really by attending on the Ordinances of
God, be equally condemned with Apostates and Heretics that raze the very
foundation of all religion, though in works they deny him.

Therefore such as stand baptized into the faith of Christ, and yet remain in
visible Communion with the Church, and do not renounce the faith of Christ,
either with their mouths, or in the intent and purpose of their hearts, cannot
only by their disobedience or wicked lives (as I shall anon labor to prove)
unchurch themselves, or declare themselves (as some would rather say) to be no
true members of the visible Church.

There are in the Church, such as 1. Seem and are not. 2. Are and seem not. 3.
Are and seem, and are none, visi, not seen. 4. Are, and seem, and are seen
also.


He that is and seems not, is a David in desertion; he that seems and is not,
is a Judas betraying with a kiss; he that is, and seems, and is not seen, is
a Saint in a cave; he that is, and seems, and is seen also, is, I presume, not
only the man savingly qualified professing the same before men; but our
ordinary professor and Churchmember, that usually attends upon visible
communion with the Church, though wanting saving grace.

The same persons in diverse respects, may seem to be what They are. They are
not.


Or the same persons may be said in one respect, to be hypocrites, and in
another respect true believers; so that, though we are wont to condemn all for
hypocrites, that profess Religion without real holiness, yet, I suppose, I
shall not err, if I say, we ought to do it, not without caution, and
limitation.

I confess, that, if not all that thus profess Religion without saving grace,
yet most of them, are hypocrites; in that they pretend, if not seem to be, what
they are not, viz. savingly qualified; and I humbly offer, whether it be not in
this sense, that Divines generally charge such professors as have no saving
grace, with the sin of Hypocrisy; even, because they pretend to have that Mr.
Perkins speaking of temporary believers on Luke 8. 13. says, these though they
are not sound, yet they are void of that gross kind of hypocrisy. Their
minds are enlightened, their hearts are endued with such faith as may bring
forth these fruits for a time* and therefore herein they dissemble not, but
rather show that which they have. His Ep. to the Reader, before his Treatise
tending unto a declaration of a man's estate.
grace and interest in Christ, or as they would say, in the true mystical
invisible Church, which indeed they have not.

But let us seriously consider, can either they, or we, with any color of
reason or justice, adjudge men to be hypocrites farther then they are so; or
for professing themselves to be what indeed they are, though also they should
profess themselves to be, what they are not; may not men be so far
illightened, as to know, and believe the Scriptures, really, and yet not be so
far sanctified, as to believe effectually to salvation? and may he not profess
this faith which he truly has, though he also profess and pretend to more?
and is he not a true believer and a true professor so far, as he has, though
false and hypocritical, in professing more? and to be accounted a true Believer
as to the Church visible, though a hypocrite as to the Church invisible.

A hypocrite is one that pretends or seems to be what he is not; but when
men that have no saving grace, pretend or seem to be visible Church Members,
relatively holy, Gods Vovenant People, common believers, etc. they pretend and
seem to be what in truth they are, therefore thus far they are no
hypocrites; but true believers, so far as they truly believe; and true men, so
far as they profess. But what they thus truly believe, and what they truly
are.

The devil is an hypocrite, while he professes himself an Angel of light, but
when he acknowledges, what he truly believes, that there is a God, and that
he is a fearful avenger of wicked spirits, and that Christ is the Son of God,
etc. in this the devil is no hypocrite; so what is good in wicked men is still
good, and what is true in them is still true, notwithstanding all the evil and
falsehood, that they are guilty of. Their hypocrisy in one respect cannot
destroy their reality and truth in any other.

In a word, a hypocrite, as such, cannot possibly be truly a member of any
Church, whether it be visible or invisible; for that which is false, as such,
can never be true; so he that pretends to saving grace and interest in the
Church invisible, if his pretense to that saving grace be false, his interest
in this invisible Church cannot be true; and likewise he that pretends to the
common faith, and yet does really renounce it, cannot possibly be a true member
of the visible Church; yet one that is an hypocrite, as to the Church
invisible, may in another sense be a true believer, and have a real interest in
the visible Church accordingly.

CHAP. IV.
Arg. 1. From the Etymology, or the Name of the Church.
HItherto of the Terms of the question, and the sense thereof; by what I have
already intimated, I am bound to adhere unto the affirmative part, which
turns it self into this Thesis.

The visibly Church may be considered to be truly a Church of Christ without
respect to saving grace.

Thus I shall now proceed (as the Lord shall assist me) to prove from these
five considerable places or heads of Argument, viz. the Etymology of the Church
visible. Causes of the Church visible. Definition of the Church visible.
Testimony on my side Absurdity on the contrary.


First, then, as method requires, we shall set down the Etymology of the
Church, and argue from it.

The name or word signifying Church in the Greek original; (which is generally
allowed to be argued from) is known to be (...), which (primitively derived
from (...), and more immediately from (...), contained in it both, Calling and
calling out; a right improvement of each of these, I presume, will help us with
its Argument.

SECT. I.
My first Argument then arises from the calling, that we find name (and is
indeed inseparable from the nature) Primum illud quod actu eccle siam
constituit, est vocatio, unde and nomen and definitionem suam accepit; ecclesia
enim est coetus hominum vocatorum. Med. 161, 162 Inter Orthodoxos, qui
ecclesiam definium coetum electorum, vel per electos intelligunt secundum
electionem vocatos, vel non ecclesiam quae actu existit. Medul. 161
of the Church thus.

Arg. 1. The Church and the called, are of equal latitude: But the called may
be considered to be truly so without respect to saving grace; therefore the
Church, etc.

That the Church and the called are of equal latitude, is not only confirmed by
the Etymology of the Church, but is the evident consent of all Divines;
wherefore Amesius tells us, that the first thing which constitutes the Church
actually is calling; and that the Church has not only its Name, but its
definition from calling; who also desineth the Church to be a company of men
called.

Yea, so strict is Amesius in this point, that he concludes the very Elect are
not of the Church either visible or invisible, but as they are called; and by
consequence, that the Church is made up of the called; as distinguished not
only to those that are not called in general, but particularly to the Elect.

Trelcatius expressly says, that external calling is the very form Forma
ecclesiam visibilem constituens est vocatio illa externa quam mediate Deus
efficit. Inst. Theol p. 223.
that constitutes the visible Church.

The assumption, viz. that the called may be considered to be truly so without
respect to saving grace; appears, 1. In the evidence of our Saviors known
words [many are called, and few chosen.] 2. Of the very nature of a true call.

1. Those whom Christ affirms to be called are truly called; let Christ be
true; but Christ affirms some to be called that They are called foro Christi,
not only foro ecclesiae.
have no saving grace; for, he says, that many are called, and but few chosen;
therefore more are called then are chosen, then some are called that are not
chosen, then some are called, that neither now have, nor yet ever shall have
any saving grace, unless the reprobates may. Therefore some are truly called
that have no saving grace; and if so, doubtless, none will stick to grant, but
that they may be considered to be truly so without respect to saving grace.

2. This appears from the nature of a true call, which does truly consist
without saving grace, as is easily manifest by a due distribution thereof.

Calling is Active or direct Passive or reflex, and this Partialis Totalis
Common. Saving.



The direct or active calling, is such a calling as is not answered by the
persons called upon; whereby, though indeed, they are called upon, they are
not, in the Scripture sense, called; this hardly any can think does render the
persons called upon, truly a Church; thus Paul called the Athenians, but yet
left them as he found them, not a Church of Christ, but of Satan, viz.
Idolaters; this call, seeing it obtains no part of its end at all, I presume
to term vocatio mefficax, or as Master Baxter has well Englished, The calling
which is common to Pagans is vocation uneffectual.

The reflex or passive calling is such as terminates effectually in the persons
called upon; which is, when persons both hear and answer the word calling;
suffering themselves to be called and brought unto God thereby; this in
general, I presume, to term effectual calling, as it stands in opposition to
the former call, which is not at all effectual; and also as this shows it
self, most exactly and pr^fitably effectual for its most direct and pr^per end,
a calling and gathering a people to God.

Indeed, this which I term effectual calling is twofold; it being effectual,
either only in common; or also in saving effects. The first, to wit, that
calling, which only reaches unto common effects, is that by which persons are
called out of the world, to renounce all false Gods, and to profess the true
God, according to the true Religion, and thus to become truly members of the
visible Church, and of the number of the many called in the Text; and
therefore, I humbly desire, that two things may be here noted. 1. That though
some please to term this kind of call partialis, it must only be understood
with respeact to that other saving work, which belongs to the next branch of
the distribution, and not at all with respect to the work specified, or the
calling, to be truly members of the visible Church; which doubtless is
perfectly and totally done by the true and genuine efficacy of this which we
term a common call. Secondly, let it be further noted, therefore, that when we
say this common call is effectual to common effects, we mean only such
effects, as are common to the Elect and Reprobate, but not common to the Church
and the world, but special and peculiar to the Church alone, wherein more are
called then are elected.

The second sort of effectual calling, to wit, that which works saving
effects; is indeed, though not, more truly effectually, yet more gradually,
and further, if not specifically more, effectual then the former; for it
brings men not an ecclesiastical, but also to a mystical and saving union
with Jesus Christ, and by that which is opposed to the common faith, which is
said to be wrought by the former common call, and is usually called justifying
or saving faith; which is called by those which term the call partialis,
vocatio totalis, and is, as I conceive, plainly implied in the chosen, in the
text forecited; few are chosen, i. e. few are called (as Amesius expresses
it) according to election.

The distribution being thus laid, two things are briefly to be done in order
to a fit application thereof, and then I have ended this first Argument.

1. To Apologize for this (which to some may seem a new) sense of the common
distinction of calling into effectual and ineffectual.

2. To evince this common call to be truly a call.

For the first of these, the distribution forelaid, seeming so rational to my
self, and so adequate to the meaning, if not to the very terms of most
Divines, I hope little need be said yet.

1. I must confess it is somewhat rare for Divines, to term the common
calling effectual calling; yet, I presume, it is as seldom termed ineffectual.
Trelcatius gives the term efficax only unto the saving call; yet he does not
term the common call (opposed by himself in the very same place unto the
saving, and as he styles it effectual call) in efficax.

2. Yea, though Trelcatius does not term this common call efficax, he does
evidently imply that it may be lawfully termed so; he tells us that externa
vocatio is that quam mediate Deus efficit; Now if this common or external call
be that which does efficere, it may doubtless be properly said to be
effectual; yea, more Instit. p. 114.
plainly in another place, he teaches, that efficacitas vocationis est duplex,
una salutaris, electorum propria: Altera non salutaris, sed praevia secundum
ordinem communem, and ad vocatos communiter spectans; so that there is an
efficacy in the common call which is not saving, and therefore this common call
is efficax.

3. However a Learned Author of our own, viz. Reverend Master Baxter has
authorized it for me; it was noted before Apol. p. 88.
that he allowed us the former branch of the distinction, viz. vocation
un^ffectual, as common to Pagans; and again in terminis, he affords the latter,
viz. vocation which is effectual only to bring men to an outward profession,
which he also says is larger then Election.

4. Lastly, I acknowledge, it is the sense of the distinction, and not the terms
I contest for; and if I may be granted that, let these be censured as my reader
pleases.

2. Now that this external or more properly common call, is truly a call; and
that those that are called therewith are truly called, though not savingly
appears thus.

(1.) This was the called which our Savior affirms the many were called
withal. For, first, these were called not with the calling common to Heathens
only, nor with that calling which is proper to the Elect, therefore they were
called according to that only branch remaining, viz. the common effectual call,
which brought them into the visible Church.

1. This Call cannot be meant of the uneffectual call common to Heathens, these
words of Christ [many are called] are the close of two Parables, Matthew. 20. 16.
and 22. 14. the one of laborers called to the vineyard, the other of guests
called to the feast; and in both, applied to them that answered to the call;
that came and labored in the vineyard; that came with other bidden ones to
the feast, and not to those that refused.

2. Neither yet can it be meant of the saving effectual Call, for we see it is
applied by Christ, unto more then are capable of saving vocation, more then are
Elected, as before was noted; therefore it must needs be meant of that which is
termed an effectual call opposed to that which is ineffectual; and a common
call, opposed to that which is more then common, viz. saving.

(2.) This must needs be truly a call, because it is the same call which the
Elect partake of. I grant the Elect partake of an higher call, viz. a saving,
which the reprobate never enjoy; yet the Elect have the same call which the
reprobate have; as seems clearly to be collected from the words before us; for
the few chosen are apparently included in the many called; they were all
called, and but few of them chosen.

(3.) This common Call is a true effect, therefore also truly a call: yea, a
divine effect, a work of God himself, and that he is Vocatio communis est actio
Dei Instit. p. 109
pleased to efficere, as Trelcatius speaks, who further and more expressly
terms it Gods action, therefore doubtless not counterfeit, but true in its
kind.

4. This common call is also a true cause, and therefore it must needs prove it
self to have a true being, to be truly a call in its kind: for nihil agit
quod non est. It is a true cause, for it works true effects: persons by this
common call are truly brought out of the world of infidels, and united to the
visible people and Church of God; to own and profess Jesus Christ, to attend
upon the ways and Ordinances of his worship, to see some necessity of faith
and repentance, and of yielding obedience to the Gospel of Christ, as
Trelcatius aptly asserts, vocatio communis est Actio Dei gratiosa qua homines
-- ab infidelitate ad fidem evecat. Instit. p. 109.


(5.) In this common call are both the necessary parts of a Duo enim haec
concurrere necesse est ut vocatio sit efficax: vocationem Dei and nostram ad
illam vocationem (...) seu relationem. p. 222.
true Call, truly and really, therefore the totum also. Trelcatius teaches,
that two things concur to make a call effectual or true; the call on Gods
part, and the answer on ours; so that all those, that do answer the call
wherewith God calls them truly and really in a^y measure, are so far truly
and really called of God, though not fully and savingly as the Elect regenerate
are.

But now none can doubt but that men by this common call alone, may and do
answer the call of God truly and really in a great measure as before is noted;
therefore the common call is truly and really such.

CHAP. V.
Arg. 2. From the Etymology or the name of the Church.
WE now descend to the second Argument offered us from Ecclesia ab (...).
the name of the Church, as it is more immediately derived from (...), and
denotes a calling out.

But, that we may lay the foundation well, before we begin to build, there are
three things to be truly premised, before we fix the Argument.

1. That this Etymology of the word, does not in the least contradict, but most
evidently perfect and complete the former; for by the former the Church is
concluded to be called, in a general and simple sense; and by this, the Church,
which was thus before said to be called, is, in a more strict, close, and
respective sense* said to be called out; where we have plainly intimated to us,
that there is some special term, place, or state, out of which, or from which,
it is called.

2. That this Etymology is generally allowed by those that we Etymologice
ecclesia est coetus publica^ autoritate evocatus. de eccles. p. 214.
find most accurate upon this subject. Etymologice (says Trelcatius) the
Church is a company called out by public authority; and pasor, does not only
derive (...) from (...), evoco, but even renders the word (...) in Latin, by
Caetus Evocatus, which is in plain English, a company called out.

3. That this calling out, which we find in the name of the Church, does not
so properly or exactly note the inward state from which, as the outward caetus,
or society* out of which it is called; which will be easily granted me to be
the world; therefore we find the Church set in opposition to the world, out of
which, and not to sin, darkness, or Satan, from which we are called,
according to that of our Savior. I have chosen you, (that is, by calling, as
we know he did his Disciples) out of the John 15, 19
world.

Whence (as the Learned Master Baxter, seals with a certainly) all Divines in
their definitions of the Church are agreed, that it is a society of persons
separated from the world to God, or called Against Tombs
out of the world; and therefore no society, the calling of whose members, has
not the world for its term from which, has persons Nullus coetus cujus
membrorum vocatio non habet mundum terminum aquo, habet sanct^ vo^atos, pro
proxima mate^ia. Norton. in ^e^p. ad totam. quest. syll^g. p. 1^5.
of a holy calling, for its next matter; or, by consequence can be a true
Church; as another argues, who cannot be imagined possibly partial to my cause,
namely, that learned and Scholastical Divine, Reverend Master Norton of New
England.

These things thus premised, the Argument hence is this.

As the visible Church may be considered to be called out of the world, so it
may be considered to be a Church of Christ. What has been said has put this
out of doubt.

But the visible Church may be considered to be truly called out of the world,
without any respect to saving grace.

Therefore, the visible Church may be considered to be truly a Church of
Christ, without respect to saving grace.

The minor here which is all that is left questionable, is easily evident if we
distinguish of the world, as we are wont to distinguish of the Church, viz. to
be visible and invisible; the visible world is the world of infidels, and such
as openly detest the true Messiah; the invisible world is the world of ungodly,
which being, as tares amidst the what of the godly, cannot be discerned by men.
The first is opposed to the visible Church, the latter to the invisible; out of
the visible world, the visible Church is called, and out of the invisible
world, the invisible Church, or the Church of the saved, is called.

Again, the visible Church is, as truly called out of the visible world of
Pagans and Infidels, and such as live without the pale of the Church, as the
Church of the saved is called out of the world of the ungodly; does not the eye
of the whole world see this, and bear witness to it? viz. that the visible
Church, is, by the calling of God, in this sense effectually, (in that it is
really) separated Vocatio communis -- ab infide. litate ad fidem evocat. Trel.
ut supra.
from, and stands in distinction, and opposition unto, the whole world of
Infidels, Pagans, Turks, and Jews, and all other societies and parties of men
in the world, as the called of God, his lot and portion, and peculiar people;
all which, and a great deal more Master Baxter (as well as many others) is
pleased to acknowledge, that the Scriptures attribute to the visible Church.

CHAP. VI.
Arg. From the visible Church, in its causes; and first, as it is of God.
HItherto of the quid nominis; proceed we now to the quid Rei; and to seek for
that thing, and nature and truth of being in the Church, which the name, we
have found, does import.

I shall put my self and reader into the way of this search, by an offer of
this general Argument taken from the causes of the visible Church.

As we may consider the causes of any thing, so we may consider the thing it
self.

But we may consider the causes of this Church to be real, causes without
respect to saving grace.

Therefore the Church to be truly a Church, without respect to saving grace.

I think, the major will not be questioned by any; seeing whatsoever any thing
is in it self, it is the same, first in its causes; Quicquid est in effectu,
prae existit in causis. Causatum quod ex causa suum esse habet.
yea, the very definition of the effect is, that it is but the result, or that
which has its very self of the cause, and depends by its cause; and therefore
it is called effectum, or a thing done, or standing as it is, by it cause, and
causalum, that is a thing caused, that is such a thing, as is Causalitas sive
causatio est influxus ille, seu concursus, quo unaquaequc causa in suo genere
actu influit in effectum, Suar^z
no more a thing, then what it has from its cause, or as it is caused; and
causality or causation (which is but the formal reason of the cause) is nothing
else but that Influx, or concurrence whereby every cause, in its own kind,
does actually flow into the effect.

The minor only then rests upon proof, viz. That the visible Church may be
considered to have its true and real causes without respect to saving grace;
which I shall labor to maintain, by a particular induction and examination of
the several causes of the visible Church in order; the efficient, the end, the
matter and form thereof.

Here, now, are two things to be jointly enquired after. First, what these
causes are. Secondly, whether they may be considered to be real causes of the
visible Church, without respect to saving grace;

Let us first then begin to consider the efficient cause of the visible Church,
thus; namely, what it is, and what kind of effects it works, without respect
to saving grace.

1. The efficient cause of the visible Church is Principal. Instrumental.


The principal efficient, of the visible Church, is secundum. Efficient.
Constitutionem. Ordinationem.


The principal efficient, in the constitution of the Church, is God; Romans 2. 29.
in the administration or ordination of it, is Christ, thus God Romans 12. 5 1
Cor. 3. 11 Col. 1. 18.
is properly the author; and Christ is properly the head of the Church.

The instrumental cause of the Church, especially in its constitution Acts 2.
41 2 Pet. 2 23 1 Timothy 2. 15
is the preaching of the word; for how can they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard, and how can they hear without a preacher; this distribution
needs no proof, seeing it is generally allowed.

2. Let us, now, come to our task, and examine whether these efficient causes,
may not be considered to have a real influence into the visible Church, which
yet does not include saving grace.

As for the instrument, the preaching of the word, we need not insist
particularly thereupon; partly because the instrument is but subordinate to its
principal: efficient in the same operation; and therefore, if the work of
principal efficient be real, so is, doubtless, the same work relating to the
instrument of it; and partly, because the influence of this instrumental cause,
the preaching of the word, into the constitution of the visible Church, is
reserved to be largely handled, in answer to a great objection against cur
Churches in England at the latter end of this discourse.

Therefore we have but two things here before us, whether God may be considered
to be truly the Author; or Christ to be truly the head of the visible
Church; without respect to saving grace; and of these in order, I shall humbly
signify my opinion, by forming the same into Arguments.

The Argument from God, as the Author of the visible Church.

If God, in the constitution of the visible Church, by the preaching of the
Word, may be considered really to effect the same, without the bestowing of
saving grace, then he may; without doubt, be considered to be the real Author
of the visible Church without respect to saving grace.

But, now God in the constitution of the Church, by the preaching of the word
may be considered, really to effect the same, without the bestowing of saving
grace.

Here is nothing to be interposed, but these four things; Mr. Perk. speaking
of temporal believers, says. 1. They have knowledge. 2. they give assent. 3.
they give assent to the Covenant of Grace. 4. They are persuaded in a general
manner, that God will perform his promises to the members of his Church. Ep. to
his declar. of a man estate. And ads, Mark, here is a true faith wrought by the
holy Ghost yet not saving faith.
either,

First, that the calling, whereby men are brought to leave the world, to
renounce Idols, to embrace the true religion, Hystorically to believe the
Gospel, to see a necessity of depending on Christ, repentance and obedience to
salvation, are no real works, but this would be against common sense; for we
see the contrary with our eyes.

Or secondly, that these common works are also saving works; but this would be
against experience; which sadly tells us, that men may go so far, and yet no
further in the way to heaven, or else against the doctrine of perseverance.

Or, Thirdly, that these common graces do not really constitute a visible
Church, but this would be against what we have formerly proved.

Or, Fourthly, and lastly, that God is not the worker of these common effects
by his Word, which would indeed be against Religion.

I shall, therefore, conclude this Argument with those known and pertinent
words of Amesius; hence (says he) even visible Hinc ecclesiae etiam visibiles
and particulares, ratione fidei quam profiteutur, rect e dicun tur esse in Deo
paTre and in domino Jesu Christo. 1 These. 1. 1. 2 These. 1. 1. Medul. p. 168.
and particular Churches, by reason of the faith which they profess (as also I
might add by reason of the grace which they have received from God) are
rightly said to be in God; he does not say ratione fidei qua, but ratione fidei
quam profitentur, that being the faith of God which they profess, through the
work of the common grace of God, upon them; they are recte, or truly said to
be in God, without any further consideration of any saving grace, by which they
believe, received from him.

CHAP. VII.
The Argument from Christ as the head of the visible Church.
THe second Argument from the efficient is taken from Christ as the cause
efficient of the visible Church according to dispensation, or as he is the head
thereof. Thus,

Christ, may be considered to be truly the head of the visible Church without
respect to saving influence; therefore, the visible Church may be considered to
be truly his body without respect to saving grace.

The reason of the connection, here, is most evident; but I must needs confess,
that the antecedent requires, as well a modest inquisition, as strong
demonstration; seeing it is easily noted to cross many plain expressions of
eminent Divines.

In this antecedent, there are two distinct branches, First, that Christ is the
head of the visible Church, this passes. Secondly, that he may be so
considered without [necessary] respect to saving influence, this is my task;
which I shall humbly undertake after I have gotten a fair understanding with
my reader therein.

For I desire, it may be heeded, that I do not affirm, that Jesus Christ does
perform the office of a head fully, without saving influence, but (as it is
expressed) truly (i. e.) in some measure truly.

2. It may be also observed, that, truly, here, stands not in opposition to
mystically, but to falsely, or to seemingly only; for though our Divines do
usually mean by the mystical body, the Church invisible, yet doubtless Master
Cotton (as is well noted of him by others also) does not speak improperly, when
he terms a particular visible Church, a mystical body; and if that be
granted, the visible Church, though not particular, may also challenge the same
title; and if the visible Church be granted to be the mystical body of Christ,
then Christ may be said to be its mystical head. Besides, if Christ be indeed
the head of the visible Church, as none do doubt; and if he be not the head
thereof, as it is Physically or Mathematically taken, which none will affirm,
who can deny but that he is so Mystically.

3. Further may it be noted, that it is not said, that Christ does perform the
office of an head to the Church, truly without saving influence, in any other
consideration, but as it is the visible Church; for if any will assert a Church
invisible, I am not bound at all, to follow him, and say that this Church
invisible, also, has true influence from its head, Christ, which is not
saving; a thing not to be imagined.

4. Lastly, neither do I offer to say, that Christ is the head of his body
visible, without saving influence; but that he may be so considered, without
respect thereunto; seeing there are influences not saving. which yet descend
from Christ, as the head upon his body, the Church; and upon many of the
members thereof that shall never be saved; and this is enough for my present
purpose, because in whatsoever sense, Christ may be said to leave the influence
of a head upon his Church; the Church may in the same sense, be said to be his
body; and if it shall truly be made to appear, that Christ does really
perform the office of the head, when he does not give saving grace, it will
thence easily follow, of it self, that the Church may be conside^ed to be
truly his body, without respect thereunto.

Now, that Christ may be considered to be thus truly the head of the visible
Church, without respect to saving grace, I think, appears thus.

Arg. 1. Christ truly dispenses gifts and graces (not saving) to the visible
Church, and to many particular members thereof, head: therefore he may be
considered to be truly the head of the visible Church, without respect to
saving influence.

The Antecedent (which is, alone, to be proved) has three parts.

1. That Christ does truly dispense gifts and graces not saving to the visible
Church, which none that know, what the gifts of prayer, preaching, healing,
etc. or what the graces of illumination, conviction, common faith, and common
love, are, will offer to deny.

2. That Christ bestows these, both, gifts and graces, upon some particular
members of the visible Church, which shall never be saved; this also will be
easily granted me. 1. Concerngifts, in Judas, and in those that are reserved to
cry out another day, we have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name we have
Mat. 7. 22
cast out devils; and, Secondly, concerning graces, if we but once shall think
upon that sad catalogue, the Apostle records, Heb. 6 4, 5, 6.

3. That Christ bestows these gifts and graces, not saving, Profession of
says before a visible Church uniteth to Christ as head of the visible Church,
whether the person be sincere or no cobbet of Inf. Bapt. p. 57.
as a head which is also very evident. 1. Because they are gifts and graces
abound in the Church alone. 2. Because they are conveyed to the Church by the
dispensation of Ordinances, which is the dispensation of Christ, as head. 3.
Because, the Scripture it self has noted them, to be the proper work of the
spirit of Christ, which is peculiarly designed and sent to do the work of
Christ, as head; gifts are so, there are diversities of gifts, but the same
spirit, that gives them all; graces are so too, for the spirit is to convince
the world of sin, etc. and those that were enlightened, and had tasted the
good Word of God, and the powers of the world to come by common grace, they, as
the text adds, were made partakers of the holy Ghost. 4. Because these gifts
and graces, are most properly reducible to the work of Christ's offices, which
he dispenses as head, gifts to his prophetical, and graces to his Priestly and
Kingly office.

Arg. 2. The members of the visible Church may be considered members of Christ,
without respect to saving grace; therefore, Christ may be also considered to be
truly the head of the visible Church, without respect thereunto; the
consequence is obvious.

The Antecedent, viz. that members of the visible Church may be considered, to
be truly members of Christ without respect to saving grace, appears. 1.
Because the members of the visible Church, may be considered to be truly
obj^cts of discipline, truly called to the Ministry, and truly baptized,
without respect to saving grace.

1. The members of the visible Church may be considered to be truly objects of
discipline; without respect to saving grace; 1 Cor. 5.
unless fornication, railing, drunkenness, covetousness, malice,
wickedness, or scandal as such for which discipline is properly appointed,
carry respect to saving grace; or those that are about dispense the rod, should
first consider whether the fault may consist with grace, or a saving condition,
and otherwise not to lash therewith.

Therefore it will follow that the members of the visible Church may be
considered to be truly members of Christ, without respect to saving grace. For,

(1.) All discipline is truly a part of the administration of Christ, as Head
of the Church, it being truly appointed by himself; to be dispensed by such as
stand in his stead, in the Church; Quia vero tam efficaciter urget obedientiam
er ga Christum, idcirco non s^ne ratione singulari magna pars regni Christi
preut visibiliter ecclesiam regit, ab optimis theologis in ista disciplina
colocatur. Medul. p. 202
to be dispensed by them in his Name alone; to be made effectual by his power
alone; and lastly, it being so urgent a means of obedience to his Gospel.
Wherefore as Amesius adds, is not without singular reason, according to the
method of our best Divines, reputed a great and special part of the Kingdom of
Christ, which all will grant belongs to him as Head of the Church.

(2.) The objects on whom discipline is to be exercised, or granted by all to
be members of the Church, and consequently of Christ; for as we have said,
discipline is part of his dispensation as head, and the influence of the head
is not beyond the body; Certainly, Christ judges none with discipline, but
such as the Church ought to judge; now the Church ought to judge none, but
those that are within, for those that are without God 1 Cor. 5. 12, 13
judges; Within and without what? but the Church? and what is the Church but
the body of Christ? therefore Amesius exactly Personae circa quas exerceri
debet, sunt membra ecclesiarum visibilium insti tutarum, 1 Cor. 5 11. and non a
lii, v. 12. Med. p 201. John 6. 70.
says, that persons about whom discipline ought to be exercised are members of
visible instituted Churches, and none other.

2. Persons may be considered to be truly called to the work of the Ministry
without respect to saving grace; for Judas was truly called to the work of the
Ministry, as is undeniable insinuated by that question of our Savior [have not
I chosen you twelve?] (i. e.) have not, I my self put you twelve into my
Ministry? yet it is known that Judas was not savingly called to be a member of
Christ, as the next words added by our Savior note, [and one of you is a
Devil] which our Savior, doubtless knew, when he first chose him, and would
never have chose him, had saving grace been essential to a true and lawful call
to the Ministry.

Therefore, it hence also follows, that persons may be considered to be truly
members of Christ, without respect to saving grace; for can any one possibly
think, that Christ would choose an infidel remaining such, to rule his Church?
or make him an officer over, that is not one, of his people? or put him into
the place of the steward of his house, whom he yet has not, and whom he never
intends to put into his house? who doubts, but that he that is a Ruler,
Officer, or Steward over the Church, people, or house of Christ, is also a
member thereof, and much more? and that he that is a member of the Church,
people, and house of Christ is also a member of Christ himself?

3. Persons may be considered to be truly baptized without respect unto saving
grace; for persons are truly, because lawfully baptized, in their infant
state, unto the consideration of their Covenant-holinesse, and not the
supposition of their personal Si ullius gratiae sunt participes, fit illud vi
faederis gratiae, atque adeo and foedus and primum foederis sigillum adipsos
etiam pertinet.
saving grace; for, as Ames teaches us, if they are partakers of any grace, it
is done by force of the Covenant of grace, and thus both the Covenant and the
first seal of the Covenant belongs also to them, not as having true grace, but
as borne to God, and in Covenant with him by their parents, and if it be so
with us when infants, I shall humbly ask anon why not so afterward? and in
our adult estate? if born Christians, and if we do not renounce Christianity.

Then hence it also follows, that persons may be considered to be truly
members of Christ, without respect to saving grace; for into what are persons
baptized, but into the body of Christ? 1 Cor. 12. 13. yea, and though
afterward, they prove ungodly, yet are they dealt with both here and hereafter
as within, and as children of the Kingdom here, they have punishment peculiar
to the subjects and members of Christ, viz. to be cast out, as before; if after
admonition, they remain obstinate, then, if they repent, and are re-accepted,
into communion with the Church, they are still dealt with as within, and are
not required to be rebaptized; and if they shall die in their wickedness;
they shall be judged hereafter and proceeded against, not as the children of
this world, but as the children of the kingdom; but of this more largely
hereafter, as we shall have abundant occasion, now accept of this short touch.

Arg. 3. Christ is considered under all those many other metaphors given him in
Scripture, to stand in relation to the visible Church, without respect to
saving grace; therefore also under this of a Head. The consequence cannot be
denied, seeing he is still but the same thing, the same mediator, and
represented under the same offices by all those various metaphors which the
Scripture gives him; and therefore, there is the same reason for one and all,
and an equal extent in the meaning and application of them all; Now, that
Christ is considered under all those many other Metaphors given him in
Scripture to stand in relation to the visible Church without respect to saving
grace, appears by induction.

1. As he is a King, he has subjects, bad and good; some to be blessed, but
some to be cursed at the great day, yet both children of the Kingdom.

2. As he is a Master, he has some faithful, and some slothful, yet both his
servants.

3. An Husbandman, that has tares as well as corn, and both in his field;
chafe, as well a wheat, and both in the barn.

4. A Fisher, that has fish that is bad as well as good, yet both in the net.

5. A Vine, that has some branches that bring forth much fruit, and yet
others, that bring forth no fruit, and yet both in him. John 15. 2


6. A Father, that has rebellicus as well as dutiful children; yet both
children. Isa. 1. 2.


7. A Housekeeper that has vessels, some to honor, some to dishonor, yet
both vessels, and within the house.

8. A bridegroom, that has Vrgins to attend him, some with oil in their
Lamps, and some with none, yet both Virgins; therefore why not such a head, as
has some members sound and others rotten, and yet both related, that is,
mystically united to him.

There are two special objections against this relation of wicked men to
Christ; which I hold my self bound to labor to salve, before I pass on.

Object. 1. The first is taken from the metaphorical terms of body and head,
and may be formed thus. That member which has not life in it self, though it
be yet united to the body is not truly a member of that body; unde equivoce
agunt membra tribui cadaveribus, as Shibler says. But wicked men have no life
in themselves; therefore they are not truly but only aequivocally members of
the body of Christ.

Answ. 1. To the proposition which has first its proper, and secondly, its
metaphorical sense. I allow it in its proper, but I deny it in its metaphorical
sense, or in this rigid application In omni parabola -- Hoc tenendum est ut
utamur parabolis, tanquam picta tabella. -- Itaque reprehendenda est illa
anxiet as and sollicitudoeorum qui in parabolis Christi omnia, student resccare
ad vivum, quod est non interpretari sed vexant Camero. praelect. in Mat. 18. 8.
of it.

It is a general complaint, by those that see how much it is abused, That men
are apt to receive apprehensions about the mystical union betwixt Christ and
his members, from the natural union betwixt the natural head and body.
Certainly a metaphor may be pressed to death, so far as the Scriptures apply
this metaphor of head and members, to Christ and his Church, we may safely
venture; but further, though it may be true, it will not bear an argument.

That I have good ground, thus to except against the proposition, I leave, in
one word, to the determination of all, but Anabaptists; for, if this be a true
proposition, that, none can be truly a member of the body of Christ, that has
not spiritual life in himself; then of necessity it follows, that the
children of the holiest parents in the world, are not to be accounted truly
members of the body of Christ, from their parents holiness, seeing that is the
life that is in the parent, and is not inhering in the child* but only
relative to it; the child has not this life in its self but in another, and
therefore, according to this proposition it is not a true, but only an
aequivocal member of Christ, if we but once grant, in the sense intended, that
it is an essential requisite to every member, ut vitam habeat in se, that it
Infantes nati in ecclesia, sunt etiam de ecclesia, contra anabaplistas Ursin.
have life in it self; and yet we know that it is the general opinion, that
ch^ldren born in the Church, are also of the Church, against the Anabaptists.

Answ. 2. But we may let the Metaphor hold, if we distinguish of life in the
minor; which may with favor of my reader, be conceived to be such as is a
necessary requisite to visible Church Membership: or such as is a necessary
requisite to saving or (if you had rather) invisible Church Membership; if you
please you may call the first an ecclesiastical, or political life; the last, a
saving or a spiritual life.

If the objection, meaning in the minor, the first of these, then I deny it,
viz. that wicked men have no life in themselves; for it is very evident, that
wicked men have so much life in themselves (if any be requisite) as is
essential to visible Church membership. I confess, life, is somewhat unusually
attributed to wicked men, and to ascribe it to them, as such, is a
contradiction; seeing, quatenus wicked, they are dead; yet seeing, they are to
be considered in a double respect, 1. As wicked men in nature. 2. As holy men
in state and condition; wicked men inherently, holy men adherently; wicked men
habitually, holy men relatively, holy by Covenant, by separation, dedication,
obligation, and profession, though they be dead indeed, in the first sense, why
may not they be truly said to be alive in the second? if holiness and life be
equivolent here, as must needs be granted; and this holiness of separation to
God by Covenant and Baptism, and continued profession, be a real thing, as
Camero says, and I think, hitherto, has hardly been denied in terminis.

Such, are doubtless, Christians, and not so far alienated from the life of
God, as the Gentiles, or Heathens are; they are not now, Ephesians. 4. 18.
without Christ, or aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel, or strangers to the
Covenants of promise, having no hope, or without God Ephesians. ^. 12.
in the world. which is the Scripture-description of such, as are in a Gentile
condition, viz. out of the verge and pale of the visible Church.

Yea, I have one, and he an author not to be contemned, considering what
pains he took in the controversy, that says expressly that wicked men are
not only members of the Church in the general, but as the Church is, the body
of Christ, and that they have the life of true members in them; his words are
these.

Such may be, and and are of the visible Church, who only outwardly submit
themselves to the true worship of God, though they be not true worshippers;
this profession of the true religion and submission, I speak of, is all in all
in this case; it is that which gives life and being to every member united to
his body; so, as whosoever, makes this profession and uses this submission
being knit to this body, and not cut off by excommunication, is in and of the
visible Church. Dayrel of the Church. page 36.

But, if life, here, be intended to signify such; as is essential to ones
being a member of the Church of the saved, as it seems to be.

I answer, that either (unless it be proved that the Church visible, and the
Church of the saved are of equal latitude, which I wholly despair to see) there
are four terms in the argument, the major intending the visible, and the minor
the invisible Church: or else there is the fallacy termed ignoratio elenchi
discovered in it, the conclusion being only that life is essential to a member
of the Church of the saved, which was never questioned, when it should (as
easily appears) have been that this life is also necessary to visible
Church Membership, to which it carries no aim at all

Object. 2. The second great objection, against this Argument is taken from
those known words of Zanchie, de eccles. 534. Membra sunt Satanae non Christi.
Hypocrites and reprobates are members of Satan, and therefore they can be no
members of Christ.

Answ. In answer hereunto, I shall first consider the sense of Zanchy in these
words, and then his reason.

1. I conceive that Zanchy, did not intend, by these words, that they were not
members of the visible, but of the invisible Church; which I have observed to
be the general meaning of our reformed Divines, when they speak of the members
of Christ, insomuch, that there is almost ground to think for one that is well
accustomed to their writing; they distinguish betwixt the members of the
visible Church, and the members of Christ; as they also generally attribute,
two other terms, viz. Catholic and Mystical, as if they were peculiar to the
Church invisible; whereas, I presume, hardly any of those same Divines, but
would, upon a little consideration thereof, allow all the three, viz. Mystical,
Catholic, and members of Christ, unto the visible Church also; for if the
visible Church be not a natural, it is a Mystical body; and if it be unversal,
which they did not deny, it must needs be Catholic, and if it be not the body
of Christ, whose is it? yet, I say, it is of most easy observation, that
seldom, either of the three, are given by them to the visible Church, and
therefore not likely to be so here; and if he meant of the Church invisible,
it is nothing to our question.

Again, another reason why Zanchy may be thought here, to speak only of the
Church invisible, offers it self from the scope of the place; for he is
evidently striking at the Papists excessive error, touching the members of the
Romish Church, as if every one that had the honor to be a member thereof, was
thereby a member of the Church of the saved, which Zanchy seems to
anticipate, as other our Divines in the like case, asserting that there are
reprobates and hypocrites in the visible Church, and these are not to be thence
concluded, to be real members of Christ's (invisible, mystical) body, or in a
state of salvation; and thus membra sunt satanae non Christi, quoting that
place, that is seldom, if ever interpreted of the members of the visible
Church, viz. they were not of us, 1 John 2. 19. for confirmation thereof, and
that his secret bent is against the Papist, as I have said, is more then
intimated by his next words, quicunque spiritum habent non Christi sed
Antichristi.

Thus much for his sense; now for his reason here, that one cannot be both a
member of Christ, and a member of Satan; but wicked men are members of Satan.

I answer. 1. By concession; for it is most true, one cannot be both a member
of Christ, and a member of Satan, at the same time, and in the same respect,
one cannot be a member of Christ's Is it then possible that the self same men
should belong both to the Synagogue of Satan and to the Church of Jesus Christ?
Unto the Church which is the body mystical not possible; howbeit of the visible
body of Jesus Christ, etc. Hook. eccles. polit. p. 84.
visible body, and of Satan's visible body, that is a Christian, and an infidel,
a believer and an unbeleever, at the same time and in the same respect; this is
a plain contradiction.

But, Secondly, by way of exception. I answer further, that the same person,
may at the very same instant of time, be both a member of Christ, and a member
of Satan in diverse respects; he may be a member of Satan internally, and a
member of Christ externally, and yet, both, really; a member of Satan
habitually, a member of Christ relatively, a member of Satan by obedience, a
member of Christ by profession, a member of Christ by Covenant, a member of
Satan by service. Lastly, a member of Christ his visible Kingdom, and a member
of Satan's invisible Kingdom; and both really and truly so; as a man that is
openly and really the husband of an honest wife, may yet the member of an
harlot, by a close and reserved course of uncleanness with her; even so, one
that is really and openly in Covenant with Christ, and truly a member of his
body, may yet, by a secret course of unfaithfulness to him, be also a member
of Satan.

CHAP. VIII.
The Argument from the End of the visible Church.
HItherto of the efficient causes of the Church, and the Arguments thence
arising; next, proceed we to the end thereof, and argue thus.

As a thing may be considered to have its end; so it may be (...). Plut. Nihil
potest esse causa nisi in quantum est ens Si medium non existit, non producitur
finis.
considered to have its being; for nothing can be further a cause then it has
a being; therefore not negation or privation an possibly be a cause of a real
and positive effect, but that which is a cause of a real and positive effect,
must needs be something real and positive in it self. 2. If the means do not
exist, the end is not produced, and therefore if the end be produced, the means
is thereby certainly discoved to have its existence.

But now, the visible Church may be considered, truly and really to have its
end, without respect to saving grace; therefore, also its being.

There are three things which may tend, by a brief dispatch to the clearing of
this Assumption. 1. To assign the ends of the visible Church. 2. To prove the
same to be real and proper ends therefore. 3. To show that the visible Church,
as it is a means thereof, may be considered without respect to saving grace.

First, the ends of the visible Church, is ultimately the glory of God in the
world; and more immediately, his worship in the world; the great means of the
former, viz. his glory, as Szegedine exactly teaches, the end of the Church is
the true Finalis causa ecclesiae est verus Dei cultus: ordinata enim est
ecclesia, ad verum Dei cultum ad glorificandum Deum. Szeged p. 2^6 Theol.
Instit. p. 215. Quae causa finalis ecclesiae? verus Dei cultus Bucan. de eccl.
lo. 441. p. 477.
worship of God; for the Church is ordained for the true worship of God, that
he might be glorified; which Trelcatius has handsomely couched together,
saying that the visible Church is instituted ad cultum gloria Dei, for the
worship of the glory of God; now, as that which is suborainate hereunto, the
visible Church is made the seat and subject of all visible administrations;
whereby, also, the wicked in the Church may be left without excuse, the Elect,
converted; the converted, edified; the visible Kingdom of the Devil vanquished;
Christ's visible Kingdom advanced, and the Nations of the earth openly gained to
a visible subjection thereunto in due season.

Secondly, these are the real uses, and proper ends of the visible Church. For,

1. The visible Church, as such, has a near aptness and kindlinesse Medium
est aptum and utile fini.
in it, and is per se, and sua natura, useful hereunto, viz. for the keeping
and upholding the glory and worship of God in the world, as none will deny;
seeing God is herein truly owned, visibly professed, submitted unto, obeyed,
and worshipped according to his will, and that with such a smooth and easy
tendency as naturally Quod sua natura utile est ad aliquid efficiendum propter
illud esse videtur.
^ows from the visible Church as such. Now it is a maxim, that that which is
apt of it self, and according to its own free nature for the effecting of any
thing, seems to have its being for that very thing, and by consequence, that
thing is truly and properly the end thereof.

2. The visible Church, as such, is necessary for the obtaining of these ends;
without it, what glory would redound to God in the world, or what worship?
where, else, would visible Ordinances be fixed and dispensed? how would the
visible Kingdom of Christ be advanced; the visible Kingdom of Satan
subverted? How would hypocrites in the Church be inexcusably judged, or the
Elect be ordinarily saved; if there were no visible Church? Quod alio quo piam
indiget, vt acquiratur, hujus finis est. Sin^ quo quicquam existere non potest
in natura, id est illi necessarium, atque propter illud factum.
Now the Rule is, that, that which wants another thing for its own attaining,
is the end of that other thing; but these particulars want the visible Church
for their obtaining; therefore they are the ends thereof; which is evidently
grounded by Scaliger, upon that necessity, that there is of the means in order
to the end, which is the thing I am urging; for (says he) that thing is
necessary for another, when that other cannot exist in nature, without it; and
therefore, this was made for that other, and consequently, that other thing for
which this was made, is the end thereof.

Here is a double necessity of the visible Church for the ends specified.
Necessitas.
^. Of the means, (i. e.) without which these ends cannot 1. Medii.
be attained; this has been now spoken to. 2. Of the ends (i. e.) where this
means of the visible Church is, there, these, in some true 2. Finis.
measure, do of necessity follow; which might serve us another evidence, that
the ends before are true and proper ends of the visible Church; for quo
existente, necessario pr^ducitur aliquod bonum, hoc est, aut videtur esse
illius finis.

3. God himself hat ordained the visible Church for the ends specified;
Praecepti vel institutionis.
therefore it is yet further necessary for them, viz. with a necessity of divine
ordination and institution; and then there is no ground of doubting left, but
that they are true and proper ends thereof. Has not God ordained the visible
Church, to put his name there, to be the ground and pillar of his truth? that
he might have a praise and a name in the Earth, and in one word, that those
that worship him might glorify his Name? Psalm 89. Finis rei est sua
operatio. Operatio est usus vel actus ad qu^m ordinatur
now, if so, are not these the ends for which God has ordained the visible
Church? the end of a thing, is but its operation, and operation in this logical
sense; is but that use or act for which any thing is ordained, by God in
nature, or by God in Scripture; the latter of which we are now upon, and
therefore I shall rather choose to express i^ in the wor^ds of a Divine lately
cited, the Church is ordained [by God] for his true worship, that he might
Sz^gid, p. 226
be gl^rified, and therefore the end of the Church is the worship of God.

Thirdly, as these are proper ends of the visible Church, so the visible Church
is truly a means of them, and may be so considered, without respect unto
saving grace; for what necessity of saving grace can we imagine to the
attaining of the foresaid end^ the glory of God in his visible worship before
the eyes of men? much less what possible necessity is the^e for our having
respect unto saving grace, when we truly consider thereof? does men's attending
upon public Ordinances, essentially depend upon their saving grace? or cannot
we truly consider thereof, but we must suppose the men savingly gracious? do
not the common effects of the spirit in illuminating, conviacing of sin, and
of necessity of attending on the means of grace, for peace and salvation work
men out of conscience, to a constant and solemn dependence thereupon; and yet
none will say that any particular thus expressed, does necessarily suppose a
saving work; yea, the end, which is nearest, and most generally allowed to the
visible Church, viz. the worship of the glory of God, may doubtless be
obtained by a great deal less, viz. by a visible profession of, and submission
to, that way of worship, that the Lord has ordained, which does not of
necessity require, such a great degree of common grace, as before was specified.

True grace is indeed necessary to work out our own salvation: But, we are wont
to say, that gifts, which do not necessarily suppose true grace, are only
necessary to work on others; especially in the way of the worship of God, for
the advancing of his name and glory thereby to the world.

It Is also true, that saving grace, is necessary to the acceptance of our
worship before God. (I mean to a plenary acceptance for some, we read of, that
found some measure of true acceptance, in their serving of the Lord, though
without saving grace.) But, yet not necessary for the effecting of Gods glory
before men (that can judge only, according to appearance) in his visible
worship, saving grace is an invisible thing; then what necessary use can there
be thereof, in such visible effects as may be done without it? and such, as in
their present consideration, respect only such creatures as cannot discern
things invisible.

I grant, that saving conversion of visible Church Members, is one great end of
the visible Church, and that, therefore, the promises of first grace do most
especially belong unto them; but this if well heeded, rather helps, then
hinders my design; for it evidently supposes the visible Church, and visible
Church membership to have its being before his conversion, or saving grace, of
Finis est postorior medio in executione.
which the visible Church is said to be a means; for the Rule is, that the end,
is after the means, in execution.

CHAP. IX.
The Argument from the Matter of the visible Church.
HItherto of the external causes of the visible Church, and the Arguments
thence arising; let us now consider the causes thereof remaining, which are
called internal, viz. the matter and form.

From matter of the visible Church in general, I argue thus.

The visible Church may be considered truly to have the matter of the Church
of Christ, without respect to saving grace.

Therefore to be truly a Church of Christ without respect thereunto; This
consequence, simply taken, I confess is not so warrantable, because the matter
does prae-exist before, and remain sometimes after the form; yet take it
respectively to the form afterward to be maintained, and to the question in
controversy, which is chiefly concerning the matter of the Church, and
especially to the opinion of my present Opponents; we readily affirm that all
the question is about the matter of the Church, that if this be fained, so is
our Church; and if this be real, so is our Church, and I doubt not but it will
pass without interruption.

However, the thing that I am dispatching, does not engage me for the
consequence, though the other causes have been found so pregnant as to bear
such a particular improvement; only to assign and maintain to the visible
Church all its causes, and therefore its existence truly so, in our
consideration, without respect to saving grace; which, I presume, has been
done already, as to the Author, the Head, and the End of the Church, to which
I now proceed to add, the matter thereof, affirming (as before in the
antecedent (that the visible Church may be considered to have the true matter
of the Church of Christ without respect to saving grace.

The matter of the Church, habet rationem Partium. Subjecti.


1. The matter of the visible Church having the reason of the parts, is, the
Ministers and the people, the pastors and the flock, ecclesia utens, and
ecclesia docens, as some speak, and as we read, 1 Cor. 12. both making up the
compositum, the Church; and this Church must needs be the visible Church, for
there are no such organical parts; no Minister but Christ himself in the Church
invisible.

Now, may we consider, both these parts of the matter of the Church, as truly
such, without respect to saving grace? did not Judas truly teach, and do not
thousands truly profess in the Church of Christ, being truly called, though
not savingly chosen, without any measure of saving grace? but, this will more
fitly meet us in the next consideration of the matter of the Church, viz. as
having the reason the subject matter.

Next, we enquire what the subject matter of the visible is, and whether it
also may be considered without respect to saving grace.

1. What is rhen the subject matter of the visible Church? Trelcatius tells us,
that it is all such as are called out, and externally profess the faith;
which, I think, none can choose but approve of, when they consider that faith
is a thing invisible, and therefore not any way fitted to commend the matter of
the Church to us, as visible, and though it be granted that faith does unite
men to the Church, yet it must still be yielded, that profession thereof does
render them members of the Church as visible.

2. But here, seeing most do consent that professors of the faith are the
subject matter of the visible Church, it will, I presume, be worth our
inquiry, what is meant by the faith so professed. Certainly, it must be either
the doctrine, or the grace of faith; and which of these is properly, or usual,
said to be professed.

1. Is it the grace of faith which men profess? certainly no, for that is the
faith by which, and not the faith which we profess. 2. How incongruous a speech
would it be to say, I profess that I believe, while it is good and sound, and
relishing upon the mind of the hearer, to say, I profess what, or that
doctrine which I do believe. 3. If the meaning was that we do profess the
grace of faith, then the Epithet, true, which Divines do generally annex to
faith, should be put to profession, and whereas they usually speak of the
profession of the true faith, they should should say, the true profession of
the faith. 4. This appears in its contrary out of doubt; for such as fall away
from the faith, are not said to deny their own faith, but the faith or doctrine
of Christ.

2. Then it is doctrine of faith, which we profess, as members of the visible
Church; and if this be the note or character of the matter of the visible
Church, it can, in the most strict and rigid sense, that can possibly be put
upon it, only require two things; truth in the object professed, and truth in
the subject professing, (i. e.) that he profess the true doctrine of faith,
and that he believe what he professes, (i. e.) that he have a good profession,
and that he have a good principle answering to it; such a faith as such a
profession does require, to make it not dissembled, but true and real; and
thus, though we do not profess the grace of faith, yet the grace of faith so
far is consented to, as is requisite to a true profession, seeing thereby we
truly believe what we so profess.

3. Yet though this faith is supposed to be true where the matter of the Church
is true; the matter of the Church does not receive its denomination of being
true, from the truth of this grace of faith, but from the truth of its object
or doctrine believed, and accordingly professed which, as also what was before
asserted viz. that the doctrine of faith is the object of proper profession, or
the faith properly professed, appears by abundant example in Scripture. The
Eunuch being being demanded, do thou believe? answered not, my faith is
sincere, but I believe that Jesus Acts 8. 37.
is the Son of God. The like did they, Matthew. 14. 33. when reproved for their
unbeleef, they professed, saying, of a truth thou art the Son of God. John
also bare record, and what was it? that is the Son of God, Joh. 1. 34. so
Nathael professing said, thou art the Son of God, v. 49.

But most remarkable is that eminent profession of Peter, with Id est, super
hauc firmam confessionem tuam, qua confiteris and credis me esse Christum
filium Dei viventis, edificabo ecclesiam meam. as Bucer in loc.
Christ his approbation annexed to it, Matthew. 16. 16, 18. thou art (says he)
Christ the Son of the living God; to which our Savior answers, upon this
rock, (upon this rock, as some eminent expositors conceive, of profession, or
upon this profession, as upon a rock) will I build my Church.

Christ, then it seems will build his Church upon this rock of profession, of
the doctrine of faith, and such as are built thereupon, are true stones in his
house, and the true subject matter of his visible Church, and those that
require a profession of the grace of justifying faith, or of saving grace, as
necessary to our entering the visible Church, seem to lay another foundation
thereof, then Christ himself has laid.

Therefore, answerable hereunto, is that of the Apostle, being built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, (i. e.) (as Bullinger teaches) upon
their doctrine, not their grace, nor yet Ephesians. 2. ult.
our own; not as if the Apostles and Prophets were the foundation of the Church
in their persons: yet it seems they were so, in their doctrine; which was
indeed the doctrine of that one foundation, other then which none may lay, viz.
Jesus Christ.

Therefore accordingly, the true visible Church has ever, hitherto, been
argued and known by the truth of the doctrine, which it has professed, and
not by the truth of its graces.

4. Therefore the true and proper principle of this profession is but a
dogmatical faith; seeing that faith, which is the principle of such a
profession, must needs fix upon the same object with that profession, Faith is
termed hystorical in the Schools, that goes no farther then to give assent
and credit to the story of that which God speaks to be true. Culverwel of
faith, p 16. Vid. Rogers of faith p 6. and Ball of faith. page 3. Temporary
faith has more then the former adding to knowledge and assent, a profession of
the Word, yet living still in their sinne^, in a carnal est^te, Rogers page 7:
Temporal faith is to assent to the heavenly doctrine, to profess it, and to
glory therein; the devils believe historically, Ursin. Cat. English. by Par.
page 134, 135.
we professing what we believe, and believing what we profess, viz. the
doctrine of faith, as the common sense within, receives the same object which
the outward organ of the eye or ear sees or hears; Yet, I further yield,
that there is an act of faith more then merely dogmatical or historical, that
does many times, if not ever engage a man to be so believing to make a
profession to the world of what he believes; for it is not the bare believing
of such a truth, that puts a man on to profess it; but usually something of an
applicative faith added thereto; which faith also must needs be yielded to be
very far short of a justifying faith; and is termed by Divines a temporary
faith.

5. Again, this profession, put on as far as it is possible, is but either
vocal by word, or real by deed; I mean, be attendance upon the visible
administration of the Gospel and worship of Christ, whom we profess, in the
sight of men: for that other profession of a holy life, is so indirect a
profession, and so uncertain a character of the true visible Church, as that
it was yet never allowed by the Church of Christ in any age, to be a necessary
requisite to the matter of a true Church.

6. But, by the two former branches of this profession, the matter of the
Church, receives the name both of professors and worshippers; which latter
term of worshippers, I cannot but express my good liking to. 1. Because the
proper quality, use, end and business of the visible Church in the world, is
cultus gloriae Dei, as before, viz. to worship God. 2. And Christ himself
assures us, that his Father under the Gospel Dispensation, sought a people to
serve him, by this very term, namely to worship him. John 4.
3. And the rule for the finding out the material cause of a thing is, Cujus
rei propria qualitas in aliquo composito reperitur, id est hujus materia.

7. But, to conclude, not any one, or all of these, do necessarily suppose that
faith which justifies, or saving grace; a man may Eternally those are within
the Covenant who expressing their repentance with their profession of the
truth, though they have not the sound work of faith, nor never shall. Hook.
surv. p. 36.
truly believe, and outwardly profess the doctrine of Christ, and constantly
attend upon the Ordinances of worship: a man may be a professor of the true
faith, and a worshipper of Christ, with outward worship, and thus be truly a
part of the matter of the visible Church, and all this without saving grace, as
none can deny.

8. Therefore the subject matter of the visible Church, may be truly
considered to be the matter of the Church of Christ without respect to saving
grace.

9. Yea, if we speak of particular members, and not of the whole, I conceive,
that so much as is already yielded, is not absolutely necessary to the matter
of the visible Church; for one that is born within the Church, and never yet
did actually renounce his relation thereunto, though he do not actually
believe, or vocally profess, etc. (as is the very case of Children, Ignorants,
Idiots, and Madmen) I doubt not to affirm, to be a real part of the matter
thereof. For, as Reverend Master Cotton, from His holiness of Church members.
p. 1.
New England, teaches; such as are borne of Christian parents, and baptized in
their infancy, into the fellowship of the Church, are initiated members of the
same Church, though destitute of spiritual grace; until they justly deprive
themselves of the privilege of that fellowship.

CHAP. X.
The Argument from the form constituent of the visible Church.
HAving found the vi^^ble Church considerable as truly such, in all the rest
of its causes; we now proceed to examine and argue from the form thereof.

And if we shall be able to prove that this cause also, may be considered to be
truly such, without respect to saving grace, I presume, that nothing can
possibly intercept this our conclusi^n therefrom, viz. then the visible Church
may be considered Posita forma in materia cengrua necessario fit compositum.
Arist. formam v^cat, (...).
to be truly such (in it self) when it has been found to be truly such in
all its causes) without respect thereunto.

For, Forma tribuit essentiam completam c^mp^sit^, it presupposes the matter
informed by it; yea, it is said, not only to perfect, but even to give the
very being to a thing; for, before any thing has its form, it is not that
thing; and so soon as ever has its form, it instantly has the being, and
justly challenges the name of that thing. Yea, it is the very reason and
principle of the being of a thing; yea, its very essence (as Aristotle says)
and ipsum quid sit.

But now, the form of the visible Church, being not essentially Forma (...).
depending upon saving grace, may be considered to be truly such, without
respect thereunto, whether we intend it systatically, the form, by which the
visible Church is constituted such, or diaretically, by which the visible
Church (being constitute) is distinguished and known to be a true from a false
Church. The consideration of each of these will afford us its Argument.

1. From the constituent form of the visible, thus.

The visible Church may be considered to have a real constitutive form,
without respect to saving grace; therefore also to be truly a Church of Christ
without respect thereunto.

The consequence must needs be yielded me, because its contrary implies a
contradiction; for to say, that any thing has a real constitutive form, is as
much as to say, that it really and formally is; therefore, to deny that any
thing has not really or truly a being, is formally to contradict its having a
real constitutive form.

Then nothing but the minor requires proof, which is, that the visible Church
has a reali constitutive form, which has no necessary dependence upon, and
may consequently be considered without respect unto saving grace; which, I
presume, will appear upon a short and easy debate.

Trelcatius, who, in some other of his passages, seems not to favor this
opinion overmuch, yet assigns to the visible Church, as it is distinguished by
himself to the Church invisible, as all the other causes, so this of the form,
and calls it by this very term, of the form constituting the visible Church.
2 Neither can it be thought that he intended such a form, as did imply saving
grace, for he terms it externa vocatio, as it stands opposed by himself to
that effectual call which he accounts to be the form of the Church invisible.
3. Nor yet can any imagine, that he thought it not a real call; because he
adds, quam mediate Deus efficit; which God himself works though mediately.

Yet I must needs enter my exception against this form assigned to the visible
Church by Trelcatius and others, viz. external vocation. I shall easily allow
it taken in an active sense, to be an efficient, or taken in a passive sense,
to be a necessary condition, as before in the matter of the visible Church, but
in no sense at all, to be the form thereof. For,

1. If this external calling were the form of the Church, then every
particular member would be a formal Church, for every particular member is
externally called, and where the form of a thing is, there we may truly say
that thing it self is.

2. Persons, qua called, seem rather to be matter of the Church, and external
vocation, to be only a condition requisite in the matter of the visible
Church, being near the same with external profession or outward worshipping, my
reason is, because that persons externally called may pre-exist a Church
informed, as also remain when the form of the Church is lost; for when two or
three are called out of the world by the preaching of the word, we cannot
presently say there is now a Church formed, though these be good stones to
begin the building withal, and a Church may be possibly consumed, even to two
or three, or dissolved and scattered, and so loose its form, though persons
called still remain, which according to the rule, should rather be accounted
the matter of the Church; for si forma perit, manente aliquo, Col. Conim. br.
materiam illud esse necesse est.

3. For which Amesius seems directly; faith, says he, Fides ut insiugulis
fidelibus existens distributive, est forma vocatorum; sed in omnibus collective
spectata est coetus vocatorum, i. e. forma ecclesiae. Medul. 163.
as it is existing in single believers distributively, is the form of the
called, who are the matter, and not the form of the Church.

Amesius teaches that the form of the visible Church, quoad externum statum,
or as it is distinguished from the invisible, is internae fidei externa
professio.

Which external profession is either personal or ecclesiastical; if personal,
then every professor, as it was reasoned before, having the form of the
Church, would be a true Church, and if ecclesiastical, yet this external
profession seems rather a formal ^ction, or an action of the Church
presupposing its being and existence, and flowing immediately from the form of
the Church, which it self is not; for before there can be an ecclesiastical
profession, or the profession of a Church, there must be ecclesia, or a Church
in the order of nature at least, which could not be, if this profession were
the form thereof, for forma est ratio essentiae, and rather before, or at
least simul natura, cum composito.

However, if this external profession be the form of the visible Church, it
will serve my turn well enough. For, 1. It will not be denied to be a real
thing, by Amesius himself, who allows it power to interest a person in the
external state of the Church. 2. Nor yet to consist without saving grace, as
his own words directly express, illi autem qui professione tantum sunt
fideles, Medul. 168
etc.

I confess that Amesius accounts this external profession, to be but the
accidental form of the Church, and that it is in terminis distinguished by
him, from the essential form thereof.

Yet, he acknowledges, that some persons, who do not at all partake of that
essential form, which is distingushed by him to Illi autem, qui professione
tantum sunt fideles dum remanent in illa societate, sunt membra illius
ecclesiae sicut etiam ecclesi^ Catholicae, quoad externum tantum, non quoad
internum statum, aut essentialem. Med. p. 168.
this accidental form, do yet truly partake of this accidental form of the
Church, and are by consequence in his own words membra ecclesiae; the sense of
which he limits in the next words, according to the external, and not according
to the internal or essential state of the Church.

If I may be modest and yet bold, I should be bold to say that Amesius seemed
here in a strait betwixt two; he was loath to say, that external professors
wanting true grace, were true members of the Church of Christ, therefore, says
he, they are not so, quoad statum internum aut essentialem, and yet as loath to
say, they were not truly so, and therefore says, they are membra ecclesiae
quoad statum externum; the Papist held the one, and the Brownist the other, how
then dare he or we hold either? the Papist was ready to charge him with
Brownisme for denying hypocrites to be members of the Church; he answers them,
that hypocrites are so according to the outward state of the Church; the
Brownist was as ready to charge him with Popery, in affirming wicked men to be
true members of the visible Church, and he answers them that they are not so,
quoad statum internum and essentialem.

But let us weigh his words a little farther, by fixing the question, whether
any thing may be considered as such, from its accidental form? seeing Amesius
has said that such are members of the Church by their participation with this
accidental form of profession.

But may a man be considered qua homo, from the figure or color of his body?
or any member of that man be considered such from its partaking of either of
these? if by the essential form alone a thing is that which it is, can any
thing partake of the being of that thing without partaking of the essential
form? do not the Schools generally with Thomas teach that forma accidentalis
non tribuit perfectionem essentialem composito? would not the affirmative to
this, viz. that the accident perfects the essence (seeing accidens habet esse
in subjecto,) be a flat contradiction? How then can Amesius say, that one that
only partakes of the accidental form of the Church, is a member thereof?
either we must allow, that such professors are true members of the visible
Church, or deny them to be so; if they are, they must needs partake of the
essential form of the body, and not only of the accidental, if they are not,
let us be rigid Brownists, and openly say what we think.

Yea, if such professors do truly partake of the accidental form of the
Church, I conceive they must also truly partaker of the essential; interest in
the accident of any thing is founded in interest, in the essence of that thing;
for an accident, as such, has no being but in its subject, and there cannot be
an interest in, or relation to any thing, but as it is; how then can a man
stand under the accidental form of the Church, unless he be pars subjecti vel
substantiae? and how can that be, unless he partake of the essential, or
substantial form of the Church.

How can any thing partake of my color, or figure, unless it be part of my
self? it may partake of whiteness, but not of my whiteness, or of whiteness
as an accident of me, unless it be part of me; so, indeed, a man may be a
professor, but he cannot partake of the profession of the Church, unless he be
a real part of the subject, the Church, which cannot be without partaking with
the essence or essential form thereof.

So that here I pitch, such professors are members of the visible Church
farther then Ames allows, or not so far; for they partake either of both
the essential and accidental form or of neither; and must be consequently
granted to be true members of the visible Church, both according to the
external and the internal state thereof, or according to neither.

Now, if in conclusion it be found, that such professors (as we are now
considering) do also partake of the essential form of the visible Church, this
essential form, must be, either the same which Forma essentialis, est Relatio
spiritualis. Med. 163. Neque ulla relatio vim istam habet praeter illam que
consistit in primi and intima affectione ad Christum p 162 163. vid p. 168 ^8.
Amesius assigns or another; but it cannot be the same; these professors (as
we are now considering) do also partake of the essential form of the visible
Church, this essential form must be either the same, which Amesius assigns,
or another; but it cannot be the same; these professors, are by himself,
expressed to be incapable thereof; for they are called by him, tantum
professione fideles, (i. e.) such as do not savingly believe; and this
essential form of the Church, which he means, is a little above expressed by
himself, to be; such a relation as carries true faith (which effectually
works true holiness) with it, of which, such as only profess, are
necessarily supposed to be destitute.

But, if that essential form of the Church be another, then that which Amesius
assigns; either, that form which he assigned, is not the true essential
form of the Church, or there are two distinct Duae formae substantiales non
possunt in eadem materia consistere.
forms thereof. Now there cannot be two distinct forms of one and the same
Church. I mean, two distinct essential forms, that is little less then a
contradiction; neither shall we be allowed to have two distinct Churches, which
must needs follow two substantial forms; for omnis differentia constitutiva
est ^orma distinguit Rem ab omnibus aliis, a prioris.
etiam divisiva, divisiva generis, constitutiva specii (i. e.) it does divide
the genus into its species, and then does constitute the species distinct from
one another.

Again, if there be found such an essential form of the Church Forma
substantialis tribuit essentialem perfectionem composito.
as those, which only profess, and are without saving grace, do indeed partake
of, then the visible Church, as such, or as it stands in distinction to the
invisible will be found to be truly and properly a Church, for the essential
form, gives an essential perfection to any thing.

Then it will follow, in conjunction with what every one grants, that there is
but one Church truly and properly so called, that the invisible Church as
distinguished from the visible, is not so.

Therefore it remains, that we now further enquire after the essential form
of the visible Church.

Amesius asserts that the essential form of the Church lies in Relation;
which, says he, is nothing else but faith, and concludes, fides, etc. faith,
therefore, is the form of the Church.

But as if he were aware, that some would reply, then, particular Fidem enim
homines fideles, qui prout sigillatim distributive considerantur* sunt vocati
Dei; sunt etiam ecclesia Dei prout conjun*ctim vel collective considerantur in
coetu. Med. p. 163. 13.
Believers were formal Churches, he anticipateth thus; faith, says he, in
particular believers, distributively taken, is the form of the called, but
collectively taken, it is the form of the Church; the same believers taken
apart, are the called of God, and conjoined are the Church of God. Thus he. But,

1. Be it so, that faith is the form of the Church, if there may be found a
real faith, as well as a real calling, that is not saving (as no doubt there
may) my case is yet well enough; though, I confess, Ames clearly means a
saving faith.

2. But, I must be allowed the boldness once more to offer my humble
exceptions, against what is here by him asserted.

For, 1. If that same faith, which is the form of the Church be indeed to be
found in particular believers scattered, I cannot imagine how this conclusion
can be intercepted, particular believers have the form of the Church, and
consequently are truly a Church, though not in coetu, or in society; do they
want the mattter of the Church? no, for they are (considered apart) in his own
words, the called of God; and the called of God, are the true matter of the
Church, none will deny.

Neither, 2. Will it be helped to say, that faith in believers, considered
collectively, is the form of the Church. For, 1. The form of a thing is real,
which has being extra mentis operationem, it receives no part of its nature
from consideration; and therefore, if faith be in it self, or properly the
essential form of the Church, so it still will be, whether we consider it
distributively or collectively, and wheresoever we find it, viz. in materia
congrua, in fit matter, as the called doubtless are. Besides, 2. Then,
something is apparently added to faith, to inform the Church, viz. the
collection of the persons so believing; and then, I humbly offer, whether
whatsoever faith be meant here, it belong not exactly to the matter, and most
unproperly to the form of the Church? for, that which does not perfect the
essence, or give essential perfection to a thing, is not the essential form of
that thing, but faith does not give essential perfection to the Church; for
where faith is, there is not this essential perfection of the Church, without
something else, viz. collection, or association of the subjects of this faith
together added.

3. Therefore he says, 1. Fides est forma ecclesiae; and then; 2. Coetus est
forma ecclesiae; wherein I am yet to seek his meaning; for either these differ
and are two things, and then there are two formal causes of the Church, or else
faith and company are all one, in his sense, and indeed almost in his words,
(fides spectata collective, est coetus vocatorum, id est, forma ecclesiae)
which I cannot comprehend.

4. If coetus vocatorum, be indeed a definition of the Church, as Amesius
says, then either vocati are the form, or coetus, or both; Med. p. 163. 12.
if vocati distinct from coetus be, then coetus is not; if coetus distinct from
vocati, then the vocati are not; and if both together be the form, then where
is the matter?

5. Again, if this be a perfect definition, and consequently, the whole cannot
be the form, one of the parts must, and now which is likeliest coetus or
fideles? not fideles, of the faithful, because that these prae-exist before the
Church is informed, and something as was before observed, is necessarily to be
added to perfect the essence of the Church. 2. One of these two must be the
matter of the Church, but coetus cannot, because the matter is presupposed to
the form, but coetus, or the consosiation of believers, does praesuppose
believers. 3. Therefore the cleanest account with me, is that believers are the
matter, the coetus and the collection or community of them, is the true
essential form of the Church. That wherein they have communion is the public
exercise of such duties, as we ead Act 2. 47. Hook eccles. pol. 89.


Here then, at length, I pitch, that the form of the Church lies in society
or community st^ictly, and properly that collection taken actively, or unit^on
is the immediate efficient, collection taken passively or union is the effect
or proper state of the Church, that communion is its formal action, but
corporation, society or community is strictly the form thereof.

Which learned Ames himself, does seem more than to intimate (if we let pass
the foresaid obscurities) saying, that faithful Med p. 163. 13.
men are the Church of God, prout conjunctim, vel collective considerantur in
coetu, and yet more plainly in the page before; p. 162. 9.
Coetus dicitur, quia in multitudine consociata vel communitate multorum
proprie consistit, non in aliquo uno vocato.

So that, in short account, the remote matter of the Church Ad homines
restringitur iste coetus. p. 162. 10
is men; the less remote matter of the Church, is men called; and the next
matter of the Church, is a many, or a multitude of men called; and now, that
which is to be added, to complete the Church, is the society or community (as
Ames exactly) of these many, or this multitude of men called; and this is
properly the form thereof; Which further appears. For,

1. The Church is allowed by all, to be totum aggregativum, or a holy heap; now
where lies the form of an heap but in the society of the parts thereof, they
being put together?

2. It Is therefore called a body in Scripture; corpus coagmentatum and
compactum ex variis membris, as Ames notes from Ephesians. 4. 16. as also a House,
a Family, a City, a Kingdom, a Flock; and where lies the form of all these,
but in society or community.

3. This notion suits so well with the principles of many, that they are called
Congregational men, and their way called, Emphatically, the Congregational way,
doubtless then their Church is a Congregation; yea, the opinion of many of
them is, that their Church Covenant is the form of their instituted Church;
which Covenant is only the bond of the company or society.

Lastly, that which being put in any matter, the thing is necessarily Quo
posito in materia aliqua, necessario constituitur compositum, and sublato
tollitur; id est, illius forma.
constituted; and being taken away; the thing is dissolved, is the form of
that thing; but society or community being added, to many men called, which is
the matter of the Church, the Church is necessarily constituted; and society or
community being taken away, the Church is dissolved; therefore, society or
community is the form of the Church.

5. Szegedine teaches, that true doctrine, and the true use of the Sacraments
are the formal cause of the Church.

But these, I conceive, are rather either the means of communion, which is, as
was said before, the formal action, more properly, then the very form it
self, of the Church; or else the distinguishing form, whereby the Church is
known rather then the constitutive form, whereby the Church has its being.

But to draw up this discourse of the constitutive form of the Church. 1.
Whatsoever it appear to be, I hope to prove that it may be truly considered
without respect to saving grace, if it be calling, or faith, or profession; it
has before appeared, that these may be considered to be truly, when not
savingly such; and if it be society or community, as has partly appeared
already (and will more fully appear when we handle the definition of the
Church) I presume none will question, but this also, may be considered to be
truly such without any respect to saving grace.

2. But if Ames should mean as he truly seems to do, that coetus vocatorum,
or societas fidelium, in an united and conjunct sense, is the form of the
Church; that is, neither the called, nor society, but these both together, as a
company or society of the called, or the faithful; though then we know not, as
before was said, where to find the matter of the Church, and that the whole
definition will be taken up in the form, and consequently, we may not grant it;
yet, I conceive, we may safely give it; for the visible Church, may be as well
considered to be a society of persons called conjunctively, as persons called,
and a society without respect to saving grace.

3. And although we should farther give him, that which also we have before
denied to grant him, viz. that that faith which is the essential form of the
Church, is a saving faith; yet he is pleased freely to recompense us again with
with as much in affirming, that persons that are only externally called, and
such, as only profess (as himself speaks) are truly members of the Church of
Christ, according to the outward state thereof, or as it is a visible Church,
which is freely acknowledged to be all, that is necessarily sought in the
present controversy.

4. Indeed, he also adds, that such profession, and outward calling is but the
accidental form of the Church (as before) which assertion, we conceive, will
hardly bear this his conclusion, however, this is nothing unto us. We
thankfully take his concession, and leave the consequence to be further
considered.

CHAP. XI.
The Argument from the distinguishing form of the visible Church.
WE now descend to the other branch of the formal cause, called distinguens vel
discriminans; contained in those notes or marks, whereby the Church is known to
be true and distinguished from a false Church. Whence the Argument is this.

The notes or marks of a true Church may be considered to be truly such
without respect to saving grace; therefore the Church her self.

None will venture upon the consequence, for if those very things (viz. the
notes) whereby alone, we take to our selves a consideration of the Churches
being and truth cannot be affirmed to have any dependence upon saving grace,
then, certainly, the Church may be considered to be truly such without respect
to saving grace.

The Antecedent appears by an easy induction of the notes and marks of a true
Church.

They are either essential or accidental; it is generally agreed, Professio
verae fidei est maxim essentialis ecclesiae nota. Med. p. 171.
that the essential note of the Church is profession of the true faith, which,
as Amesius says, is maxim essentialis, in the highest manner essential to the
Church. Now the nature of an essential mark, as the Schools teach, is certo
demonstrare infallibly to demonstrate the essence of that thing, of which it is
a mark, therefore, profession of the true faith, does thus certainly and
infallibly demonstrate the essence and nature of the true Church; but now
profession of the true faith may be truly considered, without respect to
saving grace; for the true faith may be professed by a Cain, a Judas, a Simon
Magus, a Demas, and those that have no share at all in saving grace, and that
truly to, as none, I think, will venture to question.

But this profession of the true faith (I humbly conceive, if we speak exactly)
as it is a mark of the true Church, must be taken ecclesiastically and not
personally; for there may be a private personal owning and profession of the
faith, where there is no formal, proper and exact Church; and there, we cannot
affirm profession of the faith an essential note of the true Church; personal
profession, I grant is a certain mark of a member of the Church (i. e.)
universal, and ecclesiastical profession of the Church it self.

This ecclesiastical profession (I conceive) consists in attendance upon the
Ordinance of divine worship, and is rather a real, then a vocal profession; for
the end of the visible Church, being properly the worship of God, the note
thereof is properly, that which renders it serviceable to its end, which is
attendance upon those things which are ordained for that end, the Ordinances of
divine worship.

I confess, Amesius intends a profession of faith formally and vocally taken,
which he distinguishes from the solemn preaching Professio ista in coetu
aliquo potest antecedere solennem verbi praedicationem, and Sacramentorum
administrationem. Med. p. 172. 30.
of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments. By which, he either means
a profession made by all those that are admitted into an instituted Church,
which cannot (I conceive) be proved from Scripture, to be a necessary duty,
much less an essential mark of the true Church, and is not very consonant with
reason, seeing if this be maxim essentialis nota, the Church may possibly,
through want of occasion of admitting, be many years without such an essential
note, the nature of which, if I mistake not, requires that it be more usual;
Besides, how such a profession can be looked upon, as the profession of the
whole, which is of some necessity for its being a mark of the whole; I know
not, it being not made by a public Minister, but a private member, yea, hardly
a member, if the end of his confession be in order to his admission, but
however, it is clearly the profession of the party, and a note only of his
faith and worthiness of admission, and in any sober sense, can hardly be
looked on, as the profession, much less the note, and least of all the
essential, the chiefly essential note of the whole Church; as indeed we never
found affirmed before, by any Authentic author in the Church of Christ, and
which, I humbly conceive, is not Ames his sense here; only I took this
occasion to free him from it, because I fear, these words of his, are made a
patron of such a practice.

But if this be not the profession of faith, which Amesius affirms to be the
note of the Church; it must needs be the set and solemn declaration of the
faith, by the mouth of the Church, to wit, the Minister, which was wont to be
done (as he requires) before the Sermon.

But this, I humbly conceive is not to be distinguished from the Word and
Sacraments, as it is maxim ^ssentialis ecclesiae nota, according to Scripture,
reason, or the judgment of most, if not all that have anciently written upon
this subject, is not the same faith professed by the Minister in preaching, and
the people in hearing, and by both, in participating in the Sacraments or
seals thereof, which is read in the Creed? and are not these actions, as
visible, and as essential to the Church, as the reading and hearing of the
Creed? or dare any say that where there is a constant and diligent attendance
on the preaching of the true doctrine, and lawful administration of prayers and
Sacraments, that there we cannot discern a true Church without a solemn
declaring, of the faith, in a set Creed? and most of our Churches in England,
that have at present (I know not for what cause) laid aside that practice, are
therefore, not visible true Churches?

Though I highly approve of such a solemn declaration of the faith (if possible
in the same sound form of words, to be universally made) yet I humbly
conceive, that this is but a prudential humane Ordinance, and therefore not so
necessary or so near the essence, or so essential a mark of the Church, as
sound doctrine and pure Sacraments, both which are undoubtedly of immediate
divine institution, and without which the Church cannot exist.

Which thing Trelcatius does thus most accurately and fully open the proper and
essential note of the visible Church, which flows immediately from the very
form of it, is but one, viz. the Nota propria and essentialis ecclesiae
visibilis proximeque fluens ex forma illius unica est; veritas scilicet verbi
Dei, Revelati ac communicati; cui veritas Sacramentorum tanquam connexum
inseperabile conjuncta est. -- Utriusque enim veritas ita proprium and
essentiale est (...) ecclesiae, ut veritas haec and ecclesia convertantur.
Instit. Theol. p. 224.
truth of the Word of God revealed and communicated, to which the truth of the
Sacraments is inseparably joined, for which he quotes, Heb. 4. 12. John 10. 27.
Matthew. 28. 10. Romans 4. 11. for as he adds the truth of both is such a proper
and essential mark of the Church, that this truth [of both Word and Sacraments]
and the Church, are convertible.

But of this I shall have more occasion in the next Chapter; therefore I have
only this to do here, namely, to set this profession of the faith before you,
to consider whether it does necessarily suppose saving grace, or not, in any of
these senses. 1. May not personal vocal profession be made without saving We
are to acknowledge a Church of Christ more or less corrupt according to the
greater or less abuse of Gods Word and worship. Bp. Usher. p. 39. his sum of
Rel.
grace? and the truth be professed, as well as believed, where saving grace is
wanting? 2. May not ecclesiastical profession, whether more formally by a
solemn Creed read, and silently consented unto by the people, be also done, and
considered without any respect to saving grace in the declarer or consenters.
3. Or that other real profession consisting in attendance upon the Ordinances
of God, be considered to have truth for its object both in Word and Sacraments,
and yet without respect to saving graces?

Again, the accidental notes of the Church, are also generally acknowledged to
be of two sorts, inseparable or proper, and separable or common.

The separable and proper notes of a true Church are said to be the pure
preaching of the Word, and the lawful administration of the Sacraments, which
are but the means or actions of conveyance and application of the foresaid
truth of both, unto the Church, and so near unto the profession thereof, which
was said before to be the essential mark of the Church, that I have already
reduced it thither, and need not repeat it here again.

The separable notes of the Church, whatsoever they be, cannot conclude any
thing against me; because they are such, I mean, separable, and therefore not
necessary in our consideration of the being of the Church.

However, that we leave not them only untoucht, they are usually reduced unto
two heads. 1. Ecclesiastical power. 2. And holiness of life.

Ecclesiastical power has three branches, the power of Ministry, the power of
Order, the power of Discipline; all which may easily be considered without the
least respect to saving grace. 1. Judas may truly exercise his Ministry. And,
2. Outward Order may be fixed and observed. And, 3. Discipline may be erected
and dispensed without any necessary supposition of saving grace, either in the
parties so dispensing, or in the objects (openly scandalous) on which the
Discipline is dispensed; as has been touched before, and will be more fully
handled hereafter.

I confess, holiness of life comes nearest, to show its respect to saving
grace; but this also shows as much respect to my cause; as easily appears by
this [concluding] argument.

If holiness of life be separable from a true Church, then saving grace is
separable from a true Church, for if a holy life does not always suppose
saving, yet saving grace does not always produce a holy life.

But, it is still confessed, by those which write most accurately on the
Church, that holiness of life is a separable accidental note, which is only
necessary to the order and welfare of the Church, and not to the being or truth
thereof.

Now, if saving grace be separable from a true Church, then it may be
considered to be truly such, without respect thereunto.

The sum of the general Argument from the causes is this.

The Sum of the Argument from the causes in general.
All the causes of the visible Church may really exist without the work of
saving grace, viz. The efficient, as Author, God Head, Christ.
The end of the Glory of God on earth, before men.
Worship.
The matter, whether it be Professors of the faith. The outwardly called.
Outward worshippers.
The form whether it be Constituting. Distinguishing.


he form constituting, whether it be Faith. Calling. Society or community.

The form distinguishing, whether it be Essential Profession of the faith, or
truth of word and Sacraments.
ccidental inseparable Pure preaching of the word, and administration of
Sacraments.


Therefore the visible Church may be considered to be truly a Church of
Christ, without respect to saving grace.

CHAP. XII.
The Argument from the definition of the visible Church, first from its special
quality.
HAving done with the causes, we proceed to the definition, whence we thus
argue.

The definition of the visible Church does not suppose saving (...)
grace, therefore the definition, the visible Church it self, may be considered
to be truly such, without respect to saving grace, for the definition of a
thing, is but that whereby the nature of that thing is declared or explicated,
and is plainly convertible with the thing defined.

Now whether the definition of the visible Church be inclusive of saving grace,
or not; may appear, First, from the parts thereof severally considered. And,
Secondly, by a view of such definitions of the Church, as are already given us
by approved Authors.

1. The parts are three. 1. The special quality of the visible Church. 2. Or
the special work and employment thereof. Or, lastly, the state and condition
wherein the Church so qualified is rendered capable of that employment.

First, let us look upon the special quality of the visible Church, which may
be conceived to be either the faith, calling, or profession thereof Whence by
some the visible Church is, in short, defined to be, a company or society of
Believers; or a company of men called by external vocation, or a company
professing the Christian and true Religion; where the weight and emphasis rests
upon the faithful, or the called, or professors of the true Religion.

My business is not to defend or to except against any of these, either in
their truth or fullness, but to propose, whether these and the like have any
necessary dependence upon saving grace; which to affirm, I think, is not
without evident danger.

Here are two things rest upon me, 1. That external calling, profession of the
true religion, and faith have no necessary dependence upon saving grace. 2.
That these are true and real in their kind as to visible membership, when not
saving.

1. For external calling; the very sound and notion thereof, Efficacitas
vocationis, duplex una salutaris electorum proprio: altera non salutaris ad
vocatos communiter spectans. Inst. Theol. p. 114.
sufficiently proves its independency upon saving grace, and that as
distinguished from the inward and saving calling, it is true and real in its
kind, and indeed effectual, as Trelcatius notes, I suppose is sufficiently
argued before.

2. Neither can any doubt but that profession of the true and Christian
religion is also generally done, without saving grace; and for its being yet a
true and real profession, when not saving, this depends upon the truth of the
faith, by which, or rather from which, this profession is made, and which is
next to be weighed.

3. Therefore whereas the external calling, and the profession of the faith,
have both been largely handled before, and this common faith has been often
touched upon; as again, will be frequent occasion of hereafter; I shall, now
once for all, humbly endeavor to prove, that there is a faith in the members
of the uisible Church, which is true and real in its kind, though not saving.

Arg. 1. This appears, First, from the authority. Secondly, from the reason of
Scripture. 1. From Scripture-authority, thus.

1. The Scripture intimates, that all that are not Heathen are Believers, 1
Cor. 7 14. as even all affirm, that interpret the place against the
Anabaptist; for indeed, the question was not, Existimant reformati, quod
soedcralis quaedam fanctitas qua jus habent illi qui hoc modo sancti sunt, ad
media salutis and Sacramentum Baptismi, and qua ab Ethnicis, Turcis,
similibusque al iis infidelibus seperantur, 1 Cor. 7. 14 Toti Nationi seu
populo comunicetur, cui Deus tabulas sui soederis ita imper. tit easdem
suscipiant, and profiteantur, quos ad statum visibilis ecclesiae suae vocat and
ducit, Romans 11. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Blakes Seals, p. 118. out of Apol.
touching continuance with such as were wicked, if professing religion, but
such as were Heathens, (i. e.) out of the Church; therefore Heathen and
Infidel, or no Churchmember and unbeliever, are synonimous; Let him be to thee
as a Heathen, Mat. 18. is worse than an Infidel, 1 Tit. 5. 8.

But now there are may persons within the Church, who though they are without
saving grace may not be termed Heathens. 1. The scandal of persons within may
declare they have no saving grace, yet the punishment at last to be inflicted
on such, is but to put them into the state of an Heathen, or to deal with them
as with a Heathen or a Publican; therefore doubtless they were not Heathen
before.

2. In the place before cited, a wicked Churchmember is compared to an
Infidel, or an Unbeleever (worse then an Infidel; because he professes and
owneth the faith with his mouth which he denies and wounds by his ungodly
life;) and he that is compared to an infidel; is thereby concluded to be no
infidel; for a comparison must needs be betwixt two; for it is as it were a
comparison, or a comparing things one with another; and he that is no Infidel
or unbeleever, must needs be granted to be a believer, or will be enforced from
2 Cor. 6. 15. What part has the Believer, (...), with an infidel, or one
without the Church.

3. Of which, the Scripture gives us, a clear instance in Simon Magus; it
first affirms that he believed, and then witnesses, that he notwithstanding
was in the gall of bitterness, They have indeed a true faith in their kind,
but not the justifying faith of the Elect. Boultons deceit. p. 73.
and bond of iniquity, and consequently in a state of wickedness.

4. And lastly, the Scripture is most plain, Luke 8. 13. in our Saviors
interpretation of the stony ground; which for a while believe, but in the time
of temptation fall away (i. e. from that state of faith wherein they stood a
while;) our Savior does not say by their falling away it appears, they did not
believe Upon this Luk 2. 13. Master Perkins notes three things, 1. Their faith,
they are said to believe for a season. 2. The fruits of that faith, they
received the Word with joy. 3. Their unsoundnesse in the time of temptation,
they fell away. Mark (says he) here is a true faith, yet not saving faith.
Epist. before his declarat. of a man's estate.
at all, or show themselves to be what indeed they were before, viz. Infidels,
but he affirms they did believe. 2. Again, that this was a real faith, for he
says they fell away from it; they could not fall away from that which was not.
Lastly, in the time of temptation, implying, that before that time they might
be truly said to stand in the; else the blast of temptation could not have
thrown them down; as also those that made shipwreck of faith, are supposed, 1.
To have had the faith, else they could not have lost it. 2. To have had no
saving faith, for then they would not have made shipwreck of it.

2. In the reason of the Scripture, it is also plain, that there is a true
faith which yet is not saving; whether we consider it in a relative, or in a
qualitative sense.

1. There is a relative or (if any had rather) a federal faith as well as
holiness; allowed by all but Anabaptists upon the account of our parents
Church Membership.

Obj. If any should reply that this faith is in the parent, and not in the
child.

Answ. I must have leave to deny it; an account of which I shall give more
largely hereafter, in brief here, thus.

1. The faith that is in the parent is a personal, habitual, or qualitative
faith, this faith that relates to the child is foederal.

2. The child is as truly the subject of this faith, which he has by
relation to his father, by grace, as of filiation or sonship, which he has
also by relation from his father by nature.

3. Yea, this faith is more firmly seated in the child, then his One sort of
real holiness consists in a bare relation of the people of God and depends
wholly upon birth within the pale of the Church, and the parents embracing the
covenant. Blak. Scals p. 150. out of Camero.
filiation; for this dies with the parent that does not; which shows that the
child has its faith as well be relation to the Church and Covenant, in which,
and indeed, God himself, to whom he is borne, as to his earthly parent.

4. Therefore the children are said to be holy themselves, as well as their
parents, 1 Cor. 7. 14. that is federally; and that which is a reason of this
foederal holiness is equally a reason of their foederal faith.

5. Indeed, nor we, nor our children have any right in Abraham's Covenant, but
as we, and they are Abraham's children; he is the great root, and we and ours
branches upon him; now none are Abraham's children, but believers; he is the
father of the faithful, therefore our children, being children of Abraham, are
believers, as we are.

6. Therefore children may be known (as Christ himself intimates) to believe in
his Name, i. e. by their being born within the Church, Mat. 18. 6, 7.
or else they could not be received, or offended as such, as Christ supposes.

7. Lastly, none but an Anabaptist will deny our children to be both of the
Church, and the subject of their own Church Membership, and therefore to be
sealed such in themselves, and not only in their parent, by baptism, and
consequently, the Camero distinguishes of real holiness one sort consists in
the bare relation of the person, etc. as Mr. Blake notes, Seals 150
subjects of their own faith; seeing baptism is also a seal of the
righteousness of faith.

2. Neither, let any reply, that this is not a real, because it is a relative
faith; for even, therefore, it is real (real being opposed here, to that which
is either false, or not at all, and not unto relative) is not a child, a son
really, because relatively? 2. That must needs be real in it self, which has
real effects; but this relative faith has real effects; hereby we are borne to
God, and Tametsi relatio est Ens debilis entitatis, tamen est magnae efficaciae.
in the Covenant, hereby we have a right to baptism, and all other Ordinances,
so far as we are capable of them; being members of the visible Church and body
of Christ, and all these really and truly so.

3. Now, that this foederal faith, differs from that which justifies The
Church in dispensing, looks into visibility of interest in the Covenant to
guide her; nor is the saving interest of the persons her rule etc. Cobbet cited
by Blake Seals p. 124.
and saves, (which is, necessarily, a quality of the person so justified, or
saved) or, at least, that we need not respect the saving grace of the child;
whom, upon this foederal and relative consideration, we are about to receive
and admit to Baptism, I think, none but an Anabaptist will stick to question.

2. Habitual or qualitative faith, may be considered also to be a true faith,
when not saving, both as it is an historical, and as it is a temporary faith,
as Divines distinguish.

Both which, viz. the historical and temporary faith are distinguished from
justifying and saving faith generally, by most Protestant Assensus ille
generalis quem poutisicii fidem statuunt, non est fides (i. e. justificans)
quia ipsis fatentibus, potest esse sine ulla vita Am. Med. p 8 Virtutis activae
quantitas, ex quantitatis effectu cognosci debet. Trel. Inst. Theol. p. 114
Divines; yea, those which hold as the Papists generally do, that historical
faith does justify, even they do yet grant, that there is an historical faith
in some degree and acts thereof, that is not saving; which is most apparent in
the other, viz. temporary faith, which is, doubtless, a higher degree of faith
(if there be a difference) and evidently includes a dogmatical faith within
it;) for this being but temporary cannot be saving.

Now, that both these are real though not saving; appears by the truth of their
effects; an Historical faith does generally produce a temporary faith, wherein
there is still more or less of an Applicative faith, though never so much as a
justifying faith.

Sometimetimes this temporary faith shows it self by a strong application,
bringing its subject truly to answer, though Efficacitas vocationis est
interna, cum tanguntur, intellectus and voluntas. Tree. Inst. 114. Ex modo
vocandi non ex effectu vocationis. Inst. Theol.
but in part, the call of God, which renders him really, though but commonly
called; yet, not outwardly, but in a very deep measure inwardly called; for as
Trelcatius has most accurately noted, this common calling is termed external,
only with respect to the manner of calling, and not with respect to the effect
of the call; this common call, being as truly, though not so thoroughly an
inward call, as that which is saving; for it reaches the mind, and produces
its change truly there, by bringing it to see danger and vanity in the ways
of sin; and to judge the ways of grace and holiness better and safer; it
touches and turns the will also, to perfer and choose, and accordingly to
apply it self to the true Religion; it unlocks, interrupts and partially
awakens the deepest part, and secretest closet of the soul, the conscience; by
convincing it of sin, and the wrath and terrors of the Lord accompanying
sin; by persuading it, of a necessity of repentance unto life, of believing to
the saving of the soul, of mortification of sin, and of becoming a new
creature; by letting in the flashes of hell for duties omitted, and evils
practiced and allowed, against light and truth imprisoned; this makes a change
and disturbance in the passions; quenches love to the world, breaks, or at
least disorders and shakes the quiet hope, joy, and delight in sin, etc. and
on the other side draws it into a good compliance with better ways makes it
to attend on the word gladly, to receive it with joy, to yield some outward
conformity to the will of God, and even to taste of the powers of the world to
come; and not only to deserve the title of believer, but even of one
sanctified with the blood of the Covenant, and yet all the while but such as is
but for a while, and therefore not justifying or saving faith, as sadly
appears, Heb. 6. and Heb. 10. Therefore is but deservedly styled by Matthew and
Mark, (...), temporary.

Object. I cannot foresee what can possibly interrupt us by way of objection
here, unless it be said that real faith is taken aequivoce, and though an
historical and temporary faith are real in their kind, yet is not these but a
justifying and saving faith, which is to be understood in the definition, when
the Church is defined societ as fidelium.

Answ. But, even this was prevented; for though Ames does evidently mean a
faith which justifies or saves, yet it has appeared the Scripture does not,
in the former instances; wherein, persons that are evidently denied to have
this justifying saving faith, are yet as evidently allowed, to have real faith,
and that, such as interests in visible Church Membership.

1. None, according to Scripture, are denied to be members of the Church but
infidels; but neither temporary believers, nor foederal as before, can ever
from the Scripture be proved, either to be infidels or savingly believers.

2. Foederal faith is not justifying, or (in Wallaeus his word) does not
justify the child, yet this entitles the child to visible Church membership;
and by this, to wit, foederal faith, all that are borne in the Church are
entitled and stand possessed of the said membership; and this is the very state
and case of most of the people of God in England, and that which answers our
own case, might give satisfaction without further enquiry.

3. Yet, if not a dogmatical faith, a faith less then justifying, or a
temporary faith, or a common faith (which so far draws the person
believing, and to own and apply himself (by desire of, and submission unto
Baptism) to the true Religion, though it work not so deep as was before
explained) is sufficient to admit an adult heathen (as more largely anon) into
communion with the Church; as easily appears in Simon, who had no more; in the
Eunuch who professed no more; and in the stony ground, which hereby stood in a
due possession of this communion, till in the time of temptation it fell away.

CHAP. XIII.
Touching Communion in the Ordinances of God, and the place it has, in the
definition of the Church.
WE now proceeed to the second great specialty observable, in the definitions
of the visible Church; taken from its chief office and employment, viz.
communion in the Ordinances and worship of God.

Here, though I do not altogether exclude the qualifications spoken to, yet, I
shall humbly offer whether, communion in the worship and Ordinances of God be
not fitter to define the visible Church by, then the former qualifications
thereof.

Cons. 1. Such as lay most weight upon the former qualifications of faith,
calling, and profession; in their definitions of the visible Church do, yet
ever add, more then a touch of this holy exercise and communion of it, to the
perfecting of their said definitions, as will appear expressly anon. Amesius
himself adds unto his societas fidelium ad communionem sanctorum constanter
inter se Med. p. 168.
exercendum.

Cons. 2. These qualifications seem fitter to define the Church as invisible
by seeing they also are invisible; indeed Ames defines the Church to be coetus
vocatorum, but he evidently intends Vid. Med. cap. 31. 7. p. 162
the mystical or invisible Church; it is a most usual thing for Divines to
define the mystical (by which they intend the Church of the saved) after this
manner, viz, by some occult (invisible) quality of faith, love, calling, or the
like; whereas the defining of the Church from its outward acts and exercises in
the worship of God, is (without some show of exactness) to define the Church
as visible, from something visible.

Cons. 3. If the visible Church should take its definition, rather from the
said qualifications, then from its communion in Ordinances, then would the
Church be rather known from the evidence of these qualifications, then from its
communion in Ordinances; for that which flows most immediately from the essence
of a thing into our apprehension and knowledge, cannot but be reckoned the most
essential, and therefore, the best mark of that thing.

But the Church, on the contrary, has been ever better known and
distinguished by the Ordinances wherein it communicates, then from any personal
qualities whatsoever.

1. Therefore, the truth of the Ordinances, and the truth of the faith which is
professed, has been ever respected and looked upon, as an essential mark, and
indeed the only essential mark of the true visible Church, while personal
qualities have been ever reckoned among the seperable adjuncts thereof.

2. Indeed purity of life, and evidences of saving grace, I humbly conceive,
are rather the purity of single members, but the purity of Ordinances, the
purity of the Church as such; so that the purer the Ordinances, the purer the
Church, etc. contra.

As even all our Divines, do argue upon the Marks of the Church against the
Papist; and as is most punctually and fully asserted by the Irish confession
(Artic. 58.) But particular and visible Churches; of those that make a
profession of the faith, and live under the outward means of salvation) be
many in number wherein the more or less sincerely, according to Christ's
institution the Word of God is taught (not practiced) and the Sacraments are
administered (not received) and the authority of the keys is used (not obeyed)
the more or less pure are such Churches to be accounted.

Cons. 4. The Church is rather and better distinguished from O holy Socrates O
holy Plato; O devilish Christian; O wicked Protestant. Woods Sermon. p. 49
its opposite, viz. the world by its fellowship in Ordinances then by the
evidence of inward qualities or saving grace any other way; therefore its
definition should rather be taken from thence.

1. Many Christians are not so civil as some Heathens, and many Heathens are
not so profane as some Christians; yet no Heathens do attend the Ordinances of
God, as Christians do in their solemn assemblies.

2. As Heathens (taken in a large sense for all infidels) do openly oppose the
true religion; so Christians do more openly own and maintain the same in these
their solemn meetings, and (properly, public) assembles; particular persons
stand in most direct opposition to infidels, not by their own private calling,
faith or profession, but by their relation to these bodies and Assembles of
Gods people, and the communion thereof in the worship of God in public.

3. Therefore therein, also the Church is most exposed to the malice of those
that seek her life, and thirst to destroy her very being in the world, not so
much in her righteousness toward men, or in her private enjoying, or separate
professing the faith of Christ, as in her public and valiant owning and
serving her Lord in the ways and Ordinances of divine worship, as it were to
the worlds, and the God of the worlds, defiance; for fear of whom they flinched
(Heb. 10.) and forsock the assembling of themselves together, with the Church.

Cons. 5. This further appears if we well consider the only way, that God
himself has generally, if not ever, taken, directly and judicially to
un-church a people; namely, by removing his Ordinances, and not his graces,
their faith, calling or profession from them; Look over all the books and works
of God; and see whether this can be questioned; the very people that murdered
Christ, yet to them belongs the promise, Acts 2. and they are the seed of the
Covenant, chap. 3. and so continue, notwithstanding this height of all impiety
until the Ministry and Ordinances are turned from them to the Gentiles, Acts
ult. it is granted that such desperate wickedness does not only deserve, that
God should spew a people out, but also it does violently provoke him to it;
yea, it is threatened with it, Rev. 3. 16. Yet observe, they are to be spewed
out of his mouth, his word is to be removed from them; for how did those Asian
Churches cease to be so, but by the Lords performance of that other threatening
in order unto this, viz. removing his Candlestick out of their place, Revel. 2.
5.

Cons. 6. Yea, a people, have no other way to unchurch themselves, but by their
voluntary breaking of their communion in the Ordinances of God, by heresy,
poisoning them, and thus making them die, and cease to be Gods Ordinances; or
schism, directly rejecting them, or by the perfection of both, in a total
Apostasy.

But though wickedness did ever unchurch a people demeritorie, it never yet
did unchurch a people formaliter vel effective, as will appear more anon.

Yea, though Heresy be indeed a renouncing the faith and schism, a renouncing
the profession of the faith, yet at present, I conceive, that heresy does
properly and strictly unchurch, as it denies the faith, not, as it is the
faith of Christ, but as it is, the foundation of this communion in the Word and
Sacraments; Being built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles.
and accordingly schism does stictly unchurch, as it breaks off this
communion, and not as it cease the profession of the faith.

Therefore breaking off from this communion, is most exactly and properly
termed, schism, or a renting of the Church, and ungodliness of heart or life,
and indeed a ceasing to profess the faith, as such, is not so properly or
stictly schysme.

Cons. 7. These qualifications, faith, holiness, calling, and profession, may
all be found where there is no instituted or formed Church and (consequently,
to our congregational brethrens principles, who as Master Cotton in the name of
his brethren, phraseth it, say, that the universal visible Church is a
Chimaera) where there is no formed visible Church; wherein Ames is so express,
Fideles non constituant ecclesiam particularem, nisi speciali Med. p. 167.
vinculo inter se conjungantur; which only renders them capable of this
communion; the Jewish Church being dissolved; the Elect, that were saved, were
not of themselves a formed instituted Church, but must therefore be added to
the Gentile-Churches, i. e. Congregations.

Therefore these personal qualifications, are not so fitted to the definition
of the visible Church, as communion in the Ordinances of God; for wheresoever
this is fixed and settled, there is undoubtedly a true visible Church, this
communion supposes the called, believers, professors on the one side, and the
officers or dispensers of the Ordinances on the other side, and plainly
expresses or signifies to us, the essence or truth of the visible Church, by
the formal actions of it.

Now, that I may yet, be more free from exception, and more truly understood,
I shall here recollect, and subjoyne what has been already in a scattered way
hinted, about these two great considerable in a few brief concessions and
propositions.

Prop. 1. I grant, that these personal qualifications are necessarily supposed
in this communion in Ordinances, in the senses before given of them; the
persons thus communicating, are such as are called thereunto; such as profess
the faith therein, and such as are presumed to believe what they thus profess,
or at least not to deny or renounce it.

Prop. 2. These qualifications are therefore necessary conditions of Church
members, or of such particular persons as assemble themselves with the Church
in this worship of God, or as Ames most Med. p. 163
accurately, forma vocatorum, the form of the called, not of the Church.

Prop. 3. Therefore these qualifications are rather to be reduced to the matter
of the Church, then to the form.

Prop. 4. I grant, therefore, that they fitly serve to express the
qualification of the matter of the Church, in the definition thereof, as I
conceive Amesius and others mean, whose definitions of the visible Church, are
usually begun thus; a company of believers, etc. or of the called, etc. or of
such as profess the faith, or the true Religion.

Prop. 5. Yet, I humbly conceive, the maine distingushing part of the
definition of the visible Church, lies in the communion of Ordinances, for the
reasons above specified; this, being, as was said, the formal action of it,
immediately springing from its form and essence, viz. society or community
which is the next great particular in the definition of the Church and now at
hand to be considered.

Only, by the way, let this be concluded with the easy notice that my design
is yet going on; seeing none can doubt, but if persons void of saving grace,
may be truly considered to have faith, calling, and profession, as before,
they may much easier also be considered to partake of the outward communion of
the Church, in the worship and Ordinances of God; and therefore, so far, none
can hinder the definition of the Church to be applicable thereunto without
respect to saving grace.

CHAP. XIV.
Touching that State of the Church, whereby it is capable of communion in
Ordinances, viz. Community.
THe last great particular, that claims a place in the definition of the
Church, is that proper condition or state thereof, that only renders it capable
of the exercise of this employment, comes now to be handled.

This, I presume, will be generally consented unto, to be a company, community,
or society (as it strictly intends communion in the worship of God) wherein, I
humbly conceive, is contained.

1. Many particular persons or men (in the kind, not sex, or age. 1. Many,
coetus requirit december. 2. Many men, for other creatures below man, are not
capable of making a society, it being a political, and therefore a rational
state, and Angels are almost as much above it; society being a state of
discourse, and so most properly belonging to discoursive creatures, viz. men,
according to that of the Grammarian, coetus requirit december homines; this is
supposed in a society. Cod.


2. The union of these men by some kind of bond or other, whereby they are
embodied and made an habitual assembly, a fixed society, this is expressed.

3. Actual communion in the Ordinances of God, this is intended.

Coetus or societas here, is therefore to be taken in a moral or political
sense, from corporations or companies of trade. So, 1. It Is orderly, not
tumultuons. 2. It Is fixed, not occasional. 3. It Is habitual, not only actual.
4. It has officers belonging to an orderly and fixed society of this nature.
5. Therefore, lastly, it is a society of Christians governed by the Minister, or
Ministers of the Gospel, as we still find it to be in Scripture.

I shall crave leave to explicate my self herein, a little further, by a few
propositions.

Prop. 1. This community is of necessity required in the true or false
definition of the visible Church.

Prop. 2. This community does directly, immediately and formally Foederata ifla
conjunctio tantum constituit ecclesiam, quotenus spectat ad communionem
sanctorum exercendam. Am. Med 169.
intend communion; Communion is the most natural act, and the very essential
efflux of community; therefore coetus (a coire) (...), is truly rendered an
Assembly or Congregation.

Prop. 3. Communion, then, has the next necessity and place, to community, in
the definition of the Church, as being the essential property thereof, and its
formal evidence,

Prop. 4. The means of this communion, or its specification is the Ordinances
or worship of God, instituted and enjoined by Christ in the Gospel.

Prop. 5. Would we view all the three special particulars, that lay claim to
this definition, at once I humbly conceive. 1. That the qualifications spoken
of, viz. faith, calling, etc. taken with Ames in a saving sense, they best
serve to define the Church invisible. 2. Communion in Ordinances best serve to
define the universal visible. 3. And this community or proper society best
serves to define the particular instituted visible Church, which is the Church
which we find most frequently defined by Authors; not but that they may all
have their place in the definition of the particular Church, but I think thus
they may all have the chiefest and most necessary place in the definition of
the Church.

Prop. 6. We then may hence note three degrees of necessity in these three
great parts of the definition of the Church.

1. The Church cannot be without the qualifications specified, yet they may be,
where the Church (viz. a particular Neque tamen sufficit, subitanea aliqua
conjunctio, and sanctae communionis exercitium ad ecclesiam constituendam; nisi
etiam constantia illa accedat quoad intentionem saltem, etc. Am. Med, p. 170
instituted Church) is not, viz. in the called or believers scattered.

2. Actual communion constantly attended on, cannot be where the Church is not,
yet the Church may be where there is no actual communion; the Church is really,
when it does not meet or assemble together; this is more necessary then the
forms.

3. Communion or society referring to this communion, can neither be where the
Church is not, neither can the Church be where this is not; therefore, this is
necessary, even with the highest degree of necessity, for a right defining a
particular visible Church which further appears thus.

1. Because (as before) we conceive, the very form of the Definitio proprie
dicta vel essen^ialis est physica quae datur per Meteriam and formam vel
metaphysica, que datur per genus and differentiam.
Church to consist in coetu, in society or community, it being an aggregative
body; but I still intend such a community as relates to communion in the
worship of God; now desinitions being only to explicate the essence of a
thing, and the form being nearest to the essence, and, as Aristotle says, the
very quid and essence it self, definitions are best, when taken from the form.

2. Definitions are fittest to be taken from hence, because the qualifications
mentioned are supposed in the persons of this society and this community does
essentially con-note the communion in Ordinances, in the habit or first act of
it; when the second act, or actual communion is unavoidably suspended, by
intrinsic or extrinsick necessity thereof.

3. These qualifications may be where there is no Church, and a Church may be
where there is no actual communion, at present, The action being ended the
Assembly is dissolved, and is no longer in being; whereas the Church which was
assembled does no less continue afterward then before. Hook. eccles pol. 89*
and therefore, neither of these are so fit to define the Church withal, as
community; that was now observed, to be convertible with the Church.

4. The Names of the Church do generally intimate this community, for its most
usual and proper name (...), Scharpius acquaints us that it is from convocando;
and that among the Athenians it signified a company called together voce
praeconis to hear the sentence of the Senate, which Assembly the Latins called
concio, and this, says he, is (...), transferred to a holy use; we see here
one actual Congregation of the people, and this called ecclesia from their
being convocated, and this usual actual convocation, must needs suppose a
community, by which they were held, in a constant (...) a convocando and apud
Athenienses significabat coetume reliqua Turba, voce praeconis ad audiendum
Senatus sententiam convocdtum, qui coetus latinis concio dicitur, (...) ad res
sac as traducitur. Nempe ad significandum sanctum coetum voce praeconien verbi
vocatorum ad oracirla divina audienda, Joh. Scharp. Carsus Theol.

(...) G^aecis celebre and usitatura, significans proprie coetus, hominum a
suis sedibus in alium convocatorum ad aliquid audiendum. Poly. Anth. p. 969.
Vid Bull. dec. p 135.


preparation for these summons; but he proceeds to tell us what it is in a holy
sense, viz. an holy Assembly of persons called together by the voice of the
Preachers of the Word, to hear the Divine Oracles. Langus also teaches, that
(...) among the Greeks, signifying properly a company of men called together
from their own seats into some other place, ad audiendum, to hear something;
whence the occasion being frequent and solemn, the company became a society, or
an habitual company constantly attending in one place upon Gods worship, which
is properly a Church of God, therefore, in Latin, it is called Congregatio,
happily from the Hebrew Katial, Congregavit. (...)


Its metaphorical names import no less; it is called a Body, a House, a Family,
a City, a Flock, a Kingdom; all which connote union, and such, as directly
intends communion and fellowship.

5 The Church is therefore called a Way. I persecuted, says Paul, this way
unto the death, Acts 22. v. 4. which is a figure pointing at the persons that
usually walked together in Visibilis ecclesia est coetus eorum qui per verbum
externum Sacramentorum ac disciplinae ecclesiastice usum in unum externum
corpus coalescunt. disp. 40 These. 32 Est unitas ecclesiae quae late patet in
Sacram. omnium societate and communione. His Vind. p. 9 Visibilis ecclesia est
coetus communiter vocatorum, tum electorum tum reproborum p. 194. Arnob. p.
156. upon the 19. Art. allowed by the former Church of England.
one way of worship; and evidently intimates that the persons that thus walked
together, were a fixed community or society.

6. Some that define the Church, leave out the foresaid personal
qualifications, so do the Leiden Professors, the visible Church, say they, is
a company of persons that by the external word, the use of the Sacraments and
discipline are united into one outward body. And Augustine, it is the unity of
the Church which lies broad in the society and community of all the Sacraments.

Some again, that define the Church do not express it communion in
Ordinances; so Mr. Hudson, the visible Church, says he, is a company of people
called or separated by God from Idols to the true Religion, and yielding
professed subjection to that call; and more plainly Wollebius, the visible
Church is a company of persons commonly called, as well Elect as reprobate.

But no Author that I have yet met withal, did ever define the Church, without
specifying and expressing this society or community one way or other.
Apollonius begins his definition with societas, the Leiden Professors with
coetus: So, Wallebius, Trelcatius, Ames, and Augustine with unitas; of English
men, Bradshaw says the Churches of Christ are holy assemblies: Dayrel says a
particular visible Church is a company, etc. so Hudson, the visible Church is a
company, etc. And Arnobius upon the 19 Arti a Congregation of faithful people.

Therefore it is likely that the unity or society of the Church, deserves the
first and the highest place in the definition thereof.

Lastly, therefore I shall conclude my self in those express Fideles non
constituunt ecclesiam particularem, quamvis simul plures in codem loco
conveniant aut vivant, nisi speciali vinculo inter se conjugantur. Med. p. 169.
Vinculum hoc est foedus etc. Ibid.
words of Amesius; that neither the faithful, or many faithful, or many
faithful meeting together, or living in one place, do thereby constitute a
particular Church, without they be further joined together by some special bond
among themselves; and I shall not fear to add, with him, that this bond is a
Covenant; and that this covenant ought to be such, as he there defines it,
viz. that whereby the faithful oblige themselves particularly to perform all
those duties both toward God, and mutually toward each other, which respect
the Condition and Edification of the Church.

Yet give me leave to explain my self in a few particulars touching this bond
or Covenant, and I shall hasten to the conclusion of this last particular.

1. I grant, this bond or covenant may be lawfully expressed, at the first
constitution of a particular Church, because it rationally agrees with the
nature of such a society.

2. I further grant that the express bond, being a prudential thing, may be so
much the nearer to necessity, by how much the more prudence dictates it, to be
of use, and discovers more evident occasion thereof accidentally occurring at
the constitution of such a Church.

3. Yet I must interpose against the necessity thereof in its own nature,
because we find not any such command in Scripture, nor any such practice in
the primitive Churches.

4. Neither may the want, much less the absence thereof, by any means, be
hence interpreted, to the questioning of the truth of such Churches, as have
the Word and Sacraments purely, or but truly administered, and constantly
attended upon; for who can deny but that these are infallible marks, yea
essential notes of a true Church? besides, it is apparent even thereby that
there is an implicit bond or covenant, wherein to such a people, are not only
taken with God, but, mutuo inter se, mutually with one another (seeing as the
prophet queries, how can two walk together, unless they be agreed;) which two
of the most eminent, Dr. Ames and Mr. Hooker.
as well as moderate, Congregational men, have under their hands acknowledged,
to be all that is necessary to the truth of a visible Church in this respect.

5. Therefore, we must, with them conclude, that the form consists not in a
Covenant, as expressed; for then where that was wanting, the Church could not
exist; but as a Covenant or mutual bond, so far as it is necessarily supposed
in the nature of such a society, or community.

6. Although I have before granted, that either an express or implicit
covenanting to perform the duties of Church members, is a necessary duty,
binding all that are admitted into such a relation; Yet I must still deny it to
be of such absolute necessity, as that the non-real and actual intention in a
particular person so to covenant and oblige himself should exclude the reality
of his visible Church Membership; provided, his desire to be admitted, be real
and sincere.

The reality of his desire of admission, is essential to his very admission;
but the reality of his actual purpose to perform all the duties, to which he
is obliged by his admission, is only essential to his safe admission; the
first is necessary for his being, the last for his well-being in this state of
the Church membership.

Indeed, he is passively bound by the command of God, as also by his relation
to this society of the Church, both actively Persons may be passively bound
when they do not actively bind themselves.
and actually, to oblige himself unto the said duties: yet, if by reason of the
Churches carelessness, he is not put upon it; or by reason of his ignorance of
this his duty, or his unwillingnesse to engage, at present, so far in it; he
shall not thus oblige himself, he is not thereby presently disobliged from his
duty, by the nullity of this his Relation, or visible Church membership.

7. This actual obliging himself in truth, to perform all the duties There is
a necessary duty, and a necessary condition.
of a Churchmember, is, therefore a necessary duty, accompanying his
admission, but no necessary condition thereof, or without which he cannot be
admitted.

And this, I would conceive to be the meaning of Ames his words before noted,
viz. the bond, without which, the faithful do not constitute a particular
Church, is a Covenant, vel expressum, vel implicitum; which implicitum, I
humbly conceive, must necessarily An implicit Covenant opposed to an express
and an actual covenanting. An actual conanting is either vocal or mental. We
covenant consequentially or vertually what neither expressly nor actually.
be opposed both to expressum and to actuale; and his meaning is, or should be,
that neither an express, that is, a vocal; nor yet an actual, whether vocal or
mental Covenant, is a condition so necessary, as without which the faithful
cannot constitute a Church; but a conjunction so far foederata, as his phrase
is, as is necessary to communion, which does implicitly, i. e.
consequentially, though not expressly and vertually, though not actually, also
bind the faithful, i. e. all the members of the Church, particulatim, to the
performance of all those duties, which the nature of so holy a society calls
them unto.

For, I readily grant, that, though particular persons do not actually, either
in their words or thoughts, oblige themselves so largely; yet, by their very
desire of admission into the Church, if admitted, they do by consequence and
virtue thereof, oblige themselves unto all those duties that the state, into
which they desire to be, and are accordingly admitted, does necessarily and
naturally We bind our selves vertually to more, when we yield to be admitted,
sometimes; then we that are admitted think of or intend.
put them upon; so, in conclusion this foedus, as it is extended in Ames his
description, is necessary, in intention passionis, viz. admission, non
patientis, the person admitted.

8. Yet at length, we must conclude, that there is very little use of, and
consequently, as little reason to dispute about this bond, whether express or
implicit, in constituted Churches; seeing, herein, our members are generally
admitted in their infancy; and what shall need to be imposed at years of
discretion, cannot, with any show of reason intend their admission into the
Church; it being rightly, either but in order to their admission to some higher
Ordinance; or, at most their confirmation in that state, and those privileges,
whereinto they are indeed admitted, before, in baptism; but of this more
directly, and therefore more largely hereafter.

However, my maine conclusion passes still; for if the persons that are
subjects of both this society, and the bond thereof, may be considered (as
before is proved without respect to saving grace; then, doubtless, so may both
the society and the bond thereof, touching the first, viz. the society, there
is no color of doubting; and touching the latter, viz. the Covenant, let Amens
himself, whose words happily are the ground of our doubt, be our resolver; he,
first, assures us, that such as only profess, are members of the visible
Church; and yet, also, here adds, that the visible Church is not constituted
without the bond of this Covenant; so that, if Ames consist with himself, or
may be yielded unto in the case this Covenant may be entered, even by such, as
only profess, i. e. such as have no saving grace, or (as he in another place)
no inward virtue. Besides, what should possibly hinder, but that such persons
as are not endued with saving grace, may yet be obliged to those duties, which
are not performable, without that grace which themselves want, by an obligation
brought upon themselves by themselves, when they themselves did not intend it,
as we have found this to be; and was the very case of Simon Magus.

CHAP. XV.
Of the definition as it may be framed, by the union of the former parts.
HItherto of the parts of the definition of the visible Church, by themselves:
proceed we now, to look upon these parts in union, and to state an entire
definition therefrom.

Which is most ready to be done, by the closing, or drawing together what has
been so long considered apart.

The visible Church may thus be said to be Believers or persons outwardly
called, or professing the true Religion; ordinarily attending the communion of
Ordinances, in coetu, or in a fixed society; or if you would put them together
thus, a community of persons, that believe with a common faith, or that are
called with common calling, or that make a profession of the true Religion,
ordinarily meeting and joining together in the Ordinances of Gods worship,

For, though communion be nearer to the essence of the visible Church, then
personal qualifications; and community, then communion; yet, as has been
still acknowledged, they have all their sit place and use in the definition
thereof.

Here, therefore, is the qualification of the matter, viz. common faith,
calling, or profession; here is the form constituting, the coetus, or
community, as it looks unto communion; and lastly, here is the formal action,
or, if you please, rather the form d^stinguishing this society from all other
communion in the Ordinances of God.

Most of the definitions, that our reformed Divines, have given, so far as I
can find, do indeed express all these three parts thereof. I shall set a few
of them down here, and leave the rest to the search and judgment of the
learned.

The Leiden Professors define it to be a company of those which Visibilis
ecclesia est coetus eorum qui per verbum externum Sacramentorum and disciplinae
ecclesiasticae usum in unum corpus colescunt. disp. 40. The. 32
by the external word, and the use of the Sacraments and ecclesiastical
discipline are united into one body; wherein two of the three foresaid parts
are very evident; it is a company, and such a company as has the communion of
such a body in the Word and Sacraments. I confess, that the other, viz. the
qualification of the subjects of this company, is not by them here specified;
yet their profession is easily implied in their fellowship and communion in
Gods Ordinances, and the not mentioning, of the calling, or faith, or
profession thereof, only intimates, as before was noted, that personal
qualifications are not so necessary to the visible Church, as this community or
communion.

Indeed, they also insert discipline, but seeing that discipline is not
necessary to the being of the Church, and is but a separable adjunct of it, it
cannot be taken as more necessary, into the definition of the Church.

Ames defines the Church institute, or visible particular, to be Est societas
fidelium speciali vinculo, inter se conjunctorum, ad communionem Sanctorum
constanter inter se exercendam, Med. 168.
a society of believers, joined together among themselves by a special bond,
for their constant exercising the communion of Saints together; where all the
three parts are very visible. 1 Believer. 2. In society. 3. For communion. I
have before confessed, that he intends saving faith, as appears by his next
words; yet I humbly conceive, his meaning is, that all this society ought to be
endued with such a faith, and not that they are so indeed, or if not, no
members of the visible Church.

For in the same page, he tells us, that it is very probable that there is no
particular Church, but it has some members that do savingly believe; and by
his asserting, the greatest probability of some that savingly believe, he
evidently grants that others in this Church, yea, and many others (for they,
viz. many others, are directly distinguished to some) may be without saving
faith; and yet, as he grants in the next Paragraph, be members of the visible
Church; and in that known place against Bellarmine, says expressly, that it
is false, if any say, that we, the reformed Divines, require inward virtues,
and therefore not the root of them, saving faith, to render one a member of the
visible Church.

Trelcatius says, the visible Church is a company of men called Ecclesia
visibitis definitur coetus hominum vacatione externam, seu praedicatione verbi
ad cultum gloriae Dei, Inst. 215 Est societas coramqui veram fidem profitentur
ad communionem and societatem ecclesiasticam inter se exercendam.
out by external calling, as by the preaching of the word and the communion of
the Sacraments, to the worship of the glory of God; here, also all the parts
are manifest. A company. 2. Of men called with external calling. 3. To
communion in the worship of God.

But Apollonius seems most clear and distinct, whose definition, I had rather
fix upon, then any yet named; it is, says he, a society of persons professing
the true faith, and exercising ecclesiastical communion and fellowship among
themselves; here is society of professors, for communion; communion
ecclesiastical distinguishing this society from all others; and profession
d^stinguishing this society and communion, to be of the visible, and not of the
invisible Church.

There are some of our own contrymen, that have given very clear definitions
of the visible Church in this kind. Reverend Bradshaw says the Churches of
Christ are holy assemblies, joining ordinarily and orderly together in the
worship of God; here is an Assembly, the qualification thereof holy; the
communion thereof joining together in the Worship of God, though, I confess, I
suppose, that he here called these assemblies holy, not with respect to the
subjects or the persons that made it up, but to the works and employment about
which they were conversant, the holy service and worship of God.

Yet. I confess, that there is an obscure Author, whose name is Dayrel, that
wrote many years agon in the defense of Dayrel of the Church p. 24 like to
Hookers.
our Churches against the Brownists, whose definition is more exact to my
notion of the visible particular Church, then any of A Church as now we are to
understand it, ^s a society that ^s a number of persons belonging unto
Christian fellowship the place and limits whereof are not certain. eccl pol. p.
88 Lictionary p. 85
the former, a particular visible Church, says he* is that company, that in a
City, Town, or place cohabiting, profess the Christian or true Religion, and
do ordinarily meet and join together in the exercises of religion. A company,
united by co-habitation and profession; and having communion together
ordinarily in religious exercises, the Ordinances of God.

Much like to which Wilson has defined the universal visible Church; it is,
says he, a company of men selected, gathered and called out of the world, by
the doctrine of the Gospel, to know and worship the true God in Christ
according to his Word.

Or if these be too long, you may take it thus; the visible Church Ecclesia
specialiter, sumitur, pro coetu sacra, scu conventu hominum ad cultum Dei
convenientium, Ravanel. de eccl. for which he quotes many Texts.
is a society of persons called out of the world to the worship of the true God.

In this last, I am willing to acquiesce, it being short, and yet, I humbly
conceive, plain, clear and full, evidently containing the whole sense of all
the former, and wanting, for ought I can see in no necessary property of a
perfect definition.

Herein we find the matter, persons called; so termed by Christ himself, as
peculiar to the visible, distinguished to the invisible, or the Church of the
Elect. 2. They are persons called out, so it exactly answers to the most
natural and allowed Etymology of the Church. 3. Here are the terms of this
motion, a quo, out of the world, ad quem, to the worship of God; wherein we
have its separation, The end of the Church in the Scripture in the time of the
Gospel is to worship God as before, from John 4
and its dedication; its separation from the world, its dedication to God and
his worship. Wherein also, its distinguishing form, and end, and office is
con-noted, communion in the means or Ordinances of this worship of God. 4.
It Is also said to be a society, a fixed community, that respects this
communion, wherein as has been often said the to formale, the very
constituting form of the Church consists.

This definition is also convertible with the thing defined; it does not lie
broader or narrower, but just adequate and even with it; for every society thus
called out of the world, to the worship of God, is a Church of God, and e
contra.

Object. Neither does it avail to object, that in this definition, there is no
mention at all of the constant or ordinary meeting thereof for this worship of
God; as some other definitions have it.

Answ. For we are defining, a visible Church in general, which ought to be
such, as agrees with every kind of visible Church, if I may so speak, both
universal and particular; now this constant* actual meeting together, is rather
peculiar to the particular Church, then common therewith, to the Church
universal, which has this actual meeting together, but either in its
representative, a general counsel; or in its parts, particular Churches,
whereas a society called out of the world to the worship of God, is general and
common, both to the universal and particular Church.

2. Yea, a particular visible Church it self, is such, when it has not this
actual meeting together; much more, when it has it not constantly; from which
it happily may accidentally be long suspended, and yet not lose its being; and
therefore not come short of its definition; the essence of the Church lies not
in act, but in habit; not in communion, but in community; as this community *
Foeder ata ista conjunctio catenus tantum constituit ecclesiam quatenus spectat
ad communione^ exercendam, to be exercised. Am. Med. 169 Sanctae communis
exercitium ad ecclesiam constituendam sufficit, si constantia illa ac^edit,
quoad intentionem tantum, quae statum ad sert corporis, and membrorum in
spirituali quadam politia, as with small variation of words is gathered. From
Am. Med. 170 parag. 21
looks toward, and always intends this communion, to which it is therefore
said to be called out of the world, in the definition.

As a man does not lose any part of his essence, or cease at all to be a man,
when he cease the exercise of his reason, in his sleep, or the like; because,
the essence of his manhood lies not in the exercise, but in the faculty of
reason; whereby he is fitted, and duly furnished to exercise the same, when
occasion is offered, and impediments are removed; So the Church cease, not to
be a Church, when she cease her actual communion in the worship of God,
because the essence of the Church, being in society to that end, does not
suppose it, though indeed it strongly intend it, and dispose unto it, as it
contains a habit thereof, or at least an obligation thereunto, upon due
seasons.

Yet, though the communion be not actual, but only habitual; we may not say
the community is only habitual and not actual; it would be strange to say,
that a man is only an habitual man, because his reasoning is now habitual, and
not actual, or a society of such a trade is only habitually so, when it does
not actually meet and assemble together. The communion therefore is but
habitual, but the Church has its essence and existence, when it does not meet
together.

Therefore, to have put ordinary or orderly meeting together, into the
definition of the Church, would have made the definition larger then the
definitum sometimes; so that sometimes the Church must have been no Church,
when indeed it is so; or the definition thereof, must have been no proper
definition thereof, but variable, sometimes fit, and sometimes not; fit when
the Church is an actual meeting, and not fit, when she has adjourned to
another time.

Therefore this definition [a society called out of the world to the worship of
the true God] being fit to express the nature, both of the universal and the
particular visible Church, and that at all times and states thereof, it may, I
think be yielded, to be a proper definition thereof.

Now to draw up this discourse, I shall only further intimate, that the
definition of the visible Church, may be truly considered to be such, and
truly applicable to the visible Church, without any respect to saving grace,
as appears to the very first glance of our observation from the definition
fixed upon, viz. that it is a society of men called ^ut of the world to the
worship of God; who will be so ventrous as to question either the fitness of
this definition, or its applicablenesse to the visible Church, without respect
to saving grace. For,

1. All the parts that are either essential, or necessary, or fit for this
definition of the Church, have appeared before, to be thus truly applicable
thereunto, without respect to saving grace, therefore the whole is so likewise.

2. All particular definitions now mentioned (except one) are to be truly
considered without respect to saving grace; without any color of question,
much less controversy; and that one, viz of Ames, is nothing against us,
seeing Ames his judgment is for us, and himself allows such persons a place
in the Church, as he will not allow, if we understand him any place in the
definition of the Church, as before is noted.

3. Therefore these very Authors take occasion to acquaint us, that the
Church, which they thus define, contains Hypocrites, as well as the Elect,
and that, with the joint consent of the reformed Divines; which, I doubt not,
abundantly to make to appear, when we speak upon the head of humane Testimony.

CHAP. XVI.
Objections answered, and the true sense of the reformed Divines considered,
who say the invisible Church is only the true Church.
BEfore we pass on to that way of arguing, termed inartificial namely from
authority; we think fit to consider a few objections, which may be called
artificial, and leave the other Objections which arise from Scripture, and the
judgment of the Church, to be handled (I think more methodically) after my
arguments thence.

The first, and indeed the only considerable objection against me is this.

Object. It Is confessed, that there is but one true Church; it is also confessed,
that the invisible Church is one true Church; but now, the Church invisible
cannot be considered to be truly such without respect to saving grace;
therefore, neither the Church visible.

Answ. I answer, that in general this argument is justly exceptible against;
because, before it reaches the conclusion of my opponent, it evidently
concludes that, which I presume, himself renounceth, viz. that the visible
Church is in no respect at all; either with, or without saving grace, to be
truly a Church of Christ; that this is the first conclusion of the argument is
most obvious, from the two first propositions. 1. It Is said there is but one
true. 2. The invisible, is one true Church. What now does force it self from
hence, but therefore the visible is no visible Church; somewhat a strange
conclusion, unknown, I think to all the ages of the Church before us; and such
as imposed upon the providence of God, to have entrusted this whole worship and
Ordinances in the hands of a false Church.

2. Hereby also we have a quick dispatch of the present controversy; for, what
need we reach any further after the thing before us, viz. whether the visible
Church may be considered to be truly a Church of Christ, without this respect
to saving grace, if it be first concluded, that there is no visible Church at
all.

3. But, more directly, I answer, by denying at least one of these things;
either, 1. That the one true Church is the Church invisible. Or, 2. That though
the one true Church be invisible, yea, and this invisible Church cannot be
considered to be truly such without respect to saving grace, yet it follows
not that the visible Church may not be considered to be truly a Church of
Christ without respect to saving grace.

1. I might deny (with fairness enough) that the one true Church, is properly
the Church invisible, until my arguments above, for the contrary are answered;
till when, the present objection, can challenge no answer.

2. But here, I shall rather deny the consequence; and that though I grant the
invisible Church to be the only true Church, and that this cannot be truly
considered, as such, without respect to saving grace, yet, the visible Church
is a true Church, and may be considered to be truly such without respect to
saving grace; the reason is, because these attributes of visible and invisible,
though they are given to the same subject, the Church; yet in diverse respects;
which appears by this argument, if they are to be taken in the same respect,
and visibility be, as none will deny, an inseparable adjunct of the Church;
then there is no invisible Church, for to say as Ames says, the Church never
cease to be visible, and there is an invisible Church; if visible and
invisible here be to be taken in the same respect, is a plain contradiction:
now the consideration of the diverse respect, wherein the same Church, is said
to be visible and invisible, detects the fallacy of the former Argument, thus;
the Church, with respect to its saving faith, and to those persons that have
this saving faith, is said to be invisible; this faith, being not seen, and
these persons, not to be certainly known: And again, the same Church, with
respect to its profession, and the persons therein, that own the same, in the
eyes of the world, is truly said to be visible; So that, though there be but
one Church, there is a Church invisible, and a Church visible And again, though
this Church, as invisible, cannot be considered to be truly such, without
respect to saving grace (seeing it is therefore said to be invisible, because
of its saving grace, and the subjects thereof, cannot be seen or certainly
known by men) yet, this Church, in its visible consideration, or as it is the
visible Church, may be considered to be truly such, without respect to saving
grace; (seeing, that which renders it thus visible has no necessary dependence
upon saving grace) as Reverend Hudson says well, the Church is considered to
be visible and invisible, a duplici modo communionis, externae and internae;
visible, with respect to its external way of communion, which does not suppose
saving grace; and invisible, with regard to its internal way of communion,
which does suppose saving grace.

This is doubtless the plain sense of the reformed Protestant Churches, as is
clearly stated by that eminent patron thereof; Med. p. 165
Dr. Ames his words are known: The Militant Church is invisible and visible;
this distinction, is a distribution of the adjuncts of the same subject, in
diverse respects; the one internal, the other external.

I confess, the reformed Divines, I mean, many of them do affirm, that the
invisible Church is only revera ecclesia, the true Church; but their meaning,
I humbly conceive, must be taken, with a great deal of caution; which, with all
humility, I shall labor to unfold in a few distinctions, as near their own
sense, and with as much of their spirit, as I am able.

The Distinctions, which may help us herein; may be either, of the Epithete,
true; or the subject, the Church.

1. Truth, as applicable to the Church, is taken Respectu Naturali Vel
Entitatis. Morali Vel Status. Vel Finis.


Now, I humbly offer, whether the reformed Divines, asserting the invisible
Church to be the only true Church, can possibly be though to exclude the
visible Church from being true in the first branch of this division. viz. in
that natural sense, whereby a thing is said to have the truth of being and
existence; why then do they still define the visible Church? and give it all
its Profession and preaching of the true doctrine is the only proper and
certain note of the true Church. Hildersham on Joh. 4. p. 161 This was the
meaning of Wickliff Husse, and others, who therefore define the Church to be
the multitude of the elect not for that they think them only to pertain to the
Church, and no others; but because they only pertain unto it principally,
fully, effectually and finally. Field on the Church. p. 13. Distinct. 2.
real causes? why do they tell us of the marks of the true visible Church? why
do none of them assert that the visible is not truly a Church, or that the
invisible Church, is alone, the Church truly so called? yea, in that they
assert it to be visible, they conclude it to be real, seeing we cannot see that
that is not.

Therefore they may be granted to mean only, that the invisible Church is
only true with respect to her state in the favor of God, and to her end,
salvation; that is the members of the invisible Church alone, are certainly and
infallible instated in the love of God, and to be saved; their controversy,
with the Papist, engaged them to both these in their defense of the invisible
Church, and perseverance, but no further; for, though the question was whether
all in the visible Church were in a state of grace, or whether all that were in
a state of grace should persevere therein to the end; yet we never read that
they ever came to question, whether the visible Church might be truly said to
be a Church of Christ, or not, the centrary being indeed acknowledged on both
sides.

The Church invisible then is the only true Church in this moral sense, it
only being truly in the love and favor of God, and sure of salvation; but
the visible Church is also true in a natural sense, it being really and truly
a Church of God. Or,

2. Truth, as applied to the Church is so Simpliciter. Secundum quid.


Truth, as taken in general, large, or simple acceptance, may be easily
conceived to be granted by the reformed Divines even to the visible Church;
it is true in its kind, with such a truth, as is agreeable to the nature of a
visible Church: I think, none will deny this, nor affirm the invisible Church
to be the only true Church, in this sense.

Yet there is a restrained sense of truth, in order to some particular
determination of it, which belongs only to the Church invisible, and which our
Divines must needs mean whatever it be: yet generally they explain
themselves, as Bullinger does himself; revera ecclesia, says he, viz.
fideles, Electi Dei, viva membra, connexa Christo, non modo vinculis and
externis notis, sed spiritu and fide.

In which words he plainly expresses that there is a double way of being knit
to Christ, 1. Fide and spiritu. 2. Vinculis and externis notis. The first of
which he intends, when he speaks of the true Church, viz. that the invisible
Church is the only true Church in this respect of being knit unto Christ by
faith and the spirit, leaving room for any to conclude besides, that such as
are knit unto Christ by outward bonds alone, are yet so far truly knit, as
to be truly members of the visible, though not of the Church invisible.

Union with Christ is true outwardly (externis vinculis) by which the visible
Church is truly his Church, and true savingly, whereby the invisible Church is
the only true Church in that respect.

The subject of this questioned truth may also be distinguished for the better
discovery of the mind of these Divines herein.

The Church is taken Strictly. Largely. Consisting of the Elect regenerate.
Distinct. 1. Hac autem ecclesia latius accepta quatenus and bonos and malos
continet. Zanch. de eccl. p. 65. Militans ecclesia rursus consideratur
dupliciter vel enim strictius considerata vel latius, and malos complexa. Bull.
Dec. 350. Vox ecclesia ambigui stricte, latissime, minus late in quo electi and
hypocrite. Ravanel. etc. Objicis, sat scio, hypocritas me numerasse, etc. Dec.
p. 347
Good and bad.


This we may the bolder insist upon, because it is of so frequent use amongst
the reformed Divines themselves, upon the same occasion; and as they themselves
explain it, the Church strictly taken is the Church invisible consisting only
of the Elect, as Trelcatius; Bullinger, etc. or of the Elect-regenerate and
called, as Ames, and others, and the Church largely taken, consisting of the
Elect and reprobate, Believers and hypocrites, good and bad, as their general
language is.

To apply it, when these Divines affirm, that the invisible Church is the
only true Church, can they be understood in any other sense then this, viz.
that they only are the true Church in this close strict and saving sense, as
the Church is taken strictly? and is it not as evident, as any thing in the
world, that they intend only to shut hypocrites out of the Church in this
strict and saving sense? and as plain, that they allow them a place in the
Church, as it is largely taken, which large acceptance of the Church is by
themselves generally expressed to be ecclesia bonos and malos amplexa.

Bullinger frames an objection on purpose that he may have an occasion to
declare his mind to this point; his objection is, How can hypocrites, being
members of Satan, be members of the Church? He answers, by distinguishing of
hypocrites. Some, says he, confide in their own righteousness, as the
Pharisees did; these are not; others do not so, but neither hating, nor flying
from, nor persecuting the Church, do outwardly join with it, and profess the
same faith a while with it, etc. these are members of the Church till they fall
away; and much more those that continue in this profession till they die; which
he largely proves (as indeed most of the reformed Divines do) from all the
parables of Ut jam nihil addubitarc possumus Judam non fuisse membrum internae
Sanctae dei ecclesiae, licet esset membrum exterioris ecclesiae. Quam superius
appellavi ecclesiam militantem strictius consideratam; aliam vero visibilem
illam bonos and malos comprehendentem latius consideratam. Dec. page 355
the Kingdom of Heaven in the Gospel, at length concludes, that hypocrites are
members of the Church visible largely taken, containing the good and the bad,
but not of the Church invisible, not true and living members of this interior
Church, or the Church so strictly taken.

Yet, this does not infer two distinct Churches, for if we take the Church
strictly, then hypocrites are no part of the Church; and if we take it in the
large sense, then the strict Church is but a part thereof, to instance in the
material Church, if taken in a strict sense, it signifies the body of the
Church exclusive of the chancel, if largely, for both together; and then, the
Church strictly taken is but part of the Church largely taken.

This is clear, while we distinguish the Church, qua Church, but when we
consider it as visible and invisible, it fails us. We say well, that the
Church taken strictly is part of the Church taken largely, and the Church
largely taken contains the Church strictly taken, but it would be hard to
say, the Church invisible taken strictly is part of the Church visible taken
largely, to say a thing, as invisible is part of a thing as visible, is
contradictio in adjectio.

It Is evident then, that invisible and visible are opposed here in the
accident, not in the subject, i. e. it is not meant that as some persons are
invisible, so others in the same respect are visible, as if saving grace was
not seen in some, and yet seen in others; but thus some persons having saving
grace not seen, are said to be invisible, and others having profession visible,
are said to be visible.

Moreover, this subject of these accidents is rather the faith Bull. Dec. 355
Invisibilis and interna dicitur non quod homines sunt invisibiles, sed quod
hominibus non appareat, qui vere and ficte credaut.
then the person; they are applied to the person, but intend the faith, or the
truth thereof, as it is saving, it is invisible, as it is professed, so it is
visible, and not because the men are either visible or invisible.

Lastly, the Church largely taken, may be considered Either Asolutely. Or
Comparatively.

In it self, or in comparison with the Church strictly taken; and accordingly
the reformed Divines may be thought to mean, that the Church largely taken, if
it be considered absolutely and in it self, is a true, or at least, truly a
Church of Christ, but when the Church largely taken, as it includes the bad and
the good together, is compared with the Church strictly taken for the company
of the Elect or savingly called, then, as they say, the latter is the only
true Church, and the former in comparison thereunto, is not a true Church, that
is not so truly in the favor of God, and union with Christ.

Object. 3. I confess that Ravanellus and Calvine (with others happily) affirm,
that the Church, thus largely taken, is the Church improperly, and the Church
strictly for the Church of the Elect only, is the Church properly taken. But,

Answ. 1. I humbly conceive, that their difference with the Papist did not
exact their assertion from them, for the Papist denies the invisible Church
altogether, and not, that it is the Church properly, or improperly taken; then
this remains as a lawful controversy among us Protestants, whether the
visible or invisible Church be most properly the Church of Christ.

2. Neither, do I think, this assertion of theirs does necessarily flow from
this strict and large acceptance of the Church; the larger acceptance of a
thing, does not always imply the most proper acceptance thereof, nor e
contra, God of Abraham not of the dead.
the man (as Abraham) taken from the soul only, is not the largest, nor yet
the preperest acceptance of man. The Church taken exclusive to the chancel, is
not the largest, nor, I think, the properest acceptance thereof; a
denomination from the better part, is not the largest, nor, I think the
properest denomination of a company; this is figurative, therefore the other,
viz. the larger acceptance should be the proper, as opposed to figurative.

3. How ever, this touches not my conclusion which is, that the Church in this
large acceptance, may be considered to be truly a Church, and not properly;
much less more properly so, then the Church (invisible) or strictly taken.

4. Yet, I humbly crave, that my former arguments for the contrary part, in my
state of the question, may have the justice of consideration, if not, the
charity and honor of a confutation.

Object 4. I confess, once more, that Ames has placed reprobates and
hypocrites, out of the essential, and within the accidental form of the Church.
But,

Ans. 1. I humbly conceive, that this is his peculiar language, we find diverse
of the reformed Divines distributing the form of the Church into internal and
external, as they also do, the state, society Vid. Cameron, praelect. de eccl.
cap. de natura and condition ecclesiae in prin cipio, and circa medium caput
and communion of the Church.

2. I have ventured before to manifest the inconsistency hereof, with his own
concession; that hypocrites and reprobates, while they remain in the communion
of the Church, are membra ecclesiae; yea, that this very expression, that they
only partake of the accidental form, has a contradiction in it self

For, if there be no essential form besides; this, then, cannot be an
accidental form; seeing this, viz. the accidental form is opposed unto the
essential, and must needs suppose an essential Accidens, hic, est accidens, non
praedicabile, sed praedicamen tale; quod opponitur substantiae distributio enim
est in formam substantialem and accidentalem
or substantial form to give being to the subject of this accident, all whose
being is in the subject of it; if there be no substantial form, there is no
substance, and if there be no substance, there can be no accident; for the
definition of substance requires that it do substare accedentil us; and
(therefore as Schibler says) the reason of an accident requires, that it do in
haerere in subjecto.

Or if the Church have another form, viz. essential, or substantial, besides
this, (accidental) as indeed he allows; then, I cannot yet see, but that
interest in the accedental form, is necessarily founded in interest in the
form, which is called essential; and that, by granting that hyrocrites and
reprobates do partake of the accidental, he necessarily implies that they also
partake of the substantial form; and therefore, to say, that such (or any)
persons, do only partake of the accidental form of the Church, is for ought I
can see, a plain contradiction to it self.

For, if the reason of an accident be, to be in the subject, then, it no
farther is, then it is in the subject; then, also, nothing can stand under it,
as it is the accident of such a subject, viz. the Church, unless it be part of
the Church, unless it also partake of the substantial form of the Church, or
that which renders the Church (or the subject of this profession, or what ever
it is, which is said to be the accident thereof) a Church, a dead carcass,
though it still retain the same color and figure, that it had when it was
alive; yet it cannot be said to stand under the color and figure of a man, and
why? because the substantial form of a man is not in it; it is not a man,
therefore not capable of the accidents of a man; so, a hypocrite may partake of
profession, which is like the profession of the Church, but cannot partake of
the profession of the Church, nor any part of the accidental form of the
Church, unless it be part of the subject the Church, which it cannot truly
be, without partaking also of the substantial form of the Church, where there
is an essential totum, as well as an integral, all the essential parts must
feel the influence of the essential form, or else they do not partake of an
accidental form of the totum; for, indeed, a member, that admits no influence
from the form, is no longer an integral part of the body, and consequently,
does no longer partake of any thing, as it is of the body.

Yet, I shall add one Argument ad hominem to prove that hypocrites partake of
the essential form of the Church; a mark is said to be essential, because, 1.
It flows directly and necessarily from the essence. And, 2. It is a sure
indication of the essence of a thing; therefore, wheresoever we find an
essential mark, there the essence of the thing is, and there we may know it to
be; now, what is the essential mark of the Church? has not Ames answered, the
profession of the true faith? therefore hypocrites, etc. who, doubtless, do
partake of this profession which himself acknowledges to be the essential note
of the Church, are and may be known to be of the essence of the Church. Ames
tells us, that hypocrites have a share in the the outward profession of the
Church, which he says is the accidental form, and which, he also says, is
the essential note of the true Church; therefore, they, partaking in the
accidental state, or form of the Church, they also partake in the essential
note of the Church, and therefore of the essence of the Church, and therefore
of the essential form of the Church.

3. I confess it is my present opinion, that that which Ames assigns to be
the essential or internal form, viz. faith is no form at all, either of the
Church visible or invisible; but only a necessary qualification of the matter
of the Church of the saved, or the Church invisible; which seems not much
incongruous to Ames himself, sometimes for he affirms that fides taken
distributively is but forma vocatorum, the form of the called, and not of the
Church; and that collective sense, that he would put on faith, to make it the
form of the Church, is it self as distinguished from faith, the form of the
Church, which is not far from his own meaning, yea, and words too, in another
place, ecclesia maxim consistit in coetu.

4. Yea, further, I yet judge, that the visible Church has no internal form
at all, and that which Ames calls the accidental form, and others the
external, is very near unto all the essential form, constituting of the
visible Church; the visible Church is a collective or aggregative body, and
that visible. Now whether is the essential form of a visible aggregative body
inward or outward? indeed, the particular parts of such a body separately
considered, have their internal forms, but is not the form of the whole
another thing? is not union, or rather unity or society of the parts, the form
of the whole? and is not this external? for instance every particular sheep
has its form internal, but as these are a flock, they have another outward
form, which yet is not accidental, but essential to it, as it is a flock, viz.
their being in unity or community or society together.

Indeed, it is necessary that there be sheep, if there be a flock of sheep, and
it is necessary that these sheep have their essential, which is an internal
form; yet both these are but conditions of a congruous matter which is
essential to every compositum. I grant therefore, that sheep with their
internal form are essential to the flock, viz. as the matter is essential, but
they are no part of the form.

I grant also, that in rational aggregative bodies, viz. societies of men;
there lies some difference from a heap of inanimate creatures, as stones, etc.
and from a flock of sensitive creatures, as sheep, etc. because the reason of
man does qualify rational societies, with an habitude or aptitude to various
ends and employments, which are accordingly distinguishing and specifically
differencing rational societies; and which is not communicable to other
collective bodies which are irrational; therefore there is something to be
understood, at least, if not expressed, which is to signify the reason or the
end of every rational society, to distinguish it from societies of men, of
another kind. Ex. gr. among men there are domestic politic scholastic and
ecclesiastic societies, which constitutes a family, a Commonwealth, a
College, and a Church. Now, without some peculiar reason or end of these
several societies, how shall we distinguish the one from the other? they are
all collective bodies, they are societies of men, yea, they may be all
societies of Christians, yea, they may be all societies of Christians that are
in a state of salvation; and yet discovered by a general description only, and
nothing intimated to distinguish to us one kind of society from another.

Therefore, something is to be added, besides a bare society of Christians, to
distinguish the Church from a Christian family, a Christian Commonwealth, or a
Christian College, which has been often hinted to be the peculiar reason and
intention of this ecclesiastic society from all others, viz. the joint and
public communion thereof in the worship and Ordinances of God.

Neither, may it be then replied, that the form of the Church consists not
in coetu, or in society, because there is something to be added to distinguish
the same; for that which is added, is but the quality or reason of this
society, or its being such a society, yet a society still; even as none may
say, that the form of a man is not his soul, because a soul, in general, is
not that which distinguishes a man from a beast; a beast being an animated
creature as well as a man, without the specification, or essential quality of
reason added. However, indeed it is such a soul that is the form of man; not a
soul in general, nor yet reason in abstract consideration from soul, but the
soul as such, or the reasonable soul; so in the case before us, the form of
the Church lies in a society so qualified or intended, or as such; yet still a
community, though as Ames says, a community that looks at communion in the
worship of God.

Yet, lastly, that I may not seem to acquiesce in my own sense, and also that I
may, if possible, attain the genuine notion of the reformed Divines, in the
point. I shall not stick to say, that Essential here is not the attribute of
totum; or opposed to integral, but of forma, and opposed to accidental.
Essential form is also used here in a large sense; for the substantial form of
any real thing, and accordingly applicable to compositum agregativum, as well as
essentiale strictly taken. In all visible assemblies many bad are mingled with
the good, and therefore of necessity we must allow another Church whereto they
properly belong, which can be none but an invisible Church. White his way to
the true Church.
I yet perceive no great absurdity to be incurred; if one should assert that a
double acceptance of an aggregative body may make a supposition of a double
form, and they both essential.

Give me leave to explicate my meaning by the former distinction of the Church,
as largely and strictly taken, each of which acceptance, I conceive, will bear
its distinct definition, and consequently may be supposed to have its distinct
essential form, so far, as this diverse acceptance will hold.

A heap of stones, wherein there are many precious stones, may be taken
strictly for a heap of precious stones, and largely for a heap containing both
the precious and the common. Now, if this heap be defined exactly according to
both these acceptations, who would not see a formal difference betwixt them?
the one must be exclusive of all the common, and the other must generally agree
unto, and receive in, both the common and precious; Thus if we define the
Church, as consisting only of the Elect; and again, if we define it as such a
society as agrees to both the Elect and reprobate; must not the definitions
differ as much as the Elect and reprobate, i. e. specifically; for in the
latter the Elect and reprobate are found to agree in one common bond, or
fellowship; which, by the former is utterly dissolved.

Yet, this does not make two distinct Churches, farther then in our
consideration; the reason thereof is plain; because the Church is a society
made up of heterogeneous parts, or parts specifically differing in their proper
natures; and this various acceptance thereof, does strictly consider and
define only one part, or largely takes the whole together; yet all the while
there is no real separation of these Churches, but the one still remains the
whole, and the other is but a part if largely considered; we may consider the
precious apart, and the common apart; and we may define it as a heap of
precious stones, and as such a heap as contains in it stones both common and
precious, and yet there is but one real heap, and the heap taken strictly is
but part of of the heap taken largely.

This matter may be plainer understood thus; an aggregative body is such, as
not one thing absolutely; but such as contains Trelcatius de eccles.
in it self two things; one of which is like to multititude and matter
dispersed; the other is like to unity, order and collection.

So that we see ground. 1. To consider such a body in one respect, In an
aggregative. 1. Matter dispersed.
like to multitude, or matter divided; now this matter thus divided, may be
either of the same kind or nature, which is called Homogeneous, or of
different which is called Heterogeneous: If this matter be Homogeneous, i. e.
of the same nature, then if you define a part; you define the whole, or at
least you define the whole in part, i. e. you define the whole matter of this
body, though you do not define it with respect to its form, in collection; but
if this matter thus divided be of different nature; so far as the nature of
the matter differs, so far will the definition of one part differ from the
definition of the whole; because the definition of the whole must be so
general, as to agree to both parts; but the definition of the one differing in
nature, from the other, must distinguish it, from all things else of a
differing nature, and so consequently, from the other part of this compositum,
and consequently from the whole; which, as was said, must have a definition so
general as to take in all the parts in some common reason Efficacitas
vocationis duplex una salutaris electorum propria; altera non salutaris ad
vocatos communiter spectans. Trel. p. 114. and do not these specifically differ.
or bond agreeing to all. Ex. gr. the Church strictly taken is defined to be
coetus electorum; this now is specifically exclusive of the reprobate, and as
differing from that definition of the Church is which to take in the reprobate;
which by Wallebaeus is said to be coetus communiter vocatorum: The Elect are
commonly called and more; as more, they are defined by themselves, and
specifically differ from such as are only commonly called; as they are
commonly called, they agree with those that are only commonly called, and fall
into the same definition with them; which definition must differ specifically
from the former: suppose we should frame such a definition as takes in both man
and beast, would not that specifically differ from the definition of man as
distingushed from bruits; whereby he is said (...) not only animal, as they
are, but animal rationale, as they are not.

Yet, we have still, evident ground, in the second place, to consider There is
also a unity of this matter in an aggregative body.
this matter in the unity of this collective body; the parts, though never so
different in nature, are not divided in state, but united so far, as to agree
together in the same body; homo and brutum, though specifically differing in
themselves, yet they are the same generally, and united together in animal; the
Elect and reprobate, they are specifically differing in themselves, yet both
agree in their genus of visible Church Membership by common calling; the like
might be said of tares and corn, chafe and wheat, etc. these being also
specifically differing in themselves; yet they visibly meet in the same heap,
and agree to stand together in the same field.

Let us, lastly, observe, that this notion of the Church, is sufficient to
maintain the reformed sense, from that of the Romish.

For the controversy, betwixt us and them, was not whether there be a visible
Church, but whether there be a Church invisible, i. e. such in the Church, as
are in a higher sense, the children of God, the members of Christ, and in a
state of salvation, then others; who may also be called a Church in a distinct
consideration, to the rest of visible professors; which the Church of Rome
denies, and the reformed assert and maintain against them.

Neither, indeed, is the controversy so much, about the nature of the visible,
as about the being of the invisible Church; every one knows, that there is a
vast difference, about the head, about the succession, and about the visibility
of pomp and multitude, and about the infallibility of the visible Church
betwixt us and them; yet about the nature and definition of the visible Church,
the difference is but small; the whole burden thereof resting upon the nature,
being and definition of the Church invisible.

I shall presume, to give my reader one famous instance of this from the great
late controversy of the present point, in France betwixt Mons Mestrezate and
Cardinal Perron, as is to read at large, in an excellent Treatise, written in
French, by that Learned Monsieur, whereof please yet to take this short account.

He begins his book with a necessity of distinguishing ^he Church before he
comes to the definition of it; his distinction is founded in diverse respects,
viz. 1. ^he internal. 2. The external state of the Church; he gives us the
notion of the Church in Scripture, viz. 1. For a visible society of Christians.
2. The invisible condition of Christians; The first, he builds on these places,
Col. 4. 16. 1 Cor. 14. 12, 19, 23. Acts 14. 22. Gal. 1. 13. Act. 8. 3. 2 Cor.
8. 1. Gal. 1. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 1. 2 These. 1. 1. Apoc. 1. 4. and 2. 23. The second
he builds upon, Ephesians. 5. 25, 23. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Ephesians. 5. 29, 30. Heb. 12. 23.

According to this distinct acceptance of the word Church in Scripture, he
proceeds to distinguish of the Church more properly, which, he says, is the
nuptial body of Christ; and the Church less properly is the outward communions
and visible societies of Christians, then he addresseth to his definitions of
the Church thus diversely considered.

The first, says he, is the body or multitude of those whom God according Lib.
1. cap. 4
to the eternal counsel of his election, has drawn out of their natural
corruption and perdition, by the Minstery of his word and the power of his
Spirit incorporating them into Jesus Christ by true faith and sanctification
unto life eternal; now, upon this rests the dispute; for, the last, viz. the
visible Church he agrees, in most part, with the Cardinal in this definition.

The Church is a society of those whom God has called unto salvation Lib. 2.
cap. 1
by the profession of the true faith and a sincere administration of the
Sacraments by lawful Ministers.

Whence, we conclude, that the difference betwixt us and the Papists, is not
much about the nature of the visible Church; both are agreed that it is a
Church, and that it is such a Church, for the most part, as the Monsieur has
here defined, but chiefly about the Church invisible.

But, before I close here, methinks I am tempted to cry (...), and that I have
now hit the very sense of the reformed Divines touching the nature of the
Church invisible and visible, they clearly hold that there is but one Church,
and yet they do so distinctly consider this one Church in its strict and large
acceptance, For the militant and Catholic Churches are not all one in state,
by reason whereof they may be in one which are not in the other. Whites way to
the true Church.
or as visible and invisible, that any one that gives the lightest observation
thereunto, must needs confess that their definitions thereof do more then
accidentally differ, and therefore essentially; which two things are reconciled
only, by granting that when they define the Church strictly taken, they define
but one part of the Church, when largely taken; and when they define the Church
largely taken, they conclude the Church strictly taken under some general
attribution, which equally or at least jointly admits, both of the Elect and
reprobate; which are Heterogeneous matter; yet united in one society, the
visible Church, as before is explicated.

Yet, would I, with all modesty, submit, this, and what else I have, or shall
conceive and write to the judgment of my abler brethren, knowing, that the
spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets.

CHAP. XVII.
The first Argument from Scripture. God calls a wicked people his people, and
his Church.
THe arguments usually termed artificial, with their objections have been
hitherto insisted on; we shall therefore descend in the next place to take the
evidence of testimony; both divine and humane; of God and the Church.

The records of divine authority and testimony, are the holy Scriptures. Whence
our first argument is offered, thus.

God is pleased in the Old Testament, to own such a people for his people, and
Christ, in the new, for his Church, which at the very same time, he himself
universally brands as wicked, rebellious, evildoers, back-sliders, etc. and
takes no notice at all of any good thing in them; therefore, surely, a people
may be considered, to be truly a people of God, and a Church of Christ without
respect unto, and upon other terms besides, saving grace.

Here now, what I have writ, I read over, again and again; yet must I
seriously profess, that I cannot foresee any colorable answer that is to be
given to this Argument.

He that has but a slight knowledge in the holy Scripture, must needs confess
the antecedent, and he that has but a very slight reason, me thinks, cannot
but yield the consequence.

1. For the antecedent, viz. that God and Christ do thus acknowledge a wicked
people, at the very same time, when such their wickedness is charged upon
them, for their own people and Church, is so legible in the whole course of the
Scripture, that, truly, to heap instances and proof upon it, would be to
weaken it. I shall, only therefore fix my reader upon one undeniable instance
in each Testament, according to the parts of my proposition.

That in V. T. is Isa. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. where the Lord himself does very
eminently and above all kind of contradiction, both charge and acknowledge a
people, as before is asserted.

1. Then observe how he is pleased to charge them. And, 2. To own and
acknowledge them.

The charge is observable. In, 1. The matter of it. 2. The extent of it; the
charge in the matter of it, is, that they are ignorant and inconsiderate, ver.
3. rebellious against the Lord, that nourished (...)
them and brought them up, v. 2. or magnified and exalted them, as the
Interlineary translates it, or brought up and (...), with the Arabic.
exalted, as the vulgar Lattine version with the Syriack, or begotten and
exalted, as the Septuagint; loved and honored, as the Caldie paraphraze; all
which, except our English translation denote the great honor and privilege of
this people, as well as Gods care and provision for them; yet they rebelled
against him that had so begot and bread them, so loved, honored, and exalted
them above all other people; or they prae-varicated with (...)
him, as the Interlineary has it; which is somewhat explained by the Syriack,
per fide mecum egerunt, they have dealt treacherously with me; they pretended
my name and cause, but while they seemed to be for me, they underhand betrayed
and rebelled against me; and thus, as the Arabic has it, fefellerunt me, they
deceived me; indeed, the Septuagint, and the vulgar Latin is more mild,
though not much, spreverunt me, they (...).
have despised me. But the Caldie paraphrase, is near our English translation;
they have rebelled against my Word; which seems to me to be very proper,
seeing they owned the person, and professed the cause of the Lord, but they
would not do what he commanded them, and thus rebelled rather against his Word
then himself; thus, they properly praevaricated with God, as the Hebrew, or
despised him, i. e. in his Authority, as the Septuagint and vulgar Latin have
it.

However if this charge be not heavy enough; if we look to v. 4. there is
weight sufficient put into the scale; there, they are cried out upon as sinful,
yea laden with iniquity, populo gravi iniquitate, as one would say, big with
iniquity, traveling with (...) Gravatam iniquitate, the Syriack. (...).
iniquity, and almost ripe with sin, or ready to bring forth the iniquity,
which sin has conceived in her; and as the Septuagint has it, full (of poison
and rebellion against the Law of God) of sins, and such as God foresaw, would
certainly be delivered of this wicked burden, and would revolt more and more,
they being about to add more prevarication, as the Latin; defection, Semini
malignantium. Interlineari. Corruptoribus Haeb. Sceleratis Latin and Arabic
scclesti Septuag. corrup. Syriack.
as the Hebrew; iniquity, the Greeks, impiety the Arabic; yea, they are not
only blamed, for being the parents of sin, but they are said to be the seed
of sinners; the seed of evil doers, or malignants; progeniei pessimae, as the
Arabic, and therefore a wicked seed, as the Septuagint and Latin version
renders it; and as is expressed in the next words, children that are
corrupters, or wicked children.

For the matter of the change, I think may suffice; the extent thereof may be
briefly noted to be universal; though there might be a few among them upright,
yet their wickedness was so abominable and abounding, that it denominated the
whole: (...). Septuag.
Ah sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity; but were not the chief of the
Nation faithful and holy to God? no, the whole head is sick, and the whole
heart faint, on which the Chaldee paraphraseth, a reliquo populo usque ad
principes, non est in ^is qui perfectus in timone mei, from the rest of the
people even unto the Princes, there is none that fears the Lord; Or as the
Text, From the sole of the foot, even to the head there is no soundness in it,
but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, ver 6.

This the Lords own evidence against this wicked people, and can the Lord own
them yet, and acknowledge them to stand in any relation to him? if they be not
his people; or if by their wickedness, they have indeed broke off all their
interest in him and relation to him; surely, now is a time for God to free
himself from the shame of their wickedness, and to let the world know that it
is nothing at all to him; that though, indeed they profess his Name, yet their
wickedness has cut them off from his Covenant, or by their wickedness they
appear to be none of his people, and that he will not own them; if it had
indeed been so, who would have expected other language from the Lord, in this
heat of his wrath and provocation.

Yet behold, we find it far otherwise. Observe, says the Lord, (had another
spoken it, he might have been deceived, but the Lord himself has spoken it,
ver. 1.) yea, and he calls both heaven and earth to bear witness to it; that
this wicked people are my children, ver. 2. this is Israel and my people, verse
3.

It cannot possibly be replied, that the Lord means a few of them, viz. those
that had not rebelled, or were not ignorant and inconsiderate, to be his people
and children, and that the rest were not; for this relation of God to them is
laid all as large, as the complaint or charge of God against them; yea, it is
most evident, that this their relation to God is made by the Lord himself to be
the great aggravation of their rebellion against him, and therefore plainly
belonging to them, who were thus rebellious; therefore, it attended them in the
very punishment, as God is pleased to affirm, Jerem. 7. Shiloh was destroyed
for the iniquity of my people, says the Lord.

Nor, yet will it help to say, that the whole is denominated from the better
part; for God has no consideration at all (express Vae ^is qui vocati sunt
populus Sanctus, and peccaverunt; Congregatio electa, and multiplicaverunt
delicta: cognomen sunt semen electum, and male egerunt: dicti sunt filii
dilecti, and corruperunt vias suas, dereliquerunt cultum domini; detestati sunt
timorem sancti. Israel. in loc.
) of the better, but altogether of the worser part, or rather the whole; in the
same sense and respect God owneth them for his people; wherein he charge them
with wickedness, but God charge them all with wickedness with respect to
the worser part; therefore owneth them all with the title of his people and
children with respect to the worser part; my children that rebel, my people
that do not know me, nor consider; otherwise the whole force of this great
aggravation is utterly lost, if they were none of his people indeed that were
ignorant or did rebel, wherewith the Chaldee paraphase has adorned the place
in so divine and excellent flowers. Woe be to them, who are called a holy
people, and yet have sinned; a chosen Congregation, and yet have multiplied
transgressions; their Surname, or their name of grace is an Elect seed, yet
they have done evil; they are called beloved sons, and yet they have
corrupted their ways, they have relinquished the worship of the Lord, and
detested the fear of the holy one of Israel, etc.

The instance in the New Testament shall be the Church of the Laodiceans, Rev.
3. 14. ad finem; where, also, first observe the charge of Christ against her;
and first negatively, there is not one thing in her that Christ thinks fit to
commend her for; as he had done before in all his Epistles to the rest of the
Churches. Secondly, positively, she was so abominable in her lukewarmnesse,
ver. 14. and her carnal security and self-confidence, and slighting of Christ
and his riches and treasures, ver. 16, 17. his stomach even rose against her,
so that he threatens to spew her out of his mouth, ver. 15.

Yet, secondly, observe the mouth of Christ himself, and that from heaven, and
even now, in the very midst of his heat and anger against her sticks not to own
her, and call her a Church; to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea; he could as
well have directed his letter to the governor of those that would be thought
to be a Church, or that pretended Church; or have left the superscription to
have been written by his servant John; who in charity might have cured, and
have styled her a Church, who indeed was none; but lo, this is a truth
revealed from heaven, and that by the mouth of him, that had just now told this
same Church, that he was a true and faithful witness, v. 14. and therefore may
not be thought to flatter her, that a wicked people may yet be owned by Christ
himself to be his Church.

2. Thus the antecedent appears; the consequence, which is, that therefore a
Church may be considered to be truly such without respect to saving grace) is
as fully manifest by two short considerations.

1. Let it be seriously considered, whether it can reasonably or indeed,
possibly, be imagined, that God or Christ do intimate, by owning such a wicked
people, as is noted before, that yet notwithstanding all this wickedness
abounding upon them, they were savingly sanctified, or had saving grace? and
yet, clearly thus it must have been, if a people cannot be considered to be
truly a Church of Christ without respect unto this sanctifying or saving
grace; and if it were not so, and it be granted that God had no respect unto
their saving grace, when he owneth them thus, for his Church and people, then
it will hence easily follow, that God does own such a people to be his Church,
and people upon other terms and respects, then this of saving grace; and then
who sees not the undeniablenesse and strength of the former consequence.

2. Again, it is yet more evident and forceable, if we add this to the former
consideration, that we are speaking of the visible Church quoad homines; or as
men are to consider of it; then we may reason thus; if God and Christ call a
people his people, and his Church, that give no evidence at all of their saving
grace; then, we are, doubtless, to account a people, sometimes, at least, to
be a Church and people of God, that give us no evidence of saving grace; for
none will deny, but that we are to account of a peoples relation to God, as he
himself is pleased to reveal it to us; Now, God, as we have heard, has in his
word revealed, that a people visibly wicked, and consequently without any
evidence of saving grace, are a people of God, and a Church of Christ;
therefore we also are to reckon a visibly wicked people, and a people that give
no evidence of their saving grace, sometimes to be a people of God and a Church
of Christ, and then how apparently and irresistibly must it needs follow, that
as a people may be known to us to be a people of God, and a Church of Christ,
without the help of the evidence of saving grace; so they may be truly
considered to be thus a people of God and a Church of Christ, without respect
unto saving grace; seeing God himself has been pleased to reveal that there
is something else (on which we shall through Gods assistance particularly
insist anon to ground a true and right understanding of a peoples interest and
relation to God, as his people and Church, besides this sincere or saving grace.

CHAP. XVIII.
The second Argument from Scripture; such as the word declares to have no
saving grace it gives titles equivalent to Church Membership.
THat we may yet further search into the mind of God in the present
controversy, we shall now descend to consider the titles which all allow to be
equivalent to visible Church Membership; and to what kind of persons the
Scripture applies them; which with the more fairness and fitness of
reasoning will be dispatched in the confirmation of the following Argument.

If the Word of God ascribe such titles as are truly equivalent to visible
Church Membership, unto such persons, as the Word of God it self has testified
to have, at that time, had no (evidence at least of) saving grace; then the
visible Church, may be considered to be truly a Church of Christ without
respect to saving grace.

In this consequence, I confess there is one thing begged, which yet I think
none will deny me, viz. that it is good arguing from the members, to the body;
or the parts of the Church to the whole.

But considering that, 1. The Church (entitively taken) is nothing else but a
company of members. 2. That the whole difference, in dispute, rests upon the
matter of the Church, and the necessary qualification thereof: And, 3. That
chiefly, as it has rationem subjecti, in which sense Ministers, and all within
are members of the Church. And, 4. That the end of this great controversy, is
evidently practice, which is only conversant about particular persons or
members, my consequence here is not to be excepted against.

But now the Word of God ascribes such titles as are truly equivalent to
visible Church Membership, to such particular persons as the Word of God it
self has testified to have at that time, had no (evidence at least of) saving
grace.

This is indeed the proposition that the nature of this dispute expects to to
be proved; which I think I shall be able to do in many particulars.

1. Brother is in 1 Cor. 6. 8. equivalent to Churchmember, yet even there it
is ascribed to some that give no evidence of saving grace; ye do wrong and
defraud, and that your brethren; those that do wrong and defraud their
brethren, give no evidence of saving grace, but some that do wrong and defraud
their brethren, are even by the Scripture called brethren; for if the defrauded
are brethren to the defrauders, then by the same reason of relation, the
defrauders are brethren to the defrauded, but the defrauded are brethren to the
defrauders your brethren; therefore the defrauders are brethren to them, as
indeed they are expressed to be; verse 6. Brother goes to Law with brother.

2. Called, is a title in Scripture equivalent to Churchmember. But our
Savior therein also tells us, that some are called that give no evidence of
saving grace; even some that neither then had any saving grace, nor ever
should; for more are asserted by Christ to be called then are elected, but no
more, either now have, or ever shall have saving grace, then are elected;
therefore some are called that neither now have, nor ever shall have, saving
grace, and consequently that give no evidence thereof; but of this frequently
heretofore; if it be said, that they seemed to have saving grace, that is
nothing; for our savior saw, that they indeed, had none; and yet the same
time, when he makes a discovery of that, he says, not that they seem to be,
but that they are called. q. d. these many seem to be elected, but indeed some
of them are not elected, they are only called; for many are called, but few
chosen.

3. A child of God, a child of the Covenant, a child of the Kingdom, are all
of them titles in Scripture, equivalent to a Churchmember; but all these are
ascribed in Scripture to such as the Scripture it self witnesses to have had,
no (evidence at least of) saving grace.

1. The title of being a child of God, is Romans 9. 4. given to such as had no
evidence of saving grace, viz. to Israelites, who by that most dreadful scandal
of crucifying Christ, and persisting therein without repentance, and with a
continued obstinate gainsaying, and persecuting the Gospel, did bring so great
heaviness, and continual sorrow to Paul's heart, as we read, ver. 2. to whom,
yet says the same Paul, pertains the Adoption, as ver. 4.

2. The title of being a child of the Covenant, is also given to the same
wicked Israelites, Acts 3. 25. ye are the children of the Covenant which God
made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the
Nations of the earth be blessed. Romans 9. 4.
Yea, unto them belonged the Covenants, that implies, that they were not only
borne in them, but entrusted with the keeping of them, viz. with the giving of
the Law, as there it follows, Romans 9. 4. Yea, their very breaking of Covenant
is an evident As they are charged, Deuteronomy. 31. 16, 17.
sign of both. 1. That they were in it; a propositione secundi adjacentis ad
propositionem primi adjacentis valet argumentum. 2. That they had no evidence,
at least, of saving grace; for, unless men were in Covenant, how could they
break it? and if men do break Covenant where is their evidence of saving grace?
seeing men are charged, in Scripture, to violate the covenant only, by gross
and notorious scandals, which are utterly inconsistent with such evidence, viz.
idolatry, Deuteronomy 31. 20. rebellion, Ezra 17. 15, etc.

3. The title of being a child of the Kingdom, Matthew. 8. 12. given to such as
have no saving grace; for Christ himself there assures us, that some of the
children of the Kingdom, must go accursed into hell; but certainly, never any
that has the least degree of saving grace, shall go thus accursed into Hell.

4. Being in the field of Christ, the barn of Christ, the net of Christ is in
Scripture equivalent to visible Church Membership; for the Kingdom of heaven
is compared in Scripture to all these; and to be in the Kingdom of Heaven, and
a Churchmember, are in the Scripture of equal latitude.

But now, the same Scriptures which compare the Kingdom of heaven, or the
Church of God to a field, barn, floor and net, do fully attribute a place in
them all to such as have no saving grace; there are tares in this field, chafe
in this barn-floore, and bad fish in this net of Christ.

5. Being in Christ, is doubtless equivalent unto Church Membership. But the
Scripture (and Christ himself therein) acknowledges some persons to be in him,
that yet it witnesses at the same time, to have no truth of saving grace, John
15. 2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit; Some branches are such, as
bear no fruit, but must be burned, as verse 6. yet even these are owned by
Christ, to be branches, and branches in himself.

I have read a bad answer somewhere unto this, that the words [in me] are to be
understood last, and that the sense of the words are but thus, every branch
that bears not in me; which is said, not to imply the branches being in
Christ at all, but only to intend its bearing no fruit in Christ; but the very
look of the text shames it; For, 1. Wherefore is it called a branch, but with
relation to the Vine, mentioned, ver. 1. which was, as it is said, Christ
himself. I am the Vine, ye are the branches, and every branch, etc. 2. If we
should read the words, as this objection requires, then it follows that some
may bring forth fruit, and yet be out of Christ, contrary to the words
following, without ((...)) or out of, or severed from me; ye can do nothing. 3.
But from what shall these branches be cut, if they be not upon the Vine; or
whence shall they be taken away by the Father; or out of what shall he be cast
forth as a branch, v. 6. 4. And lastly, what congruity is there in the
following caution, if a man abide not in me? if such cannot be branches in him,
that may prove fruitless or Apostates, and be cast forth, wither and be burned.

6. Disciple, in Scripture, is a title equivalent to visible Churchmember. But
the Scripture does reckon some to be disciples, whom it self also testifies to
have had no saving grace, John 6. 66. From that time many of his Disciples went
back and walked no more after him; now let it be supposed, that by their
apostasy (it being indeed total and final) they now ceased to be disciples, yet
this only evidenceth for the time past, that they never had any true grace,
howbeit they were then disciples, unless they had gone on, they could not have
gone back, and so long as they went on, they were disciples; not those that
seemed, but those that were disciples went back; and though now they are
discovered never to have had any saving grace, yet it is still acknowledged
that they were disciples.

7. To be a vessel in the house of God is more, and therefore, indeed implies a
being in the house of God, or a Churchmember, but the Scripture, 2 Timothy 2. 20.
ascribes this title of being a vessel in the house of God, to some, whom it
also witnesses, to have Romans 9
had no saving grace; for it says, there are vessels of dishonor, and
therefore of wrath fitted to destruction in the house of God; as Hymeneus and
Philetus, were sad instances.

8. To be within, to be of Israel, and to be of the house of Israel, are
equivalent to Church Membership; but the Scripture, attributes all these to
such, as it also testifies to have had no saving grace; or at least no
evidence thereof.

1. The Scripture, 1 Cor. 5. acknowledges the incestuous person, to have been
within, when it puts him upon the Churches judgment, who has not to do
with them who are without; and yet by laying so heavy a charge of incest upon
him, it does plainly evidence, that he had then no (evidence at least of)
saving grace.

2. The Scripture, Romans 9. 6. affirms, some to be of Israel, whom yet in the
very same place, it denies to have any true saving grace; all are not Israel,
i. e. all are not in the purpose of God according to election, v 11. that are
of Israel, or of the visible Church; therefore some are of Israel that are not
elected, and consequently that have no saving grace.

3. The Scripture, Luke 15. 6. affirms some persons to be of the house of
Israel also, whom it also denies to have any evidence of saving grace, viz.
lost sheep; lost sheep are of the house of Israel, but lost sheep are therefore
without evidence of saving grace, therefore persons whom the Scripture
affirms to be without evidence of saving grace, it attributes interest in
the house of Israel, or the visible Church unto.

9. To be the people of God, to bring forth children unto God, and to have a
right, coram Deo, or in the sight of God, unto the first seal, or the
Ordinance of initiation, do all of them import, in the Word of God, visible
Church Membership.

But the Word of God ascribes every one of these unto such as it self also
testifies to have had no (evidence at least of) saving grace.

1. The Word of God, Jer. 7. 12. (as also before the same was observed from,
Isa. 1. 3.) thus attributes the title of the people of God to such as had no
(evidence of) saving grace; even to those Israelites that by their abominable
wickedness had brought a curse and desolation upon the place where they lived,
viz. Shiloh; see what I have done to Shiloh for the wickedness of Israel, yea,
of my people Israel; but evidence of saving is inconsistent with such
wickedness.

2. The Word of God, Ezekiel. 16. 20. ascribes the honor of bringing forth
children unto God, unto such as had no (evidence at least of) saving grace;
they sacrificed their children unto Mol^ck, therefore they had no evidence of
saving grace; yet their children, which they thus idolatrously sacrificed, God
owns for his sons and his daughters, and such as the parents had borne unto him.

To say that these children were the first born only, which the Lord
challenges for his in a peculiar manner, may seem to gratify an Anabaptist
somewhat, but does not so much as seem to weaken my inference hence; for the
first borne of those, in whom the Lord had this interest only, and who were
related to God as his people, were challenged by God for his in this peculiar
manner; therefore, if we grant that these were the firstborn only, yet
seeing God challenges them for his sons and daughters, he owneth and
acknowledges the parents of them yet to remain in his Covenant, and to be in
the number of his people. If those that are graceless had a command to receive
the seals, had warrant to receive them, then they had a right from God, but
such as Ishmael. Mr. Hooker survey. p. 41


3. The Word of God, Genesis 17. 23. acknowledges that one may have a right to
the first seal of the Covenant, and that coram Deo, and in the sight of God,
that has no saving grace; in the case of Ishmael; Ishmael was thirteen years
old, verse. 25. when he was circumcised, and therefore past the age and state of
Infancy; and of age to answer for himself; yet again, Ishmael had no saving
grace, which the Lord knew well enough, neither was he within the Covenant of
Isaac, the Covenant of absolute and certain salvation; from which he was
excluded, verse. 19. If Ishmael had not been circumcised he had broken the
covenant, v. 14 therefore he was in covenant. The Hebrew calls Ishmael a wild
ass, and the Targum retains the original word Metaphorice, pro homine
insociabili, and ferinis moribus praedito, says Rivet, who with Paraeus,
Cajctane, Pererius, and others judges him to be a reprobate. as Mr. Mar. has
observed. page 277.
yet, lastly, Ishmael has a right unto the first seal of the Covenant, (and
consequently was truly in one respect within the Covenant) coram Deo, and in
his sight, as is most evident from the immediate command of God, that he that
was borne in Abraham's house, as God knew that Ishmael was so already, must
needs be circumcised, v. 12. and accordingly Abraham understood it, although
the Lord himself had but now revealed to him that Ishmael in particular was to
have no part in the Covenant of Isaac, or the Covenant of salvation, or the
saving state of the Covenant rather; he proceeds upon the command of the Lord
to circumcise Ishmael first of all; Now what is it that gives one right to any
Ordinance but the command, or at least more evidently then the command of God
himself; and that right which we have from Gods command; is doubtless a right,
coram Deo, and in his sight; and the consequence from that first seal of
circumcision, to ours of baptism, will pass without scruple, upon all, but
Anabaptists, with whom I am not now disputing.

10. To be borne again, and to be of the body, are both equivalent to
Church Membership. But the Word of God acknowledges such to be borne again,
and to be of or in the body, the one great body of Christianity, whom it also
witnesses to have no saving grace.

1. The Word of God, John 3. 5. acknowledges that all that are baptized with
water, are borne again of water, wherefore happily baptism is meant by the lavor
or washing of regeneration, Tit. 3. 5.

2. The Word of God acknowledges also, that all that are baptized, are
baptized into that one great body of Christianity, 1 Cor. 12. 13. we are all
baptized into one body.

3. And yet the Word of God has witnessed, that many are baptized that never
had any saving grace; as Simon, Hymeneus, Philetus, Alexander, Ananias and
Saphira, etc.

11. To have the Spirit, to have begun in the Spirit, to be sons, to be
children of the promise, to be children of the free woman; (that is, I
conceive, by embracing and submitting unto the Gospel of Christ Jesus, who was
the seed, in whom the promise to Isaac was especially fulfilled) are all
equivalent to Church Membership. But the Word of God ascribes all these to
such as gave no evidence of saving grace; and all of them in those two
Chapters, the third and fourth to the Galatians.

Gal. 3. 2, 3. they are acknowledged to have received the Spirit, and to have
begun in the Spirit; yet the same place witnesses their folly, and their great
danger of ending in the flesh; which gave no evidence of their saving grace.

Gal. 4. even those are said to be sons, v. 6. to be the children of the
promise with Isaac. v. 28. and children of the freewoman, (that is, I
conceive, not under the Law but the Gospel) v. 31. of whom Paul traveled in
birth again, until Christ be formed in them, ver. 19. and of whom therefore we
may safely say, they had no saving grace.

12. Believers, sanctified, redeemed, and a state of grace, are all equivalent
to visible Church Membership in the Word of God.

But the same Word of God attributes all these unto some that had no saving
grace.

1. The Word of God, as was noted before, acknowledges that both Simon Magus,
and the stony ground believed, and the Word of God witnesses also, that
neither Simon Magus, nor the stony ground had no saving grace.

2. The Word of God, Heb. 10. 29. ascribes the title of sanctified to such as
trampled under foot the Son of God, etc. which doubtless had no saving grace.

3. The Word of God, 2 Pet. 2. 1. acknowlegeth such to be redeemed and bought
by Christ, who yet fall away and deny him, and bring upon themselves swift
destruction, but these had never any saving grace.

4. The Word of God, in the last place, acknowledges Gal. 5. 4. that some
persons were once in a state of grace, who fell from grace, and therefore such
as never had any saving grace, they were in a state of grace first, otherwise
they could not have fallen from grace; their grace, however, was not saving,
for from saving grace none did ever fall away.

CHAP. XIX.
The third Argument from Scripture, admitting persons into Church Membership
upon account diverse from saving grace; the difference of the Infant and Adult
estate largely considered.
MY third and last Argument from the Word of God, is grounded upon the
condition of admission of persons into the visible Church of God, therein
allowed, and it is this.

The Word of God both allows and requires, that persons be admitted members
of the visible Church, upon an account that is really diverse from saving
grace; therefore the visible Church may be considered to be truly a Church of
Christ without respect to saving grace.

The antecedent here is not to be touched: for unless we pretend that
according to Scripture, the child born within the Church is admitted a member
thereof, for his own habitual or inherent grace, or that foederal or imputed
grace is saving grace, or that he is not of the Church, or not to be baptized,
till he make a profession of saving grace in his own person (all which are
apparently absurd) we must needs yield, that according to Scripture persons are
admittable into the Church, upon an account that is diverse from saving grace.

Obj. It may not be objected, that the child is admitted upon the evidence of
his parents saving grace; for, as that is false in it self (as anon will be
shown) so it reaches not at all to our present purpose, which only
concerns the qualification of the very person admitted, and the ground
thereof in himself.

Yet, I grant, that this is concludent only in settled Churches; for at the
first plantation of a Church personal qualities are to be expected in Heathens
adult for their admission into visible Church Membership, as also when they are
to be adjoined to any particular Church already settled; and therefore so far
only as concerns the admission of infants in settled Churches.

However is not this our common case? yea, and of all the Churches? were not
our and their members admitted in infancy, time out of mind? all standing as
members grown up, or branches sprung from the old root, in the garden or Church
of God? at least ordinarily and for the most part? for how rare a thing and
extraordinary is it, to hear of a Pagan, Turk or Jew baptized Christian?

The consequence is also evident, upon this ground, that the same grace may
easily be considered to continue the being of the visible Church, which first
gave it; unless some violent accident (as renouncing the Covenant, etc.) has
since disolved it; for as Dayrel says well, we must know that all which be
once admitted page 171
into the Church, do remain members of the same Church, be they never so
wicked, until either they themselves depart from it, or else by excommunication
they be cast out; and that consequently all the scandalous persons aforesaid,
were in and of the Church, yea, the incestuous person, till he was
excommunicated; and this (as he adds) they of the separation likewise
acknowledge to be true.

Object. The great objection here is, that children remain Church Members by
foederal holiness until they come unto their adult estate indeed, but no
longer, for then they must give the answer of a good conscience for themselves,
and continue this relation to the Church upon the account of their own faith.

Answ. 1. I readily grant, that all children baptized in their infancy ought,
when at years of discretion, to give this answer of a good conscience, both by
their evidence of their knowledge of Christ, and an holy conversation.

2. I further grant, that there is an evident necessity upon all such baptized
persons, to own the faith into which they are baptized, at least, negatively;
seeing that a positive renounciing thereof puts out of the Church.

3. Yet, admit that persons thus baptized, in their infant state, state, do not
give such answer, at years of discretion, either of their knowledge or
holiness as they ought to do, it by no means follows, that they are
forthwith rendered out of the Church, or that their former foederal, or
relative holiness, is hereby null; for these Reasons.

Reas. 1. The Word of God (wherein alone his mind is revealed) has no where
evidenced that foederal or relative holiness of persons borne in the Church,
or their relation to the Church thereby, is extinct at years of discretion, or
removed and lost by ignorance, or the want of the evidence of saving grace; if
but one text were produced intimating this, this part of the controversy ends.

2. Yea, indeed, the contrary is more then evident in sacred writ, viz. that
relative holiness does proceed, even into the adult estate, and that ignorance
or want of the evidence of saving grace, does not then extirpate our former
(hurch interest conveyed thereby, and sealed in infancy; was not Ishmael and
the incestuous person at their adult estate? or were they such as evidenced
saving grace? yet Ishmael [Gal. 4. 30.] and the incestnous person [1 Cor. 5.
12.] are both acknowledged to be within; has it not appeared, abundantly, that
persons charged by God himself with actual rebellion, are also acknowledged at
the same instant, by the same God, to be his people? how could they be so
charged, had they not been at adult age? and how could they be so acknowledged,
had they had no foederal or relative holiness, for they had none other.

Yea, (to put it out of further question) this people are expressly said to be a
holy people, Deuteronomy. 14. 2. even while they were charged with being stiff-neck'd,
and a rebellious people unto this place, chap. 9. verse 6, 7. and what
holiness could that be, that was consistent with a stiff neck, and a
rebellious heart, but a Covenant-holinesse? even as it is there expounded to be;
I have chosen thee to be my people, or a holiness of separation; as it also
follows, Deuteronomy. 14. 2.
to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations that are upon the
earth.

And to anticipate any that should restrain and limit this Covenant-holinesse,
consistent with actuai wickedness to the time of the Law. The Apostle Peter
has taken the very same passage, and made its application to the times of the
Gospel, 2 Peter 2. 9.

If yet any possible scruple remain, seriously weigh that method of reasoning
God is pleased with, in Psalm 50. 7. God threatens there to testify against
Israel (a sufficient note of Isreal's wickedness) yet in the same verse God
owneth Israel, a competent token of Israles holiness; but how does God own
wicked Israel? not in Covenant? yea doubtless in both the maine parts thereof,
thou art my people, and I am thy God; hear O my people, and I will speak, O
Israel, and I will testify against thee, I am God, even thy God; here is
sufficient, doubtless, infinitely to supersede, what can lawfully be argued
against the possibility of a wicked Israelite, his being in Covenant, from v.
16, 17. so much insisted on.

3. Therefore nothing is more trite in reformed Writers, especially against the
Anabaptist, then the distinction of persons holy, vel actu, vel orasione
professione debita, holiness real and relative, habitual, and imputed,
foederal and inherent; who generally acknowledge that some persons are holy in
a relative, foederal and imputed sense, and by profession, obligation,
separation and calling, that are not holy really (as it stands opposed to
relatively) actually, personally or inherently; who are yet only called to be
Saints, taking the word [called] (...), ut sint sancti, as Paraeus, Aretius,
and diverse others do; in which sense Master Baxters words are ordinarily
quoted, That there are His Rest. p. 105
many Saints or sanctified men, that shall never come to Heaven, who are only
Saints by their separation from paganism into the fellowship of the visible
Church. Whence also Chamier proportionably reasons, quomodo Paulus dicebat
Romae, i. e. omnes sui temporis Judaeos esse sanctos, quod eorum Truncus, i. e.
Abraham sanctos fuisset.

4. We need not trouble our selves to prove particularly, that the judgment of
the reformed Churches, is that foederal holiness does proceed into the Adult
estate, seeing those Churches, (viz. of New England) which alone are capable of
suspicion in this controversy, have expressly declared for it; or at least
very strongly Mr. Cottons way of the Church of New England. page 51.
intimated, in these words, those (say they) that are baptized in any Church,
may (by virtue of this former interest) require the Supper in that Church, if
there be no impediment in regard of their unfitness to examine themselves.

Which yet Master Baxter has somewhat more clearly, for, says he, their being
baptized persons, if at age, or members of the universal Church, into which it
is that they are baptized, is a sufficient evidence of their interest to the
Supper, till they do by heresy His Rest. p. 104
or scandal blot that evidence, which assures us to be the confident issue of
much doubting, dispute, and study of the Scriptures.

5. Yea, that prudent Ordinance called confirmation, though of singular use in
the (hurch, if well managed, and that only thing that seems against us in
this part of dispute, it being looked upon as a mean of passing from the Infant
to the Adult estate; yet it is most evident, this did not intend to exclude
those that were found ignorant; and wanted a fit and ready answer at their
examination, presently out of the Church; or, on the other side, to admit the
rest, upon a new account into Church Membership, they being sufficiently so
before; for they styled this exercise not an admission, but a confirmation; or
if in any respect it was an admission, the term thereof was only into the
company of adult Church Members, or to some higher privilege of the visible
Church, viz. the Supper, and not at all to the state or society of
Church Members as such.

Neither did such examinants intend (at least, a direct) search, for evidence
of grace, but competency of knowledge; or at utmost, a renewing of that
covenant, or promise, personally and actively, which before in their infancy,
they were only passively, and in their sureties bound unto.

Which promise (having for the object of it repentance and obedience, and being
for the nature of it a promise, that is, respecting the future, and being made
for something yet to be) does rather suppose, that as yet they have not
repented, nor entered upon a course of new obedience,, and consequently, are not
yet supposed to have any saving grace, though thought fit upon such a promise
to pass by confirmation of their examinants, out of their Infant, into their
Adult estate.

6. If those that do not render this answer of a good conscience, are no longer
within the Church. I demand whether they were truly members of the Church in
their state of Infancy, or only seemingly so.

1. If it be replied that they were only seemingly so, then Infants interest
in the Church by foederal holiness, is not a real interest, which is plainly
Anabaptistical; or at least but dependently, and upon the supposition of future
saving grace, which is absurd and plainly against the Scripture.

For after heaven had revealed that Ishmael was none of the seed of the promise
of salvation with Isaac, and that to Abraham Vid. Genesis 17
himself; he is yet by virtue of his relative foederal holiness, from his
fathers family, and in plain obedience to Gods command, circumcised by
Abraham, the mark and token of the Covenant of God.

And the bond woman and her son, who indeed was Ishmael, are clearly
intimated to be within, Gal. 4. 30. where they are charged to be cast out.

Where also the Apostle assures us, that this history of Ishmael and Isaac was
alleg^rical, and served to conclude, that even in the days of the Gospel to
the end of the world, there should be Ishmaels as well as Isaac's in the
visible Church; the Apostle arguing v. 29. from then to now.

2. Again, if it be said, that such were really visible members before, in
their infant estate, but now, they wanting that which their Adult estate
requires, to continue this their membership, they cease to be any longer so.

I then must demand whether they cease to be so on course, and by any thing
which flows from the nature of such a state; or whether they cease, or rather
are made to cease to be so, by violent censure or Excommunication.

1. If the first be chosen, viz. that they cease to be any longer members of
themselves, without any censure of the Church.

1. I humbly conceive here is a new way of loosing Church Membership, viz. by
ignorance, wickedness, etc. unknown to the Scripture, or any age of any
Church before.

2. Then Idiots and distracted persons cease to be members of the visible
Church at their Adult estate.

3. What shadow of Scripture or reason is there that ignorance for which
ancient people may not be excommunicated, should of it self, put the younger
out of the Church? or that wickedness, which cannot put elder persons out,
with censure, should be thus effectual to exclude youth just at such a crisis
or age.

4. Why then are not such persons whose ignorance, or want of the answer of a
good conscience, has made their interest in the Covenant null, upon their
after-learning, etc. to be rebaptiz'd.

5. Yea, if this confirmation be indeed a new admission, viz. upon the account
of personal or habitual holiness, and the former ground of our Church and
Covenant interest, viz. foederal holiness, do pass no further then such an
age, why are not all at this transition rebaptiz'd? we are no longer in
Covenant, then the reason of being in Covenant holds; and the seal of the
Covenant holds no longer then our being in Covenant continues; and it seems
the reason of our former being in Covenant, is now lost, and we enter Covenant
again, upon our personal (a new) account, why then must not we have the seal
of entrance applied also, viz. baptism? But,

Lastly, this is most expressly confuted by the former instance of Ishmael, he
was borne in the Church, he has sigillum foederis put upon him, and therein he
continues though wicked, until he is by violence cast out, as the Scripture
witnesses, Gal. 4. 30.

2. Then there is no refuge left, but that such as are found ignorant, etc. at
years of discretion, are to be cast out of the Church by Excommunication. If
this be said,

1. I answer, that it is hereby granted me, that the interest of ignorant
persons, etc. is real until they be excommunicated; and consequently, that such
persons may be (that is, actually, though not lawfully) real members of the
visible Church, as have no saving grace; which as much as I need desire in
general, yea, or in this particular; for then this Church Membership is
continued upon the account of foederal holiness, not saving grace, until this
violent accident of excommunication dissolve it.

2. Howsoever this does not at all distinguish the crisis or period of the
beginning of the Adult estate, which we are now upon; for no reason can
possibly be shown why ignorance or scandal, should deserve this censure more
at this time or state of passing, then at any other age of our lives.

3. But, lastly, let me be answered; did we ever read either in Scripture, or
any history of any Church, that ignorance, or unreadinesse. to answer, or
learn when catechized, does render youth so censurable, as to be wholly
extirpated, and cast out of all relation to the Church therefore? and yet, let
us bethink our selves, is not this the very case?

Let me conclude with plainness; a child is borne in the Church, and sealed
therein, in his infancy, and therein continues until ripeness of years, and
all this by virtue of his first Covenant-holinesse. I desire to know, whether
this his Covenant-holinesse, and his relation to the Church, so long held, and
continued till now, thereby, does now expire? what Scripture or reason
depriveth him of it? the authority of what Church has declared it void? what
can cast him out but excommunication; whether all excommunication does utterly
root up Covenant* interest? what can merit so great a penalty but known and
proved scandal? and lastly, whether all (or any) ignorance at ripeness of age,
or unaptnesse in youth to learn the Catechism, be tollerably to be accounted
according to Scripture or the judgment or practice of any one Church of
Christ; a scandal, or such a scandal as may be censured and punished with utter
extirpation out of the Church.

CHAP. XX.
Objections from Scripture considered.
BEfore I pass to the humane authority, I hold my self bound to answer such
objections against my Scripture-arguments, as are offered thence.

Though, I humbly profess, I can hardly find or think of any, that have either
weight or color in them but what have had sufficient, (though occasional
answer already, or at least been anticipated.

However (that this head may have some body, and that I may not write nihil hic
nisi carmina, etc.)

Object. 1. It is objected from John 8. 37. that those that were Abraham's seed
were yet the devils children.

Answ. What then? therefore some Church Members are really the children of the
devil; but this we deny not, only, we still assert, that notwithstanding they
may be really members of the visible Church, as well as really Abraham's seed;
in regard of their holy profession and state, they were really Church Members
and children of Abraham, yea, of God; but in regard of their unregenerate
nature, and rebellious lives, they were (as our Savior affirms) the children
of the Devil.

Were there any need, we might fully explicate the answer hereunto, by
distinguishing of the Jews. First, as they are acknowledged to be Abraham's
seed. And, secondly, as they are called the Devils children.

First, these Jews may be thought to be Abraham's seed, either carnally,
ecclesiastically, or spiritually, i. e. savingly, as his natural offspring, as
Jews, or as borne of him, the head of the Covenant, as holy branches of that
old root or members of the Church. Or, lastly, in that strict and saving sense,
as the children of Isaac, or the seed of the promise, elect to salvation.

1. Now to apply, if our Savior here mean, that these Jews were Abraham's seed
only in this first sense, viz. borne of his naturaly body, but by their
heresy denying Christ, and their schism, negative, keeping themselves off
from the Gospel Dispensation; and positive, raising themselves as a Church in
distinction and opposition to the Gospel Church now planting in the world (of
all which they were highly guilty,) deservedly divorced, and cut off from the
Church; then I say, this text reaches not our case; for, though such desperate
murderers of the Lord of life, and open rebels against the doctrine and means
of salvation, are no real Church Members; it follows not that therefore we
cannot consider others that join themselves to the Gospel, and profess to
expect salvation from Jesus Christ, etc. to be so neither.

2. If our Savior meant that they were the visible Church and people of God,
and Abraham's seed in that ecclesiastical or Covenant-sense; This I take to be
the common sense of Expositors, for though they call these Jews carnales
Abrahae posteras, yet they oppose carnales here to spirituales, i. e. veros in
their known and common sense. Vid. Expos. in locum.
then, it either rests to be proved, that our Savior intended here to
declare them only nominally or equivocally so, because he charge them as
children of the Devil; for which there is no color in the world, seeing both,
as before, may be really predicated of the same subject, viz. that they are
really members of Christ's visible Kingdom, and yet really children of the
Devil; as those children of the Kingdom were, who went accursed from the mouth
of Christ in another place. Or, secondly, it is yielded, that these Jews were
not only nominally, but really members of the visible Church, and then my
desire is granted, viz. that persons void of saving grace, as these Jews were,
may be considered to be real members of the visible Church.

3. Indeed, if we take Abraham's seed, here, in the last sense, viz. spiritually
or savingly such; then the opposition is most evident; for thus they could not
be Abraham's seed, and the children of the devil also, and our Savior plainly
staves off from the first, by so sharp a charge of the second, q. d. you think
because you have Abraham to your father, that you are the heirs of salvation
and heaven, but alas ye are the devils children, and must look for your place
and portion with him.

Secondly, we may distinguish also of these Jews, as they are here affirmed to
be the children of the Devil. The children of the devil are so in nature or
habitually, or in conversation, or service, or so in state, condition,
profession and visible show; nor though such as are in nature and service the
children of God, and in grace and works the children of Abraham, cannot be in
state, profession or outward show the children of the Devil, yet on the
contrary it is too evident in sad experience, and plain in the Scripture, that
such as are the children of God and our father Abraham, in profession and
condition, may yet be the children of the world, the flesh and the devil in
heart, and life, and service; as these Jews were, who though they were so
notoriously eminent in the service of the devil against Christ and his Gospel,
are yet acknowledged by our Savior here to have Abraham to their father, and
by Paul, Romans 9 4. to be the adopted children of God.

Object. 2. He is no Jew that is only so outwardly, Romans 2. 28. therefore he
is no real Churchmember that is only so in profession.

Answ. It Is confessed that he is no Jew in the Apostles sense, that is only a
Jew outwardly; and that this, by analogy, will conclude from Jews to
Christians; but the great question yet rests, viz. in what sense the Apostle
means that the Jew outwardly is no Jew. 1. He cannot mean that he was no Jew
carnally, this is confessed while the Apostle terms him a Jew outwardly. 2. He
cannot mean that he is no Jew ecclesiastically, or with respect to visible
Church Membership; for that also he allows in the very next words, chapter 3. 1, 2,
etc. what advantage then has Quum enim cos circumcisionis symbolo insignitos
suisse tra dit, quo filii De^ haber^ntur, non eas fatetur suo aliquo meri to,
excelluisse sed Dei beneficiis. Bull. in loc Romans 9. 4.
the Jew? as if he had said, if he be in some sense no Jew, what then is his
advantage above the Gentile, he answers himself much every way? and wherein,
but in Church Priviledges? and how, but as this outward Jew is a Churchmember?
3. Then thirdly, there is no sense left for these words of the Apostle, but
that spiritual saving sense before mentioned so that here is a Jew and no Jew;
a carnal Jew and an outward Jew, a member of the visible Church, to whom
belongs the adoption and the glory of the Covenants, etc. and yet no Jew
spiritually and savingly; as the very place interprets it self, if any thing
heeded, where the Jew outwardly is only asserted to be no Jew, in that he is
not a Jew inwardly; and what is that? but such a Jew as God expects, accepts, or
gives praise unto, whose praise is not of men, but of God; the conclusion is,
that some are outwardly Christians or members only of the visible Church, who
are not spiritually or savingly so, or that shall find no praise or acceptance
with God, which was never denied.

Object. 3. Some in the Church have only a name to live, when indeed they are
dead; Rev. 3. 1. therefore there are some that are only nominal, and not real
members of the Church.

Answ. I have before confessed that there are some persons mingled with the
Church and people of God, that are of his Church only nominally and not
really; that have the name alone, and not the thing; whether we respect the
visible Church or the invisible; such as pretend (contrary to their direct
intentions, as the Jew at New Castle) to join with the Church upon any corrupt
or treacherous design, may have the name (but that is all) of a visible member
thereof. Again, all hypocrites that cover their rottenness under specious
professions of the truth of their grace, from the eyes of the world, have the
name and show of the members of the Church invisible, or of the Church of the
saved, when they have nothing at all of the truth or being thereof.

2. But it is most evident, that our Saviors words now urged, reach only the
latter sort of these pretenders; and lay us a ground only to distinguish of
nominal and real members of the Church of the saved; so far is it from
troubling the course of our question at all; for if we mark, the Text says not
that this Church has a name to be a Church, but to live, to have spiritual and
saving life in her in opposition whereunto she is alone said to be dead.
Again, this life does not seem so much as to pretend the life of outward
grace, or that which is the principle of the state and condition of the visible
Church, but only the life of habitual and inward grace, or that which is the
principle of good works and a holy conversation, as is very evident from the
very Text, I know thy works, thy works are not perfect before God, v. 1, 2.

3. Yea, to put all out of doubt, the same mouth, that thus charge her to be
dead, does also acknowledge her to be a Church, and her Ministry to be an
Angel, to the Angel of the Church in Sardis, v. 1. and concludes this Epistle,
v. 7. as he does the rest, Let him that has an ear hear what the Spirit
says unto the Churches; it is also called a golden candlestick as well as the
rest, yea and by name said to be one of the seven Churches, chapter 1. 11. and 20.

Object. 4. To the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my
Statute, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, etc. Psalm 50.
16. therefore wicked men are not in Covenant, and consequently not in the
Church.

Answ. This passage may be thought to be spoken of wicked Ministers.

1. From the context in the verses preceding, which chiefly treat of the work
of Ministers, viz. sacrifices, and offerings, and burnt-offerings, as the
special matter of the present discourse, from v. 8. to v. 14.

2. From the Text it self, which supposes the persons here reproved, to be
such as used to declare Gods statutes, [to others.] I should not lay much
weight upon this interpretation, but that it seems to have been the mind of
the eminent translators of the Bible, who point us in their margent to Romans 2.
21, 22. as a Text parallel and exegetical of this, and which is manifestly
concerning Ministers. Now if the Text before us should indeed be thus to be
understood, viz. of Ministers, who sees not its distance and utter incongruity
to our purpose?

2. But should it be found to intend the people, it will also be found far
enough from wounding, or indeed touching my conclusion; for it cannot be
conceived to determine any thing touching that with which it medleth not, viz.
the outward Covenant-state of this people, it does not so much as seem to
offer any service at all against us; unless to the Brownist in another point,
viz. that wicked men ought not to perform holy duties; which yet indeed it
does but seem to do; for the intention of the Text is not to resolve what is a
wicked man's duty, but what will be the fruit and issue of all the duties of
wicked worshippers, and what ruin and destruction abides them, as is most
evident from their contrary in v. 14. they that offer thansgiving, and pay
their vows to the Lord, they have a promise made unto their duties, verse 15.
but now to the wicked God says, q. d. thou have nothing to do with this grace
or promise made to the godly, etc. what have thou to do with my name or
Covenant? do thou imagine that I will have any mercy for such a wretch and
hypocrite as thou art, deceive not thy self, etc. therefore v. 21, 22. more
directly, I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee, therefore
consider this all ye that [in your duties] forget God, least I tare you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver.

All the advantages that this corrupt gloss of the Brownist has, is taken
from the sound of this English phrase, [what have thou to do] which indeed is
only to an English objection; for if we examine all the other languages we
shall find it will not bear any weight at all, viz. no more then quid tibi ad
narrandum, vel ut enarres, etc. will help him too (which doubtless is fitter
to be understood of what profit or benefit such a one can expect from his duty,
then what duty he is bound to perform) as the Hebrew and Targum are rendered, or
quare tu enarras, etc. wherefore do thou worship God, for what end, what
(...)*
can thou hope for? as the seventy, the Aethiopick and the Latin version
have it; but might the Syriack version be heard, there is less color for the
objection, hence against my position, for it ends the interrogation (and so the
question) with declaring the Statutes; and makes the Covenant of God, and the
Peccatori dicit Deus, quid tibi, and libris mandatorum meorum? gestas enim
pactum meum ore tuo, attamen tu odisti disciplinam, etc
taking thereof into the mouth, an aggravation of wickedness; thou carriest my
Covenant in thy mouth; yet thou hate my discipline, and castest my words
behind thee.

3. To conclude, whatsoever be found to be the true sense of these words, most
certain it is that the sense of this objection is not; for how plentiful is
the Scripture in acknowledging wicked men to be Gods people, and outwardly in
Covenant with him? yea, if we cast our eye to the seventh verse of this same
Psalm, this is cleared beyond contradiction; where we find the Lord summoning
his people to be testified against from heaven, yet owned by the name of his
people, and himself acknowledged to be their God, most Emphatically, I am God
even thy God, q. d. though I am about to testify against thee, let none
imagine that I intend thereby to disown or reject thee, or that thou art no
longer in Covenant with me, for notwithstanding thou art my people, and I am
God even thy God, or as the Covenant expressly sounds, I am (yet) to thee a
God, and thou art to me a people.

Object. 5 It Is said, John 2. 19. that those that left the Apostolical Churches
were never of them; therefore those that have no saving grace, though they be
in the Church, they are not of it.

Answ. One great help for the right understanding of this Text is to weigh the
conditions of these persons here spoken of; the Apostle in the immediate verse
foregoing, tells us that they were Antichrists, that is, desperate heretics,
for ut Christus suum aluit tulitque proditorem, sic etiam Apostolis alendi
erant multi Antichristi and Pseudo Apostoli, as Marlorat has collected out of
Thomas Naogeorgius, of whom Bullinger out of Tertullian, Irenaus, and Eusebius
gives us a particular account in his Commentary upon this Text; they were
(says he) Simon Magus, Menander, Saturninus, Basilides, Carpocrates,
Cerinthus, Haebion, the two first of them were by their proselytes worshipped
as God, the rest denied, either the Divine or the Humane nature of Christ.

And now the question would be, whether these persons were guilty of those
gross and Antichristian Heresies, while they continued to be ex Apostolorum
societate, as Marlorate speaks, or under the pretext and profession of
Christian Religion? those words of Naogeorge on the place, subdolos and falsos
fratres seem to carry the affirmative; as also, what Bullinger adds of them,
cum Christianorum nomine se vinditarint Haeretici, etc. Now if so, the matter
is ended, for I have before acknowledged, that such, as upon any treacherous or
corrupt design take up and carry the profession of religion not historically
owning, but with a secret purpose of mind rejecting the faith and doctrine of
Christ, are only doubtless (to use Brentius his words) Christianorum numero,
nomine and titulo; rever a nunquam crediderunt.

2. But (least this content not) another special means of clearing this doubt,
will be to consider what is meant by these words [they were not of us] and in
what sense these that are now departed from the faith and the Church, are said
never to have been of us.

Now, first, I yield that this phrase is not to be restrained to the society of
the Apostles, but to be enlarged to the company of the faithful, or those
primitive Apostolical Churches, from which they truly broke themselves off, as
well as from the Apostles.

2. I distinguish of persons being of the Church, viz. by profession Of the
Church p. 14
only, or by profession principled with a common faith, or by profession with
a saving faith; or with Dr. Field, after Stapleton, some persons are of the
numero only, some numero and merito, and others numero merito and electione;
the first are real members of no Church at all; the second are members of the
Church of the called, the third and last only of the Church of the Elect, or
the saved.

Whereof I make application thus. 1. None will deny but that these Whence our
Divines conclude non profecto veniet Antichristus ex Judais, quod quidam
credunt neque ex Turcis sed ex Christianis. Naogeorge in loc.
Heretics that were never of the Church in the Apostles sense, were yet of the
Church in the first sense. numero, nomine, titulo, ex Apostalorum societate,
and Christianorum, and thus Christiani, as Bullinger says, Christiani olim
fuerant quos hic vocavit Antichristus, they were Apostolorum discipuli, though
ficti, and fratres, though subdoli, and falsi, as Naogeorge says; but thus, as
before was noted, the Text concerns not our question at all.

2. Yet, I grant, that some of these Heretics might formerly have owned the
true Religion, without these Heresies, or any purpose and design to promote
the same, or themselves by them; but that they came on (as in our age, men
usually do) thereto, by degrees; and that, though they were not of the Church
in the Apostles sense, yet they were of the Church according to the second
branch of the distinction before explained, viz. of the Church of the called,
though not of the Elect. Tertii vivam habent fidei radicem, ac suae Adoptionis
Testimonium penitus fixum in cordibus gerunt, de his loquitur Jobannes cum
impossible esse dicit ab ecclesia alienari. Calv. in loc.


Therefore the Apostle means, that these Heretics did make it appear by
their departure from the Church upon so damnable an occasion. that they were
never of the Church to be saved, or elected to salvation; though yet they were
once of the visible so ciety of Christians, or of the visible Church from which
otherwise they could not have departed, and that really, though not
effectually, finally, fully, or savingly; they were not of us (says
Oecumenius) that is of the lot of them which are saved; yet they were truly of
us, as Augustine fully and clearly distinguishes the place; his words are
these, such as will not tarry in the Church, but finally forsake it to the end;
in the prescience of God, and respect of the small benefit they shall have by
their temporal and small abode there, be not of or in the Church; though
according to this present state they are truly members thereof; which words
are quoted and sealed to by Fulk against the Rhemists in Vindication of the
Protestant judgment, aspersed by the Papists (as more fully anon) in this
point; those other words of Augustine used by Fulk upon this Text likewise, are
yet more clear; these men therefore were of the many that were called, but of
the few that are chosen, they were not.

And this double sense of being of the Church (at which some seem to be
offended) is clearly grounded upon the Scripture, those that are of the visible
Church, and not of the invisible, are as well said to be of Israel, though not
Israel, by Paul to the Chap. 9. 6
Romans, as those are here said to be of us, that are of the Church invisible
also.

Therefore I conclude with Fields apt and pertinent words, by that which has
been said that none but the Elect are of the Of the Church. p, 14
Church, in that principal and high degree before mentioned, we may easily
understand the Truth of their meaning, who say, that hypocrites, wic^^d men,
and cast awayes are in, but not of the Church.

Object. 6. The titles, that are proper to the savingly believing (as Saints,
Gods children, people, etc.) are communicated by Scripture to all
Church Members, therefore all Church Members are by Scripture supposed to be
truly and savingly believing, and those that are not savingly qualified, are
but equivocally so called by Scripture.

Answ. To take it for granted, that such titles as these, are proper in
Scripture to such only, as savingly believe, is too plainly to beg the thing
in question; or rather, that which has been wholly put beyond all question, by
the Scripture it self before.

Had not we already found the holy Ghost almost throughout the Scriptures, when
he does not only suppose, but expressly charge a people to be notoriously
wicked, to own such a people at the same time, and in the same place to be Gods
people; children, holy, etc. this might have seemed a plausible and handsome
argument; but seeing it is indeed thus, a very easy reply may serve it, until
our former arguments from Scripture against it, are answered.

How such titles as these became so generally received, as proper and peculiar
to such only, as savingly believe, I dare not presume to guess; however give
me leave to fear, that the too frequent restrained or ambiguous application
thereof (shall I say unadvisedly) from our pulpits, has had some influence
into that sad and schismatical persuasion and error, of the Anabaptist as well
as others.

CHAP. XXI.
The Authority of the Church searched after; and first in Augustines age.
LEt us now at length descend from the consideration of Divine authority, to
that which is called Humane, and from the Scripture to the Church.

But if we would indeed discern the clear and distinct opinion of the Church
in this famous controversy, we need not be so much busied in drawing
consequences, or offering snatches from what she has scattered by her worthy
hands, up and down, upon other occasions; but rather seriously to fix and
ponder upon what she has delivered about it, when called by some eminent and
special providence to speak punctually to it.

Before this controverting age of ours, there have been three remarkable
periods of special occasion, exacting the sentence and judgment of the Church
in the present case; upon all which we now proceed, briefly to examine what
judgment she has made.

The first eminent occasion hereof was urged by the Donatists; Aug. Tom. 7.
Gram. l. 2. c. 3. 4
there was, indeed, as Austine observes some slight motion of it, by some
Schismatics in Cyprians age before, but Donatus was the first great stickler
in it; who held, that none but the godly were true members of the visible
Church; the very point, I humbly conceive, that we have all this while been
arguing against; but was this indeed the opinion of the Donatists? if St.
August. may be believed, doubtless it was, illud ostendere tentaverunt (inquit
August.) Donatistae prolatis multis testimoniis Divinarum Scripturarum, Aug.
Tom. 7. Col. cum. Donatistis.
quod ecclesia Dei non cum Malorum hominum commixtione futura praedicta sit;
though driven by dispute, at length they evaded, by limitting their opinion to
openly wicked, as Augustine testifies also, Malos in ecclesia permixtos esse
confessi sunt Donatistae, sed occultos eos esse dixerunt.

Now this worthy mouth and champion of the Church in his age has noted this
opinion as an error, and therefore not his own opinion, and as an error of
this sect of the Donatists, and therefore not the opinion of the true Catholic
Church of God in his time, as abundantly appears by his set and purposed large
disputation, in most of his volumes against the errors of the Schismatical Aug.
lib. de correp. and gr. cap. 9. and de don. persev c. 8
Sect.

And least it should be thought that the heat of dispute should have
transported him, he gives us his judgment, most clearly and fully upon other
occasions about it; as before we noted (after Dr. Fulk) Augustine teaches us,
that such as shall certainly fall away, and that finally and consequently, such
as have no saving grace, according to their present state (that is while they
abide with the Church) they are truly members thereof.

Again in the same place upon those known words of the Apostle, they were not
of us; that is, says he, they were not of the number of the sons, even when
they were of the faith of the sons (what he means by sonship here, he tells
us in his reason in the next words) because, they that are the sons indeed
are foreknown and Ecclesia etiam mali sunt, imo bonis multo plures ut in co rum
comparatione pauci sunt. de unit eccles. cap. 12
predestined these men, therefore were of the many that were called, but of
the few that were chosen they were not; yea, in another place he assures us,
that there are not only evil men in the Church, but indeed so many as that the
good being compared with them are but a few.

CHAP. XXII.
The judgment of the Protestant Writers searched after.
THe second eminent point of occasion was sharpened by Bellarmine, Stapleton,
the Rhemists and other Papists, by their envy and malice against the
Reformation; falsely charging the doctrine thereof, concerning the visible
Church, to be, that none are truly members of it, but such as are elected, or
such as have saving grace.

Hereby the Patrons of our Protestant and reformed cause are provoked to answer
for us; and what is their answer? do they Am. Ant. Bell. Tom. 2. l. 2. c. 1 n. 5
acknowledge the charge to be just? or do they not with Ames, cry, falsum est?
it is false that we require internal virtues or saving grace to render one a
member of the visible Church according to the outward state thereof.

Accordingly Dr. Fulk wipes off the like aspersion cast upon us by the
Rhemists; the visible Church (says he) has both Fulk upon the Rhemists on
Mat. 22. 14
Elect and reprobate in it, but the Chatholick Church invisible, which is the
body of Christ, consists only of Gods Elect; the true members of his body;
thus you know (speaking to the Rhemists) right-well, but that you are disposed
to slander us, wheresoever you can take occasion to blind the ignorant by
ambiguity, or generality, or double understanding of any word.

Again, the Jesuit having charged us falsely in these words, the only reason
by which heretics hold the Church to be invisible, because they imagine the
Church to consist only of the elect, or at Whites way to the true church
least of the good. White, not more generally then boldly answers, Here the
Jesuit bewraieth either hid ignorance or malice; let him if he can, for the
credit of his Word, show where any of those whom he calls Heretics do teach
or affirm, that the Church militant (whereof the question is) consists of
the Elect only.

Whereupon also Whitaker says, that Bellarmine ought to Debuit Bellar. probare
in ecclesia Catholica, etc. Whita. Contro. secund. qu. pri. cap. 7
prove, that there are both good and bad in the Catholic (that is the
invisible) Church; which when he goes about to prove from the Parables of the
barn-floor, etc. he ought to understand by the barn-floore in this place, not
the Catholic, but the particular Church, in which we confess that there are
both good and bad.

To whom Doctor Reynolds in his defense of the Church, Reynolds in his second
thesis.
which consists of the Elect alone, fully accords; the wicked (says he) must
needs be a part of the Church, if the name of the Church did signify the
visible Church, and we call it consisting of the good and bad.

Famous Willet also adds his testimony hereunto, when in answer Willet.
Synop. of the Church.
to the Papists, he openly and freely acknowledges, that such as do not truly
believe, (whom he calls) close infidels are of the visible Church, viz. de
jure) yea, and that open sinners are of the visible Church de facto, until they
be excommunicated.

Our industrious Fox is very distinct in the point; which visible Church (says
he) having in it self a difference of two sorts Fox Act etc. p. 27.
of people; so it is divided into two parts; of which the one stands of such
as be of outward profession only; the other which by election inwardly are
joined to Christ; the first are in the visible Church, but not in the invisible.

We have before occasionally noted the consent of Pareus distinguishing the
Church of the called from the Church of the Elect. Pareus, Polanus Bull^nger,
Ravanellus, Wollebius, Gomarus Apollonius, etc Vid. etiam. Mel. part. sept. p.
33 Ociand Enchir, p. 126
Polanus reckoning the invisible to be but a part (not the whole) of the
visible Church. Bullinger, Ravanellus, etc. who distinguish the Church by a
large and a strict acceptance, and account the visible to be of larger extent
then the Church invisible, and with Wallebius, Gomarus, Apollonius, and even
all the reformed Divines define the Church largely taken, viz. the visible
Church, to contain within it, both good and bad, elect and reprobate.

Master Hooker thus reasons, all are of necessity either Christians, or not
Christians, if by external profession they are Christians, Hook. eccles. pol.
p. 84
they are of the visible Church; and Christians by external profession they all
are, whose mark of recognisance has in it those things which we have mentioned
(one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism;) yea, although they be impious idolaters,
wicked Heretics, person excommunicable, yea and cast out for notorious
improbilities; -- yet such we deny not to be Imps and limbs of Satan, even as
long as they continue such.

Field assures us not only of his own, but even of the judgment Field. p. 12,
13, 14
of such as are most liable to exception in the case, and confidently tells
us that the meaning of Wickliffe, Husse, and others, who defined the Church to
be a multitude of the Elect was not, as if they thought them only to pertain
to the Church, and no others, but because they only pertain unto it
principally, fully, effectually and finally, etc.

Externally those are within the Covenant, though they have not for the present
that sound work of faith, and may be never shall. Hook. survey p. 36.

Mr. Cobbet confesses (or asserteth rather) that there is a Mr. Cobbet. Concl.
3. in his just vindication Vid his Book of Inf. Bap. p. 57 Bish. Usher sum of
Relig. p. 396 Vid. Cottons way. p 1 Expos. in 39. Art. p. 87.
bare external being in the Covenant of grace by persons, who possibly never
shall be saved; and therefore who have not any saving grace.

The visible Church consists of good and bad; as at the beginning we see it
did in Cain and Abel; whereupon our Savior compares the Church to a net, in
which are fishes good and bad.

But I shall conclude the matter out of doubt, with the observation made for
us, by the industrious exposition of the English Articles. The members of the
visible Church (it says) are some of them for God, and some against God; all
of them not withstanding deemed parts of the Church so long, as they make no
manifest and open rebellion against the Gospel, which also adds, that the
Churches bear witness hereunto, referring us to confess. l. Hell. v. 1. Art. 14.
and 2. c. 17. Bohem. c. 8. Gal. Art. 11. Wittimb. Art. 32. Survic. Art. 15.
whereunto I also refer my Reader.

CHAP. XXIII.
The judgment of the Brownists, and of our Church against them herein.
THe third more special occasion, exacting the judgment of the Church herein,
was given by the Brownists; whereupon we shall briefly note two things to serve
us in our passage. 1. That it was the opinion of the Brownists, that the
essence of the visible Church, consisted in saving grace, contrary to what I am
laboring to prove. 2. That this was judged an error, and a great part of the
error of Brownisme, as such, by the eminent patrons of our Church and truth in
that generation, going only before, as in the present design.

1. That this was the opinion of the Brownists indeed, viz. that the essence of
the visible Church carries in it saving grace; most plentifully appears, by
their asserting, owning, and pleading for the same in all their writings,
witness Smith, Barrow, Ainsworth, Robinson, Johnson and Cann, etc, who tell us
Defense of the churches. p. 17 their Apol. p. 44 counterpoison p. 115. and 200
Barrows true description of the visible church. p. 2 Principles and infer. p.
8. and 10
that the Church is a separated company of righteous men from the open wicked
men of the world, and that it cannot consist of all sorts good and bad, in
which no unclean thing or person enters, that keeps the unity of faith in
the bond of peace, and love unseigned; that is a company of faithful people
that truly worship Christ, and readily obey him, a company of Converts, a
visible communion of Saints, that is such as are separate from all known sin;
practicing the whole will of God known; growing in grace and knowledge and
continuing to the end.

And more fully and accurately let Smith be heard once more in the name of the
rest; the true form of a true visible Church (says he) is partly inward, and
partly outward; the inward Princ. and inf. p. 11
part of the form consists in three things. 1. The Spirit. 2. Faith. 3.
Love. The Spirit is the soul animating the whole body; faith uniteth the
members of the body to the head, Christ Jesus; love uniteth the members of the
body each to other; the outward part thereof is a vow, promise, oath, or
Covenant betwixt God and the Saints.

2. Now that this was held the error of the Brownist, and a part of their
Brownisme, and that it was not the allowed opinion of the true Church,
especially in England, appears abundantly in the disputations of all our
Divines against them; wherein we find these two propositions irrefragably
proved. 1. That an Assembly may be a true visible Church, though its worship be
very corrupt. 2. That persons may be members of the visible Church, by
professing the true Religion, though without sincere grace or holy life; the
latter of which is directly for us; and in defense whereof, Dayrel so smartly
replied to Mr. Ainsworth you speak (says he) you know not what, for herby you
imply a true visible Dayr. p. 36, 37
Church is a company of people professing and practicing such things as will
bring them to salvation. Whereupon it follows that there is no hypocrite in the
visible Church; for whose practice is answerable to his holy profession, he is
no hypocrite; nor reprobate, or any that shall be damned; and thus you unawares
confound the visible and the invisible Church.

Johnson himself testifies thus much on our behalf, even while he His defense
of the churches and Ministry of England. p. 71.
says his accusation against us; the forward preachers of England (as he
pleases to call them) teach (says he) that the true visible Church of Christ
is not a separated company of righteous men from the open wicked of the world,
but may consist of people good and bad.

Neither may we think that that this was the doctrine of the Episcopal A book
by sundry godly and learned Ministers standing out and suffering in the cause
of non conformity
party alone, for the very non-conformists have a book extant, intended
purposely against the separation, and therein, near the beginning of that
book, they openly acquit themselves of, and charge Barrow and the old
Separatists with this error, that they held the visible Church to be a company
of faithful people that truly worship Christ, and readily obey him.

CHAP. XXIV.
Seven Arguments yet further proving that the judgment of the Church has
always been on our side introduced by two Objections.
THere is a twofold distinction by some made use of, to evade or weaken the
authority aforesaid.

1. It is urged that some eminent Divines assert, that hypocrites are only
equivoce, and not vere of the visible Church.

But hereunto we need only remember what has formerly been (I think truly)
observed, that such Divines understand, by Church in the proposition, the
Church of the saved, which they themselves usually called the Church Catholic,
or the Church inviand none can doubt but such Church Membership is predicable
of hypocrite, only, nominally, or equivocally and not really.

2. It is also pleaded, that some, as eminent, affirm and teach, that
hypocrites are only in the Church, not of the Church. But,

This tenent may seem to cross many of our own D^vines in their writings
against the Papists; but indeed it does only seem so, for it is manifest that
the Church which they intend, is not the same with this which I have to deal
withal; for they speak of the Church catholic, consisting only of the Elect.
Hudson. his Epistle
Here we may fairly understand our Divines, to mean the visible Church in the
former, and the invisible Church in the latter branch of this distinction. q.
d. they are in the visible When Willet had let fall that expression, that
wicked men are in, but not of the Church, he presently corrected himself,
adding, yea they (wicked men) may be members of the visible church for a time,
Genesis 2. contro. of the church. p 62
Church, but not of the Church invisible, as the number of the saved.

Or, as before we received from Doctor Field. We are to take them as intending
only, when they say that wicked men are not of the Church, that they are not
of the Church so fully, effectually and savingly, as the righteous and elect
are, not but that they are so really.

Therefore there is plain Scripture ground to distinguish of being of the
Church, viz. savingly, as they that fell away (1 John 2. 12.) were not. 2. In a
visible, outward, and common sense, as those were, Romans 9. 6. that were of
Israel (to whom belonged the Covenants, and glory, of the visible Church)
though they were not Israel, to whom belonged the absolute promise of salvation.

But to silence all possible objections, I shall now undertake to conclude from
several principles, undoubtedly owned by all the Churches in all ages, that
they have ever denied saving grace to be essential to visible
Church Membership, and consequently, must needs have ever held that wicked
persons may be of the visible Church, and that really, and not equivocally
only, if it be opposed to really.

Arg. 1. To believe that relative holiness is really sufficient Fidelibus sunt
annumerandi -- tanquam ecclesiae membra fidelium little liberi, qui sunt in
ecclesia, 1 Cor. 7. 14. participes enim ejusdem foederis and ejusdem
professionis cum suis parentibus. Medul. Am. p. 168, 169
to interest in visible Church Membership, is to believe also, that saving
grace does not only do so, unless relative holiness and saving grace be all
one, a Paradox that no Protestant asserts; but the Church has ever believed
that relative holiness gives real interest to visible Church Membership.

For first, she never doubted but that children borne within the visible
Church, were really in Covenant and Church Members. Nor, secondly, that their
title thereto is founded, not upon personal, much less saving grace, but upon
parental or relative holiness.

Arg. 2. The constant unscrupled practice of baptizing the children of all
such, as remain within the pale of the Church can truly proceed from no other
principle but this, viz. that Church Membership may be really considered
without respect to saving grace; this is demonstrated by two considerations. 1.
That it was never the practice of any Church, constantly and ordinarily (i. e.
without the Adoption of such children unto Christian Parents) to baptize the
children of Pagans, or of such as are no Church members. 2 That it cannot be
imagined by any that are serious in the case, that all that are within the pale
of the Church make evidence satisfactory of saving Epist. 12. Infantes
pontificiorum and similium possunt baptizari; quia non sunt plane alicni a
foederi professi^ne Am. de consic. p. 248
grace.

But now it cannot be denied me that such has been the constant unscrupled
practice of the Churches of Christ in all ages, viz. to baptize the children of
all such as lived within the pale of the Church.

Indeed Calvine writes against the baptizing of the children of the Papists.
But, 1. Papists live not within the pale of our (reformed) Church. 2. And his
reason given against it, is not because the Papists have no grace, or because
they are hypocrites; but because they want sound doctrine and are judged
Heretics. Yet, 3. The ecclesiastical College of Geneva plainly Against Knox
p. 88
tell us, that wheresoever the profession of Christianity has not utterly
perished, and been extinct, Infants are beguiled of their right, if the common
seal be denied them.

I confess that Amesius, Hildersham, (and some others happily) would have us put
a difference in sealing the children of the wicked (i. e.) such as do aperte in
the face of the world, violate the Covenant. But, 1. They never questioned the
right of Ab allis piis eorum educatio suscipiatur. Qui foedus Dei Aperte
violuat little infantes cum aliquo discrimi^e debent (he does not say non
debent) Baptizari. de consc. Am. p. 247. Distinctio debet ad conectionem
malorum, ibid.
such children to Baptism. 2. Nor denied the actual administration thereof
unto such, wholly, only in prudence urged the great use of Sponsores, viz.
godly persons to undertake for children in such a case. 3. This reaches not
our case, for the reason hereof was not because they had no saving grace, but
because their open wickedness was a present blot and scandal to Religion, for
which they ought by this suspending the seal from their children, to be made
ashamed and brought to repentance. 4. However this is but the judgment of
particular men, and contrary to the judgment and practice of the Churches in
general, as our present argument extends it self; yea, howsoever our
Congregational brethren have of late taken up the contrary, Master Rutherford
has noted that Best, a famous Brownist, denied baptism to belong to the
children of the excommunicate only; which yet he doubtless did not because
such were supposed to have no grace, but because they were, by the sentence of
excommunication, cast out of the Churches; clearly yielding that the children
of all Church Members are to be baptized.

Yea, though our Congregational brethren are yet so charitable as to allow our
Churches to be true Churches, and yet so severe to deny our Infants the first
seal; we suppose this is not, because they judge us all to be void of saving
grace, or out of the general Covenant of God, but (as Master Cotton, Master
Norton, etc. affirm) because we are not within their ecclesiastical particular
Covenant, and that in their practice, in their own Congregations they are more
favorable to the Infants borne therein, and their application of the seals is
as large as their Church and Covenant.

Arg. 3. Those that in their constant course of preaching, still supposed that
men might violate their Covenant with God, cannot but be thought to hold that
men may be truly in Covenant with God, and consequently in the Church without
saving grace; especially considering. 1. That if men do break Covenant with
God, it is by great and notorious wickedness. 2. That to men, who are now the
Judges, such as are guilty of notorious wickedness, and do, as Ames expresses
it, Aperte violari foedus Dei, give no evidence of saving grace; and lastly,
that as it was before observed, men cannot break that bond they are not under,
or violate that Covenant, in which they cannot be said to be.

But now, none can have the least ground of doubting, whether such has not
been the constant course of proaching, yea, and writing too, by the whole cloud
of the men of God in all ages that has the least communion or converse
therewith.

Arg. 4. Those that hold that notoriously scandalous persons are within, until
they be censured and cast out, must needs be granted to hold also, that persons
void of saving grace, may be real members of the visible Church, that is de
facto, if not de jure; the reason is, because one that appears notoriously
scandalous, appears thereby to have no sincere or saving grace; and according
to the rule esse and apparere sunt equipollentia in jure, seeing men, who judge
only according to appearance, are Judges thereof.

But now it has been the universal opinion or judgment rather of all the
Church in all ages, that notoriously wicked and scandalous persons are really
within, until they are censured and cast out, as Willet says, close infidels
are in the visible Church de jure, and openly wicked and flagitious persons are
so de facto, until excommunicated, both of which do indeed evidently argue that
saving grace is not an essential requisite to visible Church Membership,
neither can it be imagined, that unless they are granted to be within, that
they are capable of being cast out, or unless they be granted to be really
within, that they can really be cast out; therefore persons (as Ames aptly
Medal. p. 201
and plainly teaches) about whom discipline ought to be exercised, are members
of the Church and none other.

It will but little avail to urge here, that some Divines affirm wicked men
and hypocrites, to be only in, and not of the Church, for the same Divines
acknowledge the most notoriously wicked, so far in the Church as to be liable
to e^clesiastical censure, and to be cast out; and do they not thereby
confess, that they are also of the Church, I mean visible; for otherwise, what
has the Church to do to Censure, Judge and punish one that is not of her own
society and corporation? therefore I am further confirmed in what before was
noted, that such Divines mean by such expression, that wicked men are not so
fully, because not savingly of the visible Church, or else they are not of the
Church, that is of the Church invisible; for of the visible Church they must
needs be granted to be and that really, by all such as allow them really
subject to the censure thereof, seeing the Church judges none but her own
members, and one cannot be said to be a member by being in the body, unless he
also be of the body; wherefore Ames is express in the words already cited,
that such as are liable to Church-censure are membra and membra ecclesiarum,
members (and therefore not only in, but) of the Churches.

Arg. 5. The practice of the Church-hath ever been to readmit the penitents
(that is such as after baptism have been excommunicate for scandal, and have
given satisfaction to the Church again) into Church Communion, without
rebaptization.

We read indeed of one kind of Anabaptisme in the ancient Fortunat. in Conc
Carthag. and secundinus in eodem. Conc.
Church, much pressed by Cyprian, and other fathers in the counsel of Carthage,
viz. of such as were baptized by heretics, but as this is nothing to our case,
it being in no respect to the persons that were to be rebaptized, or their
qualifications at all, but wholly in respect to the qualifications of the
administrator, viz. his heresy; so it is well known, that this opinion In Conc.
Nic. vid. Hier. dial versus Luciferaria.
was afterward both condemned by a better advised counsel, and also revoked by
the chiefest authors thereof themselves.

Now this practice of re-admitting penitents without re-baptizing them, does
evidently argue this principle wheresoever it is found that persons may be
considered in relation to the visible Church without respect to saving grace.
For, 1. These penitents were acknowledged to have had some secret union with
the Church, even by the Church her self in their most scandalous condition,
when the Church could have no evidence at all of their saving grace otherwise,
upon their repentance they had entered covenant, and consequently must have had
the initiating seal applied, viz. baptism; for what reason can there possibly
be given why, else, they could not be rebaptized; but only this, because they
were held, never wholly extirpated out of the Church or Covenant, by scandal or
censure? neither can it be imagined, that their now repenting is a certain
evidence of saving grace to have been in their hearts, in the midst of their
wickedness; and therefore conclude we must that they held that something else
besides saving grace did root and interest in visible Church Membership; for if
being in Covenant, and consequently being in the Church, did appear unto the
Churches where saving grace did not appear, who sees not this consequence
that the Churches judged, that interest in the Church and Covenant is not
founded in saving grace.

Arg. 6. The Church has ever held that vera fides, and sana doctrina, is an
essential note of the true visible, with Ames; thereupon our reformed Divines
assert that a doctrinal, and not a personal succession, is a necessary mark
thereof, and according to reverend Hildersham, profession, and preaching of
true doctrine Held. in Joh. 4. p. 161 Vid. Call. Instit. l. 4. c. 1. p. 363. and
Zanch. de eccl. p. 82, etc.
in all fundamental points, is the only proper and certain note of the true
Church; for ubi fides ibi ecclesia, that as Ames explaineth fides quam, or as
Hierome (in symb. Rufin.) fides Christi; illa est ecclesia Sancta, quae fidem
Christi integram servat; thus the Prophets and Apostles, the penmen of this
doctrine of faith are said to be the foundation, on which the true Church is
Ephesians. 2. ult.
built.

Hence it must needs follow, that the Church ever held, that the essence of the
visible Church, does not necessarily require saving grace. For, 1. The
essential property or note of any thing, does immediately connote or argue the
essence or form of that thing. 2. The profession of the true doctrine of
Christ, does not necessarily, much less immediately, connote or argue saving
grace; many with Judas, preaching; and with Simon, Ananias, Saphira Hymeneus,
and Phyletus, owning and professing the true faith, or sound doctrine of Jesus
Christ, whose hearts are alienated from the life of God; and strangers to the
grace of that Covenant, whose Doctrine they thus profess and acknowledge.

Arg. 7. Lastly, to put the matter yet further out of doubt; those very Divines
that are suspected in the point, do generally assert, that the visible Church
consists of good and bad, that hypocrites are de jure of the visible Church,
that they are to be accounted members of the Church, till they wholly renounce
the Gospel; that they are in the external part of the Covenant; that they are
in the Church according to the external state thereof, that they have a visible
right to the Ordinances, all which are most obvious as well to the slightest,
as seriousest reader, and searcher of the reformed writings; and the least of
which will fully satisfy my design.

CHAP. XXV.
The last Argument from the opposite to my position, and the dongerous
consequences thereof.
WE have hitherto argued, from the name, the causes, and the definition of the
visible Church, as also from divine and humane authority; one place of argument
more (we hope) may serve to conclude the question.

Which (let me say without offense) is the dangerous consequences that
necessarily attend the contradictory assertion, or the gross absurdities that
certainly follow it.

My Argument hence supports it self upon three positions.

1. Contradictories cannot be both false; which to affirm would directly imply
an evident contradiction, viz. as if it should be said, this neither is a man,
nor not a man; so that if it shall appear, that this assertion, that saving
grace is of the essence of the visible Church, or visible Church Membership, is
indeed false, then the contradictory hereunto that saving grace is not of the
essence of the visible Church, or visible Church Membership must needs be true.

2. Again, what is truly found in the conclusion may be justly laid upon the
premises, that infer that conclusion; whereupon it is taken for absurd, to deny
the conclusion; but the fault must be sought for in the premises; therefore, if
that which naturally follows the assertion contradictory to ours be absurd
and naught, the assertion it self, which is the ground and cause thereof cannot
be sound or good.

3. But now the consequences of this, that saving grace is of the essence of
the visible Church, which is the formal contradiction to my conclusion, may
easily appear to be somewhat absurd, by these few that follow.

Absurd. 1. Then no reprobate did ever partake of the essence of the visible
Church, or was indeed a member thereof, and Judas was either no Churchmember
or no reprobate.

Absurd. 2. Then there are no hypocrites in the visible Church, and either the
Scribes and Pharisees were no Hypocrites, or no children of the [visible]
Kingdom of Christ.

Absurd. 3. Yea then, indeed there are no hypocrites at all; for if there were
none within the Church, there can be none without; seeing it is necessarily
supposed, that a hypocrite be a professor of religion, and there are none that
profess Religion without the visible Church.

Absurd. 4. Then the election of God is as large as his calling; and either
those many, whom our Savior affirms to be called, were not called; or else,
though our Savior intimates that they were not, yet they were elected.

Absurd. 5. Then, most of those that constantly attend upon all the parts of
Gods public worship, are yet, not of the visible Church, but indeed Heathens;
seeing Heathen is put in opposition to visible Churchmember in the Word of God.

Absurd. 6. Then that great and weighty obligation, pressing wicked
Church Members to reformation in Scripture from their relation to God, their
being Israel, his children his people, etc is utterly evacuate, and made of no
force at all; for there are none such, but even to think of a wicked
Churchmember, implies a contradiction in adjecto.

Absurd. 7. Then the strong obligation upon wicked Church Members to gratitude
and thankfulness, for the bounty and favor of God in all the privileges, and
advantages, and Ordinances of the Church to them and theirs, is made invalid
and weakened to nothing; for God it seems never vouchsafes any such things
unto them, but they daily steal and rob God of them.

Absurb. 8. Then that sore aggravation of sin and punishment, which God in the
Scripture has provided from the former duty and mercy, for the rebellious
children of his Kingdom against the day of judgment, is wholly prevented; for
it seems such being no real Church Members or Subjects of Gods Kingdom, and
the duties of such, and their mercies not duly or really belonging unto them,
the aggravations taken against them thence are ill grounded, and consequently
of no weight, force, or justice.

Absurd. 9. Thus, the visible Church is confounded with the invisible, or is
not at all distinct therefrom; for if the Elect be the matter of the visible
Church, and saving vocation its form, as is pretended, and those be also the
matter and form of the Church invisible, wherein lies the difference? or
indeed, who sees not a wide difference betwixt this opinion and our Saviors
doctrine (many are called, etc.) and its perfect agreement with Brownisme of
late and Donatisme of old; together with its strangeness to the writings of
all the reformed Divines, who generally allow and improve the distinction of
the Church into visible and invisible, and judge that Church, truly a Church,
which is more largely taken, or taken largely in its distinction to the Church
more strictly taken, or the Church of the saved, or called according to the
election; and const^ntly reckon that external calling (and not saving) is the
form of the visible Church, or the Church largely taken, which they conclude
to be complexatam malos quam bonos.

Absurd. 10. This opinion, that saving grace is of the essence of the visible
Church, draws many absurdities with it, touching the dispensation both of
censures and Sacraments.

First, touching censures, if no wicked man be a real member of the visible
Church, it inevitably follows, either, that pertinacious wickedness does
formally excommunicate, and that every such wicked person does formally
excommunicate himself, seeing he cannot be denied to be the formal agent of his
own wickedness; or, at least that there is no need of such a censure of
excommunication, to put wicked persons out of the Church, seeing, that for
which a man deserves thus to be cast out, or cut off, is open wickedness, and
that has (if not put him out. yet) declared him to be without, or no
Churchmember before.

2. Yea, indeed, we may justly infer, that there is no such thing as casting
out of the Church at all; For, 1. Those alone are to be cast out that are
(obstinately) wicked. But, 2. Obstinately wicked persons were never within
(that is quoad homines) for, if interest in the Church be founded in saving
grace, and none ever fell away from saving grace, then none ever fell away from
their interest in the Church; and consequently, those that have no evidence of
saving grace (as the obstinately wicked have not) they appear to men never to
have been within, and therefore not cast out at all, but only, as some please
to speak, declared to have been ever so.

3. Then it further follows, that there is no possibility for the Church to
judge those that are within; for obstinately wicked persons are alone to be
judged; now these, if they have no saving grace are (it seems) not within; and
that they have any saving grace, cannot be discerned while they remain
obstinately scandalous, and when they cease to be obstinately scandalous, they
cease to be objects of the censure of the Church.

4. Yea then, the Church has no possibility left her of judgeing any; for she
has power to judge none, but such as are scandalous, and such as are within,
that is, such as have saving grace; neither can she judge, who have saving
grace, and who not, but by their freedom from, or appearance of scandal, and
consequently, none can possibly be both scandalous and within, in the judgment
of the Church.

I mean such a possibility as is limited by the rule, (id possumus quod jure
possumus) for, if the Church should judge de facto, she must do wrong; if she
judge such as are not scandalous, she erreth, because such deserve it not; if
she judge such as are scandalous, she erreth also, because hereby she judges
them to be within, who have no evidence (under their notorious scandal) of
their being within, but indeed strong evidence to the Contrary. If she judge
such as are not scandalous, she really wrongs the party; if she judge those
that are scandalous she visibly wrongs a higher Judge, who has pleased to
reserve to his own prerogative, to judge them that are without.

2. This Doctrine involveth our interest in, and dispensation of the Sacraments
also in inextricable difficulties and doubtings.

First, the Sacrament of Baptism is thus involved; children have their right
unto it, either in themselves or in their parents, that is, either from their
own personal holiness, The contrary tenet, viz. that no professor can be a
member without saving grace, will draw unavoiddifficulties with it, and give
such advantages to the enemies of Gods grace and the dispensation of his
Ordinances that they will hardly be regained, laying a cornerstone to build up
the wretched doctrine of the Anabaptists. Mr. Hook. survey. p. 37, 38.
or from their parents holiness, derived unto them by relation.

Now, if the first be said, it will follow from this doctrine. 1. That we are
to baptize them only upon evidence of their saving faith. 2. This being
impossible, we should ever discover, before years of discretion, it follows
that we cannot regularly baptize an Infant. 3. Yea, no child can then in his
infancy be known to be a disciple, to belong to Christ, to be a Churchmember,
to be borne to God, etc. all which are not so much obscured by Anabaptisme, as
cleared by Scripture. 4. Or at least the child being baptized in its infancy
upon charitable hopes, if afterward by a wicked and lewd*conversation, it
appear to the Church to have had no saving grace at the time of its baptism;
it clearly follows that upon the discovery of its after conversion, it ought
to be rebaptized; for if none but such as are savingly converted, enter into
Covenant, then none but such as are savingly converted ought to be sealed in
Covenant and a seal set without a Covenant is of no effect; and every one that
enters Covenant, ought to have the seal of initiation affixed to it. 5. Nay,
grace I see not but according to the tenor of this doctrine, that so often, as
a man may fall by scandal from the evidence of his saving grace, (and
consequently thereby declare to the eye of the Church that he was never really
within the Covenant, or the Church) and gives penitential satisfaction for the
same, whereby (in the judgment of the Church) he enters Covenant, even so often
he must be rebaptized, though it be seventy times seven.

2. Again, if the childs right to baptism depend upon the saving grace, or
holiness of the parent; then, such as is the evidence of the parents saving
grace, such is the evidence of the childs being lawfully and effectually
baptized; so that, Secondly, if the parent apostatize to heresy, blasphemy, or
any other kind of notorious profaneness, or if the parent never had any
evidence at all, of saving grace, so far as men may charitably judge, which
is all the rule the case and the present opinion will admit, the childs
baptism is forthwith null Then, Thirdly, what remains but that such
children, when at years of discretion, must give their own consent in person,
and be rebaptized, or else depend in an Heathenish state of waiting for their
parents return, to be rebaptized with them. But, Fourthly, I cannot see how
any one, that stands baptized upon his parents account, can ever be fully
persuaded that he is truly baptized, because he cannot be certain of his
parents Election or saving vocation; so that the whole generation of
Christians; who stand in their baptism, by their foederal bolinesse, are
hereby necessarily left in doubt, whether they be Christians or Heathens. And,
lastly, is not this a fair step and temptation to Anabaptisme? yea, truly, it
puts us upon a necessity of it; for, unless all our Ancestors, since the
first entrance of our stock into Christianity, have been really godly at the
very time of their childs baptism (a thing incredible) our own baptism is
unavoidably null; for where the reason and ground of Baptism is wanting, there
Baptism is invalid; but, according to this doctrine, where saving grace is
wanting in the parent, the reason and ground of Baptism is wanting; therefore
whenever any of our Ancestors were baptized in the time of their parents
unregeneracy, then that persons baptism was no baptism, but a seal set to a
blanck. Again, the child of a Believer has no next right to baptism, unless
the parent be also a baptized-beleever; therefore though the next in the line
of succession unto him, that through want of saving grace; first rendered his
child's sealing invalid, were truly a Saint, yet he was not a baptized Saint,
and consequently could not entitle his child to baptism, much less can this
child (unbaptized) entitle the next, or that, the next, until we descend to
our own case.

2. Again, our interest in the Sacrament of the Supper; is alike obscure and
intricate by the just consequences of this doctrine; For, 1. Unless I am well
satisfied of two things, whereof one is very difficult, and the other
impossible) viz. my own and my parents sincerity, I may not venture to receive
this Sacrament. I must be satisfied of my parents sincerity, otherwise I cannot
know my self really baptized, and consequently I cannot know my remote right,
(for one that is not really baptized has no right to the Supper of the Lord)
and then I must be satisfied of my own sincerity, otherwise, I cannot know my
next right to the Supper (or indeed my being lawfully, i. e. really, baptized,
either) and must with all doubting Christians, be deterred therefrom, though
the Scripture assures us to the contrary, viz. that if we judge our selves, if
we find our sins, though we cannot find our graces, if we judge (not justify
or acquit) our selves, we shall not be judged (as unworthy receivers) of the
Lord, as those were, 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32.

2. This must needs involve the Administrator also in hazards, doubtings, and
even necessity of sinning; which I rather commend to the consideration of my
Reader in the words of Reverend Mr. Baxter then my own, and with which I shall
conclude what has been but rudely delivered upon this question, that the end
may crown the work, his words are these, then no Minister can groundedly
administer the Sacraments to any man but to himself, because he can be certain
of no man's justification, being not certain of the sincerity of their faith,
and if he should adventure to administer upon probabilities, or charitable
conjectures, then should he be guilty of profaneing the Ordinances, and every
time he mistaketh, he should set the seal of God to a lie.

CHAP. XXVI.
What is requisite to constitute a member of the visible Church? A twofold
answer hereunto considered.
BUt, least my notion of the visible Church, wherein, as my question leads me,
I have hitherto rather hovered in generals, and negatives, should be left
suspicious or obscure, I shall now pitch upon a more fixed particular, and
positive discourse in answer to the three plain cases or queries following;
which, happily may prove a fit medium betwixt the debate already had, and some
plain practical and necessary inferences, that are yet to be drawn from the
whole.

The Queries are, 1. What is requisite to constitute a member of the visible
Quid constituit? Quid distinguit? Quid destruit?
Church? 2. What is requisite to evidence this visible Church Membership to
others? 3. What is that that does dismember, or cut one wholly off from the
visible Church.


Quest. 1. Then, what is requisite to constitute a member of the visible Church?

Answ. Mr. Cotton answers in the name of the Churches in New England, thus;
it is not the seed of faith, nor faith it self, that knitteth a man to this or
that particular visible Church, but an holy profession of the faith, and
professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ in their communion; his way of
those Churches. p. 84, 85.

Supposing what is herein to be supposed (viz. that the way of entering the
universal visible Church is not here concerned. Secondly, that the way of
Infants becoming Church Members is not here intended) I could even sign this
answer.

Only I must needs except against its fitness to be applied to the cases of
most Churches, seeing it only intends that which is more extraordinary, viz.
the entering of Heathens into our Chu^ches; and leaves untouched that which is
the ordinary and daily means of increase or continuance of them, by our
children, born therein to God, and to this privilege of visible
Church Membership.

Master Hudson also, toward the latter end of his discourse of the Church,
proposes and answers this same Question, viz. what is requisite to make one
a member of the visible Church? his answer hereunto contains three things:
Competent knowledge, holiness of life, and subjection to the Gospel.

By which, his answer, it appears that he likewise intended, only that, which
is requisite to make an adult Heathen, a member of the Christian Church, not at
all noting the common way of entering into the Church and Covenant amongst us,
viz. by birth-priviledge.

However, let me humbly offer this question, whether all such as are not so
qualified, may be truly said to be no Church Members even amongst the Adult?
if so, then there are no ignorant, or unholy persons in the visible Church;
which cannot well be imagined to be Mr. Hudsons meaning, by any that consult
his, p. 9. where we find him asserting that the difinition of the Church is
true of the godly, as well as of the hypocrite, and therefore true of the
hypocrite; but if he did not mean to exclude all such as want a competency of
knowledge and holy life, then these things specified are not conditions
necessarily requisite to visible Church Membership, which I presume to be the
truth, as well as Mr. Hudsons intention.

Indeed, all must grant that Church Members of years ought to be competently
knowing, and of an holy life, etc. and this is necessary upon all
Church Members, as such, with a necessity of the precept, but it is therefore
necessary with such a necessity (viz. of the means) as without it none can be
truly in the Church, I cannot but deny; many things are necessary to the
well-being, that are not so to the truth or being of the visible
Church Membership, and so are these mentioned, as (I conceive) does already,
and by and by may further appear.

CHAP. XXVII.
A distinct consideration of admission of Infants and adult persons: the
condition of Infants Church Membership.
HAving thus prepared my way for an answer, let me renew my question, and what
is it then, that constitutes a member of the visible Church?

But, seeing all but Anabaptists must needs acknowledge that the way and terms
of the admission of Infants and such as are adult, does plainly differ; a
necessity is thereby granted us; first, to distinguish accordingly before I
define or fix my answer, if I would speak distinctly of things that differ.

1. Then the first, if the question be concerning Infants, I may The way of
infants admission
briefly answer, and boldly say, that the condition or ground of infants
admission into the Church, is easily resolved by all but Anabaptists, and yet
as lightly considered by most; for who else does offer to question but that
those that come into the Church in their infancy, do advance thereunto by their
Birth privilege, that they were borne to God, in Covenant with him, and his
people, and signed and sealed such by Baptism?

But that this is as slightly considered, and as lightly weighed by most that
assert it, is too too evident; for how few do hence consider, that then most of
our people in England stand Churchmembers by verture of their birth-priviledge,
and are accordingly to be dealt withal as such; how few do clearly see
themselves hence enforced; not to deal with them as Heathens, or as persons out
of the Church, and not to require qualifications in order to their admission
(they being admitted already) unless they have thus extinguished this their
interest by such a violent course, as will afterward be spoken of.

How sweetly would the clear consideration of this original Church Membership
common to our people, lead us to see a great measure of the mystery and ground
of most of our confusions and sad distractions to pitch and settle here; even
in the want of a more serious considering, what this principle, so generally
granted, viz. that we are borne Church Members, and sealed such, even from our
infancy might prevent and conclude.

Yea, what can we imagne to have a more direct and kindlier tendency to the
ending of our differences, thus desperately heightened, then a serious sincere
and impartial yielding to the natural ducture, and true consequences of this
irresistible truth, both about the Church and Sacraments.

But that is our misery which Justinian terms but an inconvenience; we puzle
our selves about a way of settlement, while Inconveniens est, omissis
principiis, and origin repetita illo it is manibus materiam tractare.
indeed they are off from our ground; or rather expect the still waters, and
silver streams of peace and purity in the waters of strife, or divided streams,
or rather flames, of our own contention, every one prosecuting the ground of
division with pretense of union, and beginning at the foot, that is cloven, when
it were better prudence to begin at the wellhead, to find and detect the cause
of our breaches, and the true means of our reconcilement; which I verily
believe chiefly to consist, in a right understanding, and diligent prosecuting
this principle of infant Church Membership, in the true and genuine
consequences of it, as anon may further appear.

Object. It Is here objected that infants are borne members of the Church, de
jure only; and that they are not actually so until they are baptized, as
Rutherford distinguishes.

Answ. Our children are borne actually in the Church, or actually out of the
Church, but they are not borne actually out of the Church; for then they are
borne actual Heathens, and not Christians, as is generally pleaded against the
Anabaptists.

Ubi ponis parvulos non baptizatos? profecto in numero credentium. Aug. de
verb. Apost. Sermon. 1.
2. Children are borne to an immediate right to the seal of the Covenant, to
wit, baptism, therefore they are borne actually in Covenant, and consequently
in the Church; for though a right to be taken into Covenant, give a remote
right to the seal of the Covenant, it must be an actual being in Covenant,
that gives an immediate title or claim to the seal thereof, and that children
borne within the pale of the Church, have such an immediate right to baptism,
is not to be doubted, seeing we cannot think upon any nearer cause of title to
baptism in such children, then their Birth privilege, or their being borne in
the Church.

3. I therefore humbly conceive that our children are borne E foederatis
nascentes, etiam in foedere sunt Dei in foedere comprehenfi ab ipso utero. Bez
in 1 Cor. 7. 14. Baptizandi sunt infantes non ut sancti sint, sed quia sancti
sunt. Whitaker.
Church Members, not only de jure, but also de facto, and sealed rather, then
made such actually by baptism; though truly such as deny them to be born so
actually, if they, as Rutherford does, will but grant that they are baptized
actual Church Members, my turn is thereby sufficiently served, seeing most of
our people were not only borne, de jure, but also baptized (de facto) within
the Covenant, and members of the visible Church.

Object. 2. It is again objected that infants are not perfect Church Members,
as Ames, non adeo sunt perfecta membra, etc.

Answ. 1. There is a difference betwixt perfect and perfecta membra; one may
be a member of the Church perfectly, that is no perfect member thereof;
perfectly, with regard to being or state, not perfect with respect to nature or
quality; perfect naturally, not perfect morally; such a Churchmember, viz. in
infancy may be, and not such, as such a Churchmember, viz. in years ought to
be.

2. I hence assume, that Infants borne and baptized lawfully within the Church,
though they are not perfect members (as neither are many grown persons) yet
they are truly and perfectly so; For these Reasons.)

1. They are either members perfectly so, or not at all; for all motion from
corruption to generation is instantaneous, and there is no time when such a
thing may be said to be partly and not wholly what it is, particularly this
change from a state of Heathenisme to a state of Church Membership has no
degrees of magis and minus, but being wholly wrought in instanti, a man is
perfectly the one, or the other; and not half an Heathens and half a
Christian. Omne ens est verum and perfectum.

Now none but Anabaptists will offer to say, that such infants are in no
respect Church Members, therefore they are so perfectly.

2. They are perfectly disciples, therefore perfectly Church Members; for
disciple and Churchmember are synonimous, that they are perfectly disciples,
appears by considering what is requisite to make a disciple perfectly so,
namely entrance or admittance into the School, or the society of such as are
to be taught; indeed one cannot be a perfect or complete Scholar without
learning, yea, and much learning, but one may be truly, perfectly, and
completely a Scholar, before any thing at all be learned, and a Scholar is so
denominated, not quia doctus, sed ut sit doctus, as is noted by many; now its
generally urged against the Anabaptist that infants are admitted disciples into
Christ his School by Baptism.

Infants are thus perfectly in Covenant, otherwise we seal, in Baptism, such
as are partly heathens, and but partly in Covenant, which sounds absurdly,
therefore they are perfectly members of the Church; for as they are in
Covenant, so they are in the Church, the Church alone being the party in Gods
Covenant.

4. Lastly, it may be well observed that Ames his words give no just ground for
this objection; for he does not say that such infants are not perfect members,
much less not perfectly members, only that they are not so perfect members,
as to have a next, Non adeo sunt membra perfecta etc. vid. Am. Med.
and immediate, right to all the Ordinances, as the adult or persons of age
have, which is as easily as readily granted by my cause.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The Terms upon which adult persons are admitted visible Church Members.
PRoceed we next to consider the conditions upon which persons borne and
educated under Heathenisme may become Christians, or members of the visible
Church. Now, though the former discourse concerning infants be of most
concernment, yet here lies the burden and stresse of Argument.

In general, that might here satisfy, which Reverend Master Cotton, from the
words of our Savior, has given us, viz. that such a person as is by nature,
and birth, and breeding a Heathen, and no Christian, to the end he may become a
Churchmember, he must be discipled; that is, as Master Cotton explaineth it,
he must be entered into Christ his School.

Which, I humbly conceive, is truly done, 1. In his own part by a voluntary
offering himself to be admitted. And, 2. On the Churches part, by receiving him
and sealing him by Baptism, a member of her own society upon lawful terms.

I grant, that there is some measure of the knowledge of Christ, and some kind
of profession of the faith inherently necessary of the very design of Baptism
in Christ's Name; but I think no more then that, is absolutely necessary; though
a great deal more may, I doubt not, be expediently and prudently required by
the Church.

I would not be thought to condemn the ancient practice of the Church, in her
more strict and severe proceeding toward the Chatecumeni (though others have
so freely lashed it) yet it is known that the work of admitting proselytes by
circumcision, in the time of the Law, and Christians by Baptism in so many
thousonds in the days of the Gospel, by John and the Apostles was more speedy.

Worthy Master Hudson has an expression which I cannot but note, as very
helpful and preparatory to my set and fixed answer; page 127.
the Church (says he) is called entative, not because of inward grace; but
from the receiving and embracing the Christians Catholic faith, which is
essential to a visible Believer; accordingly my answer is.

A serious embracing of the Christian Religion as distinct from all Ex
probabilibus conjecturis an aliquis ad Christum pertineat, puta in adultis si
quis Christianam fidem se amplecti profiteatur, and ecclesiae per Baptismum
inseri ^oget. B. z.
other Religions, and expressed desire to be united to the Christian Church by
baptism, is (with a professed subjection to the ways and Ordinances of Jesus
Christ) the only necessary requisite to constitute a Heathen a member of the
visible Church, and to give him title to the badge thereof, viz. Baptism.

I grant, this must be serious, otherwise it cannot give a real right, yet I
mean, such a seriousness as may consist without saving grace, and might
otherwise be expressed by truth, or earnestness, as opposed to dissembling,
deceit, design or hypocrisy, as before is explained.

Now if this embracing Religion and desire of baptism, be thus serious, I
presume such a one has a real right in the Church and baptism, and may be
lawfully admitted thereunto by the Church, without further scrutiny or
examination, after such or such a measure of knowledge or holiness, or the
inward saving condition of the party; and this I hold upon the following
reasons added to what has been formerly urged.

Reas. 1. Heathens may be lawfully received by the Church now upon the same
moral conditions that the proselytes were in the time of the Law; and that both
by parity and identity of reason: for Heathens embracing the Christian Religion
now, are as really made proselytes into the Jewish Church (I mean the same
Church which was then Jewish but now is Christian) as the ancient proselytes
were then; for though the Church be changed in its outward dispensation and
Ordinances, it is still the same in its subjects, and Covenant, as appears
undeniably against the Anabaptist from Romans 11. Ephesians. 3. 6, etc.

But now the Jewish ancient proselytes were received, and accordingly
circumcised by the Church, upon such a single disowning all false religions and
adhering to the true, with a desire to adjoyne themselves to the people and
worship of the true God.

Therefore upon the same terms (supplying what is necessarily to be supplied,
touching the Messiah now come) may Christ an proselytes be lawfully admitted
into the Christian flock and number, and be baptized.

Reas. 2. That which is sufficient to make a disciple, is sufficient to make a
visible Churchmember, and to give claim to baptism, as Master Cotton and
others reason well from, Matthew. 28. 18.

Now an expressed desire to be admitted into the School, with a proffer to
submit to the Rules and Laws thereof, and to be taught and ruled accordingly,
is sufficient (the party being thus received) to disciple, or make one a
Scholar, or a member of the School without the addition of such qualities or
measures of learning or aptness thereunto.

Therefore a single desire to be joined to the School of Christ, and a
professed subjection (as Mr. Hudson speaks) to the government thereof, without
any further evidence, is sufficient to entitle a person to this disciple-ship,
and to warrant his reception and sealing by the Church.

Reason 3. Some Scripture admit into the Church upon as low terms as these,
viz. upon a general desire of baptism, and to submit to the ways of the Lord
in communion with his Church, as might be instanced in all the examples of
John's Baptism, with that of the multitude, Acts 2. of whom it is said that
they gladly received the Word, and were baptized.

Therefore persons may be lawfully admitted, upon as low and easy terms
still. For, 1. what was done in such cases in the Word, may be lawfully done
still; for nothing was done unlawfully then, and what was done then, was
written there for our imitation and learning. 2. Though some other Scripture
should require more then this, viz. upon some consideration, yet reason will
prompt us to look for the minimum quod sic, what may lawfully be done, in such
places, as require least, seeing every place and instance in Scripture
requires sufficient.

Reas. 4. A profession that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, with a desire to
be united to the Christians communion by Baptism rendered the Eunuch worthy to
be admitted into the Church and baptized, therefore so much does others also.

What Philip required more in his question, matters not, if his answer had not
been satisfactory, doubtless he had not been baptized.

Reas. 5. He that embraces the Catholic faith or doctrine, partaketh of the
essence of the entitive Church, and he that submits himself to baptism and
ecclesiastic communion, partaketh of the essence of the organical Church;
therefore he that embraces the one, and submits to the other, has all that
is essential to a visible Churchmember.

Reas. 6. Those, lastly, that require more, viz. seem to require performance of
the condition of the Covenant in order to entering Covenant, but this is
somewhat strange.

The condition of the Covenant is twofold. 1. In order to covenanting, which is
a promise or engaging to perform, the terms or conditions of the Covenant now
to be entered; upon performance of which, the reward covenanted for depends. 2.
The other condition is in order, therefore, to the obtaining this reward,
promised upon such condition; which is the actual performance of the conditon
engaged unto, upon entering Covenant. Vid. Blakes Seals. Hystorical faith may be
in reprobates both within the Church, and also in such as be without the
Church; as Turks believe there is a God, that Christ was born of a Virgin, the
resurrection of the dead, etc. yea the devils have it, 1 John 2. 19 Rogers of
faith p. 6.
The first is necessary to entrance into Covenant, the last to the partaking of
the benefit thereof.

As it is with men, a servant enters Covenant, by undertaking and promising to
do his Master his work; but obtains his reward, or wages alone, by doing what
he has thus undertaken.

Yet with leave of that Reverend man this engaging to perform the condition of
the Covenant, is, I conceive, more then a bare historical or dogmatical faith;
for there is something of application in that faith, that does not only believe
but embrace the truth, and the true Religion, and make application to the
Church for admission and baptism.

However, I humbly conceive, though more then a bare histostorical faith should
be requisite, yet less then a faith that justifies (I do not say less then
the profession thereof) may truly entitle to visible Church Membership, and
consequently to Baptism as has been shown.

CHAP. XXIX.
What is requisite to evidence a persons interest in the visible Church by men.
Quest. THe second question to be answered, is, What is requisite to evidence a
person to be a member of the visible Church to others? or how may we know a
person to be a member of the visible Church, or what does render
Church Membership visible?

Answ. 1. I answer, first, that that which evidenceth a persons interest in the
essence of the visible Church, does even, thereby, evidence his visible
Church Membership; for what can better evince a members union with the body,
then its partaking with the essence thereof?

2. Again, that which evidenceth a persons communion in the essential and
formal actions of the Church, does also thereby evidence such a persons
interest in the essence of, or his essential union with, the Church; for
nothing can have, or carry a stronger tincture of the essence of any thing,
then the formal or essential actions thereof, which immediately flow from it.

3. Then further the essence of the visible Church, has been found to consist
in community, respecting communion in Gods truth and Ordinances, and the formal
actions of this community have been found to be this communion.

4. Now that person that appears to have communion with the Church in Doctrine
and worship, or in the truth and Ordinances of Jesus, appears to partake of the
essential actions, and consequently of the essence of the visible Church.

5. These premises thus laid, I found my answer upon them to the question thus;
that, therefore that person that does not plainly renounce the truth, and
openly submits unto, and ordinarily attends upon the Ordinances of divine
worship (whatsoever evil qualities he may otherwise bear,) does thus appear to
be really a member of the visible Church.

Indeed were saving grace of the essence of the visible Church, a person could
not appear to be a member thereof, without the evidences of saving grace; but
seeing, we have found that it is not; we add, whatsoever evil qualities he may
otherwise bear.

As a man, living within such a dominion, and was either borne there, or else
is known to be naturalized and made free, according to the Laws thereof, though
he be a great offender, and highly obnoxious to Law and punishment, yet if he
renounce not his subjection, or declare not against the government, is
notwithstanding, known to be a member of that body politic, or a lawful
subject of that dominion.

Or, as in the natural body; a member remaining in union with the body, and in
communion with it in its essential actions, though it be a diseased, or
wounded, or leprous member, yet is known and granted to be a real member.

So a man that stands in relation to the Church, and ordinarily attends upon
the Ordinances thereof, and does not renounce the doctrine of the Gospel;
though he be a wicked and rotten member, is yet hereby evidenced to be really a
member of the mystical visible body, the Church; for this sufficiently
evidenceth that common faith, which (though it avail not to justication, yet)
is found effectual, so far, as to constitute, or interesse in visible
Church Membership.

Obj. It may be hence urged, that, then children cannot be known to be
Church Members, and consequently cannot be members of the visible Church.

Answ. May not a child be known to be a member of the Commonwealth, by its
being borne therein? and does not the Scripture intimate as much concerning a
child born in Zion? it shall be said that this man was borne there? q. d. that
this man is known to be a member of Citizen of the City or Church of the living
God, because he was borne there, or by Birth-priviledge, or being born free.

2. Children have visible communion with the Church, in their parents
profession, as Ames teaches, sunt participes ejusdem profesfessions, etc.

3. They have some visible communion, with the Church in their own persons also
in that first Ordinance of Christ, of which they are capable; and thus, being
entered, they remain in the Churches communion, so far thereby, until they shall
be capable of enjoying more

Object. 2. However it may be said that the excommunicate are thus excluded.

Answ. Not so, for though the excommunicate should have no actual communion
with the Church, yet they have a fundamental and habitual communion with it, as
a palsy member, is yet a real member, and may be truly said to have an
habitual communion with the body, though at present its actual partaking of the
animal influence be denied or suspended; or as a man out-lawd may be said to
have a remoter right, fundamentally in the Law of the Land, though he have no
present actual benefit thereby, which indeed the violence of discipline, and
not the nature of such a condition, has brought him unto.

But, secondly, there is, notwithstanding, some secret actual communion,
betwixt the body and a palsy member, and the Commonwealth, and a person
out-lawed; and likewise betwixt the excommunicate and the Church; which may
also be known for that the palsy member has some influence from the body
appears by its warmth; that the person out-lawed has some benefit by the Laws,
appears in that they secure his life; it being murder to kill him; and that
the excommunicate have some fellowship with the Church, appears in that they
are within the care thereof, and under the Ordinance of God, appointed for
salvation, and not for destruction, and is to be dealt withal as a brother.

3. The excommunicate, lastly, (I mean, such only as are not heretical) have
communion with the Church in preparatione animi, and in their desires, which is
only suspended for their good, a while, with hopes of repentance, and
satisfaction, and thereupon, readmission; as the palsy member in the
disposition or preparation of nature, is ready, as it were, to receive the
suspended influence from the body again, viz. upon the unlocking and opening of
obstructions, which a member wholly cut off, or dead, has not.

CHAP. XXX.
What it is that does wholly put a man out of the Church; and first that it is
not ignorance.
WE proceed, Lastly, having shown what is requisite to constitute and evidence
visible Church Membership, to enquire into the means and ways of dissolving
it; and the question is, What is that which wholly dismembers or cutteth off
from the visible Church.

Hereunto, I answer, Negatively, and Positively.

Ans. 1. Neg. First, I assert that the want of such a competent measure of
knowledge as every one ought to have (which is commonly termed, ignorance) does
not simply or of it self, wholly cut off from the visible Church, and the
Reasons hereof, are,

Reas. 1. Because such a knowledge does not go into the essence of the visible
Church, which we have found to consist in society or community.

Reas. 2. Because evidence or appearance of knowledge is not a necessary, or
essential requisite to discover Church Membership; for then, none might take
another, for a member of the Church, before he is satisfied of his knowledge
(which would be a strange thing) therefore, ignorance, or the want of such
knowledge, does not signify one, no Churchmember; the consequence is built
upon the common rule, eadem est ratio contrariorum.

Reas. 3. Because the Scripture does not assert it, which alone has authority
from God to satisfy us in this point; the Scripture does often charge the
members of the Church with ignorance, but does never, either, say that ignorant
persons cannot be Church Members, or that ignorance, does cast men out of the
Church, or indeed so much, that ignorant persons ought, merely for their
ignorance, to be excommunicated.

In the time of the Law, we read, that Israel does not know, my people have no
understanding; but where is it said, that because they do not know, they are
not Israel, or because they have no understanding, they are none of my people.

Under the Gospel we read also, that some were so ignorant, that they did not
discern the body of the Lord in the Sacrament; and that to some of them the
Gospel was hid, of whom indeed it adds, that they eat and drink their own
damnation, and that they are likely, at least, to perish, but it is not said
that they thus put themselves out of the Church, or that they are no
Church Members; yea does it not rather acknowledge even these as well as the
rest to be members, when the whole are called the body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and
saluted under the title of the Church, 1 Cor. 1. 1.

The Apostle tells us also of some Christian Hebrews that had need
(notwithstanding all their means) that one should teach them again what are
the very Oracles of God, wherein they are at once charged both with ignorance
and scandal, yet adds nothing of their being declared to be no longer members
of the Church, but rather the contrary calling them (yet) Babes; yea, and at
the very same time when Laodicea is charged with blindness, she is also
acknowledged to be a Church by Christ for heaven; now, let us take heed of
judging without Gods Law.

Reas. 4. Lastly, if knowledge as such, be a necessary condition to visible
Church Membership, then no ignorant person could be a Curch-member; for none
can be a member without that which is necessarily required thereunto; but all
will grant, except Anabaptists, that some ignorant persons, viz. children, etc.
may be, and actually are Church Members, therefore also, none merely for their
ignorance, are no Church Members, for then every such one would be equally
excluded, according to the Rule, a quatenus add omni valet Argumentum.

Object. But children stand in the visible Church, in their Parents right, who
are supposed to have knowledge.

Answ. 1. An Infants right in the Church may be considered three ways. 1. In
its rise or ground. 2. In its conveyance. 3. In its receptaculum or seat, as it
is granted, conveyed and seated; it is granted, principally, by the free grace
of God, whose promise is freely made both to us and our seed; it is indeed
conveyed to such and such infants by the means of their parents and their
Christianity, and thus the promise is first to us, and then to our seed. But,
lastly, it must needs be seated in the child it self; who is a Churchmember,
as well as his parent, therefore the promise is to our seed as well as to us,
and to our seed distinct to us; the promise is to you, and to your children and
accordingly the seal also.

2. That the Infants right is seated in it self, though it be derived from its
parents, further appears thus.

1. Because otherwise the child should have no right at all; for the accident
does inhaerere in subjecto, to the very being of it, as such; and if the right
of the child, which is the accident be not in the child, who is the subject
of it, it is indeed no where, nothing at all.

Possession may be in another for my use. 2. A right to the same thing (lying
yet in common, and not actually divided to the partners) may be seated in two
or more, howbeit every one of these partners cannot be said to have a right to
the whole (if it be divisible) but rather in it. 3. A right may be transferred
from one to another, yet when the right is thus transferred, it now resideth no
longer in him that before had it, but as we use to say the property is altered.
4. Right may be seated in one for another use; as it is in some cases or
persons of trust.

Yet it still remains a contradiction to say that ones right is seated in
another; and it is as much as to say, that one has a right, and yet he has
none; for meum and tuum cannot be separated from me and te; and mine belongs to
none but my self.

2. As persons are sealed, so they have a right in the Church, But children are
sealed, i. e. baptized in their own persons, therefore their right is seated
also in their own persons.

3. Children have lawful possession in their own persons, therefore the right
by which they thus possess, is seated in their own persons; Calvin speaking
the reformed sense, says, Dicimus ccclesiae filios nasci and ab utero reputari
in Christi membris.
for nothing can legitmate possession, and make it lawful, but a right seated
in the possessour.

That children have lawful possession of membership in their own persons is
denied by none but Anabaptists, seeing according to Scripture they are
generally allowed to be disciples, in Covenant, to belong to Christ, and the
Kingdom of God, and to be borne to him, all which are equivalent to visible
Church Membership.

4. If the child had no right but in its parent, it should have no possession
but in its parent, and the parents Church Membership and seal of baptism,
should be sufficient for himself and his child; but this is absurd. Ergo,

Object. 2. But the greater objection comes now to be removed, it lies thus.
Consent is required in adult persons, for their being in Covenant with God; but
knowledge is required to consent; therefore knowledge is requisite for an adult
persons, being in Covenant, and consequently in the Church.

Answ. Neither of these propositions may safely pass, without exception, or at
least distinction upon them.

First, therefore we distinguish of consent as requisite to covenanting, and
thus answer to the first proposition. And, secondly, of knowledge as requisite
to consent, and thus answer to the latter proposition. Thirdly, of an adult
persons being in Covenant, which may be helpful also in answer to the whole.

Consent, is positive or negative; knowledge is implicit or explicit; and
this again is clear, or cloudy; full, or but in part; and being in Covenant,
as it is said of adult persons, is either such as they received in their Infant
state, or such as they received after they were in years; according to these
distinctions, I apply my answer, thus.

1. A Positive consent is an expressed or professed consent, and this, I
affirm to be necessary in any, that would enter Covenant with God, or his
Church, at the adult estate; so far there is no controversy, especially if we
note the things to be thus consented unto, to be but entering into Gods
Covenant, and among his Covenant people, to be baptized, and to submit unto the
Laws and Ordinances thereof in general.

2. Yet, I humbly conceive, a negative consent (which is but non-actual
dissent, or a non-renouncing of the Gospel, etc.) to be sufficient to continue
such in Covenant, as before were admitted, whether in their infant or adult
estate.

Though we grant that their non dissenting, or rather nonwilful withdrawing
from the Church of God, is an evident token to men of their positive consent,
and that men are happily upon that account reckoned members of the Church.

As in the Commonwealth, a person that desires to become a member or a subject
thereof, must necessarily express his desire of it, and consequently his
consent unto it, with his submission to the Laws and government of that
Commonwealth; yet, one that was borne free, as also, the former, after his
freedom is granted him, his consent may not be questioned, much less his
freedom or interest in the Nation, while he remains quiet and peaceable, and
breaks not himself off therefrom by defiance, or open rebellion.

And that thus it is in the Church also, is plain from Scripture the great and
infallible Charter of the Churches freedom. In the time of the Law, it was
requisite that proselytes were expressly to consent (as Hamor and Shechem said
only let us consent unto them, viz. to be circumcised, and they will dwell
with us, i. e. own us as one people with themselves) yet persons that were Genesis
34. 23
borne Israelites, were to be circumcised by Gods command, though without their
own, and against their parents will; and both these, as also the proselytes,
were for ever after to be reckoned in Covenant, without any further scrutiny,
so long as That is, the command was in force, and such children had a right
though the parents did not circumcise them.
they did not bewray themselves by open apostasy; and now in the times of the
Gospel; we use to urge against the Anabaptist, that both the subjects and
conditions of the Covenant are still the same now as then; the Gentiles being
now ingraffed into the same stock, and baptism succeding in the room and use
of circumcision.

Therefore, it is worth our observation, that Gods Vovenant People in the time
of the Law, were not only admitted without any respect to their voluntary
consent or knowledge, but commanded to renew their Covenant, in such a manner,
as that they that Deuteronomy. 29 11, 12 15 2 Chro. 15. 9, 12 Jer. 34. 10.
were absent, and not in place to express their consent, were included in
those that were present. I say, to renew their Covenant, for doubtless, they
were Gods Vovenant People before; neither, can any possibly imagine, that such
as did not expressly consent to this present act, did cease from the number of
Gods Vovenant People thence-forward.

3. Though a clear and distinct knowledge of the conditions be requisite to
interesse in the benefits of the Covenant, yet a general, cloudy and partial
knowledge, is sufficient to enstate a man and to continue him in the Covenant
of God, viz. some general and dark apprehensions of the true Messiah of the
true God, opposed to the false, that God is to be worshipped by all his people,
etc. is such, as I mean and no more can be supposed to have been in those three
thousand, Acts 2. in the Jailour, Simon Magus, or the Eunuch himself, when they
were received by the Gospel Church, and baptized.

We have the reason given, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. why the people were to enter, i. e. to
renew their Covenant, viz. that such among them as were idolatrous might be
discovered, plainly intimating, that those who did so far consent, as that they
might appear thereby, to be no idolaters, which required only a general
knowledge and owning of the Lord, were not to be distinguished in, much less
cut from, the Covenant people of God.

This might suffice us, yet we have four advantages more to add, with which I
shall end this answer.

1. It is not said, nor to be thought, that all those that were guilty of
idolatry, and thus found out, did presently cease to be of the Church.

2. Though such an explicit general knowltdg, to be a necessary condition of
admitting into the Church adult persons, yet this reaches not our common case,
viz. the continuance of persons within the Church, who were born there, and
sealed in infancy.

3. A search after, either, their knowledge, or consent, in order to their
continuance in Covenant, who break not out into open rebellion against the
same, has no footing at all in Scripture or Antiquity.

4. Especially, seeing that such do usually make a real profession of their
consent, by their ordinary attending upon the Ordinances of divine service;
which, for ought I yet see, may pass for an explicit consent among men,
seeing, it is real and actual, though not vocal; which consent none can deny to
be given by those, that have a very inconsiderable measure of knowledge, as
daily experience witnesses.

CHAP. XXXI.
Wickedness does not put a man out of the visible Church.
IGnorance has already appeared in sufficient, we proceed to enquire what
profaneness, or wickedness has to cut a man off from the Church.

A person may be thought to be cut off from the Church, either de jure, or de
facto, or in plainer terms, meritoriously or effectively; in the former of
these respects, a man is said to be cut from the Church most improperly, for
unless desert or fault, and punishment be all one, a person that only
deserves to be cut off, and is not actually and really proceeded against, can
only, properly be said not to be cut off, as yet.

I apply my answer thus: That seeing a profane or wicked person before the
censure of the Church be passed upon him, can only be said to deserve (and not
yet to suffer) it, I conclude, that profaneness or wickedness does not
properly, i. e. formally, effectively, or actually, cut off from the Church.

After all, that has already evinced the truth hereof, I might add one
argument, ad hominem, whatsoever genius attends my Opponent. If it be thought
that saving grace be essentially requisite to membership, then the profane or
wicked (whose case is now a trying) is either such a one as has the seed of
God abiding in him, under all his wickedness, as it was in David; or else he
is wholly without grace, as Judas was: if he be supposed to have any measure of
saving grace, then he can never lose it, (for saving grace cannot be lost) and
if Church membership essentially depend upon that saving grace, which he has
and cannot lose, certainly his wickedness cannot cut off this his membership,
nor indeed any thing else; it is little less then a contradiction, to affirm
a particular; after a general denial that cannot possibly admit an exception;
and if it be first said that a man can never lose that which entitles to
membership, there is no room left to affirm afterward that wickeduesse cutteth
it off.

Again, if such a profane and wicked person be supposed to have no true grace,
then (if grace be of the essence of the Church) he was never truly of the
Church, and consequently not at all capable of being dismemembered therefrom,
either by wickedness or any thing else; seeing one cannot lose that which he
never had, or be cut off, that was never on, or cast out, that was never within.

2. If it be my Opponents judgment, that excommunication does cut a person
wholly off, this cannot consist with that which we deny, viz. that wickedness
does so too; for that which is already done, cannot be done again (I mean
according to the same act) but if wickedness which is the fault does put a man
wholly out of the Church, then the man is wholly out before the censure of
excommunication proceeds to do it, (for the fault is before the penalty) and
consequently excommunication is prevented in its work, and does not put a man
out of the Church.

Learned Willet saw a necessity of this consequence, wherefore, having first
concluded that excommunication does cut off from the Church, he adds, that
therefore wicked men are members of the Will. Synop. second controversy of the
Church.
Church, de facto (though not de jure) till cut off, accordingly by
excommunication.

3. Yea, if my Opponent affirm, that excommunicate persons, are yet, not
wholly cut off from the Church thereby, then my conclusion gains advantage,
and forces it self with greater strength; for if excommunication, which
supposes wickedness, procuring it, does not wholly cut off, much less does
wickedness do so of it self, without this censure added to it; and if wicked
persons, excommunicate have not lost all title to membership, much less have
wicked persons not Excommunicate, thus lost it.

Object. It may be urged here, that wicked persons are de jure, cast out before
men, or in the judgment of the Church, though not excommunicate, and therefore
they are so, de facto, before God.

Answ. This does not follow; for of the two, the judgment of the Church, is
first, viz. in nature; and therefore, the censure of God cannot be first in
time; the promise is, that God will bind what the Church binds Heaven waits
and expects the Priests sentence here on earth; the Lord follows the servant
and what the servant rightly binds and looses here on earth, that the Lord
confirms in heaven. Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Isa. vid. Greg Hom 26 in evang.
; intimating that in ordinary course of proceeding, the Church must censure and
bind first, and then what she binds on earth, God, according to his own Word,
will bind in heaven; God who uses to work by means, does this also, of
casting out of the Church by the means, or mediation of his Churches act, clave
non errante.

Besides, that God does account wicked persons not excommunicate, to be members
of his Church, or of the number of his people, notwithstanding their
wickedness, has, I presume, so fully appeared from his own words, in my
former discourse, that nothing more can need to be added, either to this
answer, or this Chapter.

CHAP. XXXII.
Excommunication does not put a man wholly out of the Church.
YEt it may be questioned whether excommunication does root up membership, or
break off all relation to the Church.

It has been a long question betwixt the reformed Divines and the Papists
whether excommunication wholly cut off from the Catholic Church, or the Church
of the saved, though by Catholic the one side meant the invisible Church, and
the other, the visible.

Our Divines do unanimously assert, and undeniably evince, that excommunication
does not cut off from the Church invisible; though some few of them seem to
intimate, that it does cut off from the visible Church.

Yet with respect to the visible Church, they mince their assertion with a
conditionaliter, and say that upon condition and hope of repentance (as
Trelcatius) or potentia (as Willet) an excommunicate person is a member of it.

However, I presume, they had as good deny them to be members of the visible
Church altogether, for what does conditionaliter or potentia add to the
excommunicate, more then will fit a Turk or Pagan as well as them? may it not
be said of a Turk or Pagan, that he is upon condition of repentance or in
potentia, a member of the Church both visible, and invisible? for indeed a
person that is no more a member then upon condition of repentance, or in power
whether excommunicate or not, is no more a member then an Heathen, that is not
at all, till the condition be performed, and the power be reduced into act; for
though there be degrees in power, and there is a nearer power in the
excommunicate then in Heathen, yet if he be only so in power, it can only be
said, that he may be so, and thereby it is intimated that he is not so at all
for the present.

Divines do generally distinguish of two degrees of excommunication, the
greater and the lesser; if this distinction be allowed, our present question
concerns the lesser degree of excommunication; for I grant, that if there be
such a degree, as the greater, called Anathema Maranatha, this does, in the
usual understanding of it, wholly cut off from the visible Church; though I
crave leave to add, that there are but few footsteps of it, in the New
Testament, and that in the use and extent thereof, as it is explained by
Divines, it belongs to such only as have sinned the sin against the holy
Ghost, and puts men out of the Church, without hope of repentance, and as
accursed till our Lord shall come; whereby it is rendered impossible to be
inflicted by men, before that day of his coming, and therefore such as are by
necessity cut off from our practice, may be very well exempt from our present
discourse of choice.

Now concerning the common censure called the lesser (or the lesser degree of)
excommunication, which yet I yield to be more then suspension) I renew the
question, whether this does wholly dismember, or cut one wholly off from the
visible Church, and for the negative, I offer.

Reas. 1. If there be two degrees of excommunication, then the first degree
does not put a man wholly out of the Church; for the g^eatest and last degree
of excommunication is a Church-censure, as well as the first, and lesser; now
if the first degree of excommunication, did wholly put out of the Church, where
i^ ^here room for the second? if by the first they be put wholly out, how
shall the latter judgment of the Church reach them? for what has she to do to
judge those that are without? therefore, she judging those that are within,
with this last censure also, they are concluded to be within in some sonse,
that are capable of such judgment, though under the lesser excommunication
before.

Now that there are two such degrees of censure in the power of the Church, is
not questioned by most that are likely to oppose me in this controversy, so
that this may serve at least as an argument to them.

Reas. 2. But to the thing, such excommunication, as we discourse of, does not
sever a man from the community of the Church which is its essence, nor yet
wholly from its communion or its formal actions; so that a person, though, thus
excommunicate, has yet both habitual and actual communion (in part) with the
Church; (either of which is far more then a bare conditional or potential
communion with it,) and therefore participateth of the essence, and cease not
wholly to be a member thereof.

1. An excommunicate person has habitual communion with the Church, which is
real and more then potential, though he Habitual.
should have actual communion, this has largely appeared before; for, his
communion is only suspended upon expectation of satisfaction, and he has it
in desire, and in the preparation of mind, and the seal of the Covenant, viz.
baptism is yet in force upon him.

2. Yea, such an excommunicate person has actual commmunion with the Church,
in many, though not, all her Ordinances. Actual.
1. As before, in the ordinance of Baptism. 2. In the prayers of the Church,
which are or ought to be made for him, as a person in some relation (as a
brother) to them, which he may claim, at least, if he may not hear. 3. In the
counsel and exhortations of the Church, which doubtless is an Ordinance, Heb.
11. 25. and to be performed to the excommunicate, count him not as an enemy,
but admonish him as a brother. 4. In the Ordinance of excommunication also,
which is acknowledged to be appointed, and ought to be executed, as a medicine
to heal, and not always as a sword wholly to cut off, a diseased member; the
Excommunicate are thereby under the means of cure, (...), 1. Cor. 5.
the means of salvation, which no one, wholly out of the Church, is.

Yea, some conceive, that the excommunicate, have an actual right in all
Ordinances, but the Supper, and the politic acts of the Niddui.
Church; Niddui, among the Jews, which is thought to answer to our lesser
degree of excommunication did not exclude a man from the Temple, as the
Talmudists say; though, according to Drusius, he might not come into the
Synagogue, whence happily Vid. Gillesp. Aarons rod.
that form of speech, casting out of the Synagogue, in Scripture.

Yet Joh. Coch. thinks, that an excommunicate person was not altogether cast
out of the Synagogue neither, but was permitted to hear, and in other things
was separate; which, yet, has some color from that proverb of the Jews, that
he that was under Cherem, or the greater excommunication, non docet, non
docetur; and by this he was distinguished by those under Niddui, intimating
that such, though they might not teach, yet they might be taught, otherwise
there appears to be no difference betwixt them herein.

That which favors this opinion amongst us, is, that other Ordinances may be
dispensed to Heathens and Publicans; a Publican may come into the Temple to
pray, and an Heathen came into the Church at Corinth to hear, and a person
thus excommunicate, is but an Heathen, or a Publican; but enough of this, I
presume not to determine any thing in so nice a Controversy: I crave only
leave to conclude, that if the excommunicate hear only as a Heathen, and pray
only as a Publican, then not as a Churchmember; which serves to cut this
Observation wholly off from the present question, and to break short off the
thread of my answer hereto.

CHAP. XXXIII.
What does wholly cut a man off from the visible Church; first, on Gods part.
HItherto we have answered negatively, and labored to show that ignorance,
wickedness, and excommunication, (viz. the lesser) does not wholly root up
visible Church Membership; come we now, to give our positive answer, and to
show what does.

The person, that is, the subject of this sad change, may be considered The
person cut off is passive or active in it.
to be passive in it only, and to be cut off, or active also, and to cut
himself off from the Church.

If we look upon him as passive in it (I mean in the punishment, not in the
sin) the agent can be none in a strict and principal When the man is passive,
God is the agent properly.
sense, but God; for as the Husband is said most properly to give the wife a
bill of divorce, though others, viz. the administers of the Law, be subservient
also; so God alone has this prerogative to admit into, and cast out of his own
Church, though the discipline of the Church be used by God therein; therefore,
we are taught by Divines, that when the key of the Church erreth, God does not
bind in heaven, and consequently, men are not really bound at all.

1. But God may be considered to give this bill of utter divorce, two ways;
first, mediately by the hand of the Church in her God does divorce. 1.
Mediately by the Church.
highest act of punishment (if such a one there be) called Anathema Maranatha;
which God does either by ratifying in heaven, what is done accordingly on
earth, when the Church dares arise to so great and dreadful a judgment (as it
is said, she did against Julian;) and does not misapply it; or else by putting
forth such a judicial sentence against a person, known to himself, to have
sinned the unpardonable sin (though not to the Church) as a dismal addition,
and not only a ratification of the Churches lesser censure.

Secondly, sometimes God does put in his own hand, and sickle, and wholly cut
off persons and Churches, more immedialy, i. e. without 2. Immediately two
ways.
the means or mediation of the Church: and that two ways. 1. By the stroke of
natural death, whereby a person, if wicked, is in 1. By death.
heavy judgment, wholly cut from the Church in all respects; but, if godly, in
much mercy, wholly cut off from the Church in our present respect, viz. as
militant; to be joined to Jerusalem above, in the glory and triumphs thereof
for ever. 2. By removing his Ordinances 2. By removing the candlesticks
(the only means of Church Communion) from the place where such a person or
people who have not hearts or fruits answerable, do inhabit; for, otherwise,
though the Gospel be removed, yet if a man's heart be to it, indeed he has
habitual communion with all other Churches, and power to join himself to any
true Church in the world, and to claim actual communion with it (as none can
doubt) though his own former Congregation be dissolved.

Just thus it was with the ancient Church of the Jews; God, after many warnings
and threatenings, when she had stoned the servants and killed the heir, and yet
still refused her own mercies, scorning to be washed in the blood her self had
shed, or healed by the wounds she had made; God, at length, gives commission
to his servants in the Gospel, and lo, they turn to the Gentiles, and carry
away the light and glory of Israel, the golden candlestick of the Gospel and
the Where God utterly (taking away the means of his Word and worship, Acts 15.
46,) has apparently given the bill of divorce, Isa. 50 1 then are we not to
acknowledge any Church at all at this day in Jerusalem once the holy City; but
where these means are yet continued, we are to acknowledge a Church of Christ
Rev. 2. 12, 13. more or less corrupt according to the g^eater or less abuse
of Gods Word and worship. Bish. Usher sum of Divin. p. 398.
Church along with them.

Yet observe, though the rest were blinded, the Elect were saved; many of the
former Church of the Jews (now dissolved) joined themselves unto the
Gospel-Churches; which indeed were the same, for substance, and differed only
by a new administration of Ordinances, with their own Church before.

Now, of any other way wherein God does directly and formally reject or divorce
a person or people besides these, I think we read not in Scripture.

CHAP. XXXIV.
How a man may cut himself off from the visible Church, viz. by Heresy, and
Schism.
THe destruction of man is of himself, not only meritoriously but sometimes
efficiently; and so, in order thereunto, is his cutting himself from the Church
of God, the means of his salvation: That it is so, is not doubted, our
question is, how it comes to pass.

The visible Church is usually considered in an entitive or organical apacity;
accordingly, it is said to be endued with two properties, profession of the
faith as entitive, and communion in worship as organical; respective hereunto,
a man may violate his right in the Church, and dismember himself. 1. By
Heresy, denying the faith, he cutteth himself from the Church entitive. 2. By
Schism renting himself from its comunion in worship, he breaks himself off
from the Church organical; so that my general answer here, is, that a person
may wholly cut himself from the visible Church by two means, viz. Heresy and
Schism by the first, he goes off the foundation which lies in doctrine by the
last, he forsakes the fellowship which lies in worship; of these a little more
distinctly.

1. Heresy cutteth off from the Church, as it breaks the great Haeresis
opponitur fidei, and schisma charitati. Ames.
bond of the Churches union, viz. faith, and as it necessarily carries with it
a want of that historical faith, which has the doctrine of faith for its
object, and which none do doubt to be an essential requisite to a true
Churchmember. Therefore the Jews Buxtor. Lex. Called. Talm. and Rab. p. 195
held that an heretical Israelite, had no communion with the Church of Israel;
and why, but because communion supposes union, and union with Israel, or the
true Church is lost with faith; they also held (as Master Seldom notes) that
an Israelite turning an Heretic, (i. e. denying any of the thirteen
fundamental Articles) to be as an Heathen man; and did therefore permit a Jew
to lend De jure Not. and gent. l. 6. c. 10
him, upon usury, as to an Heathen; and why? but because he had renounced the
Law, which chiefly, if not only differr'd a Jew from an Heathen.

Not that every error is so dangerous, for every error is not heresy; nor
yet every heresy, only such as is so general, and desperate, as that it takes
one wholly off from the maine doctrine of Christ, his Prophets, and Apostles,
the (doctrinal) foundation Ephesians. 2. ult.
of the Church.

It has been a very ancient controversy in the Church, whether Heresy does
wholly cut off from the Church, or not; upon which counsels have contradicted,
and contra-decreed.

The Africane Bishops in the Council of Carthage held, that heresy As Mr.
Hooker observes out of Fortunat. secundin and Hieron.
did put out of the Church; which opinion was afterward condemned in the
Council of Nice, even by the chiefest of the authors thereof themselves.

Mr. Hooker, who inclined to the negative, (seems to plead for the fathers, so
far, as they appear on the contrary side. If the Ecclesias pol. p. 87.
fathers (says he) do any where, as oftentimes they do, make the true visible
Church of Christ, and heretical companies opposite, they are to be construed as
separating heretics, not altogether from the company of Believers, but from
the fellowship of sound Believers.

However, I presume the controversy may be easily ended, viz. by parting
stakes; and allowing some truth on both sides; it is true, that Heretics are of
the Church; and it may be true, that Heretics are not of the Church; there is
a latitude in heresy; Thus the Ancient fathers held, for their opinion was,
that that heresy which did not deny the Trinity did not wholly cut off from
the church. Paget.
some heresy which absolutely denies some particular fundamental truth, and
takes up some one or few stones thereof, is consistent with Church-interest;
and other heresy which raseth up the very foundation of Religion, denying
most, or the most chief, if not all of the Articles of our Christian faith, is
inconsistent therewith.

Object But it should seem, then that Heresy does not un-Church; for if
denying of some particular fundamental truth do not, then heresy, properly,
does not, for that is properly heresy; and that which raseth up the foundation
of Religion, seems more then heresy, and may be Apostasy.

Answ. A falling from the faith, is indeed Scripture-Apostacy, though I humbly
conceive, that that expression as it stands in that place of Scripture, intends
as well a falling from the companies of the faithful by schism, as a falling
from the doctrine of faith by heresy, and indeed both these, viz. perfect
heresy and perfect schism, make proper Apostasy (as Reverend Hudson
observes) for a man to remove out of the Church Catholic, either entitive by
disclaiming the doctrine, and faith of Christ [which is heresie] or organical
by refusing to join to any Christian society, which is schism) is a great sin
and Apostasy.

2. But, I conclude, though a man deny not all the maine Articles The
difference betwixt heresy and infidelity, and apostasy; the two latter are the
denying or renouncing the whole faith of Christ, but the former of any one
single part of it. Han. paraen. p. 64.
of Christianity, without which he is not properly an Apostate (in the sense of
Divines) yet by denying many, or most of the chief fundamentals (whereby he may
fitly be said to tear up the foundation, though he do not take up every stone
thereof) a man may cut himself off from the Church, the pillar of truth.

3. Besides, does not Apostasy imply the height of Schism as well as Heresy?
can a person be properly said to be an Apostate (if we speak as others do) that
yet remains in the communion of Ordinances? why then may not a person, that
renounceth all the Articles of the Christian faith, if he yet refuse not
communion Ita ut hereticus quis possit esse, and non schismaticus. Ames.
in Ordinances, be rather said to be an Heretic then an Apostate? But I
dispute not for words, be it granted me, that such a renouncing of the
Christian faith, without any personal separation from the Church is sufficient
to cut a man off therefrom, it will not trouble me to have termed either
Heresy or Apostasy.

2. Schism may be thought also to put a man wholly out of the Church, as it
breaks the other great bond of union, viz. Schism.
love; though I must check here, for schism simply considered, and of it self
alone, does not wholly destroy our relation to the Church.

Dr. Hammond observes, that whatsoever may be thought to unchurch, is
reducible to these four. 1. Apostasy. 2. H^resie. 3. Schism. 4. Consumption
and devastation; yet afterward Paren. p. 84.
adds, for the third of that schism, the fathers, which aggravated the sin
of it to the highest, do not yet allow it the force of unchurching, but call
them brethren, i. e. fellow Christians, which were most obstinately guilty of
it. I suppose he means such as were single; as well as violent schismat^cks,
and chiefly the Donatists and not that this should contradict what before he
had said, that Schism may be thought to be one means of unchurching among the
rest, that is, as it may be qualified. Therefore,

Schism, as sufficient, to un-church, or dismember, must be,

1. Total, viz. a breaking off from all communion with the Speratio fiat certis
quibusdam actionibus -- quamvis schismatica, non tamen statim separat ab
ecclesia, Am Cas. de schis. p. 307.
Church; for to divide with the Church in some things, or parts of worship, and
to retain the rest, has been always reckoned a separation, only in the
Church, and not from it, much less so far as to lose all interest in it; if
this separation be just, it is not Schism; If unjust, it is but partial
Schism, and the subject is a member, but in part cut off, and yet hanging to
the body.

2. It must be universal, that is a breaking off from, and refusing communion
with, all the purticular Churches of Christ in the world; for one may
schismaticaly, that is, causelessly depart Si separatio sit ab una ecclesia aut
pluribus particularibus possunt tamen alia^um ecclesiarum membra manner ubi
supra. Schisma proprie dictum est peccatum gravessimum ubi supra.
from one particular Church of Christ, and join himself to another; which
though it be a very great sin, and schism, both in the party, and the
Church, that knowingly receives him, yet not so great as to render that party
no member, or that Church no Church.

3, It must be also heretical, such as is caused by, or accompanied with, the
renouncing of some fundamental doctrine; for (as Willet observes) if
Schysmaticks retain (that is, in a body) purity of doctrine, and the right use
of Ordinances (as some schismatical Congregations in Augustines time did, and
now do) they make up a true visible Church; a flock of sheep is truly such,
though consisting of particulars strayed from their several folds; Schismaticus
potest esse, qui non est haereticus, ut siquis credens omnes Articulos, fidei,
nolit tamen cum ecclesia vera communicare in actionibus piis. Ubi supra.
to which they ought, notwithstanding, to return, as to their proper and lawful
places.

Yet, I conceive it possible that a person may by a total and universal
schism, (though not Heretical) that is, if he neither join himself to an
ancient or to the Schismatical Churches) cease to be a member of the Catholic
organical Church hereby:

Though positive schism be usually a great aggravation of negative schism,
yet it is rather a diminution of it, when the negative schism is (as before
universal and total; the reason is, Si separatio pertinaciter fiat vel ab
omnibus ecclesiis veris, vel ab ulla propter causam communem, tum tales
schismat. quamvis fieri possit ut fidem retinentes sint membra ecclesiae
Catholicae) non possunt pro visibilibus ecclesiae membris haberi. Ubi supra.
because it is better to be a member of a Schismatical Church, where the
worship of God is in any measure exercised, then of no Church at all, and
consequently to join in no kind of public worship at all, though, doubtless
it is best of all to remain with, or to return again unto, the communion and
worship of the true and ancient Congregations of the Lord,

So that, we may add as a fourth property of such schism, as destroys
Church Membership, it must be negative as well as total, universal and
heretical.

Object. It may be thought that this enumeration of the means, whereby a person
or a people unchurch themselves is too short; seeing idolatry and apostasy, do
as well unchurch as Schism or Heresy.

Answ. I answer concerning Idolatry. 1. Idolatry cannot be Idolatry. Papismus
est pernitiosa haeresis, quia pracipuam partem pietatis evertet variis modis in
falso cult^ and idolatria, de consc. p. 171.
considered distinctly from Schism and Heresy; indeed it is made up only of
them. 1. A denying the true God, or a denying the true worship of the true God,
and a giving of Deity, or the worship of the Deity, to a creature in our mind
or opinion, which is mental Idolatry, is nothing else but high heresy;
therefore Ames gives this reason to prove Papacy to be heresy, because it
overturneth the principal part of piety in false worship and Idolatry.

Again, secondly, the other great part of Idolatry, is Schism; both negative,
in withdrawing from the worship of the true God, or a withdrawing worship from
the true God; and positive, by setting up a false worship to the true God, or
giving the worship of the true God practically, or actu exercito, to a false
God, Idolatria est tribuere ei rei divinitatem ac honorem Dei, quae non est
Deus, ac adimire cultum Dei, and creaturae tribuit. Zegid. de Idol. p. 382
and therefore practical idolatry is properly and directly opposed to the true
worship, as mental idolatry is to true faith.

2. Idolatry, as such, on all kind of idolatry, is not inconsistent with the
true Church, or true Church Membership; and indeed it is so, then only when
its heresy or schism so renders it, or when it is rather a fruit of
apostasy, or a total defection from God and all true Religion.

The people of the Jews were frequently guilty of this great sin of idolatry,
yet who will venture to affirm, that they so often ceased to be a true Church,
or a people unto God? and for The Jews idolatrous, yet a Church.
what reason did not their idolatry wholly cut them off from God, but, because
they did not totally immerse themselves therein? they still retained the
Statutes and the Law of the true God, and so their heresy was not total; as
also, in a measure, his worship and service, and so their schism was not total;
and consequently their departure from God was but partial, and not to be
branded in proper Ecclesiast. polit. p. 85
speaking, with the foul charge or title of Apostasy; wherefore as Mr. Hooker
thinks, not only amongst them, God always had his Church, because he had
thousands which never bowed their knees to Baal, but whose knees were bowed
unto Baal, even they were also of the visible Church. Apostasy, a genus or an
integrum of heresy and schism.


And if it be yet urged, that apostasy should be reckoned among the means of
unchurching; I reply that Apostasy may be thought to be a genus of heresy and
schism, or a compositum made up of both; and the perfection of heresy and
schism; as it is in the first respect totum universale, or in the latter
respect totum essentiale vel integrale, whose species or whose parts are
heresy and schism.

1. Now, if we consider apostasy, as a genus of heresy and schism, Apostasy
as a genus, etc. is such in grammar and Scripture.
then we may conceive heresy or a falling from the faith, to be one kind of
Apostasy and Schism or a forsaking the Assemblies to be another kind of
Apostasy by the one, men fall from the truth, and by the other from the
Church, and by either or both from God; Apostasy thus understood, as I humbly
conceive, both according to grammar, or the Etymology of the word (which is in
general only [a falling from] which may equally respect the truth and the
Church) and also according to Scripture or the use thereof in the Scripture, is
such in the first and properest sense of the word.

Now if we take Apostasy in this signification, it cannot be reasonably added,
as a third means of unchurching unto Heresy, As a compound the usual sense.
and schism, seeing that a genus is universale and not individuum, and
existing only in its species, and not as distinct thereunto, or in it self.

2. If we take Apostasy in the sense of the Church (wherein it is usually
taken) for a compound of perfect or total Heresy and Schism; or a perfect and
absolute renouncing the faith, and forsaking the communion of the faithful;
then, I answer, that it seems needless to add this, as a third means of
unchurching in this sense, either, seeing it has no other nature or force
thereunto, but what it received from its parts, to wit, heresy and schism,
which have been before insisted upon, so that all the difference is, that
heresy and schism, considered in themselves, do unchurch, apart, and
considered in Apostasy, they do unchurch together; or they are considered to
do that together in Apostasy, which they were considered to do before, apart,
in themselves; and this need not be added, as a third means, which has no
energy to do this effect, but that which it receives from the other two, yea,
even as it consists, wholly thereof.

I conclude, this discourse, with a synopsis of what has been said herein,
given us in those pertinent words of Learned Willet; Synop. of the second.
contr. of the Church.
he, first tells us, who may not be of the visible Church, viz. Infidels, i. e.
such as are not baptized. 2. Heretics. 3. Schismatics, to which he adds
excommunicate persons; he, secondly, teaches, who are or may be of the visible
Church, viz. 1. Such as are not predestinate. 2. Manifest sinners, [de facto].
3. Close Infidels, i. e. hypocrites.

CHAP. XXXV.
Our Churches in England are true Churches; inferred from the former discourse.
I Had once resolved to have written no more but finis to the former discourse;
and to have entrusted it, as it is, to the impartial improvement of my Readers
Genius; for who sees not what great things, a very little use of reason, may
infer therefrom, both touching our Churches, Sacraments, and Censure:

However, though peaceable prudence be ready to advize, as things and persons
now are, to be very sparing in taking the advantages offered us thence, yet
love to the truth, and the zeal of the house of the Lord, has prevailed with,
to add something upon each of these heads, as most direct and easy
conclusions, from the former premises; and first concerning our Churches; thus,

If we seriously consider what has been said, what can possibly hinder us from
concluding therefrom, that our public Congregations in England are true
Churches?

Were not all our members borne in the Church, baptized in the Church? and have
they not hitherto remained in communion of the Church? has Apostasy, Heresy,
Schism; has a removal of the Candlestick, or excommunication it self (if it
have such a power) unchurched them?

Are not all our Congregations called out of the world of Infidels, Turks,
Jews, yea and Papists too? and do not they stand, as holy communities, separate
therefrom to the true worship? and ordinarily exercised in the Ordinances of
God?

Does the Scripture require any more to the essence of the Church, then ours
have? or does it note any thing sufficient to unchurch, that ours are not free
from? are not all the causes distinguishing marks of the true visible Church,
eminently in ours? or does not the whole definition thereof, agree to them? do
not all the Churches salute and own us as true Churches? and, would not many
dangerous absurdities, both in judgment and practice immediately follow the
denial thereof?

Are our Churches corrupt in their conversation? true, but the essence of the
Church consists not in saving grace, nor its visibility in an holy life;
besides what Scripture-Church is there (except one, viz. that at Philippi) but
is even by the Scripture it self, both blamed for corruption, and also
acknowledged to be a Church or people of God?

But I intend not to enlarge here, having elsewhere largely anticipated this
discourse; only, having often observed one great objection taken from the
first constitution of our Churches to be the last, and only hold of the
ancient Brownists, as also of the subtiler sort of our later Anabaptists, to
whom, we might add the Papist, I shall spend the remains of this chapter, in
the view and answer thereof; it is this,

Obj. Our Churches were, not rightly constituted at first, therefore they are
no true Churches.

Answer. This Objection, as it lies thus in general, may be easily evaded upon
all our adversaries own principles.

1. To the Papists we reply, that our Church was at first rightly constituted
upon Popish principles, for do they not say, that we were at first converted
unto Christianity by the preaching of Augustine the Monk, and that he was
commissionated thereunto, by the Pope himself?

2. To the Brownist we say, that we were at first converted by the Ordinance of
preaching, (whether of Joseph, or not) to which we may add, in answer to the
Anabaptist, that our ancestors were then baptized, upon their personal
professing the faith at years of discretion; which thing cannot be rationally
doubted, seeing all are agreed that Heathens are not to be baptized, but upon
such profession of the faith, and again, that our Ancestors were Heathens,
before their conversion to Christianity.

Object. I know, that all these adversaries are ready to reply that something
has since intervened, that has destroyed our Churches.

Answ. Yet, then the objection taken from our first constitution is vanished;
for now the fault, it seems, is found in something that has happened since;
which, also ought to be made to appear, 1. To be truly charged upon our
Churches. And, Secondly, sufficient to destroy them; otherwise our Churches,
being thus confessed, to be truly and rightly constitute at first, and nothing
being found to destroy their being or truth, since it cannot be denied, but
that they are true Churches still.

Let it be therefore briefly examined what they severally allege against us.

Obj. 1. The Papists object that our schism from the Church of Papists.
Rome has destroyed our Church.

Answ. But this will never serve their turn, without the proof of two things,
which are never to be proved.

1. That the Church of England was guilty of Schism by renouncing obedience to
the Church of Rome; For, 1. England was never an obliged member of that
particular Church of Rome; but a Sister Church unto it. Secondly, as we and
Rome were both members of the Catholic Church, we never separated from Rome,
only in those things, wherein, Rome first separated from God, truth, and us.

2. That Schism merely of it self, without heresy, is sufficient to destroy a
Church; which the Scriptures never affirmed, and which, they know, that the
Ancient fathers ever denied.

Object. The Anabaptists object, that though we were lawfully baptized at
first, yet our present members are not; and where Anabaptists.
there is no true baptism, there is no true Church.

Answ. But there are three rotten pillars to uphold this argument, which cannot
support themselves.

1. That Infant Baptism is no lawful baptism; which they themselves now see,
that they cannot evidence; and are therefore now weary of the point; and only
labor to prove the lawfulness of believers baptism.

2. That Infant Baptism may not be true and effectual baptism, though they
could possibly prove it to be unlawful; and that we should not have been
baptized till years of discretion, fieri non debuit factum valet, is sometimes
a good Rule; an error in a circumstance does not null the action, persons
baptized with water in infancy, and with the holy Ghost since, who dare say
they are not baptized?

3. That Baptism is of the essence of Church Membership; Learned Master John
Goodwin, has written a Treatise on purpose upon this subject, showing by many
arguments, that supposing Baptism not lawfully administered to Infants, yet
this is no just ground of separation, from such Churches as do baptize infants;
and one has made an attempt to answer them, but with very unhappy success.

Whether, Infant Baptism, has plain Scripture proof or not, it is both
certain and plain in Scripture, that the children of Lamb.
Church Members, are born in the Church and Covenant of God. But from what
Scripture can it be inferred, that one that is borne in Covenant, cease to be
so, if not Baptized; I know not, I grant that the admission of persons, not
borne in the Church, ought to be solemnized with Baptism; yet, I conceive,
that Baptism is the seal and badge of this, his admission, rather then
essential to it; and that, he is a member indeed, and before God, by his
sincere embracing the Christian Religion in his heart, though not baptized;
though his submission to Baptism be a necessary expression of his Christian
profession, for the Churches satisfaction; and yet, I conceive, there is much
difference, betwixt the cases of such persons, and of those that are borne in
the Church, and that this difference is clearly revealed in the Scriptures of
both Testaments.

Object. There is but one thing that has any color of bjection in Scripture
against it; that the person not circumcised should be cut off from the people,
and that he had broken the Covenant of God, Genesis 17. 14.

But this is easily removed; for, both his sin and punishment plainly intimate
such a persons interest in the Covenant. 1. He has broken my Covenant, that
was his sin; of which he had not been capable, had he not been in Covenant;
and therefore a person refusing circumcision was in Covenant. 2. His punishment
was to be cut off from the people; which also intimates, that at present, he
was among Gods people, and to be punished with that punishment which was
peculiar unto them; it matters not what was meant by this cutting off; for
whether it was by death, or excommunication, we can thence only argue, desert
of the like punishment in the like case; and not that such a person is not yet
in Covenant before this punishment is inflicted which is only due unto him,
for breaking the Covenant, in refusing the seal of the Covenant, which he
could neither have been guilty of, nor had any right unto, unless he had been
in Covenant.

Certainly therefore, faith, and not Circumcision or Baptism, is that which
enters a man into Covenant with his seed; we say, Baptism is the Seal of the
Covenant, and the badg of Christianity; yea, the Anabaptists and we are agreed
in this, that Baptism is to be administered only to such as are in Covenant
already; and consequently that persons are in Covenant before they have right
to Baptism; and therefore baptism is not of the essence of the Cevenant or
Church.

Object. The Brownist, supposing the destruction of our Churches Of Brownists.
in Queen Mary's days, thus objecteth. The true Church is gathered by the
preaching of the Word, but the Churches of England were called only by Queen
Eliza's command, and not by the preaching of the Word; therefore they are no
true Churches.

Answ. This is the Goliah-objection, yet with no great difficulty vanquished;
for,

1. It cannot be proved, that we wholly lost the being of a Church by the
Marian persecution. The Fundamental points, touching God, Christ, Scriptures,
Ordinances, did still shine through that red veil; at least, they were never
covered, much less lost in that Popish Rabble; which God most graciously and
suddenly cleansed, by the means of that happy, succeeding Queen; so that, it
was rather a reformation then a constitution of a Church, which we then
received; and the Queen did no more, in putting for her entrusted power, for
recovery of our former purer Religion; then what other Scripture-Princes had
done before her, with applause from heaven.

The people in Josiahs time were far more Idolatrous, then in Queen Mary's;
the like might be observed of Hezekiahs time; see how Ahaz and Amon left them,
2 Chronicles. 28. 2, 3, 4. and 23. and 33. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9. yet we find that these
Princes compelled all that were found in Israel, to serve the Lord their God;
as it is said of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33. who commanded the people to serve the
Lord, 2 King. 23. 21. and Hezekiah with his Parliament, made a decree,
requiring the people from Dan to Beersheba to return again unto the Lord God
of Abraham, whom they had forsaken, 2 Chronicles. 30. 56.

Now who will say that Israel was not a people of the Lord, because thus
reduced again, unto him, by the command of these Kings? in like manner, our
gracious Queen Elizabeth, did her duty to God in following these happy Kings in
the like case, in England; and the people did no less then their duty to God
and the Queen in returning to their God at the Queens command.

2. Neither can it be sufficiently proved, that the preaching of the Word is of
absolute necessity at the first constitution of a particular Church, especially
where some Knowledge of God and his ways is presupposed, as our case in
England then was.

1. I grant, that in ordinary cases the preaching of the Gospel is required to
the constitution of a Church; but that there can be no extraordinary exception
to this rule, I deny; especially when men would thence reason us out of our
senses, as well as our Churches; we see our Churches in all the parts and
essentials of true Churches; shall we yet argue against what we see, and not
believe our own eyes, because their first constitution was not as we would have
had it, or as indeed ordinarily Churches are constituted? would it not have
been judged a madness in Caine and Abel to have reasoned their parents out of
the number of mankind, because they were not born of a woman, as men
ordinarily are.

Let who will undertake to prove, that our Churches in England were not
constituted at first by the preaching of the Word, and I dare engage to make
good the assumption that our Churches in England are true Churches; and thus we
may happily discover another (extraordinary) way of constitution of Churches,
besides the preaching of the Word.

2. The preaching of the Word as necessary to a true Church, may be thought to
be either antecedent or subsequent to the constitution thereof, either of which
is sufficient, provided that the people are brought to a willing embracement of
the Christian profession by any other means; so that, where the Candlestick is
pitched, and the Ministry of the Word is fixed among any people that freely
attend upon it, there none may doubt, but that God has chosen a people to be
his Church; for here are found the infallible marks of a true Church.

Now none can deny, but that our Congregations in England (if they were not at
first reduced by the Minstry) yet they have enjoyed it, ever since, that their
reduction from the Popish yoke in the days of that famous Queen, and that none
may have cause to say, that this our attendance on the Ordinances of God, is
generally forced by a Law, (as was wont to be laid to our charge,) we have of
late, a most clear evidence, that it is indeed, free and voluntary, seeing all
compulsory means, are known to be rebated, and taken away, in the present
liberty.

3. Much less, can it without gross ignorance, or dangerous impudence, be
denied, that the Ministry of the word was instrumental with the Queens command
to the reduction of the people in her days from Popery to Protestantisme; yea,
it is well known, that diverse Ministers were sent into all parts, to satisfy
the people touching that change in Religion, which she then was about, and
allowed the people that their return might be free, above half a years time to
consider of it, and what law was made at length, to compel in any regard, was
made by consent of the people themselves in Parliament, all which are so
evident in history, that I shall need say no more thereof.

However, suppose that all these things should be granted them.

1. That we lost our Churches in Queen Mary's days.

2. That a true Church can be constituted only by the preaching of the Word.

3. That our Churches in Queen Elizabeth's days, were gathered, or rather
compelled only by the Queens Command.

4. And consequently, that they then were no true Churches, but societies of
Heathens (all which have appeared to be false;) yet, what will this adversary
conclude from thence, against our present Churches? especially if we add the
serious consideration of these four following particulars.

1. That our people have had the preaching of the Word ever since.

2. That they are now a willing people in Gods public worship, all means of
compulsion being now taken off.

3. That they became thus willing to embrace and abide in the true Religion, by
the preaching of the Word; seeing no other means by their own principles
could make them so.

4. And therefore, consequently, we stand true Churches now, by their own
principles; being constituted such, at length (by the long abiding of the same
among us, if not so, at first) by the preaching of the Word.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Inferences from the former discourse, concerning Baptism and title to it.
WE have found the former doctrine helpful to us, in the vindication of the
truth of our Churches, let us follow it a little further, and it may happily
discover something also, touching their title to Sacraments.

And, First, of Baptism. Secondly, of the Supper.

Concerning Baptism it follows, that if the former principle stand, the
children of four sorts of persons may lawfully communicate Baptism.
thereof; the children of such as have no saving grace, nor evidence of it; the
children of visibly wicked persons; the children of the excommunicate, and the
children of such as ought not to be admitted to the Lords Table; which will
fall into so many Positions.

1. Then, first, saving grace in the parent is not absolutely necessary to a
real-right, nor its evidence to a visible right in baptism for his child, or
the children of such, as have no such grace, and make no satisfactory evidence
thereof to the Church, may yet have a clear and good title to Baptism, and be
lawfully baptized.

1. The children of such as have no saving grace, may have a Children of
graceless persons have right in Baptism.
real right in baptism because such parents may, notwithstanding their want of
saving grace, be really members of the visible Church, and be themselves really
baptized; which is all that is requisite to entitle their children to visible
Church Membership, and consequently to baptism; the children of such parents,
are within the Covenant; and interest in the Covenant, carries Foederatis
competit signum foederis.
(doubtless) a right in it, to some seal of the Covenant; and if to any, must
it not be to the first, viz. Baptism.

2. The children of such as give no satisfactory evidence of saving grace, may
yet have a visible title to baptism, and a just claim for it, from the hands
of the Church; because such parents may, without such evidence, have evidence
enough of their interest in the Covenant and the visible Church, sufficiently
satisfying the Judges thereof, by some other means: for that which being real,
gives real right to Ordinances, in Gods account, being visible, or seen and
known, or not to be doubted of by men, gives visible right thereunto in the
Court of the Church. But something else besides such (saving) grace, being
real, gives real right to Ordinances, therefore something else, besides saving
grace, being visible, etc. to men, gives visible right thereunto in the Court
of the Church.

Now that such persons as have neither grace in d^ed, nor grace in show, may
yet have both a real and a visible interest in the Covenant and Church, I
presume to have been plentifully manifested, by the whole scope of the former
debate, and need not be here repeated. Children of wicked Persons, etc. 1 Cor.
7. 14 Ezekiel. 16. 20 Josh. Acts 2. 39 Luke 3. 6. 21 Joh. 4. 1 Ex. 20. 6 Genesis 17.
12, 13 Jer. 31. 29 Ezekiel. 16. 4. All they who be within the Covenant, and such
only are to be received into Baptism. Infants of Christian Parents are within
the Covenant. Those are not to be denied to be Christians, who make so much as
a general Profession of Christ. Hier. Ca^ech. p 75


Yea, the children of openly wicked Parents, may have the like real and visible
title to Baptism.

For this there are many Arguments urged by Divines, that to me were never yet
satisfactorily answered; 1. That such children may be (...), Saints, as well as
others, seeing this title depends only upon the foederal holiness of the
Parents, which is not inconsistent with personal wickedness. 2. That such are
expressly said to be borne to God. 3. Such we^e expressly commanded to be
circumcized. 4. That the Call, wherein the visible Church of the Gentiles is,
is of as great a latitude now, as the Call, wherein the Jews stood, in the
times of the Law: 5. That the Baptism of John, and Christ his Apostles,
admitted all that offered themselves. 6. That the Covenant passes, in its
force among such, as profess Religion, where the Word, and S^als, and People
of God are continued, through a thousand generations. 7. That such children
have their right supplied, from the holiness of the place or people wherein
they are borne, or their Susseptores. 8. And that the child may not bear the
Parents iniquity.

But the Argument that my former Conclusion helps unto, lies thus.

The children of baptized Church Members, ought to be bapti^ed. But the
children of many openly scandalous and wicked persons, are the children of
baptized Church Members. Therefor such children ought to be baptized.

He that breaks with the first of these Propositions, shakes hands with
Anabaptisme. And he that exc^pts against the second, engages against all my
former discourse, and therein, I presume, against the verdict of all the
Churches, and the plain Testimony of God himself, in both the Testam^nts of his
Word.

I think, neither of the Propositions (much less the Conclusion) wete ever
doubted of by any Church, for any considerable time, if ever before, our
present generation.

Should I grant that Zanchy, and some others, are against me in this. Yet I
know that diverse eminent Divines seem so too, that are reallie for me. Calvin
is against the baptizing the children of Papists. Yet Rutherford reckons him
among the number Calv. ep. 12
of those that affirm the lawfulness of the baptizing of the children of
wicked Church Members.

Ames says, that the Infants of such as openly break the Covenant, debent
baptizari, they ought to be baptized, though indeed De Consci. p. 247, ^48
he adds, cum aliquo discrimine, viz. for the shame of the Parents. But who
knows not that Augustine, Bucan, Wallaeus, Apollonius, Perkins, and infinite
more are expressly for it; together with the Leiden Professors, and the
Ecclesiastical College of Geneva; whose words alone I shall here cite, as the
language of the rest of the Churches. Whereso^ver (say they) the Profession of
Christianity, has not utterly perished and been Against Knox.
extinct, Infants are beguiled of their right, if the common seal be denied
them.

Indeed, Mr. Hildersham seems to give reasons against us, yet in the issue
closes perfectly with us. Both may be briefly examined, and I have done with
this.

His Reasons against us are four.

viz. by baptizing the children of wicked Parents) there is a great contempr of
Gods public Worship.

But, I answer, that if Baptism be indeed the right and due of such a child,
it is a duty on us to pay it, and to deny Justice upon such terms of Prudence,
is but to excuse God, for not providing sufficient means of preserving his own
Worship from contempt.

The Execution of an Ordinance of God, cannot directly and per^s^, expose any
part of Gods Worship to contempt; therefore, if any should take occasion hence
to contemn Gods Worship, we ought rather to make them understand, that they
take occasion when it is not given; then to dispense with Justice to our
Neighbor, and our duty to God, and his Ordinance.

Hence, occasion is given to the weak (viz. as he says, Brownists,)

But again, if such Faptisme be our duty, the fault is evidently weakness, who
take occasion not given. Let us do our work, and they mend the fault.

Holy things are hereby profaned.

Not so, Because they are dispensed in a holy way, the way of holy God, and
holy duty. 2. Because they are also dispensed to holy persons: Holy, 1.
Negatively, they are not (I mean the children) actually sinful with their
Parents, and the child may not bear (much less suffer for) the iniquity of
the Parent. 2. Foederally, they are holy, as borne to God, with the holiness
of the Covenant, wherein they are to be sealed by Baptism.

Children are to be admitted only in the Parents right.

This has been largely answered before. Both Propositions denied. 1. That
children are baptized in their Parents right; for they, being borne to God, and
in the Covenant, they are baptized and sealed in their own right. Therefore the
Promise is to our seed, as well as unto us. 2. That the wicked Parent has no
right while he is a member of the Church, he is foederally holy, though
naturally wicked, and thereby he has the force of his own seal, and a right
for the Seal of the Covenant to his child.

So much for Mr Hildershams objections, which, as I noted before, do only seem
to be against us. For he that reads, page 128. of that Book, will there
plainly discover, that that Reverend man, did not intend by all this to deny or
question the child of wicked Parents right to Baptism. As appears by that one
condition, that he puts upon all that has been said, viz. provided, that there
be no necessity requiring haste, on the childs part. Why! it may be said, if
the child have no right, it is a sin to baptize it? and what necessity is
there to sin? what haste to sin?

1. Therefore, doubtless, all that he had said, was only for dispensing a while
with the children of wicked Parents, actual baptizing, (not to question their
right) upon prudential grounds, viz. the Parents good, and the Churches credit,
the bounds of this Prudence, I shall not touch, much less determine or remove.

2. Yea, he seems indeed to speak ouly in the case of Bastardy, which case, is
clearly distinguished by Casnists, from cases of other notorious scandals? who
yet do generally grant that in such a case the illegitimate child should be
baptized, upon certain conditions, and consequently, question not their right,
but only ptopose a prudential, creditable, and fit way, means and manner, for
the application of Baptism to them, in such unclean cases.

3. Yea, once more, we may truly observe, that this worthy man, Mr. Hildersham,
in the place infisted on, did mixtly at least intend, the debarring such wicked
Parents from the Supper of the Lord? which course, if well proceeded in, would,
I think, wholly remove all the foresaid inconveniences. For were the Parents
justly censured for their personal wickedness, by being debarred from the
Supper of the Lord; what contempt of Worship, profaning of Ordinances, or
offense to any could possibly arise from a just dispensing to such (their)
children their right in in Baptism, who ought not to suffer so great a loss,
for their Parents fault.

Again, if I should add, that the children of persons excommunicate, Children
of excommunicate persons.
ought to be baptized, it is well known, that many learned men would bear me
out. Certainly if the Parents in this state of censure, are united to the
Church, and have the seal of Baptism in its force upon them, I see not, but
their children have yet a right unto Baptism not to be violared. For what is it
that entitles the child to the seal, but its being borne in Covenant? and what
is the means of this, but the Parents foederal holiness and Baptismal state?

But (praeteritis hic etiam illis, quae alibi sunt disputata) I shall say only
this, that either the excommunicate Parent is in Covenant or not. If he be in
Covenant, then his child has right to Baptism; if he be not, then upon his
repentance, he ought to be rebaptized; for if the Covenant Interest of an
excommunicate person be wholly voided, then is the seal of the Covenant broken,
and must upon renewing of Covenant, by repentance, be anew affixed by a
rebaptization; without any colorable contradiction, that I yet can hear of.

Lastly, it will easily follow, that then, the children of such as The children
of such as ought not to be admitted to the Supper.
ought not to communicate in the Supper may have right to baptism; because
wicked persons, and persons de jure excommunicated, and persons actually
excommunicate, ought not to be admitted to the Supper, and yet the children of
all such, being the children of parents in Covenant, ought not be de denied the
seal of the Covenant, viz. Baptism.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Concerning private accession, or coming to the Sacrament.
SECT. I. The Introduction.
MY principle now leads me into a large field, made by some a common; by
others, I think, a too to narrow and strict enclosure, viz. Communion in the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

I am conscious, that (seeing so many and various ways herein,) I may, easily
miss the right; however, I shall go as near as I can in the middle path, that
may be the rightest, seeing as vice lies in the extremes of virtue, so error
in the extremes of truth; and as we use to say, of persons fallen out, there is
usually a fault on both sides; it may be also the nearest way to my wished end
(of peace and unity) for so is the middle by rules of Geometry; and I doubt not
of the the safety of it, remembering that of the Poet, in Medio tutissimus.

That which my principle helps me to infer, here is,

1. Concerning the terms of accession, or ones own private coming to receive
the Sacrament.

2. Concerning the terms of admission, or the Churches public receiving
persons to this communion; for as Reverend Vrsin says, these are two
questions, Who ought to come to the Sacrament? and who ought to be admitted?
though, I cannot discern so great a difference betwixt them, as some do.

First, touching the private accession or liberty to come to receive, or to
offer ones self to this communion, I reason thus.

If union with the Church depends upon saving grace, then a right to
communion in general with it, and consequently to the Supper does not, for
communion is founded in union, as it is in natural and politic bodies.

Whence may flow these two Positions irresistibly.

1. That such as are of the foundation of the Church, or Church Members have a
fundamental right and title to all the privileges that belong to the Church as
such.

2. That all Church Members may lawfully proceed by virtue of this fundamental
right to actual communion with the Church in the Sacrament of the Supper,
unless some special prohibition in the word does limit it.

Hence arise, two great and famous points of Controversy.

1. Whether there be any such command in Scripture forbidding some
Church Members to come to this Sacrament.

2. If there be, whether this condition, without which, Church Members are
forbidden to come to the Sacrament, it be saving grace, or not.

SECT. II.
Whether there be any prohibition of persons within the Church from the
Sacrament.
UPon the first of these, I affirm, that there is such a command in Scripture
forbidding some Church Members, to receive the Sacrament. 2. I affirm that
this command is to be drawn from 1 Corinthians. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself.

1. That there is such a command forbidding, or charging There is a prohibition
of some persons.
something upon Church Members, as conditional to their coming to the
Sacrament; and consequently rendering the right which persons have to the
Sacrament, by virtue of bare or single Church Membership, but a mediate right,
and the command obliging Church Members, as only such, but a mediate, or a
conditional command. I affirm upon these reasons.

Reas. 1. For, if the command obliging all the circumcised to eat the
passover, was not absolute, but upon a supposition or condition of their
cleanness, what reason can be given, why this command, obliging the baptized
to communion in the Supper, should be so absolute, as to admit of no condition
at all?

Is not the Supper the Christian Passover? as Baptism is the Christian
Circumcision? at least is not the Supper as holy as the Passover? is not the
Gospel Dispensation as strict as the legal? is not the Supper at as great a
distance from Baptism, as the passover from circumcision? however, if these
will not be yielded unto, I am sure that this will force its way, that no
reason can possibly be given, why the command for the Supper should be more
absolute, then that of the Passover.

1. It Is nothing here, whether the legally unclean only, were forbidden the
Passover. For, 1. The legally unclean were circumcised. 2. The legally
unclean were prohibited the Passover. 3. Therefore some circumcised persons
were prohibited the Passover.

2. Neither is it our question whether those that were forbidden the Passover,
were equally forbidden all other Ordinances; for if so, then, 1. The Passover
was forbidden also. 2. Then other Ordinances, were, it seems, but conditionally
obliged unto in the time of the Law, upon Church Members; and what should
hinder the Supper to be so now?

2. Offering the gift, at the Altar, is commanded by Christ, conditionally, or
mediately, (first go and be reconciled, then come and Mat. 5. 23, 24
offer, and till then lay down thy gift) why then should the command to receive
the great gift at the Christian Gospel-Altar be more absolute? is there any
ordinancy greater circumstance, greater solemnity. is there any part of the
Gospel Worship, more guarded with threatenings, more exacting preparation and
seriousness toward God, and charity to our Brethren, in the comers thereunto,
then this of the Supper?

3. If all Church Members are bound to hear the Church, then some
Church Members are bound to abstain from the Sacrament; for some
Church Members are forbidden by the Church, and in obedience to God, to
abstain from the Sacrament.

1. The catechumeni are Church Members before their baptism, otherwise they
should never be baptized; because none but Church Members, are to be baptized,
none but foederati ought to be signati, as before. 2. The chatecumeni were
forbidden the Sacrament in the missa chatecumenorum, who had at most but a
remote or mediate right thereunto, until they were baptized.

2. Children, borne and baptized Church Members, are truly Church Members; yet
such children are prohibited by the counsels of the Church to receive this
Sacrament, until they are arrived to years of discretion; which all our
adversaries (even the highest for the privilege of membership) readily consent
unto.

3. Excommunicate persons, as before, I have labored to prove, are yet
Church Members; yet excommunicate persons, are charged by the Church, not to
receive this Sacrament.

I know that such as I now oppose do usually acknowledge that such
Church Members ought not to receive, but then, let them bethink themselves, how
is the command obliging all Church Members to receive the Sacrament, an
absolute command? How then does single Church Membership give immediate,
absolute, and actual interest in every Ordinance?

4. To persons of more moderate principles, I might instance, in members
legally convict of scandal, or grossly ignorant, and therefore suspended, are
not these Church Members? again, are not these commanded by the Church to
abstain from this Sacrament? then, ought they not to abstain? then, does the
command of God oblige them to come, while the Church forbids them? then is not
their suspension a bar to their actual right in the Sacrament? and, lastly,
then is not the command to receive conditional upon Church Members, upon a
supposition of Age, Knowledge, freedom from sandal, suspension,
excommunication?

Lastly, let us hear the Church; does not both the practice and express
judgment of the most eminent fathers of the Church, in most ages thereof,
testify as much, namely, that actual communion in the Supper is not for all
Church Members; and consequently, the command obliging them is but conditional,
upon a supposition of their fitness.

1. That practice of the Church concludes it, wherein, she The practice of the
Church. Let no unclean person, no adulterer, no usurer, etc. offer himself to
the receiving of this Sacrament: if any be such a one, I require him by the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, and by the Judge of the quick and dead, that he
come not to the Lords Table, that he betray* not the son of God. Bp. Jewel of
the Sacram. p. 279 Chrysostom. in Heb. 10. 9. in Ethic.
has generally dehorted, and doctrinally suspended, such from the Supper,
whose own private hearts and consciences knew their own unfitness, or
unworthiness of it.

Such a practice as this, could possibly proceed from no other principle but
this, that Christ did not require this part of his worship from such unworthy
hands? and that, in such a condition persons ought not to receive the
Sacrament; for, if Christ did absolutely loose such persons to this duty of
receiving, and that to the Churches knowledge, how could the Church without
sin against knowledge, bind them from it? what is this but to contradict
Christ in his Word, and to rob him of his honor, worship and Sovereignty? if
our common Master, do indeed absolutely command us all to come, who dare forbid
any, upon the most glorious pretense in the world?

Now that this has been the usual course of the Church (if not juridically to
withold from the Sacrament, such as were scandalous (which anon also may be
examined) yet doctrinally thus to diswade and terrify secret sinners from
approaching the Sacrament easily appears.

Chrysostom witnesses for the Greek Church long agone. The Priest (says he)
admonishes all that are coming to the holy Sacrament, driving away the
unworthy, but inviting the prepared, and that with a loud voice, and hands
lifted up, standing aloft, where he may be seen and heard of all.

This has been the constant practice of our own Church, according to both the
Rubric in the common prayer, and the late Directory.

The Common prayer enjoyneth the Minister to dissuade all such Common prayer.
as are blasphemers of God, envious, or guilty of any notorious crime in their
heart, to abstain from this Ordinance; where we may note. 1. That in the
judgment of our Church then, some Church Members that were not juridically
censured, even such as were known to be unworthy by themselves alone [in their
heart] ought to abstain from the Sacrament. 2. Therefore in the judgment of
our Church then the command on the people to receive, is binding only
conditionally, viz. upon a supposition of fitness.

And does the Directory require otherwise? vid. page 34. there we read that the
Minister is in the Name of Christ to warn Directory.
all such as are ignorant, scandalous, profane, or that live in any sin or
offense against their knowledge or conscience, that they presume not to come to
that holy Table; where, also we may note, that the persons to be thus
dissuaded; are not only the openly scandalous, but such wicked persons as are
known to be such by their own knowledge and conscience alone. 2. These are to
be warned away in the Name of Christ, which who dare presume to do, that does
not believe that the will of Christ is, that such persons ought not to receive.
3. Therefore, our Directors judged that the Will or command of Christ, our
Master is not, that such Church Members, as are thus unworthy, ought to
receive, but rather the contrary.

Yea, this is generally granted to us, even by those that deny the thing, as
well as those that deny us the power of juridical suspension.

Yea, this is granted and forceably urged by some, that as earnestly plead,
that the command, do this in remembrance of me is inconditional and absolute;
which I crave leave to say, is a contradiction; for if the Command, do this,
etc. be absolute, either upon the Administrator or upon the people, how then is
the Aministrator to warn any of the people not to suffer him to do his duty in
administering to them, or not to attend upon their own duty in communicating? to
say that a Minister is bound by Christ's command to administer to all Church
members, and again; that he is bound in the Name of Christ, to warn some not
to receive; is to make the will of Christ contrary to it self; and to say, that
a Minister is bound to warn the wicked from the Sacrament, and yet to say,
that the will of Christ is, that all are absolutely bound to receive, is to
contradict our selves; by the first, we confess that the will of Christ is,
that wicked men ought not to receive, which is formally denied in the latter.

Neither is this gathered only from the practice, for it is indeed the
express judgment of most eminent men in the Church, almost 2. Churches
judgment.
in all ages.

Irenaeus is express for it in his time, who seems to speak the unquestioned
sense of the whole Church, then for whom he makes (...). Apol. 2.
this Apology, with us (says he) this nourishment is called the Eucharist, of
which it is lawful for none to partake, but such as believe our doctrine, such
as are washed to remission of sins, (or baptized) and such as live so as
Christ has commanded.

This place of Irenaeus gives cause of doubting to a learned man, Ludov.
Molinae (Paraen. p. 315.) Whether it ought to be understood of Christians, not
admitted by confoederal discipline to partake of the Supper, or whether they
belong to that command of Paul, 1 Cor. 11. whereby it is not lawful for an
unworthy man, or a man wanting faith to receive, but tells us he could easily
believe the latter; adding that it is granted to be spoken of such as are
baptized (and therefore Church Members) who live not according to the doctrine
of Christ; and that is, as much as I contend for, that some baptized members of
the Church, ought not to partake of the Eucharist, in the judgment of the
Church, in Irenaeus his time.

We have seen before what the judgment of the Church was in Chrysostomes time
also; and for the opinion of later fathers and Schoolmen, it is sufficiently
known to be on our side; as also of most of the Reformed Divines and Churches.

The Church of Bohemia in her confession, says that if any approach Reformed
Churches of Bohemia.
this Table without -- such a man should greatly profane and reproach this
Sacrament, yea, and the whole institution thereof appointed by Christ.

In like manner the Church of Scotland confesses that the Scotland.
Supper of the Lord appertains only to such as be of the household of faith,
and can try and examine themselves, to these accord the Churches of Auspurgh
Saxony, France, Belgia, and most eminently our own Church, as appeared before
from the Auspurgh, Saxony, France, Belgia and England.
Common prayer and Directory, to which our confession of faith lately framed,
may be seasonably added.

The Confession of faith says, that all ignorant and ungodly persons, cannot
without great sin against Christ, whiles they remain such; partake of these
holy mysteries.

Many eminent Divines join issue hecein. Trelcatius.


Trelcatius teaches, page 185. that Materia seu subjectum participans, sunt ij
omnes qui per baptismum ecclesiae membra facti, jam adulti sanam doctrinam
profitentur and Sanctae vitae testimonium habent; to which he adds that hereby
are excluded. 1. Mortui. 2. Aegroti moriturii. 3. Pueri ac Infantes. 4. Qui
propter, Haeresius and dissolutam vitam excommunicati sunt legitime.

Bucanus loc. com. 48. qu. 8. to this question, quibus est Bucanus.
Instituta coena Domini? Answers, non omnibus promiscue.

Vrsine Cat. quae. 8. to the same question answer, tantum pii Ursin.
debent accedere.

Bishop Usher is as plain in answer to the like question, viz. who are to be
partakers of the Lord Supper, says he, such Usher.
as are of years and of sound judgment to discern the Lords body. I might
add Ames, Diodate, Calvine, Zanchy, Perkins, and infinite more; but let me
break off the trouble with these few sufficing for all.

SECT. III.
Objections hereunto, Answered.
THis point is run upon by two sorts of Adversaries, 1. By some, too strict. 2.
By others, too large.

1. Some have ventured to say, that Church Members, or rather (to use their own
term) disciples, as such, have an immediate right in this Sacrament, but none
are disciples, save persons so and so qualified.

These, I do not purposely deal with here; for the present, they may be
contented with a very short answer, that both their Propositions are false, or
at least fallacious. 1. That none are disciples, but persons qualified with
knowledge, holiness, etc. which they must needs grant to be false, if they
will avoid Anabaptisme, seeing according to the principalls of Infant Baptism,
all that are lawfully baptized are disciples, Matthew. 28. 19. and again, that
all that are lawfully baptized, are not so and so qualified, as in the case of
Infants, who are baptized, and lawfully so. 2. That all that are disciples are
to receive the Supper: this holds not, 1. Till what I have urged for wicked
men's Churchmembership be refuted. 2. Till Infants discipleship be denied. 3. Or
till both Infants* and wicked Church Members, yea, and suspended, yea,
excommunicate Church members, are proved to have an immediate and present right
to the Lords Supper, seeing all such may be Church Members and disciples.

But, let us rather weigh what is urged by the other larger party, against this
bar, upon some Church Members, to keep them from receiving the Supper.

It Is scornfully urged, more then solidly, that then Church Members duty. If
wicked Church Members are forbidden the Sacrament.

Just as excommunicate persons have a writ of Ease from all other

2. This gives a fair occasion to note the ground of that cloudy, not to say,
contradictory way of some men's expressing themselves upon this point;
sometimes, they say, all Church Members are obliged to receive the Supper, at
other times, when this pincheth, that some Church Members, viz. children, etc.
are not obliged, and ought not to be admitted. Now both these are true, and
both are false, as they may be understood. All Church Members, as such, are
under an obligation to receive; and yet some Church Members are under an
obligation to abstain, and yet here is no contradiction in Gods Commands,
though there may be, and I fear is, in men's application of them, in this case.

3. And what is the ground hereof, but want of care or skill to distinguish of
Gods Commands, and the force and obligation thereof. Which if a little heeded,
may serve both to extricate these difficulties, and solve the present objection.

1. The command, obliging to receive the Sacrament, is to The Command to
receive, is mediate to some, immediate to others.
some persons mediate and remote, to others immediate, and of present and
actual obligation. It obliges all Church Members, as such, to receive, more
remotely, upon condition of their fitness. It obliges worthy and prepared
Church members immediately and actually.

To apply this to the present objection, I answer, that such Church Members as
are not worthy, they are under a remote obligation to receive, even while they
are unworthy, because they ought to be worthy, and then to receive. And not to
receive is their sin remotely, though their immediate and present penalty.
Wicked men not excused from, though not permitted to receive. Wicked men in a
double capacity, as Church Members. 2. As wicked, in this forbidden, in that
commanded to receive. If he receive not, he sins twice, if he do receive, he
sins thrice.
So that, they are not excused from their duty of receiving by any writ of
ease, but rather still pressed with a double duty, first to be worthy, and then
to receive, though the latter is forbidden without the former.

This may receive some further clearness, from a right apprehending the
subjects of this duty of receiving, in a double capacity, as Church Members, so
they are commanded, as wicked or unfit Church Members, and so they are
forbidden to receive: Such, therefore, is the misery of a wicked man, he sins
twice if he do not receive. First, in not being worthy. Secondly, in not being
worthy, and receiving. And he sins thrice, in receiving while he is unworthy.
1. In not being worthy to receive. 2. In not receiving worthily. 3. In
receiving, not being worthy.

2. Again, the matter will yet be plainer, by considering the command to
receive either singly, and by it self, or conjoined, with the command of
worthiness.

If we look upon the Command to receive, singly in it self, The Command to
receive, single or jointly, with the command of the condition.
or separately considered from the Command of worthiness, then, this command
to receive is but mediate and conditional, and does not presently, immediately,
or actually oblige, without a supposition of worthiness, which is the
condition of this obligation to receive. God commands, indeed, both the duty
and the condition, but yet in his own order. First, the condition, and then the
duty. The condition, immediately; the duty, remotely, as depending upon the
condition. God says, indeed, Thou shall eat; but he says again, thou shall
first be worthy; and consequently* thou shall not eat unworthily, or, thou
shall not eat unless thou be worthy; for that which is commanded upon such a
condition, is virtually forbidden, where that condition is wanting.

Again, if we look upon the command to receive, in conjunction with the command
of worthiness (as I desire to do, in answer to this objection,) then, I say,
the command to receive, viz. worthily, is of immediate obligation, upon all
intelligent Church Members; for every person, at years of discretion, and in
the ordinary use of reason, within the Church, (whom I call an Intelligent
Churchmember) ought, doubtless, to receive worthily, and in this compounded
sense, by consequence, to receive; though, any such person, not being worthy,
ought in the former divided sense not to receive.

Now, I humbly conceive, thus only, or at least, chiefly, we We ought to take
the command, jointly.
ought to consider the obligation upon members of the Church, to receive the
Sacrament, as jointly obliging both to worthiness and receiving, or to worthy
receiving. God has put them both together in his Command, (Do this in
remembrance of me, let a man examine himself, and so let him eat) and therefore
let no man put them asunder in the application, and say Do this, though you do
not remember Christ, and eat, though you do not examine your selves.

Yet, as has been said, though God command both together; it is one, in order,
to the other; the one, as the condition, or the necessary qualification, and
the other as the duty. Yet one in order to the other.
The text says, Examine and eat, yet it says also, Examine and so eat, not
eat without examining, not eat, though you do not examine, not first eat, and
then examine, not both eat and examine together, but examine first, and so, or
then eat, and so, and not otherwise eat.

This difficult matter may be easily resembled by a familiar instance. The
Farmer going from home, commands his servant to plough and sow such a field.
This command is compounded by A familiar instance for it.
the Master (both to plough and sow) and may not be divided by the servants
obedience. If now, the servant do not sow this field, all will say he is
faulty. But if he should sow the field, and not plow it, would not we say he is
more faulty? if he plow not, he sins, for he was commanded to plough; if he
sow not, he sins, for he was commanded to sow: If he plough and sow not, he
sins, for he was commanded both to plough and sow; if he sow and plough not,
he sins, for still he was commanded both; yea, if he first sow, and then
plough, he sins, for he was commanded first to plough, and then to sow. Both
are commanded, but one in order to the other.

Neither is this applied to divine commands, without book all the Jews were
commanded by God to be clean, and to eat the Passover; but they were not
either to be clean, and not eat the Passover, nor yet to eat the Passover
unclean, nor yet excused from eatimg the Passover by their uncleanness; for a
day was appointed by God, when the unclean (being cleansed) should observe it,
the obligation pressed still upon them, because they ought both to be clean and
to eat, by virtue of a joint obligation upon them, though being unclean, there
was another command, that the unclean, (during their uncleanness) ought not to
eat.

Mr. Perkins has gone before us, in applying this to the Sacrament. First, he
concludes generally and compoundedly, that every one of years, living in the
Church, and being baptized, is bound in conscience by Gods Commandment to use
the Lords Supper; and then puts this case, What shall a man do that finds
himself unworthy? To which he answers very distinctly, that there be two kinds
of unworthiness, of an evil conscience, and of infirmity, and then concludes,
that the latter cannot justly hinder a man from the Supper, neither is it
sufficient to cause him to forbear, evidently implying that there is one kind
of unworthiness, (viz. his former) that is sufficient to hinder, and to cause
a man to fo^bear this Sacrament; and that nothing can be sufficient to cause to
forbear, without some command prohibiting such persons, because of such
unworthiness, none will deny; and then, here is a general command, remotely
commanding the same persons to receive, or jointly commanding them to receive
worthily, and a particular command, prohibiting them, at present, to meddle
with it.

But Ames, in a very few words, hinteth all my mind hereabout. He first
resolves, that such unworthiness (alone) which Illa (indignitas) sola qua est
cuspabili^ and conscientia mala excludit a Communione. Non debet propter illam
a Communione abstine^c, sed eam quamprimum deponere propter Communionem. Cas.
de Cons. p. 249 From Mat. 28 19, 20
is culpable, and of, or from an evil conscience, does exclude from Communion;
and then adds, that a man ought not for this to abstain from the Communion,
but rather, or chiefly, or first of all, to lay aside unworthiness for the
sake of Communnion, thereby granting, that all are bound jointly to worthy
receiving, again, that no unworthy person, while such, ought immediately to
receive. 3. That this, his unworthiness, does not take off his obligation of
worthy receiving. 4. And lastly, that the immediate duty upon unworthy persons,
is to be worthy, that they may receive, and consequently, that they ought not
to receive until they are worthy.

Object. 2. It is most confidently objected by some also, from Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Thus we are commanded to teach all baptized persons to observe all things,
whatsoever Christ has commanded, therefore to receive the Sacrament. For as
Circumcision brought all the circumcised under all the observances of the old
Administration, even the Passover, upon their lives; so Baptism, lays the
same engagements upon all the baptized to come under all observances of the New
Administration, even the Supper it self.

There are two great faults in the face of this bold Argument, Ignoratio
Elenchi and petitio principii; it labors hard to prove what is not denied,
viz. that all baptized persons are bound to observe all the Ordinances of
Gospel Worship, and takes for granted, what is, indeed, questioned, and stuck
at, viz. that if all baptized persons are bound to observe all Ordinances,
therefore, they are bound to observe them all by an immediate and present
obligation under any condition, quality, of indisposition whatsoever, the
contrary whereunto touching this Ordinance, of the Supper stands yet unshaken.

What is concluded by Analogy from Circumcision and the Passover, to Baptism
and the Supper, admits of a very easy, yet strong, retortion; for if though
all the Circumcised were commanded to observe the Passover upon their lives,
yet the unclean, though circumcised, were expressly forbidden the Passover
while unclean, as none can possibly deny; then, though all the baptized be in
like manner commanded to observe the Supper, yet what hinders (especially from
this Analogy) but that there may be another command ptohibiting the baptized,
while unclean, with Gospel-uncleannesse, to partake of the Supper?

Again, it is objected from the second Commandment, against From Command Second.
in it all parts of Gods Instituted Worship, which at any time he has, or
shall prescribe to be done upon his whole Church, and consequently this of the
Supper.

The vanity hereof easily appears, thus.

The second Commandment obliges all Church Members to observe, whatsoever God
has at any time ordained, as part of his Worship. But God did once ordain
Circumcision, Passover, Sacrifices, and all the rest of the legal rites as
parts of his Worship, therefore all Church Members are still bound to observe
all these.

Or a little nearer, the second Commandment obliges all Church Members to
observe all the parts of Gospel Worship: but public prayer, preaching, and
administration of the Sacraments, are parts of this Gospel Worship, therefore
all Church Members are bound to do all these; which the present objector abhors.

We see then, a necessity of explaining and limiting the force of this Law, for
which, two Rules will be very subservient to us, and dispatch this objection.

1. The force of this Law, as moral, and morally obliging to find to be fixed
by the said Law of Institutions, (excepting the case of idolatry, of which this
second Commandment is indeed particular) which is well hinted in the objection
it self, viz. that it obliges unto all the parts of divine Worship, that have
been, or shall be appointed by God, that is, in any other place, or by any
other means of Revelation, specificating and determining the same, whether by
the Law of Nature, as Prayer, etc. which we are not now to consider; or the Law
of Institutions, before spoken of, with which we have now to do, by which the
Sacraments are ordained and enforced.

So that, unless we can first find some particular Law in the Cospel,
absolutely obliging every member of the Church in any kind of wickedness,
unworthiness, indisposednesse whatsoever, to a present and immediate receiving
this Sacrament, the general influence of the second Commandment will nothing
avail us.

2. Again, this moral Law of the second Commandment, has Negative part, as
well as an Affirmative, fotbidding what is forbidden, as well as obliging to
what is commanded, touching Gospel Worship.

All the Jews were commanded to eat the Passover, upon a supposition of their
cleanness, yet the unclean Jews were forbidden it; now both these come within
the force of that moral Commandment; the one in the Affirmative, the other in
the Negative part thereof.

So, if we can find that any persons are forbidden to come to the Sacrament in
the Law of Gospel Worship. The second Commandment, will as strongly enjoyne
such to forbear, as the rest of Gods people to observe and partake of the
Sacrament.

But, according to the reason of a more considerable Author, Buroughs.

Briefly, to each of these. I begin with the first of them, Part.
the worthiness of the receiver, so that it is then no Sacrament where
worthiness is wanting.

I humbly conceive, this follows not. For some things may

Divines use thus, to distinguish of the administration of Baptism, by one
that is not in orders, that the thing is done, but he ought not to have done
it; which may fitly be applied to this Sacrament, received by one unworthy of
it; that which he has received is the Sacrament, though he ought not to have
received it. Fieri non debuit factum valet.

Zegedine puts this very question, An sides est de substantia and Loc. Com. p.
164
integritate Sacramenti. Let us hear his Answer, Substantia Sacramentorum
(says he) ab institutione and authoritate Domini dependent, quare non refert
ad hoc, ut integrum Sacramentum accipiamus, quid cr^damus interest quidam ad
salutis viam, quid credat, videlicet, qui Sacramentum accipit, sed ad
Sacramenti quaestionem nihil int^r^st. -- Sive credat quis, sive non credat, Q.
Quibus non debeat administrari? A. His, viz. qui scipsos explorare non possunt,
-- qui insidei mysterio parum suntoruditi p. 174 Scot. l. 4. Sent. dic. 3. qu.
2 Vid. Gillesp. Aarons Rod. p. 540
si l^gitime Sacramentum administretur, verum Sacramentum sumat, respectu
scilicet Dei; communicantis vero respectu, si quis non credat, Nudum signum,
etc. Yet tells us afterward, that such as cannot examine themselves, and such
as are but little instructed in the faith ought not to receive it.

Scotus his distinction of things necessary to the Sacrament, as administered,
may easily fit our case of the Sacrament as received. Something, says he, is
necessarinm simpliciter, and something is necessarium aliqualiter; the former
he terms that without which the Sacrament is no Sacrament; the latter, that
without which they that give, (we may chan^e it into, they that receive) the
Sacrament, cannot avoid sin, or the want whereof, makes the Ministry (o^ the
people) guilty.

The one may be termed nec^ssarium essentialiter, so the worthiness of the
receiver is not necessary to the Sacrament. The other necessarium
conditionaliter, thus it is necessary, viz. with the necessity of a condition,
sine qua non, without which, I do not say it cannot be, but it cannot be
lawfully received without transgression. The first is necessary, Ratione
Naturae rei and entis, the last ratione legis and moris; as to allude in the
words of the Law; there is a condition indeed, without which res vel
Sacramentum non est, nec esse potest, inhering in the very substance and nature
of the thing or Sacrament, this we tend not; and a condition in Law, without
which (the Law forbidding) res vel Sacramentum non debet esse, vel non potest
esse legaliter; thus, the worthiness of the receiver, is necessary to his
participating the Sacrament; God having forbidden unworthy persons, they cannot
lawfully partake thereof.

Object. 2. But it may be further urged that preparation is required to hearing
and praying; as well as to receiving the Sacrament, yet these ought to be done
though we are not prepared as we ought for them.

Answ. We may distinguish of preparations to a duty, and conditions of a duty.

Every preparation, I grant is not so necessarily pre-required, as that without
it the duty ought not to be performed; such are the preparations to the duties
mentioned, hearing and praying; but it hence follows not, that no duty, nor
particularly, this of receiving the Sacrament, has such preparation
pre-required, as is conditional thereunto, and without which we have no leave
or warranty from God to observe it.

Preparation to prayer and hearing, is mere preparation, and not a condition;
but preparation to the Sacrament is also a condition, and not a mere
preparation.

Some duties come upon us without any pre-requisite as to fear God, and some
duties have their pre-requisites; and there (if necessary) are necessary either
with a necessity of endeavor only, or also with a necessity of event;
pre-requisites necessary only with a necessity of endeavor, I call mere
preparations, which, though they ought to be endeavored, yet, if not obtained,
do not debar us from the performance of the duty; as the want of due
preparations do not from the word and prayer; therefore such commands as oblige
to such duties, have always a next and immediate obligation upon us, and cannot
be termed mediate or conditional.

Praerequisites, necessary with the necessity of event, are again necessary to
the being, or to the well-being of a duty, by reason of which, the command,
obliging to the duty, is said to be a mediate or conditional command, and under
this distinction or case of receiving the Sacrament falls.

But, I have before acknowledged, that the worthiness to receive, is not
necessary to the being of the Sacrament, therefore it is only necessary to the
well-being of it.

But is it replied, that worthiness is requisite to the well-being of the
duties of hearing and praying also?

I answer this was prevented, as well as foreseen by making the been esse of
the duty here to depend on the worthiness, with a necessity of event.

Therefore, lastly, the been esse of a duty is opposed to fruitless
performance of a duty, and may be termed the been utile esse, as in the former
cases of the Word and Prayer, and their preparations; or to the unlawful,
unfruitful performance of a duty, which may be termed the been honestum vel
legale esse, as in this case of receiving the Sacrament and its condition; so
that the sum is.

Preparation is necessary to the Word and Prayer, ad been i. e. utiliter esse,
to the well, that is profitable and comfortable performance thereof; and
preparation is necessary to receiving the Sacrament, adbene, i. e. honest and
legaliter esse, to the well, that is lawful and warrantable performance
thereof, and this, I presume has been made to appear to be the sense, if it be
not, the words of most Divines.

Moreover, the distinction it self, must needs be allowed even by those that
may be ready to question the present application thereof for, I think, none
will say that it is a sin for an Infidel to hear and pray; though he cannot so
do, as a member of the Church) and that none will but say that it is sin for
an Infidel while such, to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it being a
duty presently and immediately binding upon an Heathen to hear and pray, and to
unite himself to the true Church; but not so, but indeed, presumption and great
transgression for an Heathen, while such, to meddle with these high and sacred
mysteries of the Lords Supper.

And to conclude, one may argue as well from the present objection for a
Heathens communicating in the Supper, as for every Church Members; thus,
preparations are required of Heathens in order to their hearing the word and
prayer, yet though Heathens are not prepared, they are still obliged to hear
and pray; therefore though preparations are required of Heathens also, in order
to their receiving the Sacrament, yet though these be wanting, they are bound
to receive.

Object. 3. It is generally resolved by all the casuists that ever I saw, that
when we come unto a duty, and do not find 3. Par.
our hearts prepared, according to that we do desire; that we are not yet for
that time to let go the duty, and forbear the performance of it.

Answ. It Is granted, but my conclusion is not hurt thereby; for the question is
not whether the command to receive, be not absolute upon such as desire to be
prepared (here the Lord accepts of the willing mind) but whether it be so
obliging upon such, as do not desire, or labor for any preparation at all;
should this be affirmed to be the sense of all the casuists about the
obligation of the command to receive the Supper, I should desire my worthy
Author to review the preceding authorities.

Object. 4.

If any one (says Mr. Buroughs) in his Gospelworship 4. Par.
(in answer unto the question) perform a duty in worship in that sincerity and
strength that he is able to do, though he be not prepared as he ought, yet it
is better to do it then to neglect it; and he applies this his answer unto the
receiving of the Sacrament, as well as the word and prayer, as may be seen by
the proposal of the question.

Answ. Master Buroughs, I conceive does neither here, nor in any other of his
writing, contradict what I am pleading for; he, in terminis, supposes the
subject of his question to be one that is sincere to his power in
self-preparation, and such a one, I grant, though not prepared as he ought
(for, indeed, who is?) had better do his duty, then neglect it.

But in the present case, I should appeal to no other, but Mr. Buroughs, who
speaks directly to the point (and indeed beyond my purpose and aim) in the
same book of his Gospel Worship read him at large, page 232. 233, 234. Where he
expressly says, that none but holy persons ought to come to the Sacrament, for
four reasons. 1. The Sacrament is a seal of the Covenant. 2. An Ordinance of
spiritual nourishment. 3. Such as come, are required to examine themselves. 4.
It Is a communion with God and Saints; and if they do come, they are not to be
admitted. page 235.

SECT. IV.
Seeming dissenters do really consent.
But why should verbal discourses, longer continue real differences? do not
those, who plead most vigorously against us, join issue at last in the point
with us? let such, first seriously consider what the point is, viz. that there
is a command in Scripture prohibiting some Church Members (supposed unfit) to
receive the Sacrament; then let them examine their own principles, yea, reflect
upon their own public concessions, and, I humbly conceive, the controversy is
at an end.

Do not all such (whom the world judges adverse hereunto) take themselves to
be mistaken, yea, highly injured; when any lay this to their charge, that they
hold an absolute promiscuous communion? and hereupon are ready presently to
enumerate the persons excepted by them?

And is there indeed an exception? by whom is it made, if not by Christ the
donor of the privilege? or by what, if not by his Word, the rule of dispensing
it? or by what Word if not a command, or that which has the force or
obligation thereof.

When Mr. Prin, and Mr. Tympson yield, accordingly, that persons unbaptized,
undiscipled, and among disciples children, idiots, and distracted persons, and
persons actually excommunicated, when Master Humphreys adds to these persons,
de jure excommunicated, or as Erastus, Notorious offenders; do they not plainly
intimate, that they believe that the mind of Christ is that such should not
receive the Sacrament? (for if Christ admits them, who shall forbid them?)
and if they believe that the mind of Christ is such, that they should not
communicate, is not this his mind expressed in his word? and in that word
also, that has the force, if not the form of a prohibition.

Therefore, let us here all join hands, and cheerfully sing a sweet consent
and brotherly Christian concord, so far, at least, in the words of Mr.
Timpson determining the case of Infants Church Members applied indefinitely (to
our purpose; that Church Members (supposed unfit, by any incapacity not now
determined) are not under an actual obligation to receive the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and that receiving this Sacrament is not their actual duty; but
consequently more then is required at their hands in Gods worship; and then
superstition, and then prohibited by the Word of God.

SECT. V.
This command we find, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
Having found, that there is a command in Scripture forbidding some
Church Members (supposed unfit) for the Lords Supper; the question is next,
where we fix it; to which my second position is ready to answer, viz.

The command prohibiting such from the Supper of the Lord, is plainly founded
in 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat; for,

1 Some Church Members are acknowledged by all to be forbidden to come to the
Sacrament, as before is noted; now, if they are forbidden any where, they are
forbidden here; for they are forbidden no where else, or no where, so plainly,
so literally, so evidently, and with so general consent, and acknowledgement;
as they are here.

Those places of casting pearls to swine, and bread to dogs, and of not eating
with scandalous brethren, are in much more controversy and doubting; besides,
these immediately oblige the Church, or the persons administering unto, or
communicating with, such unworthy persons; whereas, this text of 1 Cor. 11. is
directly and immediately obliging such persons themselves, and their trial of
themselves, and their own private accession to the Sacrament; and in such a set
and purposed manner, as no other text in Scripture parallels.

This is so plain, that (so far is it from dispute) it is distinctly observed,
almost by all, that handle the point of the Sacrament.

Hereupon Diodate says, let a man examine his conscience Diod. in Loc.
to know whether he be well disposed, etc. to abstain from it, in case he be
not so until he has obtained grace, etc.

Bishop Usher also in answer to this Question, who are to be partakers Body of
Divin. p. 428.
of, limits it to such as are of years and of sound judgment to discern the
Lords body.

Upon this very place Marlorate also concludes, that to come Marlo.
unprepared, and so to eat is Sacrilege.

And Calvine, likewise upon this Text, caveat ergo sibi Calv.
quisque, ne socordia aut securitate in hoc Sacrilegium incidat.

Beza, Mr. Buroughs, and the Leiden Divines, and even all Bez. Bur. Leid.
Divin.
Expositors upon the place give this reason, why wicked persons, as well as the
ignorant, are not to communicate in this mystery, because such are bound to
examine themselves that will come thereunto.

The Church of Scotland (as was noted already) expressly Scot. Bohem.
confesses, that the Supper of the Lord appertains only to such, as be of
the household of faith, and can try and examine themselves; and (as the
Church of Bohemiah) if any man approach this Table without such trial, such a
man shall greatly reproach the Sacrament, etc. yea, our own most count, exact,
ingenious, industious, learned Countryman Mr. Morris, has honored the Mr.
Mor. p. 61
same observation; here is (says he) an express command for a man to examine
himself, which Infants are not susceptible of, and upon this account they are
not to be admitted to the Eucharist.

Master Cotton has quickened the observation, by determining Cotton. The way
of the churches in N. E.
this to be the great difference betwixt the Passover and the Supper of the
Lord, that in order to the Supper, it is required that persons examine
themselves; which was not required in order to the Passover.

There are some exceptions of late urged against it, but I conceive hardly
worth the mentioning, especially considering that all men's principles will
force their consent, even whether the persons will or not; for who will venture
to say, that all Church Members, in all conditions, or as such, ought to
receive the Lords Supper? seeing then it evidently follows, that children, etc.
are, either, not in the Church, or that children, etc. ought to receive this
Sacrament. Again, who that acknowledges that any one Churchmember ought not
to receive, will venture to fix their prohibition upon any other place, rather
then this? we will therefore, conclude, that herein* also we are all agreed,
especially, seeing Mr. Prin himself, has been pleased to note, that Mr. Prin.
p. 29 cited by Gelles. Aarons red. p. 545.
the reason why children, fools, and distracted persons are not to be admitted
(and consequently not to receive) is, because they are unable to examine
themselves.

Object. Mr. Tympson thinks to spoil all, by telling us without Tymps. p. 5, 6
against Col.
Book or proof that children and distracted persons are not kept back because
they cannot examine themselves, but, because of a natural and rational
incapacity to perform the duty.

Answ. But he should also acquaint us what he means by this natural and
rational incapacity. 1. Have not children a natural capacity to eat bread, and
drink wine? 2. And what hinders them, from a rational capacity to do this
Sacramentally (as himself, affirms they did eat the Passover) but this great
duty of self-examination pre-required?

Master Humphries his distinction of persons, that do not, and persons that
cannot examine themselves, makes only matter for Master Timpsons vapor. But
whether ignorant persons are unworthy, because they do not, as he affirms, or
because they cannot examine themselves (as is truth also) makes no difference,
for it is apparent, that those those that cannot, do not. 2. That those do not,
break this command, and consequently, may not eat; yea, lastly, if there be any
difference, those that do not examine themselves, are more directly prohibited
here, then those that cannot; for not doing our duty is more directly and more
immediately a breach of the precept, then not being able to do it, as none can
deny, yea those that cannot do their duty are rather unworthy because they do
not; and those that do not their duty, when they can do it, are most unworthy,
because most sinful and rebellious, and most deserving their Masters correction
and judgment, which men are noted to eat and drink to themselves; who for want
of this duty of self-examination, eat and drink unworthily.

SECT. VI.
Whether this condition of coming to the Sacrament, carry in it the evidence of
grace.
Having found that there is a condition without which private persons may not
come to the Sacrament: and that this condition is self-examination; we are come
to enquire what this self-examination is, and whether it imply the discovery of
saving grace.

For our fairer process herein, there are three things fall to our
consideration. 1. The nature of this trial. 2. The Court wherein it is held. 3.
The necessary issue of it, to admit, or to warrant a private person coming to
the Supper in order.

1. The nature of this trial is somewhat discovered, Self-examination what not.
1. Not being of years.
via negationis, and by observing wherein it is not to be found.

1. Certainly self-examination consists not in being of years; for some
persons of years have no discretion to discern the Lords body, or to examine
themselves as idiots and distracted persons; wherefore these are generally
excepted against, and excluded with Infants, as such, as cannot perform this
condition.

2. Neither consists it in being of the number of intelligent 2. Not being
intelligent.
persons, whether, by such is meant persons not void of common reason, and the
use thereof, as they stand opposed to idiots, or persons distracted; or persons
endued with a competent knowledge of the matters of Religion, opposed to the
ignorant.

For these if they can perchance, they may not examine themselves, and if they
do not, whether they can or not, they fail in their duty, or the condition,
here required, not being persons examining themselves.

For to be intelligent, or knowing only, is not to be self-examining, there is
an exercise of knowledge, and such an exercise, as is by way of
self-reflection, etc. added to knowledge, to make it self-examining.

Knowledge is an habit, self-examining is an act; and though knowing be an act,
yet not the act of self-examining, and though knowledge may suffice another,
that examines me, yet not my self; because knowledge is not self-examination,
and that is required of me as my particular and private duty, yet knowledge is
no more another, then my own examination; one may be knowing, though neither
examined by ones self, nor by any other.

3. Neither is self-examination a declaring our knowledge by Nor a declaring
our knowledge, etc.
discourse, or a confession of the faith, nor indeed, faith it self; it is not
habitual grace, personal holiness, a freedom from scandal or juridical
censure, nor yet an external order at the time of communion, nor indeed any
other thing, that may consist without, yea that is not an actual trying and
examining our selves, as all these mentioned habits, acts and qualities may do.

2. But then, what is it? I humbly conceive that self-examination
Self-examination, what it is, defined.
here, is an actual entering into judgment with our selves about our
worthiness, to eat and drink at the Lords Table in order to our better
preparedness for it, and profitable fellowship in it.

Where we may only note. 1. The act to enter into judgment (wherein there is
wont to be a trial and an issue; let a man examine, Explained.
etc. and so let him eat.) 2. The objectum quod, that is, self; let a man
examine himself. 3. The objectum circa quod, that about which he is to examine
himself, and that is, his worthiness for this communion, as the next words
intimate, for he that eats and drinks unworthily, etc. 4. The end of it;
his better preparedness for it, and profitable communion in it; imported in,
so let him, or so he may eat without danger of the judgment, of unworthy
receivers, and with the profit and comfort of this blessed communion.

These Corinthians had eat and drunk unworthily; many of them had eat and drunk
judgment to themselves; for this cause many were sick, etc. now, the Apostle
would teach them to prevent the like sin and judgment for the time to come;
and therefore he gives this in charge at the privy sessions, that a man should
examine himself, and so eat, and so drink.

Quest. 2. But then in what court is this trial to pass?

Answ. I conceive, that self-examination, and self-judging (v. 31.) can pass
no where, but in the conscience; therefore, I conclude that a man's own
conscience is not only the party witness, and judge, but the very court also,
wherein this trial, the issue of this trial only passes.

Grotius thinks this place may not unfitly be expounded of the public Church
censures, and consequently makes the Church the Court, wherein this trial and
judging is to be made; but then I think the command would rather have been to
examine and judge others, then our selves.

It is true, the Epistle is sent to the whole Church, yet may not he that sent
it, speak therein, of every one in particular? and though the disorder were a
general fault, yet I conceive the disorder 1 Cor. 12. 27 Ephesians. 5. ult.
was not properly a Church-fault, but rather the fault of the particular
disorderly brethren; and the connivance or non-punishing this disorder, was
rather a Church-fault. It is also granted, that this required a
Church-redresse; yet I humbly conceive, this place gives direction for a
Church-reformation, in calling every one to reform one; besides, there is
another salve provided for the sore, and put into the hands of the ruling
Church in chap. 5. 5, 12.

That the conscience, and not the Church, is the Court here intended for this
great trial (without taking any advantage from the necessity of
self-examination in order to the worthy receiving this Sacrament, the use of
this one Text, above all others, to press it, and the general stream of
Interpreters forcing it for us.) I shall briefly clear it, or at least labor
so to do, from the reason of the context, and the Scripture-sense of the word
in the Text.

1. For the context, I can find nothing there but it is of a private nature,
and such as concerns conscience, and not the Church. 1. Remembering Christ. 2.
Discerning the Lords body. 3. Judging our selves. Now in the last of these,
viz. judging our selves, three special ends of self-examination, seem to be
included; and indeed they are expressed in the text; Let a man examine himself.
1. That he may judge himself, and not that he may be judged of others. 2. That
he may escape the judgment of the Lord, and not the judgment of the Church.
3. That he may have private warrant from the Word of God in his own breast, and
not public admission by the power of the Church to come to the Sacrament; it is
not said so permit him, or admit him to eat from the liberty the Church gives,
but so let him eat, as his own single act, from the liberty the Lord in his
Word gives him; this indeed (...).
does put the usual interpretation of the Text out of doubt with me; especially
after I had searched a little after the usual signification of the word, (...),
of which I shall now give a brief account, with the favor and patience of my
Reader.

2. The word in the text is known to be (...); which I humbly conceive never
exceeds three steps of signification, either in Scripture, or profane authors,
viz. to try, to judge upon trial, to approve in judging.

1. (...) is found, sometimes I conceive to signify only a direct act, to
try, examine, by a searching into, or a fixed considering of a thing; thus the
fire tries, (...), 1 Cor. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 7. 1 These. 2. 4 Jer. 12. 3. 2 Cor. 8. 8
(...) proprie est explorare, etc.
13. (...), thou have proved or tried us, Psalm 66. 10. but more plainly, 1
John 4. 1. (...), try the spirits, the meaning cannot be, that they must judge
them and approve them, for the first intention of the duty was to discover such
as were not to be approved, as appears by the next words, for there are many
false prophets; thus we must prove all things, [(...), 1 These. 5. 21.] and
approve only that which is good; so the man (Luke 14. 19.) went to try his
Oxen, properly (...); now in this sense, none can doubt, but a man is here
bound to examine himself.

Secondly, it sometimes steps into the Throne, and passes an higher act, viz.
to judge that which it has tried; to bring the Et a diversis aut contrariis
discernere. Leighs Crit. Sacr. in verbum.
trial to some issue and conclusion; though it does not necessarily enforce
that the issue must be either to acquitting or condemning, approving or
disapproving the thing tried; thus, Luke. 12. 56. (...), etc. rendered ye can
discern, the face of the sky, but how is it that ye cannot discern this
time; now here is more then bare trial supposed; for they examined the sky and
said, or thence concluded, etc. v. 54, 55. and yet not so much as approbation;
they concluded, that rain or heat would come; not that either was good or bad,
much less that they were both good; so it is plainly applied by Christ in the
next words, why judge ye not what is right, not what is good, ver. 57. In this
sense, I conceive we have the word again, Romans 12. 2. Ephesians. 5. 10.

Now in this sense, I humbly conceive it is most properly to be taken in this,
1 Cor. 11. 28. 1. Because many have right in the Supper that cannot approve
themselves. 2. None have right therein, but such as do examine and judge
themselves. 3. Therefore the Apostle thus explaineth himself, v. 31. let a man
examine himself and so eat, for if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged
of the Lord; but more of this when I speak of the issue of this trial; only to
prevent exception, it may be noted that wicked men and hypocrites may try and
find themselves resolved sinners, but not try and judge themselves, they do
not, cannot, dare not, as Master Burges has it upon the Of self judging page
26.
place.

Thirdly [(...)] though not always, yet very often rises higher, viz. to
approve in judging, or that which it tries, and judges; thus in a great many
Scriptures, Romans 14 22 and 2. 18 and 1. 28. 1 Cor. 16. 3. 2 Cor. 8. 22. Phil.
1. 10. 1 Timothy 3. 10. 1 These. 2. 4. in all which places I cannot see how it can
be otherwise understood; yet note, that in all these places, the same person is
both the examiner, and the approver; so that, if this, 1 Cor. 11. 28. should
bear this sense of the word, it would be only this, that a man must examine
and approve of himself (and not approve himself to another) and so eat; yet I
must subjoyne this exception here, that if it be meant of self-approving, it
can extend (as a condition of receiving) no farther then approving of our
selves upon the evidence of self-judging, and not any other graces, seeing that
is the only grace here made a condition in the Text.

Fourthly, I confess Passor notes one place, viz. Gal. 6. 4. where he
conceives (...) goes a step further; namely, to approve ones self to another;
yet he says, it is to God, but I see nothing in the text or context enforcing
any such thing; but rather an approving our work our selves, or approving of
our own work; otherwise the fruit would have been to good report, whereas
rejoicing in our selves, in opposition to others, upon this reason, because
every one must bear his own burden, verse 5.

Truth is, I cannot find any instance of the word in this sense Causam suam
probare alteri.
in any author; indeed probare in Latin, sometimes has the sense of a verb
of giving, and governes an accusative with a dative, but then it signifies to
prove by argument, not by trial; But we never find (...) to signify to prove
by argument, but only by trial and experience, as Master Leigh observes, His
Crit. Sacr. in verbum, (...).
it has many meanings; but it ^^th most properly signify to prove, but not to
prove by arguments, but by trial and experience, which Master Leigh collected
from Pareus.

I have examined those two Texts, to which Doctor Drake refers Par. 2. of his
bar fixed. p. 474
us, as containing like phrases; the Texts are 2 Cor. 4 2. and 6. 4. but they
help nothing, because they have not the same word; indeed, the latter of them,
has approving our selves in the translation, but the original is (...) non
(...); I confess, in English it is good enough, to say we approve our selves to
others, but I suppose, neither the Latin, probo or approbo, nor the Greek
(...), will bear it; therefore, when the Apostle would express himself to this
purpose, he does not use this word, as otherwise he might have done, but a
paraphrasis. viz. (...) 2 Timothy 2. 15.
(...), not (...).

Happily the stretching (...) to rendering ones self approved to another, may
partly arise from this English ambiguity or double meaning of self-approving;
by proportion (says Dr. Drake) (...) notes not only self-trial, but also
selfe-approbation, which must be not only to my own conscience, but also what
in me lies, upon just occasion, to the consciences of others; but, I humbly
conceive, that (...) is so far from noting (in the grammar meaning of the
phrase) to approve ones self to another, that it does not signify, to approve
ones self to his own conscience, it never bearing the sense of a verb of
giving, as was noted before; to approve of ones self, and to approve ones self
to ones self, are two differing verbes, and two distinct acts formally
considered, though both self-approbation, and both the same thing in effect;
which may appear yet more plain, if we compare [approving our selves, or
approving of our selves] with [rendring our selves approved to others;] for
here, approving our selves, i. e. of our selves in our own immanent act, and
approving our selves to another, is our transient act, in rendering our selves;
and another act, and not our own at all in approving us; for, by the one we
approve our selves; and by the other we render our selves to another
approbation.

Yet in fine, I must needs confess, that self-examination in 1 Cor. 11. 28.
implies more, in my opinion, then barely to approve our selves; the scandal
being open, it seemss to intimate that they should examine themselves so, as to
take off the scandal from others, else the plaster seems to be narrower then
the sore; and here, I shall take the boldness to say, that I have some cause
to think, that this is the utmost intention of one very learned and Reverend
Divine, wsto is otherwise mistaken by his brethren; and if this be indeed all,
I think we have much cause to thank him for it, and none at all to except
against it; and yet, I think, I do not contradict my self. For, 1. I still
conceive the meaning of the word does not enforce it, only the consequence of
the text. 2. Therefore, the taking the scandal from off the brethren, is only
the fruit, not any part of self-examination, and intimates the issue of the
trial, not the Court. 3. That the approbation hence arising in the Church, or
others, arises not from the Churches or others examination, but from the
parties own Reformation, upon the examining and judging himself.

3. Now, lastly, what is the necessary issue of self-examination, The issue of
this trial.
to warrant a private accession to the Sacrament? or what evidences may truly
satisfy the conscience of a man (upon due examining himself) that desires to
come to the Sacrament, that he may warrantably and lawfully come?

Answ. It Is both above my skill, and besides my scope, to determine this
weighty question positively, as Method leads me, I conceive, I stand obliged
only to maintain, that the necessary issue of self-examination in order to the
Sacrament does not imply saving grace.

Neither do I touch that tender controversy, whether saving grace be necessary
to a persons right in the Court of God (as his Court is distinguished from the
Court of the Church, and of conscience) only I affirm, that the evidence of it
is not necessary in the Court of conscience, that is, that some persons may,
yea, and ought to come to receive the Sacrament, though upon the strictest
examination of themselves, they cannot conclude or discover to themselves their
own saving grace. My Reasons are,

1. Because that then those so: whom this Sacrament is principally o^dained,
ought not to receive it, viz. doubting Christians; for those that can discover
any degree of saving grace in their hearts, are not capable of longer doubting:
yet those that are weak in the faith must be received. This Ordinance is
appointed for doubting Christians, therefore it is a seal added to Gods Word to
confirm the doubtful; therein, there is bread to strengthen the weak, and wine
to refresh the drooping hearts; therein, Christ assures this is my body broken
for you, this is my blood shed for you; thus sanctifying, the Sacrament to be a
special means of satisfying such as doubt thereof.

2. Because, if none but such as do discover truth of their graces by
self-examination, may lawfully come to the Sacrament, then most of those that
have an undoubted right to the Supper cannot actually receive, viz. real
Saints, or Christians savingly qualified. The reason of the consequence is
this, because the most of those that are thus savingly qualified, cannot
satisfy themselves without doubting of the truth of such savin^ qualifications
in themselves; how few of Gods truth-humbled and savingly qualified people
would dare to come, did they suffer themselves to be thoroughly convinced of
such a principle; that they that cannot certainly conclude that their graces
are saving, might not encourage themselves to receive, but ought to abstain;
and who would press with the greatest confidence, and in the greatest numbers
to this holy Table, but such as deceive themselves (as well as others,) by
presumption and self-conceitednesse!

3. Because, if this were true, that none but such as can evidence the truth of
their graces to their own satisfaction might come to the Sacrament, the
Sacrament would seem to agree rather with the Economy of Heaven, and the
Church-triumphant (where there is grace without sin, spirit without flesh,
assurance without doubting) then with the frail, sinful, tempting, doubting
estate and condition of the troubled and militant Church on earth.

4. Yea, methinks, the text it self, with its context is too evident to the
contrary to bear much gainsaying; the text is given as a means whereby we may
prevent the sin (v. 27.) of being guilty of the body and blood of the Lord;
to which it stands knit by the particle (...), but, in the Text, and the
judgment, ver. 29. 30. of sickness, weakness, death, which many had suffered
before, for want of this due self-examination; now in v. 31. the Apostle gives
his reason why self-examination must needs prevent this sin and punishment;
because he that judges himself shall not be judged of the Lord; or in his own
words, for if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged, i. e. of the Lord,
as unworthy receivers were, and consequently, we shall not be judged of the
Lord to be unworthy receivers; then,

1. Here we may easily note that such examination, as issues in self-judging,
has the promise of not being judged of the Lord for unworthy receiving.

2. Then where men attain to this effect of self-examination, as to judge
themselves, they shall not be dealt with by God as unworthy receivers of the
Sacrament.

3. Then it follows, that such as do in examining themselves, judge themselves,
may come to the Sacrament without fear of unworthy receiving, yea, are here
invited, yea, commanded to come, so let him eat, etc.

4. Then, it seems, that our sins which are the proper cause of
self-judging, are the object of self-examining, rather then our graces; so that
if we can but find out our sins, and humble our selves in the sight of them,
and judge our selves for them, we may warrantably come to partake of this
Sacrament, though we cannot discover our graces.

5. Then (unless self-judging be self-acquitting, or self-condemning, be
self-approving, self-justifying;) a person may warrantably come to the
Sacrament, without the discovery of saving grace, in his self-examining.

The sum is, would a man escape the sin and judgment of unworthy
receiving, let him so far examine himself, as to see his sin, and judge,
sentence, and condemn himself for the same; for if we judge our selves we
shall not be judged.

Lastly, this is excellently noted, and judiciously stated, as well as
confirmed by the Assemblies larger Catechism, with whose words I shall here
conclude. One (say they) who doubts of his being in Christ, or of his due
preparation to the Sacrament, may have interest in Christ, though he be not yet
assured thereof, and in Gods account has it, if he be duly affected, with the
apprehension of the want of it, and unfeignedly desires to be found in Christ,
and to depart from iniquity (in which cases because promises are made, and this
Sacrament is appointed for the relief even of weak and doubting Christians) he
is to bewail his unnbelife, and labor to have his doubts resolved, and so
doing he may and ought to come to the Lords Supper, that he may be further
strengthened, p. 141.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The terms of public admission to the Lords Supper, not the evidences of
saving grace.
SO much for the terms of private accession; let us now enquire what my former
proposition inferres about public admission to the Lords Supper; which may (in
general) be offered thus.

If saving grace appearing, be not necessary to declare our interest in the
visible Church, then neither is it necessary to our public admission by the
Church to the Supper of the Lord.

The reason of this connection is, because visible right or interest in the
Church, declares visible right to all the privileges of the Church as such,
and consequently to this of the Supper; and if a person may be known to the
Church to be in Covenant without the evidence of saving grace, doubtless we
may argue from a visible being in Covenant to visible right to the seal; for
who can be thought to have a right to the seal, but such as are in Covenant?

This consequence is (I presume) denied by none; some do, indeed, deny the
present and actual possession of the Supper to some Church Members, as is next
to be considered; yet they deny not, question not, the right even of such
Church Members thereunto; but rather distinguish of right, and say, that such
Church Members as are not to communicate, have yet a remote and fundamental
right, though not such a right as gives claim to immediate possession.

Others seem to plead for an actual possession of all Church Members; but this
most evidently flows from an opinion, that all Church Members, as such, have a
right to all visible Ordinances, without distinction of right or Ordinances.

The minor, therefore, viz. that those that declare no evidences of saving
grace may be Church Members, is generally denied by such, as make such
evidences the condition upon which alone the Church may admit to the Sacrament,
whereby they evidently grant the consequence also.

But this proposition, that evidences of grace are necessary requisites to
visible Church Membership, does necessarily depend upon principles of
Anabaptisme, as is formerly noted, and necessarily engages the Assertor
thereof against all the stream of my former discourse, as appears in the fore
head of the sole*objection, and argument against us herein; which is this,

Object. Those (say they) that appear not to be in Covenant, have no visible
right to the seal of the Covenant, the Lords Supper, this is allowed on all
hands.

Answ. But those that give no evidence of saving grace appear not to be in
Covenant; now this I have still denied and labored against, this is it that
involveth the objector in the former labyrinth. For, 1. Either children appear
to be in Covenant, or not; if not, how then have they a visible right to the
seal? and if! where is there evidence of saving grace.

Again, evidence of grace is essential to visible Church Membership or not; if
it be not, then neither to visible right in the Sacrament, as this very
objection presses, but if evidence of grace be said to be essential to
visible-Church-membership; how then are Infants to be baptized? and my former
arguments to the contrary answered? to which (for thetsake of brevity and
peace) I shall here add no more.

But I am here thwarted with a notable Objection, to which I shall now betake
myself to give as plain and full an answer as the Lord shall enable me in so
weighty a matter.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The great Objection stated, and a general preparation for answer laid down.
THe great objection here is, that if all Church Members have a right to, then
all Church Members, ought to have a possession of the Lords Supper; those that
are foederati must be signati.

I answer in general, that the consequence is naught; we cannot have a valid
argument from right to present possession; and though the rule be true and
sound that the foederati must be signati, it will not conclude, that they must
be signati, with every seal; they have a present right in the seal of baptism,
but not of the Supper.

Now, that I may give my reader my full mind in this great particular; I shall
rank my discourse upon it under four heads, and give in my answer to this
objection, by considering. 1. How right may be distinguished. 2. The grounds of
the distinction of right so far as concerns the question. 3. The grounds of
all baptized persons right, in some kind to the Supper. 4. The grounds of
denying the present enjoyment of, or actual communion in the Supper, to those
that have some kind of right unto it.

Digression 1. The distinction of right. Distinct. 1. Betwixt right and
possession.

The first branch of this distinction seems to fall, betwixt right in general,
and possession; or actual enjoyment of that thing, to which the said right, is:
for, certainly, the nearest right to a thing in the world, is not that thing,
which we mean, by possession; neither is any kind of possession, as such a
right.

A man may therefore be as certainly and absolutely possessed of a thing, as
power and hold can give him, and yet, not have the least degree of true right
in that, which he so possesses: again, a man may have all the right
imaginable, that the Law of God, or of man, can own or maintain, and yet have
no degree of possession, or hold in that thing, to which he has so clear a
right.

We might bring easy instances for both these members of the distinction, from
the present subject, the Lords Supper. 1. Should a person that is unbaptized,
communicate with the Church in this Ordinance of the Supper, all will grant
that this is usurpation, and not rightful possession; though possession. 2.
Again, should a person that is fitly qualified, keep himself, or be kept from
the Sacrament, by voluntary abstention, or violent suspension of the Church;
all must yield, that here is a full right without due possession,

Again, this right as distinguished from possession, yet proceeds Distinct. 2.
Of right into the first and second act.
toward possession by two steps, or degrees, commonly called, Acts, viz. the
first and the second, and the second being nearer to possession then the first;
thence this is said also to be a remote right, or a right in its remote act or
degree; and that to be a next and immediate right, or a right in the nearest
step and degree to possession.

The remote right is one step or degree from the terminis a quo, viz. no right;
and the next right is one step short of the terminus ad quem, viz actual
possession; so that the same person may have jus ad rem, and not jus in re; he
may have a right and no right; the first act or degree of right, and not the
second; he may have a right unto the thing, and yet not such a right as
entitles to present enjoyment and actual use thereof.

This will be somewhat the more clear by a double consideration Cleared by a
twofold consideration of the subject of this right.
of the subject of this right answering to a double consideration of the right
it self; a traitor may be considered, as a traitor, and an humble penitent
traitor; and in both these respects, may be thought to have a right to the
pardon, that is sent to all traitors, provided they acknowledge their offense;
all the traitors, as such, have a remote and distant right; the pardon is sent
to traitors; but some traitors, such as will acknowledge their offense, have
not that condition of next right, upon which the claim of actual application of
pardon depends.

Thus, nearer to our case, a Churchmember, as such, has a remote right to
this, and all other Ordinances; but, because he is a Churchmember, not
examining himself, etc. he wants that next, and more immediate right, by which
he should claim present possession thereof; as a disciple, a person stands
nearer in right to the Supper, then an infidel, and has the first degree of
right unto it; and as a worthy disciple, he stands yet nearer to it, then as a
disciple, and has a right in the next or second act of right.

We might yet again distinguish the first act or degree of right (to the
Sacrament) to be remote or more remote; for though Distinct. 3. The first act
or degree of right is remote and more remote.
one that is baptized and not under censure, has not a next degree of right in
the Supper, merely by virtue of his being baptized, yet all will acknowledge
such a person to be in a nearer degree of right to the Supper, then one that is
not baptized, or (being baptized is) under censure; though such a one must be
also acknowledged to have some kind of right, if he be either in the number of
the Catechumeni, though not baptized, or within hopes of repentance, though
under censure.

I conclude that Church Members baptized have a remote right, and
Church Members unbaptized, viz. the Chatechumeni have a more remote right to
the Supper: Church Members baptized, and not under censure, have a remote
right, and Church Members baptized, and under censure have a more remote right
to the Supper; the person professing faith, and not baptized, and the person
baptized and under Church censure, being nearer to the Supper, and all other
Ordinances, then an absolute Heathen, or total Apostate.

Digression 2. The grounds of this Distinction, as applicable to our purpose of
the Supper.
The former distinction of right, offers its service in the present
controversy only, in the second sort of the branches of it, viz. as right is
distinguished by two acts or degrees, the first and remote, by which a person
has a kind of right, which yet is such, as cannot make claim to present
possession, the second and immediate by which a person may claim and challenge
a present possession of the thing in which he has this right.

Now this distinction of right has evident ground in the Laws of The distincti
on of right grounded. 1. In the Law of reason.
Reason, Nations, Churches, Scripture.

First, right reason determines of some cases, wherein a person that has
right, yet ought to be denied the use of that thing, wherein he has right; a
man that is not compos mentis, is not sui juris; reason says, he may not
command himself, much less any thing else, whereby he would hurt himself or
others; we do not put a knife into a madmans hand, though it be his own; who
will not say that a man in a feavour, has not right to his own beer? yet
reason forbids him the use of it; or to his blood in his veins? yet reason
commands, that to save his life, some of it be violently taken from him, and
against h^^ Will.

2. It Is established also by the Law of Nations in civil rights, 2. Of Nations.
where we know possession and actual, personal manegery of estates, is denied,
when the title is not questioned, and this especially, in two cases, of
insufficiency and delinquency.

1. When persons are by apparent insufficiency, either through In case of
insufficiency.
minority of years or wit, to manage that, to which they have a right, (as
children, and fools, and madmen) we know the Law provideth, that others shall
possess, what these have a legal right unto.

2. When persons by delinquency have abused their estates against the
government that is over them, then also the Law seazeth upon such estates, and
takes the possession out of the owners hands, and sometimes when it does not
change the property, or remove the delinquent out of his right.

Therefore as there is a case of treason, wherein the Law prosecutes the
Traiter, both out of possession and title for ever, by confiscation, or
proscription, so there is a case of sequestration; which turns men out of
their present possessions, but not wholly out of their title; which possession
is upon condition of such satisfaction, as the Law in the case demands to be
re-entred: and however, though the person offending, should not perform this
said condition, yet the penalty may not extend to the utter dis-inheriting the
offenders posterity.

I shall leave the application of these several particulars, to the case of
communion in privileges of the Church, as most obvious to my Readers
Meditations.

This is also apparently agreeable with the law and judgment 3. Of the Church.
of the Church in every generation, as appears by her constant and universal
proceeding accordingly; for she has ever suspended some persons from the
Sacrament of the Supper, whom yet she did not judge to be without all title and
right thereunto; as might be unquestionably instanced, not only in children,
etc. in most ages, but in the penitents in all. The penitents were suspended
from the Supper, until the Church was fully satisfied. But the penitents had a
right in the communion of the Church, as the hottest sticklers against
suspension grant us.

Some say indeed that there were none juridically suspended from the Supper
alone, that were not first excommunicate, and cast out of Communion, with the
Church in all Ordinances, but these also say, that the last degree of their
penance, admits them unto fellowship with the Church in all Ordinances but the
Supper; neither will they deny this Proposition, That a person that has lawful
actual fellowship with the Church in any one Ordinance, has some kind of
right to all the rest; which right these men themselves cannot urge to be next
and immediate, seeing they allow the Church in denying such penitents actual
admission to the Supper, until further satisfaction.

But I shall have a fairer opportunity to speak of this kind of suspension,
upon the head of censure. And indeed, I need the less to trouble it here,
seeing there is one kind of suspension, viz. (not Juridical) which is so far
allowed by all parties, as will fully serve my present turn, namely, that
whereby persons naturally and rationalsy incapable of emproving the Supper, (as
some men speak) are withheld from it: which those who are likeliest to my
opponents here, do not only grant, but make the ground of the present
distinction, of Jus ad rem, and Jus in re, as it stands applied to the case of
the Sacrament, as is most evident in their writings upon this subject.

This distinction is grounded, lastly, upon the Law of 4. Of Scripture
God.

1. In the old (Levitical) Law, where we find that the Leper, Lev. 13. 46. whom
the Priest had pronounced unclean, was to dwell alone without the Camp, and out
of his own house, until he was re-cleansed, yet none can doubt but this Leper
had title to his own house still; and therefore upon his cleansing he was,
without the procuring a new title, to take possession of his house again; yea,
thus it was then also in the case of Church Priviledges, if we read Numb. 9.
6, 7. We find, that certain men were defiled, etc. that they could not keep
the Passover on that day, these men say to Moses and Aaron, wherefore are we
kept back? to whom the Lord answers, v. 10, 11. that if any that were unclean,
or in a journey afar off, yet these should keep the Passover (not now, but) on
the fourteenth day of the second month. Whence Mr. Blake solidly concludes,
that their right is thus confessed by the Lord himself, and their present bar
also acknowledged, not only a physical bar upon those that were in their
journey, and could not come; but a legal bar on others that were unclean, and
must not be admitted.

2. This has been already made to appear to be allowed by the New Law of
Christ in the Gospel. Christ says to his Church in general, Do this in
remembrance of me; herein is the right, the Jus ad rem, founded for all
Church Members; yet the Apostle adds this Comment, Let a man examine himself,
and so let him eat; and herein, (as anon more largely) is the denial of actual
possession, to some Church Members founded. Such persons as do not examine
themselves ought not to communicate in the Supper. Some persons that do not
examine themselves, (as children, etc.) are members of the Church, and in some
kind of communion with the Church, and consequently have some kind of ri^ht
to all kind of communion therewith. Therefore some persons may have some kind
of right to the Supper, that have not Jus in re, that may not be admitted to
present communion therein.

These things stand upon general principles, and cannot well be questioned by
any particular persons, that understand themselves.

Digression 3. The Grounds of a baptized persons right to the Supper.
But let us draw a little nearer to our business, and apply the former general
distinction a little more closely to our present particular point of right to
the Supper, which will appear, according to the grounds already laid, to be
twofold, by presenting the grounds or reasons of these two notable positions.

Prop. 1. First, that every person lawfully baptized, has a right to the Lords
Supper.

Prop. 2. Secondly, that such persons as are lawfully baptized have not, by
virtue thereof, an immediate, or present, or actual right, to be admitted by
the Church to the Lords Supper, but may, and in some cases ought to he debarred
thetefrom.

First, that every person lawfully baptized, has a right to the Lords Supper,
appears from precept, promise, and ptecedent in Scripture, and Reason grounded
upon, or drawn from, Scripture.

1. Those whom Christ commands to celebrate his Supper have certainly some kind
of right so to do; fot what better right or from the command. Debitum agendi,
debitum habendi.
warrant can we have to do any thing, or receive any thing, then our Masters
command. Thus duties and privileges are inseparable, what God commands is
both. These things I command for your own good; and if we must do what God
commands as our duty, then we may do, what God commands as our tight and
privilege.

But now God commands every disciple, and lawfully baptized person, to receive
the Supper; and to do all that Christ has commanded his Church. Do this in
remembrance of me. Teach them to observe and do whatsoever I command you.

This will not conclude, that every Churchmember must receive the Supper,
without any further consideration. This has been, and may be further cleared;
for this command is but mediate, and consequently gives but a mediate
obligation to such as cannot, and a mediate right to such as can and do not
examine themselves; yet it is a right, though but remote or mediate; and it is
an obligation though it be conditional (seeing the condition is commanded also)
and though the condition of this obligation be such, as we before have heard.

2. God has conveyed and granted all Covenant-priviledges, from the promise.
I will be thy God, and I will give thee, etc. yea, can we have a right in God
the greater, and not in the Ordinances of God, which is the less? qui habet
habentem omnia habet omnia, how shall he not with him give us all things, and
with a right in him give us a right in all things.

I grant the Covenant is but a conditional Covenant, and therefore a right unto
the privileges thereof, is but a conditional right.

But now, though differences rise high about the way and terms of being in
covenant, yet al agree that Church Membership, discipleship, and lawful
baptism, are of equal latitude, with being in covenant. Therefore, wherever God
begins with [I will be thy God] it necessarily follows, [and thou shall be my
people] and wherever God ownes a people to be his, is to be his Vovenant People.

3. Those whom the Scripture admits to actual possession from example.


But now we find, Acts 2. 41, 42. the Scripture admits persons baptized
(putting no bar by ignorance or scandal against themselves) immediately,
without requiring any new evidence or title of them, to actual communion with
the Church in doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread, and prayers, viz. in all
Gospel Worship.

4. A baptized Churchmember stands not at the same distance from
Scripture-ground.
nigh in opposition to Infidels, Gentiles, and those without. Ephesians. 2. 11, 12


Therefore, a baptized Churchmember, must needs be granted to have some kind
of right to all Ordinances, and consequently to the Supper; for though there be
a latitude in right, yet there is no medium betwixt est and non est, right and
no right. And if the baptized be nearer in right to all Ordinances, then an
Infidel, he has some kind or degree of right thereunto not to be questioned;
if he be not ar the same distance with such as have no right, he must needs
have some kind of right. He that is not so far off from the Supper is nearer
to it; and he that is nearer to the Supper, is nearer only in a way of right;
for there is no proceeding toward a legal possession, but by a line of right.

Digression 4. The Grounds of the Churches power to deny the Supper to some
Church Members materially considered.
Though every person lawfully baptized has some kind of right to the Lords
Supper, yet the Church has power to withhold the present use thereof from some
persons lawfully baptized.

The truth of this Proposition is generally allowed, even in the granting, 1.
That children are lawfully baptized. 2. That children are not to receive, or
not to be admitted to the Lords Supper.

I shall rather therefore spend this digression in digging for, or fixing the
grounds of this truth, according to Scripture.

Which Grounds may be aptly considered Materially. Formally.


The material Grounds are the objects, about which this power of denying the
Sacrament is exercised; the Matter, for which persons, though baptized, are to
be denied the Supper: or the grounds of denying the same to such persons.

The formal grounds are the grounds of the power it self, by which the Church
denies the Sacrament to such, the grounds on which this authority of the
Church is built.

So that the present discourse is visibly engaged upon these two questions.

Quest. 1. What are the just and lawful causes for which the Church may deny
the Sacrament to baptized persons?

Quest. 2. On what is this power of the Church to deny the Sacrament, upon such
causes, fixed? or whence is it taken or derived?

Quest. 1. First then, what are the just and lawful causes of denying the
Sacrament to baptized persons?

I answer, that these causes are either privative, viz. the want of some
necessary qualifications conditional to this Communion; or positive, viz. some
apparent ill quality or blemish, for which a person though baptized, ought to
be debarred from this Communion; the first is more eminently noted in 1 Cor.
11. and the latter in 1 Cor. 5. the first may be termed unworthiness, 1 Cor.
11. 29. the latter wickedness (or scandal) 1 Cor. 5. ult. persons under the
first of these may be thought to be unfit, and to be kept off upon principles
of care and merciful caution; persons under the latter may be thought to be und
eserving, and to be cast out upon principles of Justice. The first, are
therefore rather not to be admitted, ratione cautelae, whose suspension,
(called privitive) is no act of severity, but charity. The latter, are rather
to be rejected, ratione censurae, whose suspension (called positive) is truly
and properly an Ecclesiastical punishment.

Hereby it is evident that the latter of these, is to be deferred to the next
head, viz of censures, and suspended until then; and that the first alone falls
to the lot of the present debate; where the question rather is what are the
grounds of denying of the Sacrament, to such as are unfit for it, then of the
rejecting of any from the Sacrament, for their unworthiness of it.

Again, the grounds of denying the Sacrament, or the unfitness for which a
person may be kept back, may be considered Negatively, what it is not; and
Positively, what it is.

1 Negatively, the denial of the Sacrament to baptized The grounds of denying
the Sacrament negatively considered. 1. Not non*discipleship.
persons, cannot be grounded upon their non-discipleship, or
non-Church-membership, because, though baptized, they are not so or so
qualified, as true disciples of Christ are. Thus some venture, but to me very
unadvisedly, seeing lawful baptism and discipleship are acknowled by all, that
consider what they say, to be of equal latitude, either, the absence of due
qua^ifications destroys Baptism formerly and lawfully received, which none
will affirm, or the present effectual seal of lawful Baptism, must necessarily
conclude real discipleship, or Church-membersh^p, as all must grant. But this
has been often banded before, and indeed in places more proper to it, seeing
we are here restrained to the consideration of the grounds of denying the
Supper, to persons supposed to be under lawful Baptism, and (visible)
Church Membership.

2. Others would ground the denial of the Sacrament, upon Nor want of evidence
of saving grace.
the want of the evidence of saving grace.

But this ground has been subverting all along For, 1. We have found, that
such as want saving grace may be within the Covenant and Church. 2. That the
evidence of saving grace is not necessary for private satisfaction, in
self-examination. 3. All do grant, that self-examination must be stricter then
Church-examination, and that less may satisfy the Church for admitting, then
the conscience for receiving. 4. Neither have we the least print of footstep in
Scripture or Antiquity, of denying the Sacrament upon the want of the evidence
of saving grace, unless the person were first excommunicate, which is plainly
excluded the present debate.

3. Others fix it upon the want or absence of a vocal Nor vocal Profession of
faith.
Profession of the faith, or renewal of our Covenant.

Here, I confess, I know not what to reply, unless I may distinguish; for
things may be required, either as special and extraordinary means of
Reformation in general, or as necessary conditions of admission to this
Ordinance of the Church in particular. Now my answer accordingly, in brief, is
this, that the Church has power to call her members to a vocal Profession of
the Faith, and renewal of their Covenants as these may be fit, though
extraordinary means of a general Reformation; but she has not power to call
for these, as necessary conditions of admission to this Sacrament in special.

The ground of this answer is plain, because God has allowed this power to the
Church in the first case, and denied it to her in the second. Such things as
are either Scriptural (as renewing Covenant is,) or rational, means of
Reformation (as vocal Professions may be) the Church has liberty to assume for
that great end. But she has no liberty or power given her, to make new, or
other conditions of right in Ordinances, then God himself has made, who never
denied any privilege of his Church, as such, to any Churchmember throughout
the Scripture, for want of a vocal Profession of faith, or renewal of Covenant.

Upon four conditions I should be as ready and zealous (I hope) to press
either, or both of these, as any of my brethren.

1. Upon condition, that prudence judge, upon a rational viewing of all due
circumstances, this means to be fit, viz. specific, accommodate, and proper
for our malady, and seasonable for the Crisis, period, and time of our
distemper, without which it is presumption, praecipice, and not prudence
(whatsoever we pretend) to apply it. Certainly, censures are a nearer and more
appropriate means for the Churches Reformation, and more clearly authorized by
Jesus Christ in the New Testament for this 1 Cor. 5
great end, then either a general vocal Profession or renewal of Covenant; yet
a great father (we know) thought, that sometimes of corruption were not fit to
be purged and reformed by these Prudence is the principle, and guide, and rule
of the Church, in discovering and applying fit, and proper, and seasonable
remedies in times of general corru^tion.

But whether this our present time, be a fit time or season, to call our people
to make a particular vocal Profession of their faith, or to renew their
Covenant or not, I dare not determine; especially if these be required before,
though not in order unto our peoples admission to the Sacrament.

Yer give me leave to doubt, that that means, that is, at this time, very
likely to heighten the prejudices and jealousies of our people against us, and
against our proceedings, is very unlikely to prove a means of an happy
Reformation.

Who sees not that the great design of the world, and hell now on foot, is to
widen the differences, betwixt Ministers and people, and to withdraw the
peoples affections from, by stirring up suspicions in them against their
Ministers!

Again, is it not as easy to observe from former experiencies, (of too like a
nature) and present dispositions of our people, generally, that to press a
vocal Profession of faith, or Renewal of their Covenant upon them at such a
time as this, and before their admission to the Lords Supper, when they startle
at every thing, would greatly heighten the prejudicies, suspicions, murmures,
and jealousies of our people, generally, against us, and against our
proceedings.

Indeed, were all such evil weeds in the hearts of our people, rooted up, were
there no aptness in them to suspect us, to surmize evil of us, were we open
and naked to all the world, that we aimed at nothing but Reformation, much
less at dominion, and enlarging our Kingdom and power over them, we might, I
think, press either of the former means with much fitness to the distempers
of this backsliding, unsettled, apostatizing Age; but while this general
remedy, remains complicate with this strange malignancy and venom of prejudice
and jealousy against us, and against almost every thing, that we meddle with,
he must have more skill then I, that first can fit, and than dare apply the
remedies specified thereunto.

Secondly, I should more easily yield to the calling of our people to a vocal
Profession of faith, or to a Renewal of their Covenant, provided, we express
our selves to make use of these only as extraordinary means of Reformation; as
a refuge to fly unto in extraordinary cases of Apostasy, or secret idolatry,
heresy, etc. answerable to the way of God, as it is descried in the Old
Testament, in his dealing with his people, the Jews then; and as these means,
are opposed to the ordinary means of reforming and bettering our people, viz.
doctrine, worship and discipline, and not according to the notion or practice
of those that require these things as ordinary conditions of Church Communion,
or familiar instances of trying the peoples sincerity to God, or affections to
us; our too much valued private designs, of advancing godliness and
Reformation, with the hazard of peace, unity, love, to prejudice schism, and
irreparable breaches and desolations.

Thirdsy, I should, with all my might, improve these means, in great hopes of
attaining the end of Reformation proposed, were such use of them generally
agreed upon, and backed with civil authority.

Otherwise, if some few only make the enterprise, this means of Reformation,
will be found to prove effectual, for further breaches and divisions only, and
end in destruction, and to attempt a general and extraordinary remedy in this
case, without civil influence, might show our zeal, I think, more then prudence.

Fourthly, above all, I must stick at this last exception, that the end of our
calling our people to renew their covenant, and to profess their faith, be not
to discern who are in covenant, and who not, (as some press it) or who are to
be admitted to the Table of the Lord, and who not, (as others) but (probable)
Reformation of the people indeed.

It is not within the power of Prudence to propose such ends, to such means,
nor indeed according to her good nature; which strives to better all, but
abhorres to injure any; for that is no prudence but carnal reason, that would go
to good in the way of evil, or forgets love and violateth right upon the
fairest pretense in the world.

Have such baptized persons, as appear to be knowing, and free of scandal, a
right in Covenant, and a just claim to this seal, thereof or not? if not, it
behooves us, to show their bar^e in Scripture, and to make our exception
against their claim, and not to call them to further conditions, not owned by
Scripture. But if, then how can prudence, that orders and rules in things
adiapharous, and indifferent only, deny that which is justly claimed, and so
necessary. God has already determined, what is just and necessa^y, and men
have not to do to alter this, upon any pretense of prudence. Why should we fear
the event of justice as the end of just ways, f^at, Justitia, ruat Coelum.

Fourthly, there are many that make particular examination in point of
knowledge, a necessary antecedent to admission to the Sacrament, and the
peoples submission thereunto, a necessary and indispensable condition of their
right in the Sacrament in the Court of the Church.

But this is also too rigid for moderate Presbyterian principles; we read not
of any such condition of admission to the Supper in the Scriptures; but rather
that some, viz. the disciples were admitted without it by Christ himself, and
those many (in Acts 2.) by his Apostles.

Indeed the satisfaction of the Church, touching their knowledge that would
receive, may be thought necessary, and by consequence, some means or other for
this satisfaction (as more at large anon;) but that this particular way of
examination, is the sole means of this satisfaction, or the necessary means
thereof, or the necessary condition of admission to the Sacrament, I despair to
see evinced; yea, I am bold to conclude, that if satisfaction of knowledge be
the only end of examination, that this end may be obtained without this
means, and consequently this means is not absolutely necessary for this end,
and therefore submission to this means is not absolutely necessary in order to
the peoples admission to the Sacrament.

Lastly, neither is an incapacity to improve this Sacrament, the sole or
immediate ground of the Churches denying this Sacrament Nor an incapacity to
improve the Sament.
to any of her members.

I grant that none are to be denied it, but those that appear to be thus
incapable; yet their incapacity is but the remote ground thereof; may be
thought to be the ground or reason of our rule for suspention, or the word of
prohibition in Scripture; but this word of prohibition, in Scripture, is the
next ground of suspension; we put away persons from this communion, who are
incapable of improving* not directly and properly because they are incapable,
but because the word prohibites persons incapable from it.

For, if the word should admit such as are incapable, whose deed should reject
them? if God allow them to partake, what man dare deny them? if Religion
command them to receive, what reason (grounded upon any unfitness) shall
forbid them? or what prudence, reason, or Religion can there be in pretense of
pleasing God by crossing his Will? or what pretense of charity, justice, or
fidelity in a Steward, will color his denying any of the servants the right
his Master has given him, or forbidding the duty which his master requires of
him, I need not make Application.

Besides the word of prohibition in Scripture, which is next to be sought for,
does not leave it at large to prudence to judge what is an incapacity to
improve the Sacrament, and what not, but determines and fixes us to a certain
kind of incapacity, viz. whereby we discern not the Lords body, or such as
consists not with self-examination (as anon will appear;) therefore the work
of prudence herein is yet more narrow.

Prudence may not plead thus, such persons are incapable of improving the
Supper, therefore they ought not to receive it; nor thus, the word forbids
persons incapable to receive, therefore persons incapable, ought not to be
admitted only thus, the word forbids persons thus and thus incapable, or
incapable in such and such respects, therefore such incapable persons ought not
to receive; and consequently (they appearing such) not to be admitted; and this
and no other I take to be the sense of that very worthy and learned man, that
has treated excellently upon this Mr. Blak. seals.
particular.

The positive grounds of denying the Supper.

Having found the former grounds too weak to bear up The positive grounds of
denying the Sacrament, etc.
the practice of denying the Sacrament to Church Members; we proceed to fix it
upon a firmer foundation, viz. the Word of God.

Now, I know no other Scripture so apt to warrant us in this practice, as that
which prohibites some Church Members to receive the Sacrament, which has been
found in 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himself and so let him eat.

So that our ground for denying the Sacrament, etc. lies fairly, and directly
thus; such persons as do not examine themselves, ought not to receive, and
consequently deserve not to be admitted, to that which they ought not to have;
neither have they any wrong done them, if men deny them what God forbids them,
or what they have no right in.

So that our ground for denying the Sacrament, etc. lies fairly, and directly
thus; such persons as do not examine themselves, ought not to receive, and
consequently deserve not to be admitted, to that which they ought not to have:
neither have they any wrong done them, if men deny then what God forbids them,
or what they have no right in.

So that, if the question be, what is the cause for which we deny the Sacrament
to some Church Members; the answer is at hand, not because they are no
disciples, or because they want true grace, or because they do not renew their
Covenant, or make a vocal profession of their faith, or because they submit not
to particular examination, or because they do not examine themselves; which is
the very condition of their right in this eating and drinking, fixed in these
words of the Apostle.

And, if I may speak freely, I must needs confess, that I am very fully
persuaded, that as this Text [1 Cor. 11. 28.] is to be understood, so it must
be determined at last, when all vain janglings are ended, touching both persons
coming, and being admitted, or abstaining and being suspended from the
Sacrament.

My meaning is, that if this said Text, [1 Cor. 11. 28.] be once proved not to
forbid the Supper to such as do not examine themselves; but only to require
self-examination, as a mere preparation to this, as to other Ordinances; we
must cease for ever, from deterring any person, great or small within the
Church, from the Sacrament, or denying the Sacrament to any such private
abstention, public suspension, whether by doctrine or discipline, fall to the
ground for want of something to bear them up.

Again, on the other side, if this Text (as but few have hitherto doubted)
require self-examination, not only as preparatory, but as conditional to right
in this Sacrament; so that all those are prohibited communion therein, that do
not examine themselves; I think, we have plain cause, hence, not only to
charge such as do not perform this condition, that they meddle not with this
communion; but also, to deny the Sacrament unto all such as we know do not
examine themselves.

So that the stresse of the controversy resting here, we could heartily wish
that all personal alterations might be laid aside; and more distant
circumstantial disputes, in this great concernment, might be utterly silenced;
and some able hands, on both sides, might soberly and friendly undertake the
Exposition of this Text.

However, in the mean while, this gives me some satisfaction, that those that
do express themselves with any clearness for the dening the Sacrament to any
that are within the Church, do ground it upon this Text.

Beza's gloss upon this very Text is well known, probatio suipsius necessario
(inquit) in coena requiritur, ac proiude Beza.
admitti ad illum non debent, qui scipsos probare non possunt.

The Bohemian confession argues after the same manner, viz. if any man
approach this Table without such trial, Confess. Bohem.
such a one should greatly profane the Sacrament; for which cause the
Ministers of our Churches do not admit such, etc.

The Confession of Scotland says, the Supper of the Lord Scotland.
belongs only to such -- as can try and examine themselves, and therefore it
is that our Ministers do take -- Examination, etc.

Rilenus lays down the same rule for the discovery of such as Tilenus,
Bucanus, Trelcatius.
are to be admitted, so does Bucanus, Trelcatius, etc.

Mr. Buroughs gives this for one reason, why unholy persons Mr. Buroughs.
ought to be kept back, if they do come, because they ought to examine
themselves; so do the Leiden Divines.

Mr. Cotton also gives this for a reason, and indeed for his only Mr. Cotton.
reason, why such as were admitted to the Passover ought not to be admitted to
the Lords Supper, because this duty of self-examination is pre-requisite to the
Lords Supper, which was not so to the Passover; his way of the Churches of New
Enggland, page 8.

Mr. Morris is pleased thus to reason against Infants-admission, Mr. Morris. p.
61
here is (says he) an express command for a man to examine himself, which
Infants are not susceptible of, and upon this account they are not to be
admitted to the Eucharist.

Yea, Master Gelespie has noted, that Master Prin himself, Gelesp. p. 545.
Prin. p. 29.
gives the same reason why children, fools, and distracted persons are not to
be admitted, viz. because they are unable to examine themselves.

This therefore is the sum that such Church Members are to be denied the
Sacrament, as do not examine themselves; and that this is grounded on 1 Cor.
11. 28.

Quest. But, now the great question is, who fall within this Who are known not
to examine themselves?
compass in the Court of the Church, who are to be taken for such as do not
examine themselves, and ought accordingly to be denied the Sacrament.

Answ. True prudence, the sole judge in this case, as she never crosses
justice, so she hurts not charity. Now charity thinks no ill where she sees no
harm; therefore prudence judges ac-according to appearance, viz. that those
only do not examine themselves; not, that not appear; but that appear not so
to do.

Now when do persons appear to others, not to examine themselves?

This action (as all other) results from a double principle, viz. Persons
appear not to examine, etc. when they appear unable, or unwilling.
of power, and will; so that persons do, or do not examine themselves, because
they can and will; or because they cannot, or else will not examine themselves;
both these principles being necessary to this action, the want of either
impedes the action; therefore persons appearing either unable or unwilling to
examine themselves, are prudently, justly, and without the breach of charity,
presumed not to examine themselves; and consequently not to be admitted to the
Sacrament.

Quest. 2. But how do persons appear to be unable and unwilling to examine
themselves?

Answ. Persons appear to be unable to examine themselves Persons appear unable
only by their ignorance
only by their ignorance; for the acts of self examination themselves are not
discernable to others; only this necessary instrument in the work, viz.
knowledge is discernable to others; therefore, where this knowledge is
discerned to be wanting, we are assured that that effect which essentially
depends upon knowledge, is also wanting. Unwilling by scandal.


Again, persons appear to be unwilling to examine themselves by scandal, or
visible wickedness continued in with obstinacy; for notorious wickedness
cannot consist with the effects of self- examination, as before interpreted,
and yet who knows but one notoriously wicked may come to himself and to this
duty of self-examination, etc. unless he continue thus notoriously wicked with
obstinacy.

Quest. Then it seems, that both ignorant and scandalous persons may be
denied the Sacrament upon the same ground, viz. without a censure; may it not?

Answ. I must have leave to speak my mind, and to say it does not follow;
indeed, there seems to be the same reason for both, had not God in Scripture
otherwise disposed.

I affirm, that persons found ignorant, may be deniedt his communion without a
Church censure, upon the foresaid grounds; and I grant, that so also might the
scandalous, but that God has provided a heavier punishment for them (Mat. 18.
17. 1 Cor. 5.) by the censure of the Church.

If it be Gods will that scandalous persons must be excommunicated, and thus
denied this Sacrament, what are our reasons to the contrary?

Therefore the consideration of such, as will not examine themselves (as
appears by their obstinacy in scandal) is to be referred to the next head,
viz. of censure; and the case of ignorance alone is to be tried here.

Quest. 4. But who are those that appear by ignorance not able to examine
themselves.

Answ. Certainly, not only children, fools, and madmen nor these properly;
indeed, these are reduced under the rank of the ignorant; but, even thereby,
it is evident, that ignorance is more properly attributed to persons of years,
and in the use of reason, then unto these.

However, children, etc. are debarred, quia ignorant; the ignorant as such, and
not as children, or as in any other consideration are immediately incapable of
performing the condition of self-examination, and therefore, as such, are not
to be admitted; and it is all as proper, to say, that growns affectedly ignorant
persons, cannot examine themselves, as children, fools; if we know they cannot,
by reason of ignorance. The duty to be performed is such, as necessarily
requires knowledge, and where there is want of knowledge (whether naturally or
morally) there we are sure the condition of right is wanting; and consequently
admission is to be denied, when all is done.

This Text is conditional or not; if not, then none, for want of
self-examination, are to be suspended, no not so much as children, etc. but if
then, all that appear not to be able to examine themselves, are to be suspended
equally with them: and I despair of seeing any reason to the contrary; for if
persons quia non-self-examining are forbidden, then all persons
non-self-examining are forbidden, and consequently all ignorant persons
whatsoever.

Quest. 5. But what degree of ignorance is sufficient to ground suspension upon.

Answ. This must be left in the hands of prudence and charity; but it may be
measured by its influence upon this duty of self-examination; if a person has
not so much knowledge, as in any good measure to see his sins, and to
discern the Lords body aright in the Sacrament, of which he is to examine
himself, this is a sufficient ^ause of denying the Sacrament to such a person
in my opinion.

Digression 5. The grounds of denying the Sacrament to some Church Members
formally considered.
We have last considered the Object about which this is conversant, or to be
exercised: we proceed to the ground or principle of it, formally considered,
the authority whence it is derived. 1. Negatively. 2. Positively.

The power of the Church to keep back the ignorant from the The ground of
denying the Sacrament negatively considered. 1. Not Reason.
Lords Table is not founded in reason; as if, because, that through ignorance
men have no rational capacity of improving this Sacrament, therefore reason
discovering this should warrant the Church in denying the Sacrament to them;
this is but a being wiser for God, then he is for himself; it is but bad
reasoning against Gods Will; if God will have such in Covenant, as cannot
express consent, and such sealed in Covenant, as in reason cannot improve it,
what is that to us? God may do what he will, with his own; this would reason
children out of the Church and Covenant, out of Baptism and Circumcision, as
well as the Supper; who are all as capable of acting at a few years old in
eating and drinking bread and wine, as of suffering at a few days old in
Circumcision or Baptism, or in their Church, and Covenant Relation, as soon as
they are borne; and as able to improve that; as these.

2. Neither is this power grounded in prudence, or a prudential Nor prudence.
care and caution for the good of our peoples souls: who not discerning the
Lords body, may eat and drink judgment to themselves; prudence is a good
assistant, but a bad principle of Church power. Interest in privileges
especiully this of the Supper falls under the head of spiritual property, and
right, which prudence serves well to discern, but not to make or alter;
prudence ought, indeed, to labor to the utmost, that persons come not to the
Supper unworthily; but doubtless, she goes beyond her last, if she once
ventures to deny those, whom God does not; or whom he does deny, if she has no
call thereunto; matters of property are matters of necessity and justice (as
before) but prudence has to do only with things (in themselves) indifferent.

3. Neither is mutual consent (in ecclesia consederata) by a Nor mutual
confederation, or consent.
Church Covenant, a sufficient ground of th^s power; as if, because a company
of people do agree together, not to give the Sacrament to the ignorant, etc.
therefore they may deny it to such; it is known, that upon this ground, a
learned man of late has L. M.
fixed all Church Power; but I verily believe, that the confederated Churches
dare not trust themselves upon this foundation, or venture their power or
government to stand or fall upon this bottom.

Doubtless, mutual consent is of great power in all societies, and may dispose
even of all indifferent things for order and decency in Christian societies or
Churches; but are denying Sacracraments, casting out Churches, etc. things
indifferent.

The persons under Church power are allowed this dommunion in the Word of God
or not; if they be allowed it by the word; how can mutual consent warrant the
Church to disallow it? if not, then it is determined before by the word, that
such persons should not be admitted, that wicked persons should be put away
from among us; and then the power in the Church to do this, is plainly derived
thence; I mean from those Scriptures, and not from mutual consent, though this
be very useful quoad exercitium, for the putting of this power in execution,
according to those Scriptures.

To me, this seems nothing, but a pretty device to make the confederated
Churches fall to the ground between two extremes. They have hitherto pleaded
much for Scripture, for every circumstance of Church Government; but thus, they
should stride too large from hence, upon the sole ground of prudence, and
mutual consent, for the very substance of it, as if the former Basis would bear
neither any longer.

4. Neither is this power grounded on Mat. 7. 6. or such like Scriptures; for
we here treat of that power to suspend such persons as are not censured, but
dogs and swine (if they be within) are debarred the Sacrament, as they are
Juridically such, or under censure.

5. Lastly, neither is it concluded in the power of judging, 1 Cor. 5. this is
the warrant of denying Communion to such as are wicked, and to be judged and
cast out qua wicked: and consequently, belongs to the next head, viz. of
censure, whereas our present debate, is touching the communion of such as are
ignorant, and as they are such. It Is true, an ignorant person may be
scandalously so, and it is possible, that for this scandalous ignorance, he may
lawfully be censured by the Church, yet then it is plain, that such a one is
censured qua scandalous, or scandalously ignorant, and not properly or strictly
qua ignorant, or for want of ability to examine himself.

But, if this power of denying the Sacrament to the ignorant, The power of
denying the Sacrament positively fixed.
be not founded in Reason, Prudence, mutual consent, or on Matthew. 7. 6. or 1
Cor. 5. where then may we fix it? or whence may we warrant it?

I answer, this power is founded in our stewardly and ministerial In our
Ministerial authority given us for edification.
office, wherewith authority is evidently given us for edification, and not for
destruction, 1 Cor. 108. i. e. to dispense our sacred trust in Gods Ordinances,
for the best advantage of our peoples souls. Here we know, the great command
is, Let all things be done to edifying, 1 Cor. 14. 26. to this great end we
must level all our ministerial actions, watching for the souls of our people,
as those that must give an account. Heb. 13. 17. and following after such
things as make unto edification, Romans 14. 19. wherefore, no further excuse in
all kind of charges against us, and our actions, seems needful, but only
this of the Apostle, We have done all things, dearly beloved, to your edifying,
2 Cor. 13. 19.

Whence the Argument rises thus. Upon these and the like Scriptures, our
(Ministerial) authority, to do all things for the The Argument.
edification of our people, as edification is opposed to destruction, is
clearly grounded. But denying the Sacrament to the grossly ignorant, is for
the edification of the people, as edification is opposed to destruction.

The first of these Propositions can be limited only, 1. To The Confirmation of
it.
all such things as are allowed by the Scriptures, and not contrary to the Will
of God therein revealed. And thus, indeed it must needs be limited, otherwise
it implies an apparent contradiction, for God has forbidden nothing that is
for edification. 2. To all such things as belong only to the manner and
circumstances of applying or dispensing the Ordinances, and not to the
substance or matter of them; for thus also it must escape a contradiction;
seeing no Or^inance brought into the Church, in the substance and matter of it
by humane Authority, can possibly tend to edification, but to destruction, as
superstition does. 3. To all such things as openly, plainly, and directly tend
to edification, as opposed to destruction.

Now, if our Minor, be found true, with all these limitations; none, I presume,
will deny the conclusion. But the Minor is true with these limitations. For,

1. The keeping back ignorant persons from the Supper, is God has not
forbidden us to keep back the ignorant, but allowed.
one of those things, which God has not forbidden, but rather allowed in
Scripture, as almost all do acknowledge; yea, are they not forbidden (while
thus grossly ignorant) to receive it?

Indeed, if such as are ignorant had an immediate right in this Communion
granted them by God in Scripture. I conceive, all the caution in the world
could not warrant one ignorant persons suspension from it. The Rule, Give unto
all their dues, is of indispensable obligation; but seeing ignorant persons
have no such immediate right in the Supper, what injury or wrong is there done
them, by denying it to them? God forbids, and we his servants only withhold
what he forbids, viz. the Sacrament to ignorant persons, or such as cannot
examine themselves.

Thus we have occasion to note, that all our conclusions about right in,
accession, or admission to, and disswasion or All still meet upon 1 Cor. 11 28
suspension from the Sacrament, with reference to knowledge or ignorance, are
still found to rest upon this Basis of [1 Cor. 11. 28.] for, as has been
urged, if this text does not deny this Communion to such as do not examine
themselves; I see not how any Churchmember, though but a child or fool, etc.
can lawfully be deterred or debarred from it; but if it do imply a prohibition
of such as cannot examine themselves, because they do not; I think it fairly
follows, thar Ministers have power in their very office to deny it to those
that (they are sure) do not, because they cannot, viz. the ignorant.

2. The denying the Sacrament to ignorant persons, is one of those actions that
are not substantial, but only circumstantial to This denial of the Supper is
but circumstantial to Gods Ordinances, etc.
Gods Ordinances; for we acknowledge the Ordinance of the Supper, in Christ's
own Institution and Command; and in its appointed elements and actions
accordingly; and thus we do administer it in the Church of God. Again, we have
labored before to prove, that such as cannot examine themselves are by
prohibition and Ordinance of Christ, to abstain and not to receive; so that for
a Minister to deny the Communion to such, is not to create a new Ordinance, but
only to be helpful to our brethren, in putting that Ordinance or Prohibition of
Christ into execution; excluding those whom Christ excludes, and admitting
those only whom Christ admits.

3. Lastly, the denying of the Supper to ignorant persons, is also one of those
things that do openly, plainly, and directly tend 3. It directly tends to
edification.
unto edification, as edification is opposed to destruction; for that tends
plainly and directly unto edification, as edification is opposed to
destruction, that does plainly and directly preserve and keep from sin and
judgment; but now, denial of this Sacrament to the grossly ignorant, such as
cannot discern the Lords body, or examine themselves, does directly and
plainly preserve and keep from sin, viz. the guilt of the body and blood of
Christ; and judgment, viz. eating and drinking damnation to our selves, 1 Cor.
11. 26, 27, 28, 29

The receiving of this Sacrament is a direct and proper means

True, to such as are worthy, i. e. such as God has commanded to communicate
in it, the Sacrament is directly and properly a means of their edification;
yea, so it is in it self, and in its own nature, it being ordained of God for
edification; but yet it is not so to all, not to heathens without, or those
within that have no right in it, and whom God forbids to meddle with it. The
Sacrament cannot be a proper means of edification to those, for whom it was not
appointed; for the end and use of Sacraments depend upon their appointment; but
now the Sacrament was not appointed for the grossly ignorant, or such as
cannot examine themselves, or discern the Lords body.

2. The denying the Sacrament to such as sin by receiving, as well as in
receiving of it, is not an accidental, but a direct and proper means of
edification; as edification is opposed to destruction; for what can be more
properly said to be a means of such edification, then that which does
immediately hinder from sin? but the denying the Sacrament to those that cannot
examine themselves, etc. is to deny it to such as sin by receiving, as well as
in receiving it, I mean, whose very receiving is a sin; for such as are
prohibited to receive by the Law of God, therefore (sin being the transgression
of the Law) the very receiving of such (against the Law of God) is sin.

3. Denying Communion in general, to the excommunicate, is a direct and proper
mean of edification, as edification is opposed to destruction; for that, no
doubt, is a proper mean for such an end, as God himself has appointed for that
end, and is to be executed in a direct intention and order to that end; but so
is denying Communion in general to the excommunicate, appointed of God, and to
be executed by the Church in a direct intention and order to edification, as
edification is opposed to destruction, as is plain, 1 Cor. 5. 5, 13.

Now to apply this, if all Communion wherein this part of the Supper is
included, may be denied; and this denial be a direct and proper mean of
edification, etc. what should hinder, but that the denial of this part also, to
those whose very receiving it would be sinful, may be a direct and proper means
of edification, as edification is opposed to destruction, that is, a direct and
proper means of hindering destruction, and consequently of edification.

But here the great question is, how or by what means How may the ignorant be
found out.


I answer, first in general, by this Argument, that which commands the end
allows the means, which necessarily help posito fine, ponuntur media.
Therefore, such means as are necessarily conducing to this end of discovering
the grossly ignorant, and such as cannot examine themselves, must needs be
allowed, and for my part, I desire, I plead for no more.

This will be generally granted me; but yet some very learned and worthy men,
will limit the use of these means of discovering

To this I answer, that to me it seems, not only uncharitable but
unreasonable, to use means of discovering the knowledge

But the great doubt is, who may be thought to be suspicious, Who suspected,


1. I conceive, we shall not differ with many, if in general we say, that this
suspicion takes in all the younger sort of people, the younger sort.
been satisfied. The ground of this suspicion lies thus; we know that all
these were ignorant, and we have not been satisfied of their knowledge; as
because, we know that a person excommunicate was scandalous, he is still justly
liable to suspicion, until we are satisfied of his repentance. This, I think,
is generally allowed us, seeing few deny us the liberty of examining youth, in
order to their admission to the Supper; which, I do verily believe (give me
leave to say so, without offense) if well emproved, might lay a groundwork of
a better Reformation, for the next Age, then we shall ever see, by the zealous
pressing the necessity of examination upon all, in the present evil and froward
generation.

2. Neither, I presume, do any doubt, but that some of the 2. Some of the elder
sort.
elder sort of our people, may be justly and reasonably suspected of ignorance;
the grounds of this suspicion may be many, 1. Because they may appear almost
unreasonable in earthly things; hence they may be fairly suspected to be gross
and ignorant in heavenly things, which are further off from our understandings,
as our Savior reasoned with Nic^demus, John 5. 12, 2. or because they are loath
to be brought into discourse about spiritual things, when no other reason
appears for it, but a fear of bewraying their ignorance; as a guilty person is
the more suspicious, by his seeming unwilling to discourse of the matter in
question, or to come to his trial. 3. Or if a person has never from his youth,
given any satisfaction of his knowledge, in the Fundamentals of Religion to the
Church, or his brethren; he may, upon the same grounds, as the younger sort of
the people, be still under the suspicion of the Church, and accordingly liable
to the Churches trial therein.

But it is added, if there be more means of discovering the ignorent then one,
why should we make one absolutely necessary? viz. Examination?

I answer, I hope, most of my brethren are of another mind Our Agreement in
these parts.


Indeed, we desire a conference with all our people; but not because it is the
only way, but because we judge it to be the best way to those ends, for which
we have expressed our selves to desire it. And here, I conceive, we differ with
none; seeing none can deny a conference or mutual discourse to be the best
means of discovering each others mind; for if we call conference an
examination, none (to extend the words of that learned Gentleman) do so much
question the convenience of examining, as the necessity thereof. Mr. Morris p.
85.


Yea, I shall offer further, if any one man, though in it self most expedient
fall under the suspicion of any person, much more of the people in general;
that may, I think, and ought to be yielded from, if any other mean of
satisfaction, may be tendered or had.

Bur if none may be questioned for ignorance, but such as are under a suspicion
thereof, why do you desire a conference with

I answer, there are four special reasons assigned by us in our In our
Agreement.
the state of our flocks. 2. And be the better enabled to edify the same. 3.
That we might discern such as are fit, from such as are unworthy of this holy
Communion, in point of knowledge. 4. That we might be freest from offense, in
such our proceedings.

The third of these reasons, does quit from suspecting all of ignorance; for it
supposes some to be worthy in point of knowledge, though others not; and in
the last reason, we intimate this way of conference to be the best, and most
inoffensive way of putting the difference; as doubtless it is where prejudice
rules not; but now, are there not two other reasons, sufficient to warrant our
desire of conference with the rest of our people, though not suspected of
ignorance, viz. our knowing their state, and edifying their souls? it is one
thing to require a conference or an account of knowledge, as a necessary
condition of admission to the Supper; and another thing to desire it, as a good
and expedient mean of edification; and in this sense, I know, none that in
dispute will deny it, though in practice many do.

In this sense, the words of that worthy Gentleman last named, are of much
weight. We do not (says he) altogether dispute, whether they may call men to
examination, as whether it be so necessary ratione medii, so as that if they
will not come under it, they have power for that cause only to keep them from
the Sacram^nt. Mr. Morris. p. 85


Such a conference as we desire, is an evident mean of edification; as it is a
mean of informing the ignorant, reproving and reforming the carnal and
di^obedient, quickening the careless and slothful, comforting the sad,
strengthening the weak, increasing knowledge, grace, peace, settlement and love
in all. And that the Minister has power to desire the practice of so happy a
means, is clearly manifest, in the very nature and end of his office, in his
warrant to do all things to edifying, in his duty, (if so it be) or at least,
Apostolical practice, in teaching from house to house; and more especially, his
having power to catechize Gal. 6. 6.
such, as communicate to him of all good things, where, surely, housekeepers
and grown persons are not excluded.

But, why then, do we desire a conference with our people,

Such a conference for such serious ends, is seldom unseasonable,

But then, why do you not confer with the people,

Because our great end of desiring a conference with the more knowing, is
attained by their yielding first to confer, viz. the

But, a calling all to trial, because some are suspected, is, as if because
some are suspected of Felony, we should bring all to the bar.

Answ. Not so, neither really or seemingly; if we publish, as I suppose, we do,
that we desire a conference with all, not as if all were suspected to be
unworthy; but for the other ends before specified, and without which, indeed, I
see not, how we can attain a conference with almost any that are truly
suspicious.

Now let me with all meekness and in the Name of Jesus Christ beg, my
brethren, that oppose us herein, to consider, what a hard burden they lay upon
us, while they tie us to confer only with such, as lie under suspicion of
ignorance.

1. We can do nothing by force, or without our peoples consent; then it is most
likely that if many be excused, the rest will think and plead, Why may not they
be excused as well as these?

2. The Minister must pass a judgment, who are suspicious, before he try
them; and how that will relish, I leave to be seriously considered.

3. Such as are first suspected, and upon trial found to be knowing, will in
likelihood hold themselves much wronged.

1. Yet I grant, that had we a power to assist us, and to compel all that are
suspected, we should not need to press a conference to this end of discovering
the ignorant, any further, or so generally at least.

2. Further, I humbly crave leave, to offer, that could we be secured of any
other likely way of bringing the suspected to trial, we would no longer press
this, as a mean, thereof.

3. It Is well known to many, that where conscience is seriously pleaded against
it (as sometimes has been) we are here agreed to hold communion with such as
are not suspected, though refusing to confer with us upon the terms aforesaid,
or in order to admission to the Sacrament.

4. Yea, lastly, if we should at length with tears in our eyes be made to see,
that this urging our people (unsuspected) to this conference or examination, is
likely to provoke them to Schism or to incur any other great inconveniency,
or hazard to the Church (which, the good Lord prevent) I hope, both my self
and brethren would as readily lay it aside, as we have eagerly either indeed or
in others opinion taken it up.

Thus let us be believed to press a general conference with our people, only
as a point of great convenience (as none can doubt it is) and not of necessity,
much less absolute; as we do not affirm, but indeed deny it to be.

Object. But why then do you deny the Sacrament to those that do not submit to
this conference with you, though they be not suspected of ignorance by you.

Answ. The true reason hereof (I presume) is, because we take our selves to
have the care of all the flock, as well as of particular sheep; and to be
obliged to do all things to the edification of the whole, as well as of
particulars; and we conceive that the edification of the whole is more fairly
aimed at by requiring this general conference, though with the present denial
of the Supper to some few, that may be worthy, then by giving the same to such,
with the hazard of all order and discipline.

2. Yet, if this conference be scrupled at, with seeming seriousness, there is
(as before) provision made for the admission of such as are unsuspected,
without it; but, more plainly, though such, upon the foresaid gounds, as also
because of that liberty, the Church has for the choice of fit and convenient
seasons, may be kept off a while; yet, I conceive, if they make a modest and
not a turbulent or scandalous claim, they may not be totally or finally
(merely for want of submitting to conference, of which they may also show their
reasons) be cut off, or denied the Sacrament; prudence, may a while withold
possession, but it cannot for ever dispose of right.

And, now I hope, reasonable men will, at least, be favorable in their
censures of us, and our intentions, if not satisfied with our processes: Our
most ingenious, candid Countryman, I am sure is not at much distance with me,
though the gulf betwixt us were somewhat greater then thus it is, with whose
words I shall conclude, and yield the end of this digression. If there were
(says he) no other gulf betwixt us, but the necessity (we plead but the
convenience) of examination of our knowledge in order to Mr. Morris. p. 78.
our Admission to the Sacrament, we might sooner come together.

CHAP. XL.
We may not proceed against wicked brethren but by discipline and censures.
HItherto of our Churches and Sacraments: some few inferences more added,
touching discipline and censures, will put a speedy period to the whole.

Touching censures, I infer, from my great Proposition thus; If saving grace
go not into the essence of the visible Church, but wicked persons, and such as
as have no evidence of saving grace, may be truly members of the visible
Church. Then, 1. We may not proceed against wicked Church Members but by
discipline or censure. 2. Nor reckon them without, until they are made such by
censure or cast out. 3. We are bound to proceed against all such wicked
Church Members, in a course of censure. Of these in their order.

1. We may not proceed against wicked Church Members but by What order has God
left in his Church to keep his Ordinances from contempt. R. The unruly should
be admonished, the obstinate excommunicated, and the penitent after their fall
restored and comforted. Hier catech. p. 87.
censure. Supposing that we have finished our discourse of the Churches
proceedings against the ignorant, which is not by censure, and that we are now
considering the Churches way of proceeding against the wicked, as such, or for
their wickedness, or their wicked conversation; the ground of this inference is
very plain: for wicked persons, being supposed to be Church Members, at least,
till cast out; and therefore to be dealt with, only as such, they are not to
be proceeded against, but by censure; for this reason, because the way and the
only way that Christ has appointed and allowed to his Church to proceed in,
against all her members in point of conversation, is the way of censure or
discipline; which, I presume, did never yet receive a question, much less
contradiction from any sober or learned man; and which is abundantly testified
unto by the universal practice of all the Churches; of all the several modes
and forms of Churches in the world; for what Churches did ever proceed against
any member of her own for scandal or wickedness, in any other way but the way
of discipline or censure? or what other way can there be imagined? or ventured
on, to be asserted?

Quest. But what is meant by censure?

Answ. Censure here is not taken in the large and broad sense of it, but in its
strict and ecclesiastical sense, or as it is peculiar to the Churches
jurisdiction, and properly termed Church-censure, and it may be defined thus.

Church-censure is an instrument of discipline, whereby personal Censure
defined.
Application of the Will of God is made, for the removing of scandals.

It is an Instrument of discipline, for Ames teaches, discipline is personalis
applicatio -- per censuras.

In preaching of the Word, the Will of God is really applied, but yet
generally; or indefinitely, etc. not personally, in administering the Sacraments
the will of God is personally applied also, yet by seals; but now the Will of
God in the exercise of discipline is applied by censures.

The subject, both of the scandal, and of the censure, must of necessity be in
ecclesia, or within, or a brother; if thy brother, Mat. 18. 15. and
consequently the party offended, and censuring, must be a brother too.

The sin of a brother qua scandalous or offensive is the only ground,
reason, and object of this censure, offend thee, or sin against thee, Mat.
18. 15.

Now there is no other course left by Christ, for brethren or Church Members,
or the Church, as such, to recover satisfaction from a brother, but this way of
personal applying the will of Christ unto him (as Ames expresses it) but by
censures.

But to make this more evident, and to cut the remaining work The parts of
censure.
short, let us consider this discipline or censure in its parts; which, as
Aims, has laid the division for us, are these two fraternal correption or
admonition and excommunication.

Admonition is taken simply, and largely, for a moral duty; as Admonition
twofold, simple and respective.
it is pressed, Levit. 19. 17. and in many other Scriptures; or respectively to
excommunication, or discipline, and limited or restrained to the Church, and
grounded upon the positive precept of Christ, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. the first
is indeed a personal application of the will of Christ, but no Church-censure;
the last is the first personal application of the Will of Christ, by censure;
or the first act or kind of Church-censure.

Give me leave to note the difference here, (which, I conceive Simple
admonition, no Chu^ch-censure.
may be of use) a little plainer; the first, simple, large and moral admonition
cannot well be called a Church-censure, or any part of Christian discipline. 1.
Because we stand obliged to it by the Law of nature, but so we are not to any
part of Christian-discipline, as such. 2. Therefore all mankind are bound unto
it, though none but the Church have to do with Ecclesiastical discipline.

Yet I humbly conceive that this absolute and moral duty of Yet it has its use
in the Church for sins of infirmity, which Church censuremedleth not with.
admonition, has its use in the Church also, viz. for sins of infirmity, and
sins of a weaker and more inconsiderable offensivenesse, then to be proceeded
against by discipline (unless gross obstinacy be also added; which obstinacy,
is, then, the scandal, and the object of censure, rather then the sin it self
persisted in.) My reason for this is. 1. Because most, if not all, Divines,
deny discipline to have to do with sins of infirmimity; Quale sit pecca tum
quod postulat, usum hujus disciplinae? R. Non infirmitates illae quae sunt
omnium fere Christianorum communes: Istarum enim singularis curatio and
emendatio neque expectari potest, neque ab iis exegi, qui iisdem aut similibus
subjiciuntur. Am. de consc. p. 251 252.
and yet, I think, none of them will deny, but that we are bound to watch over
one another, and thereby to labor to help onward the great work of
mortification, even of the least sin, by kindly admonition and provocation 2.
Because, if every sin of infirmity should be the object of admonition, as a
part of Church Discipline; we should do almost nothing, but persecute each
other with renewed, daily, endless and remediless troubles; for all are
guilty of such sins; and we must judge of obstinacy in sin, especially by
continuance in it; and such sins are defined to be quotidianae incursionis,
and there is no possibility of being thoroughly purged from them in this world,
and therefore if such sins be the object of censure, we must unavoidably be
continually following one another in the steps of admonition to
excommunication, as obstinate sinners.

Yet, no doubt, there is such a censure as admonition, peculiar Admonition
respective.
to the Church, and a part of its discipline; and indeed the first part of it;
and which, we now intend; which is, though not so large as the former, yet
objectively, as large as discipline and no Medul. p. 203
larger; adhiberi debet in omni peccato, cui disciplinae medela convenit, as
Ames.

This admonition, I term, respective unto excommunication; not because it is
in order to it; or if (as Ames denies well) the proper end of admonition were,
ut aditas inde fiat ad excommunicationem; but rather, ut excommunicandi
necessitas, si fieri p^ssit, antevertatur, or otherwise, indeed, as our Savior
(Mat. 18.) directs, that process may be made to excommunication.

This being a proper part of discipline, is to level at greater sins then
sins of infirmity; namely such as have a mark upon them This censu^e aims
at greater sins.
in Scripture, sins wasting the conscience, defiling the life, having a
manifest aptness in them to scandalize Religion, or to induce the brethren to
sin or sorrow; and therefore such as is proper to deal with wicked and
scandalous brethren withal, of whom we are now debating.

But to conclude, wicked Church Members are not to be proceeded Without
admonition, no proceeding against the scandalous.
against without this first part of Church-censure, or denied any part of
Church communion, for his scandal or wickedness; for this would be to execute
before sentence, yea, or conviction, or hearing.

I doubt not, to assert, that no Churchmember is to be put out of any part of
Church communion for scandal, without some degree of that censure, called
excommunication, as may appear by and by: and again, that no part or degree of
excommunication may proceed against any Churchmember, without previous
admonition. Correctio scandali ab admonitione semper incipere debet. Am. cons.
p. 252. Indicatio culpa primum est medium emendationis, and r^sipiscentiae
genuina causa. ibid.


He may be a brother, and yet scandalous: if he be an offensive scandalous
brother, he must be admonished first, that if possible he may be s^ved from
greater shame, and be still retained in Church Communion; this is the patience,
forbearance tenderness, and care required by the Gospel, toward scandalous
brethren, for the repentance and recovery of our brother, is the proper end of
all discipline, and showing of the fault is the first means and the genuine
cause of repentance, and recovery from it.

I grant, that this admonition ought to answer the public or private nature of
the scandal, by being also private or public, yet still admonition is
necessary; private admonition, and its processes, being grounded and regulated,
Mat. 18. 15, 16. and public admonition, 1 Timothy 5. 20.

Yea, is there any case when admonition is not seasonable, and not in prudence
to be performed; I shall assume that in the same case excommunication is to be
forborne, if the party have not admonished before; for still, the conclusion is
that no person is to be proceeded against, for scandal, but this is to begin
with admonition.

The other part of ecclesiastical discipline is called excommunication;
Excommunication.
whereby upon a brothers obstinate persisting in his wickedness after due
admonition, the wicked person is put away from among us, and cast out of
communion with the Church.

Now, for ought I can find, in this case of scandal, there is no other remedy
left us in Scripture after the performance of due admonition, but this of
excommunication; that which some term suspension, and many think most properly,
viz. the holding the suspected or accused person in suspense until he is tried,
cannot be reasonably termed a censure, or penalty; no more then the securing of
a suspected felon to the day of hearing who may be innocent. Besides, others
are ready to say, that such persons under such suspension ought not to be
debarred of any privilege till sentenced guilty by excommunication.

The Scripture is plain, 1 Cor. 5. and in diverse other places, that the way
of proceeding against scandalous, and wicked persons in the Church, is to put
them away from among us by an ecclesiastical judgment, v. 12, 13. and we read
in Scripture of no other; and this we call excommunication.

Obj. But thus you deny suspension of scandalous persons from the Sacrament.

Answ. Yea, as distinct from excommunication, but not as a part or degree of
it; and so indeed this kind of suspension, or abstension has been always
called, viz. pars vel gradus excommunicationis, and excommunicatio minor; it is
agreeable (says Ames, Medul. p. ^03
when the thing will suffer delay) both to Scripture and reason, ut primo
inchoetur, that at first excommunication may be begun by suspension or
abstention from the Supper, and such like Church- privileges, which is wont to
be called excommunicatio minor, the lesser excommunication; though, note, he
adds, in isto tamen grada non est sub sistendum, etc.

Suspension was termed a part, a beginning, a degree of excommunication, and
the lesser excommunication; without doubt, because otherwise it has no footing
in Scripture or Antiquity.

It Is known to be a famous question, not yet clearly determined, whether in the
ancient Churches, any persons were ever kept from the Supper alone for scandal
and admitted to all, or any other Ordinances; save only the penitents, who
were first excommunicated. I confess, methinks, I have reason to incline to
the negative.

Yet, give me leave to add, that I see not, but that the same reason upon
which the ancients received the excommunicate in again by degrees, will equally
warrant the casting the excommunicate out by degrees; and prudence encouraged
by general Scriptures, does doubtless prescribe and urge this as well as that,
yea and with better advantage.

Whereupon, though not so early (may I not say as wisely?) the Church,
afterward, took up this course of mercy and gentleness, patience and
forbearance in ejecting, and indeed abated of the former rigor, severity, and
zeal, in readmitting by such slow degrees: and who doubts, but that the Gospel
being so rich in mercy and forbearance, and the Ministry standing in his stead,
who has all fullness of grace, and every Ordinance being a mean of salvation,
our liberty is broader, and our error less in the ways of indulgency and
clemency, then of judgment and punishment; the rule of mercy exceeded, is but
an error of charity, whereas excess in justice proceeds into injury and
cruelty.

But however that be concluded, this suffices my present purpose; if such
suspention be not lawful, then excommunication in whole is necessary for the
rejecting a scandalous person from Church Priviledges, and if it be lawful, yet
excommunication is still necessary hereunto, seeing such suspension is nothing
save only as it is a part and beginning of excommunication, and has no
warrant but in those Scriptures where excommunication is founded; and is indeed
excommunication: and every person, rejected regularly from the Supper, stands
excommunicate, though but in part.

Hence will easily flow some seasonable intimations, which I crave leave to
note only.

1. It hence then follows, that we (in our Churches) may not reject any of our
brethren, from any part of our Church Communion for their conversation-sake, if
they be not liable to censure, that is, as before we explained, if they be not
guilty of some great sin, and persist therein with obstinacy; we are taught
even from New England, that they proceed not to censure, but in case of known
offense, and such offense as cannot be healed without censure; and what Church
among the very Brownists and Anabaptists proceeds by any other rule?

Let us impartially reckon of scandal and censure with the Scriprure, either in
the Old or New Testament? and, I presume this matter is ended; we must not
proceed to so high a censure as Excommunication, upon stricter terms then the
Scripture does, nor take scandal, as deserving so high a censure in a stricter
sense then the Scripture does.

2. Then, to reckon any of our members among dogs and swine, before they have
been duly admonished, if not excommunicated is rash judgment.

3. Our provoking the Gommunicants, when the fault is not known (save
privately) to make public exceptions against the lives or actions of any that
deserve admission to the Sacrament, and not rather to put them upon their
proper duty of private admonition and correption, seems to cross our
Saviors directions, (Matthew. 15. 5.) in this case.

CHAP. XLI.
We may not account the members of our Congregations to be without, until they
are cast out.
THe second inference touching Censures is this, if wicked men be indeed
consistent with visible Church Membership, then we may not reckon any member of
our Congregations to be without, though wicked and scandalous, until he is made
such by Church-censure, and cast out.

The reason of this connection is evident; for our Congregations are true
Churches. And secondly, the members of true Churches are to be accounted to be
within, and not without, until they are excommunicated or cast out,
notwithstanding their scandal. The incestuous person is an invincible instance
here; it is known that he was very scandalous, yer it is plain he was still
within, and accordingly liable to the Churches judgment, until cast out. Yea,
3. Without hesitancy, I assert, that there is no way, or means, or remedy, to
be found in Scripture, or in the practice or judgment of any Church, of
casting out scandalous persons from Church Communion, or interest, but the
censure of excommunication.

But, these things have, I hope, been demonstrated before. I shall therefore
here only add, my wonder at those that allow our Congregations to be true
Churches, and yet not only reckon of, but even deal with many, yea, most of the
members of such Congregations as heathens, before any censure have passed from
the Church upon them: an easy way, I confess, to cut off the trouble of duty,
in Admonition and Excommunication; But, I fear, not so easy a way of
satisfying conscience, or quitting our selves to our Master in the day of our
account.

O that men would seriously consider what Word of God, or Church of Christ,
will own such practice at that great day, and yet is it not a general
miscarriage? the Lo^d awaken us to see, that there is no other way for
scandalous members to become, Mat. 18.
as heathens, but by not hearing the Church, which presupposes admonition.

CHAP. XLII.
We are bound to proceed against scandalous persons within our Congregations,
by way of Censure.
LAstly, if wickedness or scandal render not the members of our Congregations
to be no Church Members, then are we not bound to proceed against the
scandalous in our congregations by way of censure? this is indeed the hardest
task, but yet it is not a clear duty, and the great and likeliest remedy of
reforming the scandalous, and preserving the rest from leaven and destruction?

If persons be scandalous, and within, what can free them from Ecclesiastical
censure? or excuse us from judging them with it? do not ye judge them that are
within? i. e. quatenus within, and consequently all that are within? is not
Christ's discipline as extensive as his Church? or is there any room in his
house not under his keys? any Scholar in his School not under his Rod? or any
subject in his Kingdom not under his power? where then is his glory?

Yea, do not those forcible and plain commands, Tell thy brother of his fault,
and if he hear thee not, tell the Church, and if he hear not the Church, let
him be to thee as an heathen and a publican; an heretic after the first and
second admonition reject; In the Name of the Lord Jesus, -- deliver such an one
unto Satan; Put away from among your selves that wicked person, etc. do not
these direct and pressing commands, convince, reprove, rebuke, exhort both
Ministers and people, as with thunder and lightning? does not the rod of
severer discipline in the ancient Churches, in more perilous times, lash our
fearfulness, laziness, unbelief and neglects herein?

The good Lord spare and pardon, yet shame us, and rowse us to our duty, that
we may no longer confer with that flesh and blood that cannot enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; tbat the Ministry may effectually quicken the people to a
regular course of admonition; and proceed with them to an high censure, upon
just complaints of such as are found obstinate.

Certainly, this is the remedy appointed by Christ for a Reformation, and while
this way is obstructed, either by us, or our people, it is no great wonder, if
men's devices, though never so handsome, remain successeless. Here we may see
with tears in our eyes, and pity and sorrow in our hearts, the blessed child
of Reformation stick, notwithstanding all our care, pains and diligence for
strict admissions to the Sacraments, or the hot separations of others from our
Churches.

Yet let me not be mistaken; I know, we ought to proceed in censure according
to rule, in fit season, not when it is like to do no good, in due measure; not
publicly when the fault is private in a right manner, with show of love and
prudence, and by a person that is likeliest to prevail if the Lord will. And
lastly, we are not to proceed to excommunication, as before was noted, until
obstinacy appear after admonition; yet though it must be done fitly, it must be
done; though all the circumstances must be heeded, the substance may not be
slighted; though there must be a right object, place, time, measure, manner,
and person observed, as near as we can in doing the duty, yet it is still in it
self a duty, and to be undertaken by us though it seem grievous.

It Is sad to observe how froward the spirits of most are unto a right execution
of this great duty; which I must have leave to note in a few particulars.

1. There are some, that hold themselves obliged to admonish Some will admonish
the Communicants only.
such only as are fellow-communicants with them at the Lords Table; and this we
have cause to bewail as a general error, though a very great one. Are not the
rest of the Congregation brethren and within, and Church Members as well as the
Communicants? do their prejudices and surmizes, against the proceedings about
admission, which hinders their present communion, or their scandalous
conversation, destroy their Church-relation, and cut off their brotherhood?
yea, this Ordinance of brotherly admonition, the very excommunicate have
interest in; account him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.

2. Others there are, that though they do sometimes (in a cold Some admonish
but look not after the issue, Mat. 18. 15
and careless manner) tell a brother of his fault; yet they look not after the
issue; they go no further in the way of Christ then this one step; whereas they
are charged to expect repentance, or else to proceed with a further
application, toward excommunication.

Here also we might sit down and weep; this is the great Remora of Reformation
on the peoples part; and their general and deep guilt; for my part, I cannot
see any ground to hope, for any considerable suecesse of discipline, until this
plain and weighty duty, be wisely, seriously, and resolvedly undertaken by our
people, and cheerfully and faithfully gone through withal. For, if that famous
text, Mat. 18. 15, 16. were but once suffered to write it self in its power
upon our hearts, we should be fully satisfied, that all the work of Discipline
and Church-Reformation does not lie upon the Ministers hands.

3. Above all, those of the people must needs be blamed, that Some expect the
Minister should do all, and separate for that which is their own fault.
are either departed already, or are still threatening to separate from us,
because many of our members are scandalous. Alas, that such would look
throughout the Bible, and see that the scandal of the brethren is no just
ground of separation. Besides, the true reason why our members are so
scandalous, is their own neglect of this duty of Admonition, which ought to
precede their excommunication.

Had such first observed their duty, according to the degrees of it enjoined by
Christ, and brought the business to the hearing of the Church, or but their
Minister, and then such admonished-scandalous-obstinate persons had been
cherished and indulged, and his good and regular endeavors discountenanc't;
there had been some cause, indeed, to complain, though not to depart; but,
alas, the world knows the matter is otherwise. Such persons, generally, first
neglect their own duty of admonition, and then, unreasonably clamor against
their Minister, for either not doing their duty for them. or for suffering that
which he cannot help, and then labor to set all on fire, and run away.

I had now ended, but that, me thinks, I hear, the people murmr; and some of
my brethren in the Ministry object against what has now been urged.

The people, I know, are apt to say, What, must we admonish Mat. 7. 6.
our pearls before swine, nor give holy reproof unto dogs.

But such may be easily answered, though hardly satisfied. Let us do our duty,
and though the heavens fall we shall catch no harm: who is he that shall harm
you, if ye be followers of that which is good. How safe is that soul that
commits it self in well-doing into the hands of a faithful Creator! how happy
is he, whom when the great Master comes, he shall find so doing, in the midst
of a people so careless of this great duty!

Again, how do we know our brethren to be dogs and swine, before we have tried
and found them such, by their evil entertainment of the pearl of admonition,
and the holy thing of reproof; but suppose the worse, thy labor of duty to
Christ, and love to thy brother is not wholly lost; for thou have prepared him
for a further Ordinance appointed by Christ, for his repentance, recovery and
salvation, viz. the admonition of the Church and Excommunication.

That which some of my brethren are apt to say, me thinks is

True, I choose rather to term this censure, excommunication [Suspension] is
in controversy; And 3. This term of [suspension] in this sense, seems
offensive to some brethren. And I intend it in no other sense then Amesius
does, upon the head of Ecclesiastical discipline; where lie purposely treats of
excommunication, and calls Suspension from the Supper, etc. Excommunicatio
minor.

The truth is, that which I have so much pressed under the name of
Excommunication, is no other thing then that which other brethren call
suspension. And provided, that this suspension be intended, and regularly
proceeded unto as a Church-censure, distinct from the suspension of the
ignorant; which is no censure (and which we have debated before.) Me thinks
this might at least for the present suffice us. Considering.

1. That all do maintain without difference that uspension from the Supper, is
a necessary and main part of the greater excommunication, grounded on all those
Scriptures, that warrant that greater censure. It Is therefore also called
Excommunicatiominor (as before) as the first degree of the censure among the
Jews, Niddai, was.

2. Many learned and reverend men affirm, that the greater excommunication it
self, does not debar men of any other public Vid. Cottons way of N. E. p. 39,
40*
Ordinance, besides the Supper.

3. So far, we may proceed, as to cast persons out of communion in the Supper,
and yet keep our selves and the person censured, safe from the Law of the Land;
and some think, no further. And if the word [Excommunication] should offend the
Law, (it being not Scripture-word) may be forborne or changed.

4. But principally, though our Ministerial authority may be larger, yet our
power can extend no fatther, as things now are; for the Church or place of
assembling, is a place of common Civil right; so that though we should sentence
a scandalous person, unfit for communion with us in all Ordinances; yet he may
come in to the common place of divine worship, and join with us in the Word and
Prayer, and do body can hinder him, without doing him civil wrong, by
entrenching on his property, and shutting his own door upon him.

I humbly present this, to be seriously conside^ed by two sorts Harding had
said, that we would have all that will not receive to be driven out of the
Church. O, Mr. Harding, you know this is neither the doctrine nor practice of
our Churches. As Jewd. priv. Mass. Ant. 1. p. 59.
of brethren. By such as suffer the Communicants to take the Bread and Wine
from off the Table with their own hands; suppose the Excommunicate should
intrude, and take also, how would you help your selves? especially if he do it
in a decent manner, and without a legal disturbance. Secondly, I commend it to
the consideration of those other brethren that do so vehemently press us to
excommunicate the scandalous from all Ordinances, and the very place of divine
worship. I cannot then see how we can well avoid one of these two great
inconveniences; either to withhold the civil right of such persons from them;
or to put the whole Church out of the Synagogue, and to betake our selves most
inconveniently to a private house.

But it may be said, how did the primitive Christians?

They met together in houses of their own private right, and

But it may be with great weight, and seriousness questioned, Augustine, and
others affirm, and is not this our case?

I dare not determine how far this is the case of some parishes, especially
where the people are generally loose, and disaffected to their Minister.

Yet, I conceive, that most Congregations are made up of three sorts of people.
1. A middle, moderate and well tempered

There is but little fear, that the first peaceable and moderate sort, will be
offended at the censuring of the scandalous.

The second sort, indeed, may be offended by discipline; and yet I hope, there
are but few (for examination of knowledge offends most) and these few are not
very apt to separation neither.

The last sort, they indeed are aptest to separate; but the want (and not the
practice) of discipline, is likeliest to offend them, and occasion or further
their separation, as experience witnesses.

And I cannot but note, for my own, and for my brethrens comfort, that whereas
it is most speciously and vigorously objected by some, that our stirring about
discipline, has offended the people and made them to separate; it may be yet
observed, that but few, if any of those, that are enemies to discipline, are
separated from us; and generally, such as are already separated, or such as are
likely yet to separate, are such as complain, that discipline is not stricter
then it is, or then it should be.

Now as for these, I fear, they will be gone, when we have yielded all we can
to hold them: O that tears could quench this distempered zeal of men, enflamed
after measures of purity unattainable, or, if to be attained, inconsistent,
with the truth of God, or the peace and unity of his Churches.

FINIS.
The Books following are to be sold by Abel Roper at the Sun against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet.
In Folio.
THe General History of the Turks from the beginning of that nation. with the
notable expedition of the Christian Princes against them. By Richard Knolls.

The Works of that famous and worthy Minister of Christ Mr. William Perkins,
the first volume.

Ovids Metamorphosis Englished, Mythologiz'd, and represented in figures, G.
Sandys Esquire

Dr. Fulk his Confutation of the translation and glosses of the College at
Rhemes upon the New Testament, and his own Annotations upon it.

A French, English Dixonary compiled by Randle Cotgrave, with another in
English and French, with the late additions of J. Howel Esquire

Theatrum Botanicum, the Theater of Plants, or an universal complete Herbal,
composed by John Parkinson the Kings Herbarist.

The famous and memorable Works of Josephus, a man of much honor and learning
among the Jews; translated into English by Tho. Ledge Dr. in Physic.

The holy Court in five Tomes, written in French by N. Caussin, and translated
in English by Sir Th. Hawkins and o-others.

The Philosophy commonly called the Morals, written by the learned Philosopher
Plutarch, translated into English by Ph. Holland Dr. in Physic.

The general practice of Physic, containing all the diseases and infirmities
incident to the body of man, and by what means they may be remedied, a a Book
of singular use to all that are studious in Physic.

Government and obedience as they stand directed and determined by Scripture
and reason, by John Hall.

The Country Justice, containing the practice of the Justices of the Peace out
of their Sessions much enlarged by its anthour Michael Dalton; and an Appendix
added of all such late Acts and O^dinances, as are to be put in execution by
Justices of the Peace.

The History of Titus Livius that famous Roman History newly revised and
enlarged, with a supplement, rendered in English by an able hand.

The history of Venice, with the Wares of Cyprus, written in Itallian by Paulo
Paruta, and put into English by Henry Earl of Monmouth.

In Quarto.
It inerarium totius Sacrae Scripturae, the travel of the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, Judges, Kings, our Savior Christ and his Apostles, with a
description of the Towns and places, also a Treatise of the weights and
measures mentioned in the Scriptures, and reduced to our English valuation,
quantity and weight by H. Bunting, a work of excellent use for the
understanding of the holy Scriptures.

Admirable events, with moral relations written in French, J. Peter Camus Bp.
of Belley and translated into English by S. V.

A Treatise of Policy and Religion by Tho. Fitzherbert, Esquire

The history of Episcopacy from our Saviors time, by P. Heylin D. D.

Vindiciae foederis, a Treatise of the Covenant of God entered into with
mankind in the several kinds and degrees of it much enlarged by its Author Mr.
Thomas Blake, Minister of the Gospel, a little before his death, unto which is
annexed a Sermon preached at his Funeral, by Mr. Anthony Burgess, and a
Funeral oration made upon his death by Mr. Samuel Shaw.

The Covenant sealed, or a Treatise of the Sacraments of both Covenants,
polemical and practical, especially of the Sacraments of the Covenant of grace,
by Mr. Thomas Blake.

-- His Answer to Mr. Tombs letter in vindication of the Birth-priviledge, or
Covenant-holinesse of believers and their issue in the time of the Gospel,
together with the right of Infants to baptism.

Three Sermons preached by Master Thomas Jacomb Min. of Mart. Ludgate.

1. Enochs walk and change, at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Richard Vines on
Genesis 5. 24.

2. The active and public spirit, at Paul's upon Acts 13. 36. former part.

3. Gods mercy for man's, at the spittle upon Mat. 5. 7.

Twelve Sermons preached upon several eminent and public occasions by that
learned Orthodox and powerful preacher, Mr. Richard Vines.

The Birth of mankind, the woman's book, or a guide for women in their
conceptions, bearing and suckling their children, illustrated with figures by
Tho. Reynald Dr. of Physic.

The perfect conveyancer, or several select and choice, Presidents collected by
four several Sages of the Law.

Rules and Orders for the regulation of the Court of the Upper Bench, published
by the Judges of that Court.

Rules and Orders for the regulation of the Court of the Common Bench,
published by the Judges thereof.

Orders for the regulation of the High Court of Chancery.

The Sum of a conference between John Rainolds and John Heart, touching the head
and faith of the Church.

The whole art of Husbandry by Barnaby Googe Esquire enlarged by Garv. Markham.

Gods mercy mixed with his Justice, laid open in Several Sermons by that
learned and judicious Divine Mr. John Cotton.

A discovery of the deceitfulness of man's heart, by Daniel Dyke. B. D.

The Assize of bread by John Penkith-man.

Via recta ad vitam longam, with a Treatise of Bathes, and of Tobacco, by Tho.
Venner Doctor in Physic.

Considerations upon common fields and enclosures, wherein is showed the
benefit of enclosures.

The Posing of parts by John Brinsley.

A paraphrase upon Solomon's Song, by George Sandis Esquire

Bucanus common places in English.

A Discourse of the visible Church, by Fr. Fulwood Minister of the Gospel.

A true relation of a dispute between Francis Fulwood Minister, and on Tho.
Salthouse a Quaker.

The noble order, or the honor which God confers on them that honor him, in a
Sermon preached before the house of Lords, on 1 Samuel 2. 30. by Daniel Evance.

The growth and spreading of heresy, set forth in a Sermon preached before the
house of Commons on 2 Pet. 2. 2. by T. Hodges.

Paul's last farewell, or Sermon preached at the Funeral of that godly and
learned Minister of Jesus Christ Mr. Thomas Blake by Mr. Anthony Burgess,
Pastor at the Church at Sutton Cold-field in Warwickshire.

Plays. The Countrey-Girle Mercurius Britanicus


In Octavo.
Lexicon Greco latinum in novum Testamentum Georgio Pasore.

Piscator in omnes Epistolas in Nov. Test.

The story of stories, or the life of Christ according to the four Evangelists
with the harmony of them.

Haynes Lat. Grammar.

Divine and moral speculations in metrical numbers upon various subjects, by Dr
Robert Aylet.

Hoptons Concordance of years enlarged.

Rastals computation of the years of our Lord, with the years of the Reigns of
all the Kings of England.

Clavis Graecae Linguae.

Leicesters Commonwealth.

Corderius translated Gramatically, by John Brinsly.

Ovids Metamorphosis Gramatically translated by John Brinsley.

Ovids Festivals translated into English verse.

Sandys paraphrase on the Psalms of David, and upon the Hymns in the Old and
New Testament.

The practice of the high Court of Chancery, with the nature of the several
offices belonging to that Court, and the reports of many choice Cases.

Reports of special Law Cases, touching the Customs and Liberties of the City
of London, by Sir H. Culthrop Recorder of London.

The History of Massianello of Naples the second part.

The Italian Convert, or the life of Galeacius Carracciolus, his admirable
conversion from Popery, and forsaking a rich Marquesdom for the Gospels sake,
illustrated with several figures.

Horatii Poemeta Annotationibus, Joannis Bond.

The benefits of Christ's death.

A Sermon preached at Sussex Assizes by Zach^us Montague.

A new A. B. C. or a short Catechism according to the rules and direction for
suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, in case of ignorance by John
Buckley.

In 12.
St. Augustines Confessions translated, and with Marginal notes illustrated,
wherein diverse Antiquities are explained by W. Wats. D. D.

The Complete Angler, being a discourse of rivers, fish ponds, of fish and
fishing.

A help to English history, containing a sucession of all the Kings Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls and Bishops, with a description of all the chief places in
England, the names and ranks of the Viscounts and Barons, and a Catalogue of
the Baronets and Knights.

Ovids Metamorphosis Englished, by G. Sandys Esquire

The history of Scotland during the minority of K. James, by Robert Johnston.

Esops Fables English.

Moretons threefold state of man.

Spare minuits, or resolved Meditations, by Arthur Warwick.

Satyrae seriae, or the secrets of things written in moral and politic
Observations.

Withers Britans remembrance, second part.

-- His Psalms 16.

Jueli Apologia. --

The Devout Christian Communicant, by Nicholas Hunt.

M. Annaeus Lucanus de Bello Civili.

A Copy Book of all the usual hands written in England, methodically digested,
as may best direct such practioners in writing, as want the assistance of a
Master.

The true way to heaven, or a Christian storehouse, a Book of Prayers and
Meditations for every day of the week, morning and evening, also prayers fitted
for all occasions, by John Gee.

FINIS.
AN Appendix. Touching CONFIRMATION, Occasioned by the Reverend Mr. Hanmore,
his pious and learned Exercitation of Confirmation.
By, F. F.
SInce this Treatise of the Church was put into Introduction.
the Press, I have had the benefit and great content of perusing our Reverend
brother, Mr. Hanmore, his exercitation of confirmation. Some, happily may be
willing to surmise that our two Propositions are irreconcilable, and interpret
me an enemy to that most ancient, useful and desirable Ordinance. Wherefore, if
I may possibly prevent so scandalous a censure. I shall not venture to hold my
Reader in so long suspense till he come to the pages where confirmation is
considered in the book, nor yet barely to acknowledge my allowance of it under
my hand; but after my humble thanks heartily tendered to our worthy Author for
his excellent pains in so seasonable a subject: I do also presume earnestly to
beseech my Reverend brethren, that what the learned and zealous Master Baxter
has so smartly pressed upon the Ministry about it, may be speedily and
seriously considered and undertaken by us.

Yet, least I should dash upon the other rock, I humbly crave the leave to
offer, without offense, whether there be not some few proviso's touching
confirmation, to be distinctly noted; to the end it may prove (which the God of
truth and peace grant) a happy mean of reconciling at length the two long
divided and differing brethren; and whether they may not be such as these.

1. That such of the Catechmmens as appear (when called to be Ignorant
Ch^istians not to be confirmed are Church members.
confirmed) grossly ignorant of the fundamentals of Religion, and consequently
such, as cannot personally profess the faith as they ought, be,
notwithstanding this their ignorance, and the further just suspention of their
confirmation, still acknowledged to be Church Members.

So far I doubt not but we are agreed, for our Reverend Author makes no
question, but the Catechumens are in p. 52. 54, and 57.
Church State; and then asserts, that if they give not (when called to it) a
satisfactory account of their faith, they are to continue and to be left in
that condition; [indeed] without enjoying any further privilege as himself
adds; yet, as he conceives, p. 60*
not to be cast out of the Church.

1. I acknowledge, that the Catechumens (baptized in Infancy) Perfection Moral,
Physical.
are but incomplete and imperfect members; yet I crave leave to distinguish;
for there is a moral and there is a physical compleatnesse and perfection; a
man that has all the excellencies and ornaments Perfectio transcendatis est
qua ens dicitur perfectum quatenus ipsi nihil deest in integretate essendi.
of a man, is usually said to be a perfect, a complete man; yet a child, that
has almost nothing but the bare essentials of a man in it, is as truly said
to be a perfect or complete man as he; the first in a moral, the last in a
physical or metaphysical sense; for omne ens est verum and perfectum; so there
are babes in Christ, in his School, his Church, as truly, and in that sense,
as perfectly so, as strong men; and such as are not fit; through ignorance, to
be received to higher privileges, have yet the essentials of Church Members,
though they want the ornament of such, as our Perfection of essence, ornament.
Reverend Author styles confirmation they have, therefore the perfection of
essence, but not of ornament; and though I need not assert them to be perfecta,
yet I hope it is no offense, to say, they are perfect membra, and not half
Christians and half Heathens.

Object. It is acknowledged that confirmation was of old called (...), the
perfecting unction; and the confirmed were called (...) perfecti vel persecti
Christiani; perfect, or perfect Christians.

Answ. Yet it may be also noted. 1. That among the ancients The Ancients deny
perfection rather to the Catechumens not baptized. O^se^v. l. 2. c. 3
the imperfection of membership is generally attributed to the Catechumeni, not
yet baptized, non initiati, non illuminati, as they used to speak, rather then
to the baptized, not yet confirmed, of these speaks Albaspinaeus (quoted by our
Author) corporis Christi perfecta, and omnino formata membra non erant; for the
baptized are initiati, not entering, but entered, not forming but formed;
Areopagitam de Hierarch. eccl. initio.
accordingly when Dionisius would note the privilege of the members of the
Church, above the Catechumens; he distributes the Church into the initiati, or
the baptized, and the fideles, or the Communicants at the holy table; and we
hear nothing of a third sort, viz. the confirmed, betwixt these two; Doctrina
(inquit) de Sacramentis e Scripturis de prompta solis fidelibus and initiatis
est communicanda.

2 The Fathers usually adorning what they treat of with Rethorical No a^gument
to be grounded upon the ancients single expressions. Credunt and infantes. --
Corpus mortis in primis parentibus generavit eos peccatores, spiritus vitae in
posterioribus parentibus regeneravit eos fideles. Aug. tom. 10 p. 421 Octa.
flowers; it may be questioned, whether it be safe to build a point of such
weight and consequence as this is, upon single expressions; especially in the
case in hand; wherein we find them varying something among themselves.
Chysostome and Austine style the catechumeni not yet baptized, brethren.
Austine affirms, that infants being baptized are membra Christi; yea, and
fideles. Albaspinaeus and Pachimer (acquainting us with antiquity) that none
could be a perfect Christian, but be that was confirmed; and that of old
confirmation, was therefore called (...), perfection. Again, that no one was
thought to deserve the name of Christian, unless he were confirmed, and that
confirmation seemed to give, as it were, the last stroke to perfection. And yet
again, that the Eucharist is the perfection and consummation Catechumeni sunt
fid^le (inquit haymo) quia credunt in verum deum, sed quia nondum sunt
baptizati non sunt sancti super 1. ad Ephesians.
of both baptism and confirmation, and that those alone were accounted fideles
or the faithful, who were not only baptized and confirmed, but had been
partakers of the Eucharist; though now the Church sees reason to maintain,
that such as are not yet baptized are Christians, holy, and faithful, or
believers, and therefore, or upon that account, to receive them to Baptism.

I doubt not but these various expressi^ns of the Ancients are easily
reconciled as will offer it self in the particulars following; therefore,

3. There is a perfection of Church State, and a perfection of Perfection of
Church State, and Chu^ch-priviledge.
Church-priviledge; those that were baptized, though not confirmed, were
perfect, with a perfection of Church State, though not yet perfect with a
perfection of Church-priviledge, until they were confirmed; which our Author
has observed, and excellently collected and approved for us; to be all that
was meant by that perfection which the ancients ascribed to confirmation; there
were (says he) such as by imposition of hands, were admitted p. 15.
to the participation of all the privileges of Church members, and so (that is
by his participation) became, and were declared to be complete and perfect
Christians.

Again, more plainly (having largely discoursed of the perfection attained by
confirmation,) that by perfection (says he) is meant no other then their right
to, and enjoyment of, those privileges, especially the Lords Supper, will
appear from the following passages; which he transcribeth also out of
Dionysius, Areopagita, Albaspinaeus, and the Apology of the Waldenses, page 21,
22.

4. Though, I must confess, I think the ancients sometimes, at least, if not
ordinarily, meant something more, viz. a perfection of grace, as well as
Church-priviledge, by that perfection which was usually attributed by them to
confirmation; for, says Cyprian, p. 20.
cited by our Author, such as are baptized in the Church are offered to the
Overseers of the Church, that by our prayer and imposition of hands they may
receive the holy Ghost, and be consummate (through the gifts thereof) by the
Lords seal; tum demum (says he in another place) plene sanctificari, that is
the grace (and esse filii Dei (that is the privilege) possunt si Sacramento
utroque nascantur; and yet more fully to our purpose; it is also necessary
(says he) for him that is baptized to be anointed, that the chrysme being
received, he may be the annoited of God, (i. e. perfectly a Christian, as it is
gloss'd) and have in him the grace of Christ.

Yet, here again, we may distinguish, and with ease and pass over Perfection
of the memb^r, and of the membership.
any objection hence to be raised; for there is a perfection of the member, and
a perfection of the membership. I grant confirmation may serve to perfect the
member, but deny it any hand in perfecting the membership, viz. the persons
relation to, or interest in the Church, which I believe the ancients never
intended; a plaster applied to a weak part or member of our bodies, may be
said to strengthen or perfect the member, but it has no influence at all upon
its membership, in which it stood as firmly by its union with the body, though
but a feeble and weak member, as the strongest part of the body; a child may
be made by good education, a more perfect child, but that adds nothing to his
filiation child-ship, or relation to his Parents or Family.

This is excellently illustrated by our authors own gloss upon p. 55.
the words of Paraeus in Heb. 6. 2. Infantes Christianorum jure promissionis
baptizabantur in infantia pueritiam egressi impositione manuum in ecclesiam
adultorum recipiebantur; not (says our Author hereupon) that these were two
distinct Churches; for they did both concur, according to their several
capacities to the m^king up of one, but rather two distinct forms or classes
of persons in one and the same Church.

So that as Scholars of the lowest form, are as truly and completely members
of the School, as those of the highest; so those The lowest form of Scholla^s
is in the School.
that are baptized, and not confirmed, are as truly and perfectly members of
the Church as those that are confirmed and invested with all Church Priviledges.

This is also p^ainly intimated in the very word [confirmation:] The word
confirmation c^rrie^h so much. Priscis temporibus impo^itione manuum baptismum
confirma^i solebat. Walf S^rab. ^eb. eccl. c. 26.
we would not confirm the catechumens, in a state without the Church; neither,
in a state of half Church Membership; their very being to be confirmed, implies
they are fully in the estate already. This Ordinance was of old, therefore
thought to confirm Baptism, or the state wherinto we are baptized, or as the
Waldenses, it was in fidei confirmationem, ad stabilitatem Militiamque fidei;
whereupon the Catechumens were admitted indeed to higher privilege, or form
in the Church; but not into any new Church State; only they were confirmed
therein, wherein they were perfectly before, though as Ames clearly to the
point of infants, non adeo perfesta sunt membra ecclesiae, ut possunt admitti
ad omnia ejus privilegia participanda.

Secondly, I think it will hence follow that a persons first foederal right and
Covenant Relation to the Church, does not dissolve A persons first foederal
right not dissolved for want of confi^mation.
upon his conviction of gross ignorance, when he comes to be confirmed, for if
only by this federal right a person stand in his Church State during his
infancy, and if when at the adult estate, he give not satisfaction to the
Church, by personal profession, by reason of ignorance (though confirmation be
justly denied him) he is to continue in the same condition he was before; then
the want of giving satisfaction to the Church for confirmation, does not
destroy federal right, or make invalid that first way of right he had in the
Church, by means of being born of believing parents.

Doubtless, the Church is bound to require, and every child of the Church to
render an account, when duly called, of their knowledge, faith, and
conversation; yet I bumbly conceive that where a satisfactory account is not
obtained, as the Church State of such a person is not lost, so the way and mean
of this interest is not changed; though I conceive that such a ones personal
profession in his general owning the true faith, and usual attending Gods
public worship, does super-adde a kind of new right, and mingle it with such
a persons, former right had by his birth-priviledge.

We do not imagine that the former right which a person who is now deservedly
confirmed had in the Church by birth-priviledge, is wholly lost or made void,
by confirmation, but rather confirmed to him, his baptism, and consequently his
first right to baptism, viz One that is confirmed does not thereby lose his
former way of right in the Church.
his birth privilege being confirmed to him and nothing taken away from him
thereby; only he has now a double right in the Church and Covenant, or rather
a right therein two ways, and both acknowledged by the Church, through foederal
faith, at baptism, through personal faith, at a confirmation; so much rather,
that right which a person, not confirmed, and so not owned by the Church, upon
personal profession, has still in the Church, must needs be his birthright,
or that which he had, by birth-priviledge; or at least that is not lost, and
another way of right introduced, by his not being confirmed: as a person that
is borne a member of a family or a Commonwealth, continues to be such (while
this his relation remains) upon the account of his birthright only, or not
so properly any other ways.

I am confident we read not of one person, e^ther in Scripture or We ^ead of
none in Scr^pt^^e or ant^quity that thus lost his birthright
Antiquity, that lost his Birthright in the Church, any other way then by
heresy, schism, or (the perfection of both). Apostasy; I think few will add
excommunication.

Object. If any should imagine that the birthright of such is lost, I think it
must be upon this ground; because the child has no right but in his parent,
but at the adult estate children are to be admitted upon their own account, as
distinct to their parents.

Answ. But the whole reason is peccant; these two propositions. (1. That
foederal holiness to which we were borne, proceeds into the adult estate. 2.
That the children of believers are themselves the subjects of their own right
in the Church and baptism, and consequently are considered and taken into
Covenant as distinct from, and not in their parents;) are endeavored to be
cleared, as occasion was administered in the Treatise. The first of them I have
just now briefly touched also; for the latter of them a word or two, and I have
done with this second proviso.

Foederal right, has respect either unto the means and way of its conveyance,
which is the parents membership as our Reverend Foederal right respects the way
of convaiance, and the subject of it.
Author affirmed; or to its seat and subject, which I conceive, can be no
other but the child it self, as distinct to its parent; Right is an accident,
and what can be the subject, wherein it inhereth, but that of which it is
predicated; it is not the fathers, but the childs right of which we are
speaking, and therefore the child and not the father is the subject of it.

The promise, its true, is first to the parent, then to the child; Credunt and
infantes unde ^r^dunt? quomodo credunt? fide parentum. Aug. Tom. 10. p. 421
Octavo.
yea, it is to the child, by means of the parent; yet it is to the child as
distinct from his parent; it is to you, and then to your seed by you, but yet
to your seed, as well as you, and you and your seed, are distinguished in the
Covenant, and not confounded, or one involved in the other; and consequently
the right in the promise accordingly.

An estate is made to me and all my children; now as soon as my children are in
being, they are as distiguished from me, in this conveyance, and by virtue of
this their interest, distinct from mine, they shall possess, when I, and my
right with me, are dead; and thus it is in the heavenly conveyance; therefore
the promise is to the child, the child is holy, the child is borne to God,
the child is in the Kingdom of heaven, the child is to be baptized, as
distinct from, and as well as the parent.

Thirdly, I crave leave to enquire also why such as are at years and not
confirmed, proving scandalous are not to be dealt with as Prove. 3* All church
members liable to church censure.
scandalous Church Members, viz. by Church-censure? otherwise, should the
peoples crossenesse, prejudices, or any thing else unhappily prevent, the
desired recovery of confirmation among us, we are like, in a while, to lose all
discipline with it; but let it be seriously weighed, are not such persons
within? who will say they are without? and they must be one of the two, or else
the Apostles enumeration is defective; yea, are they not within by Birth, 1
Cor. 5 12
Baptism, Education, and profession? else, why should they, if capable, have
been confirmed? for who would confirm them in a state, without the Church,
where there is no [probable] salvation?

But the doubt is not whether they be within, but whether they should be liable
to Church-censure; but is not a brother and one Proprium and adaequatum
objectum hujus censurae, est scandalum datum a fratre, de consc. p 252
within all one? 1 Cor. 5. 11. is not the scandal of a brother the adequate and
proper object of censure? as Ames, or rather with the Apostle, are not such as
are within, quatenus within, and consequently all that are within, liable to
the judgment of the Church? are there any without that she does judge; or any
within that she does not? and what judgment does the Apostle mean if not
excommunication? 1 Cor. 5. 12, 13.


Is there any room in Christ's house, not under his keys? any part of his
Kingdom not under Scepter? or any form in his School, not under his rod? or
any offender therein that may not need it; which, if spared, may not endanger,
and if used, may not save the child, and others too? yea, indeed, what one end
of discipline is there, that may not as well be attained by the application of
it, to the scandalous not confirmed, as to the scandalous, that are confirmed?

Obj. I humbly conceive that though they never had actual right to the Lords
Supper, or other the privileges of complete members; and therefore, they are
not capable of being cut off from them by excommunication; yet they are capable
of being cut off, if they are on the stock, and to be cast out, if they be
indeed within.

Answ. Indeed a man that never was invested with it, cannot be cut off from an
actual right in those higher privileges of Church Members yet even from these,
a person not confirmed, may doubtless be cast further off, by Church-censure,
then he was As of old the competentes offendi^g, were no^ cut off from the
actual enjoyment of the Eucharist which they had not, yet from Prayer, which
they h^d, they were. And again, the audientes were not cut off from prayer,
which they had not, yet they were from hearing, being wholly cast out of what
they had, Vid. can. 13. Concl Nic. cum can. 5. Neo c^sar. Synod. ut postea.
before; for, before, there was only confirmation betwixt such a person, and
his actual right in those higher mysteries; but, now both repentance and
confirmation; without confirmation a man has a remote right to the Supper, but
by excommunication, none will deny but his right will be set at a farther
distance, and made more remote.

Again, there is (no doubt) more in the censure of excommunication, then a bare
cutting off from astual right in the Supper, etc. which members, not yet
confirmed, are capable of; there is a public declaring against the person and
the scandal, that the sinner may be shamed and the rest warned; a renouncing
the offender, as an Heathen, and a Publican; a debarring him of his claim,
which he ought to have made to confirmation, and the Lords Supp^r; with a
judicial charging him that, during his impenitency, he expect neither; as also
a solemn casting him out of private fellowship with the rest of the members,
and to be marked and avoided by them, if not also a delivering of him to Satan.

Such a course as this, if wisely and with sincerity and courage proceeded in,
together with this Ordinance of confirmation, Excommunication and con^i^ma^ion
the b^st means of reformation.
are, I conceive, the best means we are capable of, for Reforming our
Churches, at present; yea, this way of applying censures to all within our
Churches, whether submitting to examination, or confirmation, or not, I dare
venture to affirm will be found at last, the most undoubted way of Christ for
Church-reformation, And the most undoubted way is excommunication.
while both examination and confirmation will be laboring in a cloud of
vexatious controversy; which yet the good Lord may in time dispel.

But as for imposition of hands in absolution, I think, the Churches intention,
did not refer it to imposition of hands in consirmation; Imposition of hands in
absolu^ion had no reference to that in confirmation.
as if it were to signify the restoration of those higher privileges conferred
by confirmation; but rather, that imposition of hands, being a ceremony
universally added to solemnize any great and remarkable grace and honor
conferred on a person, it was likewise introduced into absolution, as to
confirmation upon the same ground, it having no more respect to confirmation in
this Ordinance, then to Ordination, or any other great action, that was usually
adorned with the like ceremony. Though I cannot but applaud the great ingenuity
of my author, in this his very neat and uniform gloss.

I am the more confirmed, that the ancients intended no such thing by their
laying on hands in absolution; because, it is most evident that they had
ecclesiastical censures, even for the catechumeni nondum baptizati, the
catechumens none, yet baptized; and much rather, for those that were baptized,
though not yet confirmed; de catechumenis denique qui prolapsi sunt, statuerunt
tribus annis eos a Catechumenorum oratione s^p^ratos postea recipidebere; Cent.
Magd. 4. c. 6. p. 426. l. 44
therefore, they appointed, that if any of the Catechumens proved scandalous,
they should be separated from the prayer of the Catechumens, for three years;
if it be demanded qui statuerunt? Ruffinus tells us, these words before
recited, are punctually and expressly the thirteenth canon of the counsel of
Nice; with which the Neocaesarian Synod in their fifth canon, do well agree.
Catechumenus (inquit) id est Audiens, qui ingreditur in ecclesiam, and stat cum
catechuminis, si peccare fueri^ visus, figens genua, andiat verbum, ut se
abstineat ab illo peccato quod fecit: quod si in eo perdurat, objici omnino
debere; if a catechumen shall be seen to sin, he shall hear the word
kneeling upon The Centurists note some difference between the Greek book and
that of Ruffinus touching the censure of the catechumeni.
on his knees, that he may leave his sin; but if he harden himself and
continue in his sin, he shall be wholly cast out.

The Greek book of the Nicene canons, the Centurists have observed to differ
somewhat from those of Ruffinus collection, and indeed it differs from it in
this thirteenth canon about the censure of scandalous catechumens, expressing
it a little more plainly; placuit hoc Sancto and Magno concilio de
catechumenis, qui lapsi sunt, ut tribus annis inter audientes verbum sunt
tantummodo post, haec vero orent cum catechumenis; it pleased this holy and
great council concerning the catechumens, who have sinned, that for three
years they abide among those who hear the Word only, and after that time
they pray with the catechumens.

Give me leave to note a little difficulty here; the counsel styled A
difficulty touching the audientes and competentes.
the Neocaesarian, makes catechumenus and audiens all one; the Nic^n^ counsel
makes the state of the audientes to be below, the state of the catechumeni,
into which these are cast back by Church-censure, [int^r audientes,] The former
also makes the Censure of the catechumeni consist in the manner of their
hearing [figentes genua] the latter makes it to consist in being cast from a
state of Prayer to a state of hearing only.

But the difficulty vanishes, by noting a distinction, we find, Catechumenos
duplices facit Rabanus. l. 1. c. 16. de cler. instit. alii enim simpliciter
catechumeni dicuntur, ac erant ii qui audicbane and discebant doctrinam fidei,
alii vero competentes, qui jam -- so baptizari petebant. Cent. 9. c. 7. p. 291.
l. 50.
of old made of the catechumeni; some were properly audientes; some competent^,
viz. such as desired baptism; So, I think, there was a difference in the
censure belonging to them; the audientes sinning, were to hear [figentes genua]
a continuing obstinate, to be wholly cast out; the competentes sinning, were to
be put back again, inter audientes; that is, to loose the place of prayer (to
which, it seems, one sort of the catechumini (viz. the competentes) were
admitted; and the other (viz. the audientes were not) being audientes verbum
tantummodo; the Neocaesarian couns^l ^eeme to provide censure for the first
[viz. the audientes] making them and the catechumeni all one; and the Nicene
counsel for the second [viz. the competentes] making these and the catechumeni
one; as may with easy observation of the Reader appear.

The Observation I would make hereof is, that there is no relation to the
Church, but it has its proper censure; and persons offending, No relation to
the Church, but has its proper censure.
cannot be ejected from what they have not, they shall from what they have;
persons that hear and pray too, shall, if offending be debarred from prayer;
and persons, that hear only from that manner of hearing they do enjoy, or
wholly be cast out; and why not those that hear, and pray and communicate too,
if offending be first only denied the Supper? however, there is no
Church State without a Church censure in the practice of antiquity; yea, and
this censure may be safely called excommunnication also, (if we consult the
sixty seventh Canon of the Eleberine The censure of the catechumeni may be
styled excommunication.
counsel, concerning the catechumeni; prohibendum ne qua fidelis vel
catechumena, ant comicos aut viros scenicos habeat; quecunque hoc fecerit, a
communi^ne arceatur; though applied to a person neither confirmed nor baptized,
if under (atechisme; for it it is there forbidden, that any woman, whether
among the number of the faithful, or yet under catechumenacy, should marry a
Plaier; and, if any should, the same Church-censure is applicable to both; and
the chatechumena, as well as the fidelis, is to be driven from the communion of
the Church, or to be excommunicated.

And for that passage of Erasmus (though an excellent, yet a later writer) that
if such children as have been baptized, when A p^ssage of Erasmus considered.
they are grown up, do, being demanded, deny to ratify those things which
their Godfathers did promise in their name; fortassis expediet, etc. perhaps
it will be expedient that they be not constrained, but left to their own mind,
till they repent; and in the mean time [nec ad aliam interim vocari poenam nisi
ut ab Eucharistia sumenda, reliquisque Sacramentis arceantur;] have no other
punishment inflicted upon them, but this only that they be debarred from
receiving the Eucharist and other Sacraments.

Here first it may be noted that Erasmus makes it only a matter of expediency,
not necessity. 2. That also is much weakened with a fortassis; perhaps, it may
be expedient to let such alone; and perhaps, it may be expedient (at least in
some Ages, and some cases,) yea, necessary to inflict a higher censure on them.
3. Yea, Erasmus does more then intimate that the driving such as will not be
confirmed, from the Supper and other Sacraments, is a penalty inflicted upon
them; and so it cannot be but as it is gradus vel pars, a step unto, or part,
of excommunication, and then I am satisfied.

Neither, fourthly, do I think confirmation to be of so absolute necessity, as
that in no case a person might proceed into the higher Prove. 4. Confirmation
not absolutely necessary.
privileges of adult members without it; or unless he be first confirmed by
the Church.

1. Should such a thing be affirmed by any, as I hope it is not, or at least
not meant) it is not easy to perceive what a heavy charge of gross usurpation
is laid upon many of the Churches of Christ thereby, where the Ordinance of
confirmation was never in use, and yet the Ordinance of the Supper of the Lord
ever celebrated

The Centurists tell us, that of confirmation after baptism there De
confirmatione subsecura baptismum in alinarum praeterquam occidentalium
ecclefiarum historiis nihil legitur. Cent. 4. p. 422.
is nothing to be sound in the histories of any, but the Western Churches.

And it is very evident by the complaints of many of the most eminent Reformed
Divines, and their wishings for it, that Confirmation is not all in practice
with them.

And though there was the Name and shadow of it formerly in England, yet the
learned Doctor Hamond complains of its slight and perfunctory managing; and
desires, that therefore it might universally be done over again. Yea, our
worthy author himself observes that as confirmation was used by the Bishops
'twas lettle less then ridiculous, a mere vain and empty ceremony; an empty
shadow, a vain invention of superstitious men; and consequently not the
Ordinance of God in Scripture.

2. But to the matter it self; give me leave to note three steps or degrees of
necessity.

1. In the first step or degree of necessity, stands, I conceive, Three degree^
of necessity. In the first stands self-examination.
self-examination in order to a proxime right in the Supper; this seems to be
the very condition without which, no person can possibly have such a right or
privilege; and in that sense, absolutely necessary thereunto; this is express
in the text, without this a person sins if he takes, etc. and this, I mean
self-examination is that very thing, as Reverend Master Cotton well observes,
wherein alone the condition of right in the Eucharist [the Christian passeover]
now lies stricter upon us, then the condition of right in the Jewish Passover,
did upon them, in the time of the Law.

2. In the second step or degree of necessity, stands the parties In the second
stands knowledge, etc.
knowledge or ability to examine himself; this is, by evident consequence
grounded upon the former suppofition (viz. that none may receive without
self-examination) necessary also; for knowledge is a necessary to
self-examination, ratione medii; as this is, to a right in the Supper, ratione
precepti; and I conceive, without knowledge, some way appearing to the Churches
satisfaction, none ought at first to be admitted to the Lords Table; this being
to let a person into possession of that wherein it is evident he has no right;
I mean, immediately; for he that does not examine himself; has no such right,
he that has not competent knowledge does not examine himself; and he that
appears grossly ignorant, it is evident he has not competent knowledge; by the
first, he has no right coram Deo; and by the last, he has none coram Ecclesia.

3. In third and last or lowest step of necessity, stands in the In the third
stands the means of discovering this knowledge.
way and means of obtaining and discovering this knowledge, or ability for
self-examination [obtaining] on the persons part; and [discovering] on the
Churches.

The way and means for the Church to discover this knowledge or ability of her
members by, (for of that we are about) is usually called catechizing,
examination, or conference; or some of these made more solemn, by that
Ordinance we are now about, viz. confirmation.

Some one of these, I think; is necessary though not in so high a degree as the
former, yet not necessary. 1. With a necessity of the means, as if no person
might have a right in the Supper without it. 2. Nor necessary at all, as to the
giving any real right to a person in the Supper. 3. Nor yet necessary, by any
express command in order to the letting persons into profession of it. 4. But
yet necessary, with a necessity resulting from that care which the Church
should have of Gods Ordinance, as also of her own children; least she should
give the Sacrament to those, whom the Lord denies it; and least she suffer
what she may help, viz. her members to eat their own judgment; and this I
conceive is not only allowed, but required of the Church by general
Scriptures, requiring all things to be done to edifying; and faithfully
dispensed.

Alexander, seems to weaken the necessity of confirmation, Sed duo instituit
per seipsum, etc. part. 4. quaest. 8. memb ^ Art. 1.
by observing, that whereas baptism and the Supper were instituted by Christ
himself, and were therefore maxim necessaria; this of Confirmation was given
by his Apostles; though I ^ay no stresse upon that (as will suddenly appear)
yet I hope none will deny,

1. That the Lords Supper is part of Gods worship, Haec disciplina si hodie
valeret etc. Instit. l. 4. c. 19 par. 13.
and Examination and Confirmation are but parts of Discipline; so Calvine calls
confirmation.

2. That the Ordinances of worship are more necessary then those of discipline.

3. That the Ordinances of Worship are always necessary to be dispensed, but
not so those of Discipline.

4. Lastly, therefore persons may sometimes be admitted to the Lords Supper,
and have a true right therein (which is no doubt an Ordinance of Worship,)
without being first examined or confirmed by Church discipline; as none can
deny but those multitudes were in the second of the Acts; they were baptized,
and we hear no more, but that they passed immediately without any further
Ordinance of discipline intervening, to full communion in all Ordinances of
worship.

But more particularly, I conceive that confirmation is not necessary
Confirmation not necessary in three cases.
to a persons proxime right in the Lords Supper, especially in three cases.

1. First, (with respect to the party) when it is not 1. When not required.
required of him, by the Rulers of that Church, wherein he lives.

Binnius observes, that some collect from the forty eighth Canon of the counsel
of Laodicea, that the baptized, are bound under sin, to take the Sacrament of
Confirmation, but it is only dum commode possunt; when they conveniently may,
and therefore they seem not to be obliged when both opportunity and
possibility are denied; that Erit Adultis quando dabitur recipiendi copia,
nece^^arium. See Mr. Hanmore. p. 59, 60
is, when it is not used in the Church wherein they live; it is necessary
therefore (as Peresius says) when opportunity is offered; and consequently not
necessary; if no opportunity be offered, or it cannot be had.

Object. But if confirmation be a necessary ingredient to a proxime right in
the Lords Supper, how can it be supplied? or how can a person have such a right
without it?

Answ. Therefore it may be remembered that confirmation (or examination) gives
no right at all to the person; it Confirmation gives no right
only evidenceth and confirms his former right, and lets him into
possession, by admission to the Sacrament; the person, if self-examined, has
right, according to the word before confirmation, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
and by confirmation, or approving of the Church has, indeed, that which is
called an Ecclesiastical right, yet very improperly; it being only an
evidencing and testifying of the former right which before he had as to God,
and conscience, now in the Court of the Church; for, no man can convey a title
to Gods Ordinances. We must hold the distinction betwixt the means of conveying
aright, which here is self*examination; and the means of discovering this
right, and giving possession, which is Church-examination, approbation, or if
you will, confirmation; which, I conceive, is necessary to be submitted to by
the people, when it is required; but not any necessary ingredient into any
thing of their right or title to any Ordinance. Confirmation, when it is
required is necessary to possession, but not to right in the Lords Supper; but
when not required, necessary to neither; for if the Ministers neglect their
duty in not ^equiring the people to be confirmed, there is no reason the people
should be kept from the Sacrament, which is doubtless a clearer duty; and a
better means of the peoples confirmation, then that which has appropriated
the name thereof.

2. Secondly, I conceive confirmation (or examination) is not so necessary,
when the end is attained before without it; When the end is otherwise attained.
Discipline is no farther a duty then it is a means; and means, as such, are
only necessary for the attaining their ends; therefore, where the end is
attained unto, there is (no doubt) less need of the means; thus, where a
discovery of a persons grace, and knowledge, and fitness for the Sacrament,
the ends of confirmation, is attained (as it sometimes is) by other means;
there, I conceive, that confirmation is not absolutely necessary to the letting
in of a person to possess his right in the Lords Supper it being no more
required for the said ends, then any other means conducing thereunto, only as
it is a better means, and in it self more likely and apt to obtain them.

3. Thirdly, I conceive, that confirmation not absolutely When likely to do
hurt.
necessary to be used, but may and ought to be dispensed with, when the putting
it in practice is likely to do more hurt then good, viz. when upon a serious
consideration of the peoples jealousies, prejudices, or any other kind of
distempers upon them, it is rationally judged, that seeming new, and great, and
solemn undertaking will rather make some violent disturbance, rupture, or
schism among them, and alienate their hearts and persons further from us, then
any way, better reform, or order them.

The Churches in Switzerland see much in that of Augustine, that sometimes the
wickedness of the people is such, that they are not fit for discipline, and
Augustine thought the Apostle saw the same in the Church of Corinth; God grant
we may not too soon have cause of the same complaint in England; especially,
as to so solemn an Ordinance of discipline, and so little (as yet) understood
by the people, as confirmation is; where a medicine is like to do good, it is
folly to omit it; but where it is likely to hurt, it is folly, I think, to apply
it; especially after we have tried somewhat already of a very like nature to
the same sore, with but indifferent or bad success.

Object. But it may be said, that, if confirmation be required by God in
Scripture, it may in no case be dispensed with.

Answ. I think the rule holds not to any part of discipline, as discipline
opposed to doctrine and worship; a reproving our brother, or telling him his
fault, is more clearly commanded then confirmation; yet in some cases, this is
to be dispensed with, Matthew. 6. 7.

2. But secondly, confirmation as now desired, I think is not to Confirmation
not express in Scripture, or ancient churches, as now desired.
be found in any express command, or example in Scripture; or, indeed, the
ancient Churches.

Confirmation may be looked on in three special periods. First, as it was in
the times of the Apostles. Secondly, as it was in the times next the Apostles.
3. As in times nearer to us.

1. First, in the times of the Apostles, I do yet believe Confirmation as used
by Apostles.
that confirmation was nothing else but imposition of hands (with prayer) on
persons, without exacting any Covenanting or profession of the faith in order
thereunto, that they might receive the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost.

Thus the holy Ghost himself has interpreted it, in Acts 19. verse 6. when
Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke
with tongues and prophesied; and why it should not be thus understood
(whatsoever a learned man conceives to the contrary) in chap. 8. 17. I see no
reason, considering the phraze, verse 16. [as yet the holy Ghost was fallen
upon none but them;] a phraze, I think, peculiar to the extraordinary
descentions of him in those days; as also that had been only to have
strangthened them in the truth against persecution, as Simon could hardly, or
not so easily have seen that so presently, as v. 18. so would he scarcely have
thought it worth his money, wherewith he thought to have purchased that gift of
God, verse 19, 20.

In this extraordinary sense of the holy Ghost, I am also apt to conceive of
imposition of hands, Heb. 6. 2. (with great respect to that most ingenious and
elegant gloss of the Reveverend author of the first Epistle to the
exercitation;) yea, from this very Text, I humbly conceive, the Ancients took
their usual forms of speech, of enlightening, and receiving the holy Ghost;
referring the first to baptism, and the last to laying on of hands; and
truly, methinks, this same reference is even percevable in the Text it self;
[being vid. Heb. 6. 2, 4
once enlightened] seeming to relate to Baptismes; and [being made partakers of
the holy Ghost] to laying on of hands.

2. Secondly if we look upon laying on of hands, as it was used Confirmation as
used in times next the Apostles.
in the times, next and immediately after the Apostles; or as soon as we read
of its use in the Churches after the times of the Apostles; we find not, that
I can yet discern, any examinations or confessions, immediately preceding it,
or coming between baptism and it; we do not find that children were called at
ripeness of age to ratify what had been promised by the susseptors on their
behalf at their infant baptism; we do not find that children borne in the
Church, and baptized in infancy, were after baptism styled catechumeni; or
confirmed, when they came to years of discretion to answer for themselves;
much less in that great and solemn way wherein we are now desirous to do it.

Only this we find that generally such as were baptized, were confirmed
immediately after their baptism; in which confirmation, the party was presumed
to receive the holy Ghost by prayer and imposition of the hands of the Bishop;
all which is most easy to evidence.

The Bishop only might lay on hands in this work they thought, because none
but the Apostles did ( Igitur hoc erat in Apostolis singular unde and
praecipuos and non alios videmus hoc facere. Chrysostom in Art. 8. 14.
), who therefore came down to Samaria on purpose to confirm Philips converts,
Acts 8 14, 15, 16. they presumed, the receiving the holy Ghost thereupon (
Impositionis manuum per quam creditur spiritus sanctus ac^^pi posse.
), I conceive, because so did those upon whom the Apostles laid their hands;
this they did immediately after baptism too, or as soon as they could
conveniently, it may be in allusion to the instance of our Savior, upon whom
as soon as he came out of the water, the text notes, the holy Ghost descended,
Mat. 3. ( Exinde egressi de lavacro, perungimur benedicta unctione, etc. Te^t.
lib. de baptismo.

Ita vocat [Augustinus,] and Sanctum dicit [Chrismatis Sacramentum] ut
baptismus, quia ipsi erat annexum. Rive^us.

Ceremoniam confirmandi veteri ecclesiae per plura secula fuisse ceremonialem
ritum baptismi, non pe^uliare per se Sacramentum. Amesius.

Tam certum est unum, idemquo Sacramentum fuisse reputatum, ut effecti Baptismi
and Chrysostom. matis promiscue describuntur. Chamier. panstrat. de Sacrament. c.
11. s. 3. l. 4.


), as also to those a Apostolical Intergatory's, Act. 19. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 to
which they soon added the unction, in allusion, as Tertullian notes to the
oil wherewith the Priesthood in the old discipline were wont to be anointed.

Wherefore methinks Rivet, and Ames, and Chamier, had great reason to judge as
they did, viz. that the laying on of hands in the ancient Churches, was not an
Ordinance, much less a Sacrament distinct from Baptism, but a thing annexed
unto it; especially, for that nothing of so great a moment as Baptism is,
might be done in the Church, whether by such as had power to do it, or such as
had none, without the consent and hand of the Bishop, for the ratifying of
baptism in case it was dispensed by such as had no power; and otherwise, for
the unity of the Church, the honor of its Government, and the giving, as
before, the Holy Ghost, as History notes.

Now, if I do understand my author, he will hardly allow of any thing in these
primitive practices, save the ceremony of imposition of hands it self.

1. For the laying on of hands now, in order to the giving of the Holy Ghost,
in the first extraordinary way according to the manner of Apostles of Christ in
Scripture, our Author has given his sense of it in these words. This
expression (says he) of giving and receiving the holy Ghost was still
continued and made use of, because the Apostles by imposition of hands did
confer the Holy Ghost, which though none after their time did or could do,
etc.

2. And for the practice of the Churches afterward; confirming even Infants
immediately after Baptism; confirming the Adult, without exacting any new
confessions in order thereunto; restraining the work of confirmation only to
the Bishops, or making confirmation only a Ceremonial right of Baptism, as
Ames affirms the Churches of old did for many ages together; indeed I know not
which part here mentioned, either our Author, or any other late Patron of this
excellent Ordinance of confirmation, would adhere unto, or not reject.

3. Lastly, let us briefly consider confirmation as used, or rather desired, by
the Churches of Christ of later years, and we may yet more easily perceive
both its great unlikenesse to that of old, and its great aptness and
likelinesse to prove, if fixed upon its right basis, and intended to its just
ends, a most excellent and profitable right of the Churches of Christ in the
later ages.

Confirmation in this modern sense (pardon the expression) Waldenses, Calvina*
Chemnitins, Bullinger; Pareus. Three special ends of confirmation.
seems to be desired, for three most special ends and uses, all which may seem
to be carried in the very word it self, namely that the baptism, the graces,
and lastly, the proxime* right of the party in the Eucharist, might hereby be
confirmed; and is principally intended for such as being baptized in their
infancy (not excluding others) and being grown to years of discretion in the
Church, are competentes, or desire to be partakers 1. To confirm baptism.
with the Church in the Eucharist, or any other high privilege hitherto denied
them.

1. First, such are therefore now to be called to confirm openly and in their
own persons, that which their susseptors engaged for them at their first
infant baptism; according to our own Lyturgy (noted by our Author)
Confirmation (says it) ought to be observed, because when children come to
riper age, and shall learn what, and how great things their undertakers did in
their name promise in baptism; they themselves [ipsi proprio ore, proprio
concensu, public eadem agnoscant Vel rata habeant a Erasmus phraze is.
and confirment] they themselves should openly and with their own mouth and
consent, acknowledge and confirm the same; upon this now I conceive
confirmation may be rightly said to confirm baptimse, this act of confirmation
is properly the parties own act.

2. Secondly, another great end and use of confirmation to 2. To confirm grace.
such, is that by means of this solemn profession, together with the public
earnest prayers of the Church, the graces of the person may be strengthened and
confirmed; or that he Fieret publica precatio pro illis pueris ut Deuteronomy --
Confirmare dignaretur.
may receive the grace of confirmation; let there says (Clemnitius) be public
prayer made for the children (that are confirmed that God by his holy spirit
would vouchsafe to guide, preserve and confirm them in this profession;
therefore the Waldenses appoint confirmation to be done in stabilitatem and
confirmationem fidei. Now this is Gods act properly; as the first was the
parties own.

3. The third and last great use of this Ordinance is to declare To confirm
right in the Supper.
and confirm the parties proxime and immediate right in the Lords Supper, etc.
which the party had before, indeed by inward qualifications, or at least
appeared so to have by a good profession; this now is more properly the
Churches act; and that which, me thinks, is a great deal more intended by
those that strive hardest after this Ordinance, then the two former, especially
by our Author; hereby the party is admitted out of the Infant into the Adult
estate, and received into full communion.

By confirmation, say the Waldenses, is forthwith given Confirmatione protinus
data est, etc. Nemo ad sacroSanctam communionem priu admittatur quam and
catechismum dedicerit and confirmatus sit.
full power of communicating in the body and blood of Christ with all the
faithful; for none, according to our own Lyturgy, is to be admitted to the holy
communion before he has learned his catechism, and be confirmed, viz. in his
right therein.

Now for confirmation as to these three last uses; for which it is now only
desired. I shall crave leave to signify mine opinion very briefly of.

First, I conceive, it is not to be found in express command or example, or in
any express mention or words in Scripture; what the confirmation of
Apostolical practice was, we have already noted, and yet I believe it was not
like to this.

Secondly, though the eminently Learned and judicious Calvine, and some other
very worthy Divines, are very peremptory, that this kind of confirmation was
in use in the Ancient Church; I confess though I have earnestly sought it, and
desired to see it, in some ancient Writer, I could never yet be made so happy;
neither did I ever yet see any words cited, or pretended to be cited, out of
any such ancient Author, that did offer any thing like it; viz. the admitting
such as were baptized in Infarcy, when grown of age upon their personal
public profession and engagement into farther communion with the Church, by
the coremony of imposition of hands and prayer. What the ancient confirmation
was, has been already intimated.

Thirdly, yet I rejoice to acknowledge, that this modern confirmation for the
three great uses mentioned, is not only agreeable to the common principles of
nature and reason, but that likewise it is juxta consensum Scripturae,
according to the consent of Scripture, as Chemnitius teaches.

Fourthly, which consent of Scripture hereunto, is, I conceive not only
negative, but positively given in such general commands, as require all
Church-dispensations, and more expressly those of discipline, to be directed
and leveld at edification; for, I doubt not, but, that such a confirmation may
be piously used, and to the edification of the Church; as Chemnitius also
affirms;) as a means most happily accommodated to this great end.

Fifthly, therefore, I must have leave to say that I verily believe, after
these my small endeavors upon the point; that our Reverend and most Worthy
Father [Master Hughes] has hit the very white: and that if this kind of
confirmation, which is now sought for, or that way of examination which many
practice, by some also termed a little more mildly, a minister^al conference,
which are all one for substance, cannot stand upon his (or such like) grounds,
they will stand no where, but must fall at last.

Sixthly, moreover were the late superstitions and formallity removed (as all
good men must needs wish) and the stated effects and provisoes allowed, (as I
cannot but desire) and the present season and temper of our people duly
considered, and found to be receptable of it, (which I am willing to hope) I do
here most solemnly judge that confirmation might prove, through divine mercy, a
most effectual mean, as of the edification of the Church, so of reconciliation
of the much to be lamented differing brethren; and therefore to be both piously
and charitably desired; and not only coldly and faintly to be wished, but by
all the lovers of truth and peace, earnestly prayed for, and seriously
endeavored, both as a most needful and seasonable Ordinance.

Seventhly, yea, though after all due pains and endeavors used; we should not
be able to reconcile our principles in every point; if, yet we can meet in the
same practice about confirmation, though on some small differing grounds; why
may not the Church be happily edified, and the peace thereof in a measure
obtained by such an unity, uniformity in practice; while the persons differing
but in lighter matters, may wait upon the Lord in this good service for the
great blessing of unanimity, promised also.

May it be still provided, (I humbly offer) first that confirmation be not
thought to have any ingrediency into the nature or being of our membership.
Secondly, that the temper of the people be found such, as will admit of such a
change, without any dangerous disturbance among them, threatening more hurt,
then sober men can rationally expect advantage to the Church thereby; these,
methinks, have some weight in them, and may not be reckoned among the lighter
matters.

8. Lastly, for the Ceremony of imposition of hands, I cannot believe it to be
so necessary as the substance of confirmation, alre^dy declared, is; though,
with Chemnitius, I doubt not but it may be added here, without superstition;
especially when the substance of the work shall rather receive solemnity and
reverence, then disgrace or prejudice thereby, as Calvine intimates it did of
old; to the end this action (says he) which otherwise ought deservedly to be
esteemed grave and holy, might have the more reverence and respect, Quo autem
haec actio, etc. Inst. l. 4. c. 19. s. 4
the Ceremony also of imposition of hands was added to it.

After the Learned Doctor Hackwell, I am apt to judge, this ceremony of laying
on of hands to arise from natures fountain, and thence to spread it self over
all the world by universal custom. Mankind, being, as it were, prompted by
nature to solemnize any great honor to be conferred on a person, with this
ceremony; both Jew and Greek; and the Church of God have taken it into common
practice; upon all sch occasions; as is most apparent both in profane and
ecclesiastical hystory is. And upon this ground with some special allusion to
the practice of the Apostle (who its like took it up from the former natural
and universal custom, with Jews and Gentiles, when they conferred the Holy
Ghost; I presume the Churches afterward annexed it as a right to confirmation.

However, if this kind of confirmation be not found in Scripture, this right
of it, imposition of hands as relating to it cannot be found there; wherefore,
we can only say this of it, that it is a decent, ecclesiastical ceremony (as
Luther calls it,) solemn and laudable, and very fit to be added in
confirmation, when general prejudice, or any other extraordinary impediment
does not prohibit it, or when it is not likely to lose its end.

We propose two ends, at present, of setting up the practice Two ends of now
de^^ring confirmation.
of confirmation; the Edification of the people; and Reconciliation of Brethren
in the Ministry; give me leave to present unto you, a double Consideration
hereupon.

First, whether imposition of hands added in confirmation by us, now, may not
grate upon popular prejudice, and hinder, somewhat, the first of our ends.

Secondly, whether some worthy brethren, who do not at all scruple the
substance of the action, but are happily ready to join with us in it; yet,
because they see not that imposition of hands was ever used but but by a
Bishop, may not be stricken off further from us, should we venture upon it; and
thus far we should fail of the other of our ends.

I dare conclude that neither of those two great patrons of confirmation,
Calvine or Chemnitius does lay such a stresse upon imposition of hands therein,
but that the substance of the action being solemnly practiced, this ceremony of
laying on of hands, in such a case as was now proposed, may, yea ought to be
omitted.

I had thought to have added a fifth proviso; namely, that the children of such
as are baptized, and do usually join with us Prove. 5. Children of the
non-confirm^d to be bapt^zed.
in attendance upon the worship of God, though they be not as yet confirmed, be
not denied their Infant Baptism; this also seems to be granted us in our
Reverend Authors own principles; our Author questions not the membership of
such parents; yea, p. 54, 60.
further he argues, that such, though appearing unworthy of confirmation,
through ignorance or scandal, they are not to be excommunicate or dismembered.
He also asserts that children are p. 25. with 53.
baptized by virtue of their parents membership.

Thus hence, we might be bold to reason: where there is membership in the
parent, there the child may be baptized; if children are to be baptized by
virtue of their parents membership. But there is membership in such parents as
are baptized, and not excommunicated, nor to be excommunicated; Therefore the
children of such parents may be baptized, and that regularly as p. 53.
our Author adds, according to the Word.

FINIS.

