THE CHURCHES and MINISTRY of ENGLAND, True Churches and true Ministry.

Cleared, and proved, In a SERMON preached the 4th of May at Wiviliscombe;
before a numerous Congregation assembled together to hear the opposition, which
had been long threatened to be made that day, by Mr Collier and others of his
party, who, with the greatest strength the West would afford them, were present
at the Sermon.

Wherein were these Five things undeniably proved:

1. That a mixture of profane and scandalous persons with real Saints, is not
inconsistent with the Church of God, or a true Church. 2. That then the
Churches that are now in England, are Churches of God, and true Churches. 3.
That then, the Ministry of those Churches, is the Ministry of God, and the true
Ministry. 4. That then, there is a great and heavy sin lying at the door of all
such, as do presume to preach publicly among us, without a Call, who have true
Churches, and a settled Ministry. 5. And then, they also must needs be guilty,
who forsake true Churches and a lawful Ministry, to follow and hear unsent
preachers.
By FRANCIS FULLWOOD Minister of the Gospel at Staple Fitzpane in the County of
Somerset.

Before it there is an Epistle and Preface, showing the Manner, and a Narrative
[subjoyned] showing the Substance of the Dispute after the Sermon, (both which
lasted nine hours.) Set forth by the Ministers that were at the Dispute, and
Attested under their Hands.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for George Treagle at Taunton, and are to be sold at
London by William Roybould at the Unicorn in Paul's Churchyard, 1652.

TO HIS Honored Friend, Colonel JOHN PINE, A Member of Parliament, and one of
the Commissioners for the Militia of the County of Somerset.
Honored Sir,
TRuth, though above this sixteen hundred years of age, and has learned long
since to stand alone; yet experience has found, it does ever go the better
into the world, when imboldened with the care and gracious protection of a
nursing Father: and I need not dawb with untempered mortar to tell the world
(what the whole West of England well nigh knows) that the potent influence, and
pleasant shade of so noble a Tree, will better protect and secure those truths
against all the heat of present opposition, then these poor contemptible
following Leaves can do.

Now, Blessed be the God of Truth, that has inclined your heart to own his
truth, and (more particularly) to embrace an opportunity, wherein you may do
his shaken Churches throughout the world so great service; a bold expression, I
must needs confess, yet, Worthily Honored Sir, give me leave to be bold, and
I shall add, That there is nothing more certain then this, that these men's
principles we speak against, would at once strike down (I say, not the credit,
but) being and truth of all the Churches, and Ministry, and Ordinances of
Christ, that are either now, or ever have been in the world since the Primitive
times; and (who is not affrighted!) from horrid principles?

But since the design lies so deep, I beseech you Noble Sir, to consider a
little who they are that undertake it; and with what Engine they think to
effect it.

First, Who, and what are the men of so great an adventure? Methinks Fame
should carry them to be mightily skilled in the Original tongus, or deeply read
in the History of the Church, whereby they had discovered something there, that
was never found out before: or some Saints or Angels, or Christ's sent down from
heaven to open some truths, that had been locked up, and kept secret from the
Church for so many hundred years: but alas! they pretend not to be any such:
but what are they? even men of like infirmities with us, and in a word no
betterthen the Apostle describes unlearned, unstable, wresting the Scriptures.

But surely they have some weighty Arguments, though the men be weak, they
would never undertake so great a design, as to overthrow all Churches,
Ministers, Ordinances, and that ever since the Apostles times, unless their
Engine were somewhat answerable: O yes, they have allowed Infant Baptism;
Ministers that baptize infants are Antichristian: Members that were baptized
Infants are Antichristian: and consequently Churches and Ordinances are all
Antichristian: Ah poor shift! and yet you have nothing else will hold an
Argument but this: Let me now in the Name of God, and all the Churches, entreat
these men to consider a few things, or answer a few brief questions touching
Infant Baptism; and then they will see how desperate and unadvised they have
been in a matter of so great moment.

1. Suppose we should grant the baptizing of Infants an Error: May not the
true Church err? may not the whole Church err? may it not err in judgment?
and then, what does hinder but it may err in practice too, and yet be still a
true Church? to affirm the contrary is rank Popery.

Again, If the Church may err, it may err in circumstance, without dispute;
and what is the error of Infant Baptism (if it be an error) more then a
circumstantiall error? for have we not ever kept the substance of it? the
matter water, and the form, In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost? how
then I pray you can the error of Infant Baptism destroy our Churches, or
nullify our Ministers or ^^her Ordinances?

2. But alas! who told you that Infant Baptism was an error, before the
Anabaptists of Germany did? who told you when this error came first into the
Church? What Precept or Precedent have you against it in all the Scripture? or
what command have you to show for the baptizing believers only? alas poor men!
who among you dare answer to any one of these questions? and how then will thou
be able to answer them all? and much less can you warrant the desperate
conclusions you have built upon so weak, so tottering a foundation.

But why do I trouble these poor men? alas! they are but the weapons and Organs
of Jesuits, who play their game under these men's cloaks: Methinks I see them
instilling their damnable doctrines into these men's ears, and venting them
again at their mouths: how naturally do all the abominable errors of these our
times (if you follow them a little) kindly saluting each other, and joining in
one stream) tend and flow to the Sea of Rome! the Seminaries are sowing their
Tares among us, which indeed spring too fast all the Land over; and if they be
not rooted up and stopped in time, the Pope it is to be feared will shortly reap
too large a harvest among us in England, which Canterbury I remember warned us
off (who know more of their plots and methods (perhaps) then he should, or we
do) in his speech upon the Scaffold. Honored Sir, give me leave I beseech you
to point a little at the Jesuits drift, as I conceive among us.

His general last end is to advance the Pope and bring in Popery, which has
been hatching many years. The means he makes use of for this great end, is to
bring in a general Toleration, and to put down the Ministers; in a general
Toleration (there being no hedge of Discipline to keep him out) he hopes to
crowd in with the rest, and then trusts to his learning and parts to do well
enough; especially can he but get his greatest enemy, the able Ministry, down:
Which he attempts, by rendering it odious to the people because of maintenance;
and to the Parliament, by making them, what in them lies, to be enemies to the
State: But does not the Parliament very well know, that every County of the
Land can produce diverse Ministers that have been true to their Cause, ever
since they first sat, to this very day? but I need not blaze the friendship of
Jesuits, or indeed of our adversaries more immediate, to civil Authority, both
in principle and practice: and in this I am sure they agree, that the Christian
Magistrate has nothing to do with matter of Religion; which casts a greater
blur upon Parliamentary proceedings of that nature, for these many years past,
then the worst of the actions (I think I may say) that the Ministry has done.

Honored Sr, I am too bold and tedious: take this I beseech you as a pawn and
pledge, of that honor and gratitude I owe to you: and the Lord inspire you with
the spirit of discerning, to search into these things, more and more:
discouraging error, and owning his truth, who has said, those that honor me I
will honor: to whose grace and glory I am bold to commend both you and yours,
and subscribe my self, as indeed I am,

Most Honored Sir, Your very much obliged and most humble servant FRAN:
FULLWOOD.

A Preface to the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER;
FOr such a one I suppose my self speaking unto; one, who know thy self
concerned in all the affairs of Christianity: and upon that ground art the
Lords Remembrancer at the Throne of Grace, not only for thy self, but for all
others also, who are partakers of like precious faith with thee; and have
powered out many a prayer and tear for the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem.
Thou art, it may be, lately come out of thy closet, where thou had sweet
communion with him whom thy soul loves: and thou saw so much of his
comeliness and beauty, that thy heart was taken therewith more then ever: and
then thou had many such holy breathings as these; Whom have I in Heaven but
thee, etc? I will suppose Psalm. 73. 25.
this to have been thy last exercise (as it is sometimes if thou art a
Christian indeed.) Let me entreat thee then to retire to thy closet again, and
after thy former raptures and ecstasies, let it not seem unseasonable, to
reflect a little with sad thoughts and weeping eyes upon the great distractions
in the Church the spouse of Christ. Spiritual joy does not use to streighten
the heart, but enlarge it, and make it the fitter and freer to mourn; nor does
it dry up the eyes, but rather open the fountain of tears. Believe me this
would be a seasonable exercise, nay it is the mark of a Saint: The gracious
soul, as he grieves more, for that he has sinned against his God, than for any
Cross, which reaches his person or estate: so also he is much more troubled
for the schisms and heresies, wherewith the Church of God is rent and torn,
than for his own private afflications. If thou have a public spirit, and
esteemest the honor of Christ, and the promoting of Religion far more dear
unto thee then thine own interest, credit or preferment; Tell me, Would it not
be lamented, if possible, with tears of blood, that the good Spirit of God
should be grieved by reason of that Ephesians. 4. 30, 31. Ut excontextu patet.
bi^ternesse, and wrath, and anger, which are secretly fomented, and too often
break out into clamours and evil speakings of Christians one against another?
Se^meth it unto thee a small matter, that the joy in the heart of Christ Jesus
now in Heaven should be diminished, by reason of the decay of love in those who
are his members? Certainly Joh 15. 10, 11, 12. Quondam est illud gaudium
Christi in nobis, nisi quod ille di nature gaudere de nobis? Aug. in loc.
when Christians are fruitful in their lives, and abound in love one toward
another, Christ rejoices over them even in Heaven. And I see no reason, why
the contrary may not be implied, viz. That when the love of the brethren shall
grow cold one toward another (as woeful experience sufficiently shows, that
difference of opinion does, if not make a breach, yet secretly withdraw
affection) the joy in Christ's heart over them is lessened; which how great an
evilit is, I leave to them to judge, who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity.
Again, Is it nothing to thee, that the Diamonds of the Lord cut one another?
That the servants of Christ should, as it were, set the Spirit against it se^f
misimploying those precious gifts, which they received from him for mutual
help and furtherance, in bitter invectives, unsavory discoveries of each
others infirmities, fruitless and endless logomachies; so that instead of
composing, they widen the breach; and instead of terminating, rather perpetuate
strife and contention? Can thou without a sigh remember, how by this means
our Religion suffers in its reputation abroad, our profession is scandalized,
our hopeful Reformation flouted; as if the holy endeavors of our Reverend
Assembly had all this while produced a solemn Nothing; or (which is worse) had
midwived only to the birth, of that monstrous brood of errors, which now swarm
and roar among us? Does not thy heart bleed to consider how the common enemy
danceth at our discord, which makes a pleasing harmony to them? how the
Jesuits triumph in our divisions, feeding themselves with assured hopes of
prevailing against us, according to their old principle, Divide and impera? How
much 1 Pet. 5. 8. (...).
the Kingdom of Satan is hereby promoted? How many souls he has drunk up? how
the power of godliness is almost laid aside, and working out our salvation
turned into talking, praying into disputing, and preaching into railing? How
much dirt has been cast into the face of the most glorious Ministry that ever
(next to the Apostles) the Church of Christ enjoyed? And how some of them, who
at least pretended to the Ministry, have cowardly shrunk from their station,
nay traitorously run to the enemy, and (as it is said of the Janissaries, that
they are the worse enemies to Christianity, for having been once Christians,
so) these are the most eager and violent sticklers against the Ministry.
Reader, here are considerations, which if thou have a tender and gracious
spirit, may well make thee cry out, My bowels!

Consider further, how few faithful laborers there are in the Lords harvest:
How many deceivers and impostors are newly started up? What hideous blasphemies
are now vented? What a multitude of errors and heresies are now broached,
which are obtruded upon the seduced people under the specious name of
New-lights, whereas in truth they are but Old darkness: There is scarce an
error, that ever had inventor or fautour amongst that great number which
Antiquity has left upon record, marked with the black note of heretics, but
now it is plucked out of the dunghill, and sent abroad it may be with a new
dress put upon it to make it pass. So that in this respect we may truly say,
that this our age is the very draught, into which all the stinking opinions
which ever have passed through the exulcerated bowels of all the heretics of
so many bypast ages, are cast and descended. For the more speedy disseminating
of which errors (grief to behold!) the devil has the press at command.
Heretical books are printed by thousands, and dispersed into all parts of the
Land. Nor are they contented to frame and devise new of their own, but they
also translate out of other languages. Not to speak of others, I have seen He
that is minded to see some of his Divinity, may please to read Wendeline in
his Epistle Dedicatory his Theologia Christiana. Genesis 43. 30.
the works of Wrigelius printed in English. A more blasphemous heretic the
earth never bare. Thus they will traffic with any body, yea, with hell it
self, so they may have variety of baits and snares to deceive the more, I hope
I need not use motives to thee (Christian Reader) to bewail before the Lord the
sins and blasphemies of this Age; nor set any spur to thy side, to stir thee to
that to which thou hastest already: Thou art by this time in Joseph's case, who
sought where to weep. So thou, to pour out thy heart as water, before the Lord.
Yea, thou take up a resolution to be the Lords Remembrancer, and never to
stand before him with any petition, but this shall be the chiefest, That God
would chain up Satan, that he deceive no more; That he would powerfully rebuke
the spirit of error, that it diffuse it self no further; Speedily discover,
and spread dung upon the faces of all deceivers; give unto this people a spirit
of discerning, that they may try them which say, they are Apostles, and Apo. 2.
2.
ere not, and find them liars; Put it into the hearts of our learned, wise,
and pious Governors to restrain the licentiousness of these Seducers, and put
a stop to the growth of heresies; Encourage his servants the Ministers, and
give them a mouth and wisdom, that they may mightily convince and muzzle
gainsayers, reclaim (...). Jer. 6. 16.
every seduced brother, settle every staggering spirit, and confirm every one
that loves the truth in the good old way, in which alone rest is to be found to
a weary soul. And certainly never was there more need of prayers and tears then
now; never did greater exigency call upon us to wrestle with God by the
omnipotency of prayer. I am Est quaedam precum omnipotenia. Luth.
persuaded this mercy is come to the birth: it wants but an Esaias, who with his
effectual fervent prayers might be in stead of a Isa. 37. 3.
man-midwife to bring it forth. And oh that God would put into the hearts of
all, especially Ministers, a a restless importunity; such a spirit of prayer
as would be turned off with no denial! There have been many desires breathed
heavenward, many prayers and tears already treasured up for this very thing by
the Samuels and Esays of these and former times: But this mercy is so great,
that it calls for yet more prayers, yet more tears, more struglings and
wrestlings to fetch it down. Oh then when God is willing to give, and to this
purpose has the mercy already in his hand, let not us be backward in asking?

For mine own part it is true, I have not so much as became me, laid to heart
these sad distractions in the Church; nor multiplied petitions, tears and
groans at the Throne of grace, so much as one of my place should have done; yet
I have had some sad and serious thoughts about them. As who is there, whose
care and designs are not terminated wholly in himself, who has not with good
Nehemiah been sad both in countenance and heart, to consider, what a glorious
Sunshine of truth was breaking out upon us, which now is clouded with fogs of
errors: To remember what a comfortable day of reformation dawned upon us,
which now is closed up again: (Surely we are not worthy of it, we are not
fitted for it, nay, the most distaste it) To think how many Wolves are crept in
among us in sheep-cloathing, which worry the flock: what a general defection
there is from obedience to the truth, even of those who ran with the foremost
heretofore, and esteemed, at least in show, the feet of them very beautiful
that preached the Gospel, the good and glad tidings of peace: what a
phrentique wantonness has possessed thousands, who of loose ignorants became
Sceptiques, Scismaticks, Atheists? But that which may more trouble us, is, to
observe how many souls who had received slight common illumination, whose
hearts were become somewhat pliable and tender, like wax, fit to receive any
impression, these the devil, ( who as one said, is a good Bishop in his
Diocese, Latimer.
careful of loosing, watchful to win souls) strikes in with, and before any
right seeds of saving knowledge were cast in, sows tares in the ground of their
hearts, which indeed was rather scratched with the harrowing thoughts of death,
hell and judgment, then broken up with the plough of sound contrition? And
which was yet a greater grief, some, who dated themselves Professors some years
before, Old Disciples, were carried away with the error of the wicked, and
fell from their steadfastness.

And yet in the midst of so many sad thoughts, which every of these occurrents
did multiply in me, I was not without some comfortable considerations, which
did both raise and confirm my dejected and sometimes (I am not ashamed to
confess my weakness) staggering soul. To omit many, the chief were,

1. In that Satan raved and bestirr^^ himself so much. it was a sign that his
Kingdom began to totter. When his time is but short, he roars to purpose. When
he saw such light breaking forth, maugre all his malice, and devices to
^uppress it, which would surely dispell the darkness wherein he bears sway,
then he falls to his old sh^ft: if he cannot wholly extinguish it, he will dim
it. Hereupon he opens the bot^omlesse pit, whereout comes smoke of errors,
darkening the Sun of truth, and wholesome Apo. 9. 2.
air of found doctrine. Thus he did in Germany, when Luther had (I do not say
lighted, but) brought the candle of truth out of the dark lanthorn, and set it
on a candlestick: how did Satan strain his lungs to blow it out? When he failed
of that, what endeavors did he use to cast a mist about it? Then also, and not
till then, swarmed those Anabaptisticall locusts which did so much mischief. So
here, when Popery was not only lopt, but even taken away branch and root, and
religion ceased to be in show only, and began to flourish in the power thereof,
how has Satan labored to blast the bl^ssome of it with hellish fum^s, and to
eat away the very leaf thereof with infernal locusts? Hence my soul has
strongly concluded, That as when the Sun in its rising is darkened with mists,
it port^nds the fairest day: So, the Sun of the Gospel presently after his
extraordinary bright rising in our Horizon, being clouded, puts us in an
assured hope, that after he mists are once dispelled, it will break forth with
a more dazeling luster, shining more and more unto the perfect day.

The second thing which refreshed me was a clear discovery of much good already
wrought and working by these unlikely means of divisions. How many sparks of
truth have been beaten out by the collision even of flints? How much precious
flower of wholesome doctrine has been clean purged from its bran by the
somewhat violent shaking thereof in the scarce of disputations? It was observed
as one good effect of the clashings of ancient times, in that thereby the
spirits of some Worthies then living, were stirred up more fully to clear the
truth. The quarelling of the Anti-trinitarians quickened holy Augustines learned
diligence, and produced his Book de Trinitate. And there has not wanted an
Augustine in our times, who Dr Channel.
upon the same grounds has done the like, whose name is hereby made precious,
and will doubtless be ever mentioned with honor in the Churches. Above all
that most vexed question of Infant baptism, upon what weak grounds has it
hitherto stood: In opposing whereof Satan and his Instruments have been most
forward and cunning; and have concluded their objections irrefragable. But how
fully and unanswerably has that truth been asserted (as by others, so chiefly)
by learned Baxter? That God, who commanded light to shine out of darkness,
does often produce the best effects out of the worst causes. Add to this, that
hereby many hypocrites, unsound hollow-hearted professors, have been clearly
discovered, even by their falling off to error. And those who are faithful
unto the Lord, are made manifest. Read and compare 1 Cor. 11. 19. and 1 John
2. 19.

It is notoriously known to all that are not strangers in our English Israel,
how far the gangrene of error has prevailed and spread among us these seven
years last past. I meddle not with what I have heard or read of in other
Counties, (as doubtless all have had their share, the disease being
Epidemicall) these Western parts seem to have not the least infection. We
confess to our grief, the seducers have had more advantages over us, then
possibly they could have otherwhere. They found generally an ignorant and
credulous people, and therefore apt to be deceived: and the rather, because
many flocks are without a shepherd; or have a dumb dog, that cannot bark; or a
blind watchman that cannot see; or an hireling, that flees, when the wolf
comes. Hence they have seduced hundreds, unsettled thousands, distracted and
grieved all. Their impudent audaciousness is such, that they have interrupted
and disturbed many Ministers in their public exercise: and it is ordinary to
come with a gang of soldiers, and prate on a tombstone, while the Minister
preaches in a pulpit. Nay they are grown to that height of confidence, as to
challenge learned Ministers to public disputes; but with what success, I
presume good Reader, thou art able to say, though I were silent.

Such a relation I am now to give thee of a dispute, or rather Here are the
signs and marks of an Apostle.
jangling, had at Wiviliscombe in the County of Somerset, May 4. 1652. between
three or four young despised Ministers, and the whole strength of the
adversary. I was an eye and ear witness of all, or the most, that passed: and
because I was present there, yet none of the number of the Lecturers, they
desired me to write, what I have, to give thee some light in the following
Sermon and Narrative. I remember what Thales answered to one demanding, How far
Truth was distant from a lie; As much (...).
(says he) as the eyes from the ears: Meaning that the eye was a faithful
spectatour, and authentic witness of things; but the ear was open to lies,
and by it fictions and untruths had their entrance into the mind: and therefore
we should credit their relations, whose seeing eyes had observed all passages;
but worthily suspect them, who were only able to give a blind testimony. And
therefore I challenge belief from all ingenious Readers. I am not ignorant of
the lying practices of Sectaries, who cry Victoria among their injudicious
proselytes, and it may be have prepossessed thee with some untrue relation: and
therefore my Discourse shall bring thee into the place, and (with the help of
the ensuing Narrative) present to thy view the chief passages there.

First I must tell the occasion thereof. Thou must know, 1. Occasion.
good Reader, that there is a weekly Lecture at Wiviliscombe aforesaid: The
Lecturers there unwilling that their meeting at the ordinary should be without
fruit, agreed among themselves, that at set times they would, for their own
better satisfaction, discuss some of the most [at this day] vexed questions in
Divinity. And because heresies grew apace, and many of those parts fell away
daily, they thought it meet to acquaint their hearers therewith, that all that
would, might resort to the place, and hear them.

The first Question, propounded some weeks before, that the defendant might
have some time to prepare himself, was, An justificatio sit uno actu, simul and
semel? Whether a believer be actually justified from all his sins, past,
present, and to come, at once, namely, upon the first act of faith, which he
puts forth. This M r Fullwood, the Author of the ensuing Sermon, held in the
Negative: the rest opposed. In the close they all professed their unanimous
consent to what had been made appear to be truth. At the next meeting was the
Question about the lawfullness of Infant baptism to be discussed; which M r
Wood, the Minister of the place, held in the Affirmative. Their aud^ence was
now much increased, even to a chamber-full. In ^he end the major part signified
their being fully satisfied about the lawfullness thereof. But all were not, or
rather would not be satisfied. And here were the first sparks out of which
arose the after flame: the fuel whereof was the intemperate heat and
ind^scretion of some, who threatened to bring Collier to the next meeting, if he
were within An infamously famous Sectary.
many miles of the place; and the courage of others, who promised to defend
that, or any other Point, against him. The third Question (which M r How held
in the Affirmative) was, Whether the now Ministers of the Church of England, be
the Ministers of Jesus Christ Exclusively? This was to be stated and discussed
May 4. It seems that this assertion had as much offended those seduced and
turbulent spirits, as that of Infant baptism* Hereupon swift notice was given
to all or the most part of the Sectarians of the West. In the mean time many
threatn^ng and insulting speeches were given out by that party; as that no
Presbyterian Minister durst show his head there, with much to that purpose. Nor
was any thing more rife in every man's mouth, then the future dispu^e at
Wivili^combe.

The day being come, and a great Congregation assembl^d, the discourse, which
hereafter is presented, was publicly delivered, yet as a Lecture-Sermon only:
however thou may easily perceive by the drift thereof, that the Preacher
intended it as an Antidote against Error, and as a Muzzle for the mouths of
them that came to oppose. While he was praying before Sermon, Collier comes in,
guarded as it were, with some soldiers, and a great company of his furious
disciples. It was much wondered, that he should so patiently hear out so
unpleasing a Discourse; but we have cause to think, that the strength of reason
there urged and delivered, did so daunt and confound him, that he durst not
interrupt; his courage being much quailed, and his mind distracted through
fear, least he should not in all that days dispute, raze out that deep
impression, which that Sermon had made in the hearers. After Sermon ended, he
stood up and signified his not being satisfied with what was spoken; and here
began the dispute.

2. Thou expectest an account, how it was carried on; 2. Manner.
but this as to the matter thereof is exactly and faithfully set down in the
Narrative; thither therefore I shall remit thee: but some passages observable
in the manner of it, I shall relate.

1. Observable: was the cunning craftiness of these deceivers, which as it was
discernable to an observant eye thorowout the whole action, so it more plainly
appeared,

1. In the beginning: For as if their hearts had been of stone, and their
brows of steel, they began the business with such an impudent majesty, as must
needs strike a kind of horror into fools; yea and strangely amuse even honest
men of the simpler sort, who had never been acquainted with the impudent
boldness of heretics.

2. They would not suffer Mr How to state the question intended to have been
d^scussed by the Ministers: they feared belike, that he was too well provided
for them: but with eager importunity required Mr Fullwood to maintain what he
had delivered. They hoped to have foiled him, who had been tired with a two
hours preaching, and came nothing prepared for the dispute, which they
intended. For

3. Collier after some velita^ions, like a crafty soldier, draws Mr Fullwood
into the ambush of Infant Baptism, where they think themselves invincible. But
yet notwithstanding the disadvantage of the question, and the confidence of the
adversary, they were charged so home, that they were beaten out of their place
of strength, and utterly routed, as the Narrative will show.

4. They would ever and anon appeal to the people, especially when their
arguing was plausible and specious, or if there had been some verbal faultrings
in any of the defendants. For they well know, that a Stentorean voice, and
plausible speech, do much more prevail upon ignorant souls, then the strongest
reason or the most forcible Argument. The Apostle has given them this
Character, Colos. 2. 4. And Tertullian (cited by Davenant upon the place)
speaks of heretics; that Prius persuadent, quam edocent: (veritas autem
docendo suadet, non suadendo (...).
docet.)It is the artifice of deceivers, first to persuade, and afterward to
instruct: but truth does not so.

2. Observable: was Colliers notorious hypocrisy. When I had upon the desire
of the defendant given in my Greek Testament, that the Original might be
searched about the true reading of a Scripture brought to prove the lawfullness
of Poedobaptisme, the defendant gave it into Colliers hand to read the place;
who takes the book, and looking thereon, moves his lips, as if he had indeed
read it. Is it not likely, good Reader, that he is skilled in the Greek, who
instead of Primum mobile, wrote Primum Collier in a Letter to M. Rob. Gorges of
Oxford.
obilum?

I might fill much paper, and wast much time in reckoning up their nonsense,
absurdities, poor and empty shifts and evasions, to which they were driven;
which were sometimes so palpable, that the whole Assembly did more then once
break forth into loud laughter. But I leave them to be conceived by the
judicious Reader, who may, without fear of enlarging too much, guess at the
rest, by the enumeration of these few. But this I cannot omit, which I make

3. Observable: That Collier in my apprehension (and I think that I have five
senses) was put to silence more then once. But then, when the matter in
question was driven to an head, and he over-powred with strength of Argument,
and so non-plust, breaking all the laws of disputation, he would begin again,
running back to his Argument. And here also his fellows would he^p him at a
dead-lift; when he knew not what to say, they would fill up that vacancy with
clamours against one or other.

4. Most observable was the good hand of God upon us, who there did clearly own
our Righteous cause: mightily supporting the spirit of Mr Fullwood, so that
though he had preached two hours, yet he held out seven hours disputation more,
without moving from the place, pouring contempt upon Collier and his adherents;
oh how vile were they in the eyes of the most! much ado to refrain hissing them
out of the place; There was often breaking out into cachinnations, insomuch
that Collier himself seemed much to be daunted! giving the Ministers favor in
the eyes of the people, yea of their very adversaries, so that (which I look
upon as no insignificant demonstration of the goodness of our cause) Collier
himself (what wrested it from him I know not,) spoke openly to Mr Fullwoods
commendation. Report also says, that the adversaries themselves have since
confessed, that they never met with such opposition. Thanks be unto God, for
his unspeakable gift.

3. And what need I now speak of the success of this dispute? 3. Success.
The adversaries themselves know to their sorrow, and we to our comfort, that
then and there the Lions skin was plucked off from the Ass, which had made him
formidable before: And that, though there were their whole strength, yet, they
received the greatest foil that ever they did. And indeed what can any one
conceive will be the success of such a contest, when the father of lies shall
contest with the spirit of truth? When ignorance shall cope with learning,
hypocrisy with piety, error with truth? When an ignorant caviller shall
dispute with a prudent Logician? I confess indeed their strange cavils and
sophistry, made me not a little to marvel: so that I thought there had been a
(...) or a transmigration of the souls of some Jesuits into their bodies; or
as if they had been principled by some Old Loyolist: Surely they never learned
them at the Plough: But they were all so soundly elided, and their falsity so
plainly demonstrated, that the people professed themselves to have received
full satisfaction. So that by the goodness of God that days action wan great
credit to the truth, reputation to the Ministry, an increase to that [formerly]
thin and very discouraging lecture, reclaimed some deceived souls, confirmed
many; and is interpreted by some as a pledge of the fullfilling of that
Promise, 2 Timothy 3. 9.

Some men may posssibly dislike the action it self, and question the prudence
and discretion of the Ministers, who would so much undervalue themselves as to
contest with such ignorant wranglers. But the happy success thereof may alone
sufficiently answer whatsoever may be objected against their so doing; to say
nothing of the great sufferings of truth which were there likely to have been,
had there wanted strong opposition.

As for the persons who with such courage undertook, and with such felicity
managed this business: thus much I dare say, in their behalf, that they aimed
more ^t the maintenance of the truth, then at the praise of a Victory. And yet
they aimed at victory also, but not to credit themselves but the truth, I have
cause to think, that there was no Minister there, but is of my mind; who could
be content and willing to be abased, scorned, and slighted, to lose all my
comforts and hopes on earth, to wander about as a vagabond, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented; So that the name of Christ may be glorious, and his
Kingdom advanced; if it were pleasing to God so to have it, and my affliction
might be more for his glory then my comfort and prosperity.

Nor let any supercilious censurer distaste the publishing hereof. No such thing
was ever intended, till the desires of some godly Christians (who were willing
that others might receive that benefit by reading of it, as themselves had by
hearing it) and the necessity of vindicating themselves forced them to it. Some
reports were spread abroad, that the Ministers were not only silenced, but did
also acknowledge their error, and openly make recantation: So that they were
necessitated to make the whole public. And herein they have Augustine for
their President, who having had frequent conflicts with the Donatists, was
forced at last to commit all his disputations to Writing, because they always
proclaimed themselves Victorious, though indeed (as these Donatists at
Wiviliscombe) they were mightily convinced and confounded. As for these, its
true, they never left prating, but that was looked upon and esteemed as no
other then the wriggling of some Insecta, when their heads are off.

Reader, Thou may not expect any elaborate Discourse here. The dispute was
sudden and unpremeditated; the Sermon such as was then delivered, when never
intended to be published: and I hope, that these considerations will apologize
with thee for the Author, who was willing, though much to his own prejudice,
to impart it to thee, without any manner of dress, more then it had when he
uttered it.

I had thought, (Good Reader) to have spoken more by way of Exhortation both to
the honest-hearted, and also to those who are for the present gone astray; but
that I have already detained thee too long from the reading of what follows:
And I doubt not, but that, if thou read with an humble heart, and a discerning
Spirit, thou will find much satisfaction in the Points there handled. God in
Mercy guide both thee and me into all truth. So prays,

Thy Servant in the things of Christ, CHARLES DARBY.

THE CHURCHES and MINISTRY of ENGLAND, True Churches, and true Ministry.
1 COR. 1. 2. To the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in every place
call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.
CAP. I. The Text opened and expounded.
THese words containing the object of Paul's salutation, show us to whom he
sends and dedicates this his Epistle, viz. in the first and stricter place, to
the Church of God at Corinth; and then more at large and secondarily, to the
Churches of God all the world over; even as it is subjoined, with all that in
every place call upon (that is, by a Senecdoche, worship) the Name of Jesus
Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours; that is, Jesus Christ, their Lord, as
well as ours.

Now, to be the more particular and pertinent, we pitch upon the first and
stricter object here of this salutation and dedication; touching which the text
affords, First its appellation the Church; with, Secondly, its description, and
that three ways. 1. It is described in its specification, the Church of God.
2. Its situation, the Church of God at Corinth. 3. Its qualification, It Is
sanctified in Christ Jesus, and called to be holy; all which we shall briefly
run over again, and, clearing the same, make the way more plain for our
following discourse.

The word (...) (most easily derived from (...), evoco) here rendered the
Church, is frequently used for any company assembled together for any cause,
both in profane and Act. 19. 32.
holy Scriptures. We may reduce all kind of assemblies to these three,
Sinful, Civil, or Sacred, and find this word expressing them all. For first,
there is a sinful Church, the Congregation of evil doers. Secondly, There is a
Civil Church, Acts 19. 36. Psalm. 26. 5.
And lastly, There is a sacred or a godly Church, as this the Church of Corinth
was, which is here so plainly distinguished from the two former, by this
special attribute, Of God: It is not the Church of the devil or men, but the
Church of God at Corinth.

But this same [Church of God] is of various use and meaning Church of God.
too, and a little inquiry made thereinto we shall find a help and furtherance
to us in our way.

1. The Scripture means sometimes by the Church of God, the whole invisible,
mystical body of Jesus Christ, viz. the whole number of the elect both in
Heaven and earth that are or shall be gathered into one under Christ the head,
Ephesians. 5. 23. Col. 1. 24, 25.

2. Sometimes again the Scrpture uses the Church of God for the universal
visible Church, which consists of all the particular Churches and persons)
with their children) throughout the world that profess the true religion: So it
is used 1 Cor. 12. 12.

3. Sometimes also by a Metonimy, for the place it self where a certain number
of the visible Church use to assemble. So 1 Cor. 11.

4. Sometimes also by a Synecdoche, for any number of Church Members where ever
they be. So in 1 Cor. 16. 19. Col. 4. 5.

5. And lastly, Sometimes for a particular visible Church, whether it consists
of one Congregation or more, as the Church at Jerusalem, Smyrna, Thyatira, etc.
and so in the text, the Church of God at Corinth.

So far then we are come, having found this Epistle sent to a Church, and that
a Church of God, and the Church of God at Corinth too.

There is now but one main thing behind (but that indeed is a main one) namely,
the qualification of this Church of God at Corinth, which is blazed before us
in the following words; to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to
be Saints.

These words do plainly intend the matter or members of the Church at Corinth,
because all others are expressed afterward, with all that in every place, etc.
and also what these members are viz. of two sorts; Saints indeed (such as are
sanctified in Christ Jesus,) and such as are called to be so, though indeed
they be not so; for many are called and few chosen: many are called to be
members of the visible, but few to be members of the invisible Church: for they
are not all Israel that are of Israel. Or else, if you leave out those two
little Romans 9. 6.
words [to be] which the English supplies, it may seem to be thus; the words
[to all that are sanctified in Christ Jesus,] are expounded by these latter
words, called Saints: q. a. to all that are sanctified, or should be so; that
bear the name, the form, though they want the thing and power of holiness and
sanctification: one of these two (choose which you will) must needs be the
meaning of the Apostle here; which will be most clear, if we but once think, to
whom, and for what end he writes this Epistle: to the Church at Corinth, and on
purpose to reprove them too, and that for such gross and vile corruptions, as
he knew (and we confess) are even inconsistent with true sanctity, faith and
holiness, though not incompetent to a true Church, (as is plentifully manifest
through his Epistles, etc.) which I shall reduce and set before you under three
heads.

1. He reprooves them for the breach of the Laws of soberness, Sins of the
Church of corinth.
in the two gross and known sins, gluttony and drunkenness, cap. 11. 21.

2. Of righteousness, in their divisions, envyings, strifes, cap. 3. 1, 2, 3,
5. and worse, in incest too cap. 5. 1.

3. Of piety and holiness* (living neither godly, righteously, nor soberly:)
And first, in defect, I mean in discipline, which appears by their mixed and
disorderly fellowship, not casting out the lewd and scandalous rout, cap. 5.
with 11. as also abundantly, in excess, by schism: one despising Paul, and
another Apollo; cap. 3. 4. Heresy, denying the resurrection of the body, 2
Cor. 15. Idolatry, 2 Cor. 6. with (to conclude) a most egregious profanation
of the holy Table, through ignorance, gluttony, drunkenness, etc. cap. 11. 21,
etc.

Now doubtless all these great and gross corruptions, foreknown to Paul, and
even just now, with this very Epistle, about to be reproved by him, in thus
Church; he could not so grossly bewray his flattery, or sin so deeply against
his knowledge, as mean to call them real Saints, all Saints, that were the
members of it. Yea from what has been said, we must conclude; 1. That they
were not all real Saints. 2. Nor yet all visible Saints, though indeed called
to be both of these. Some true believers there were among them, some visible
Saints, not true believers; those are both likely; but this is certain, there
were many vile and openly profane and scandalous persons among them; and as
certain also (notwithstanding them) Paul salutes them as the Church of God.
Notwithstanding he fore-knew and intended by this his Epistle, to reprove all
those gross and abominable sins you have heard, yet here and behold his
salutation runs, To the Church of God at Corinth.

CHAP. II. That a mixture of profane and scandalous persons with real Saints,
is not inconsistent with the Church of God.
FRom the Text thus opened, we descend to infer some seasonable Points, which
(like unto a chain) though every link be not fastened immediately to the first,
we shall find have a plain and kindly dependence each upon other, and they
are these.

1. That a mixture of profane and scandalous persons with real Saints, is not
inconsistent with the Church of God. or a true Church. 2. That then, the
Churches that are now in England, are Churches of God, and true Churches. 3.
That then, the Ministry of these Churches, is the Ministry of God and the true
Ministry. 4. That then, there is a great and heavy sin lying at the door of all
suchS, as do presume to proach publicly among us without a call, who have true
Churches, and a settled Ministry. 5. And then (to conclude) they also must needs
be guilty, that forsake true Churches, and a lawful Ministry, to follow and
hear unsent preachers.
I shall be as brief and plain as I may upon each of these in order.

1. The first of these immediately depends upon the text explained; Scandalous
persons in a true Church.
for if there were profane and scandalous persons in the Church of Corinth,
and yet notwithstanding she bore the name of the Church of God, it must
immediately and naturally follows, that there may be profane and scandalous
persons in the Church of God: there may be, I say, but I mean de facto, and not
de jure; I confess they ought not to be there, but if they be, they do not
unchurch the assembly wherein they are: they are the disease and trouble of the
Church, but not its death: indeed, such gross and vile corruptions as we have
found to have been in the Church of Corinth, are as inconsistent with a pure
Church, as boyls and leprosy with a pure body: but yet, for all, as the soul
does not presently leave and disown the body, for any disease, except it be
mortal; so neither does Christ his body the Church. Both the natural and
mystical body may be true, though very corrupt: and what I have before
asserted, is undeniable, viz. That a mixture of profane and scandalous persons,
with real Saints, is not inconsistent with a Church of God, or a true Church:
for we see, in the purest times, in the very time of the Apostles themselves,
as soon as ever the seed was sown, tares are mixed: as soon as ever the Churches
are planted, they are thus diseased; many corruptions are known to abound in
most of them, and yet all of them are owned, none denied to be Churches of God,
even by the Apostles. If this instance of Corinth be not sufficient; consider
the Church of Thessalonica, Galatia, Ephesus, Pergamus, 2 These. 2.
Thyatyra; who had the mystery of iniquity already working; who suffered
themselves to be soon carried away to another Gal. 2. 3.
Gospel, who had lost the first love; who had those that maintained the
doctrine of Baladm, with the heresy of the Nicolaitans; Revel. 2. 3. and 3.
14. 20.
and who lastly suffered the Prophetess Jezabel. to seduce the servants of
Christ (as England too much) who yet notwithstanding are called Churches, yea
and Churches of Christ: and by the Apostles themselves commending the good that
was in them, even while, in the mean, they reprove the evil that they did, or
suffered to be done among them.

And therefore it was doubtless a very gross error of Barroh 1. Visible Church
not a company of true Saints. Mat. 13. 37. Mat. 3. 12.
and those of the old separation, to define the Church to be a company of
faithful people that truly worship Christ and readily obey him. Alas the
Kingdom of God, that is, the Ministry sent to gather Churches, is a net that
gathers fish both good and bad: and the Church is a floor that has chaff and
wheat, and a through-separation shall never be attained, till the great
distinguishing day comes. The ground of their error is this, they confound the
invisible and visible Church. It is most certain, I fear, that if none may be
said to be a true Church, but she whose members are all true believers, there
is no true Church in the world this day, if there ever have been: Besides, how
senseless it is to make true faith (an invisible thing) the mark of the visible
Church I

Again, Though the error be not so gross, it is very dangerous 2. Nor always
of visible Saints.
to say, that there cannot be wicked and scandalous persons in a true Church;
for this does immediately tend to schism, and if it raseth the foundation (as
plainly appears) of those first Apostolical Churches, well may it ours.
Alas, a particular person may have many failings and gross corruptions
powerful in him, and yet all the while (I hope) be a child of God: even so a
Church may be very much degenerate, extremely corrupt, and all the while be a
Church of God, as the Reas, Because corruptions strike not the being of a
Church.
Church of Corinth was: And the Reason is plain.

The Reason is, Because such corruptions (in manners or discipline) strike at a
Churches been esse only, and not at the being or essence of it: as a man with
boiles and botches all over his body (like unto Job) is yet a true man, a man a
live, though he be not so pure and healthy as other men are: these, indeed, do
send him forward so far as in them lies to death and the grave, however he may
not be said to be dead, so long as his soul, his form abides in him, which all
these things cannot touch.

viz. touching the form and distinguishing note of a true Church: What it is,
or where it lies?

What and wherein is the form of a visible Church. Generally in Ordinances.
Churches and Counsels, before Rome was Antichrist, and all the Churches
reformed from her Antichristianism, together with all Judicious Papists
themselves, do jointly conclude, that the formal difference of the true
Church, I mean, as visible, lies in communion in true Ordinances; and on
occasion, farther enlarge and explain the meaning thus; that therefore the more
or less pure the Ordinances are, the more or less pure the Churches are, and
though the Ordinances of Christ should suffer corruption, yet if they may be
said, but to be true, and if there remain but only so much as will carry the
Ordinances to be of Christ, even so far are the Churches, the subjects thereof,
the Churches of Christ.

When two or three are met together in my Name, defines a Church. Matthew. 18.
Communion, contains the form and essence of a Church in general: communion in
Ordinances of God, contains the Form of a Church of God; and the purer the
Ordinances are, the purer the Churches: and the truer they are, the truer the
Churches: but so long as the Ordinances may be known to be Christ's, though the
havers be very corrupt, we must own the Churches to be Christ's also.

But to be a little clearer, might I judge here, I should conclude Specially in
Ministers of the Word.
that the Ministry of the Word, rather then the Sacraments, contains the form
of a particular visible Church, for of such we speak. 1. As for Baptism, that
enters the party baptized, into the universal visible; and we must be
constitute a particular visible Church, before we have right unto, much more
the enjoyment of the Lords Supper: indeed, none can be member of a particular
Church unles he be baptized, so baptism is a negative mark: and none can have a
right to the Supper of the Lord, unless he be a member of a particular Church;
so that the Lords Supper, I mean the actual administration thereof, is a mark
redundant. But, as for the ministry of the word, that Therefore the Sacraments
are called by Reverend Usher, dependents on the Word.
has in it not only a mark, but the form and difference of the visible Church
of which the Sacraments are but seals, and seem to alter and change the nature,
as the doctrine does; as the same seal is of different value, according to the
nature and value of the writing to which it is set. So that when the doctrine
becomes antichristian, the seals thereof, can scarce be christian, though they
be counterfeit and would be so, this may not deny the baptism of Rome to be
lawful baptism; yet thus far it goes, that the baptism of Rome is no farther
christian, then their doctrine touching it is so: for should they deny the holy
T^inity, although they did baptize in the Name of the Father, Son and holy
Ghost, I hardly judge it to be lawful baptism, though happily the old Rule might
reach it, fieri non debuit, factum valet.

However this is safely concluded, that the chief essential mark or form of a
true particular visible Church, consists in a fixed and settled visible
fellowship in the ministry of the word of Christ. A Church is so called from
its gathering together, and where is this so plainly seen as in its visible
communion in the ministry of the word, especially being settled and constant?
what advantage has the Jew above the Gentile? the Church above the world? much
every way, but chiefly because to them is committed the Oracles of God: this is
the particular privilege of the Church of God.

But a little more distinctly, I mean the ministry here on both sides: Docens,
utens. The Papists of late deny this: but Stapleton one of the chief among them
says, The preaching of the Gospel is the proper and
the teaching part: and the using, hearing and receiving part. 1. The
ministerial Churches have their mark, viz. true doctrine, and this especially
joined with the other, is very potent to discover to us the true Church. For
this see Matthew. 23. 2, 3. As if Christ should say, join your selves to them;
though wicked and profane, yet they are a true Church. But how is that known?
why, their ministry is true; they sit in Moses chair: But how does that appear?
because their word and doctrine is true, though their lives be wicked; hear
them, but do a very clear Note of the Catholic Church, provided by lawful
Ministers. Princ. dort. c. 22.
what they say, not what they do. And answerable to this, is our Saviors rule,
for trial of Prophets, By their fruit, that is, by their doctrine ye shall
know what they be, whether true or false: preachers of the sound and orthodox
truth, is both a means and a mark; a means of gathering, and strengthening, or
confirming, or keeping the Churches thereby together. Now as the preaching of
the word is a means to gather and constitute Churches at first, so it being
usually occasional only, it is not said to be a mark of the true Church: but
being gathered by the word, and church'd by Baptism, the ministry settled and
fixed (as was said) among them, becomes an essential mark of the true Church.
Not only of the teaching (which it does immediately) but of the professing
Church also, since who can say where the true Church is, but where the true
doctrine and ministry is fixed and settled? and therefore we shall never read
that God did ever divorce any Church, though she deserved it long Rev. 2. 5.
Nulla possit ^ schismatius fieri tanta corruption, i. emendatio, quanta est
schismatis pernities, if the doctrine of faith be sound, Tert. de praes. cap.
6. Si confessio ejus convenit cum Scripturis verus est Christianus, sin minus
falsus. Chrysostom.
before, until he removes his candlestick from them. Which is most remarkable
in the Jewish Church, who, while a Church, God did not deal so with any Nation,
neither had the heathen knowledge of his Laws; and the Apostles are charged to
preach the Gospel to none other; and who continued without all doubt to be a
visible Church of God, until the course or the ministry is turned from her to
the Gentiles: then and not till then, God cut off the Jew and ingrafted the
Gentile.

2. There is another chief mark of the visible Church, which lies on the
Receivers part, I mean, (as before the Preachers, so here) the professors of
the truth: My sheep hear my voice, says Christ, that is, my real sheep hear
my doctrine really and my visible sheep, apparently and visibly; so that a
people baptized, professing the true doctrine of Christ, and visibly united in
the public and constant hearing and receiving the doctrine of Christ, from the
true Ministry, are a true Church, and are hereby known to be so. I say, this
profession is visibly, when the company do openly and visibly own and profess
by frequenting the public Ordinance of hearing, the true doctrine; and
sufficient to discover them a true Church, though very corrupt in other
regards. Now each of these, the settled Preaching, and constant receiving (by
public attending) the doctrine of Christ, are very good marks of a true
particular visible Church; and in both together I conceive consists the form of
the same, viz. in a fixed and constant visible fellowship with God and each
other in the sacred Ordinance of preaching and hearing the doctrine of Christ:
and from this a Church may recede and die two ways: being starved to death
through a Famine of the Word, with the Church of the Jews. 2. Or else being
poisoned to death by contagious doctrine, with the Church of Rome.

common to Infidels.

Athenians and Paul: but as it is an infallible mark of the visible Church it is
(as before) fixed and settled: and in that as occasional preaching and hearing
of the Word is the only proper means of gathering Churches; so where it has so
far wrought and prevailed, as that it is become fixed and constant with any
people, it is to me a certain mark of gathered Churches; provided always,
submission has been made to the Ordinance of Baptism.

To which I subjoyn this argument: That which does formally constitute or make
a member of a Church, does constitute or make a whole Church: But profession of
the faith does formally constitute a member of the visible Church, and
therefore the whole visible Church; since the whole here is made of parts of
the same nature: visibility denominateth the parts, and therefore the whole of
the visible Church: as true faith is essential to a member of the Church
invisible, and profession of that faith to a member of the visible: so truth of
faith does constitute the invisible Church, and profession thereof a visible
Church, according to the rule, quae est ratio constitutiva partium, est etiam
constitutiva totius.





2. While they desire the same they have a right thereto, and enjoy this
public communion in its first act, though they want the actual administration
and enjoyment of it.

3. But considering how much of the form of the Church Ecclefia est unius
co^gregationis cujus membra inter se combinantur and ordinary convenient uno
in loco ad publicu^ Religionis exercitium. Ame. Med. p. 215. 2. 2.
consists in this public communion together, I cannot compare such a people
better then to a man in a swound, in whom for a time the soul, the form,
cease to perform its formal actions; though it be not yet severed and gone
from the body, yet if such a fit as this continue, Physicians tell us it is very
dangerous, and experience reckons it a sure infallible sign of death: even so,
when Vision fails, the People perish.

CHAP. III. That the Churches that are now in England are Churches of God.
THe next conclusion does naturally follow, and closely and immediately depend
upon the former, for since (as we have found) a mixture of profane and
scandalous persons with real Saints, is not inconsistent with the Church of
God, or a true Church; Then our Churches that are now in England, are Churches
of God and true Churches.

I dare not say they are pure, and much less perfect, yet I Our Churches true
Churches.
doubt not to prove them true Churches.: but by Churches I mean not (though I
highly commend that hand of wisdom that made the parochial difference) the
Parishes here (or at least not as under the notion of Parishes) but the fixed
and settled and usual assembling (...) consisting of Parishes, or more or
less. These I affirm (...) Churches of God, and true Churches. In the proof
whereof, though I might very safely confine my self to what has been said,
touching the essence and marks of a Church before, I shall lay my line somewhat
larger, to make (if possible) surer work.

Yet all shall be reduced to two Arguments, and the first is this.

Nothing in them to the contrary.
what then can hinder them from being true? First, I say, there is nothing in
our Churches to make them false.

1. Neither of manners, nor 2. of government. 1. For manners, 1. If either, we
in these later days should have some allowance above these first Apostolical
Churches, for the Church is compared to a ship, the which the more it sails
upon the sea the more it is subject to leakes: to a house, that with oldness
does decay and grow to ruin, etc. See Morney of the Church. p. 38.
we confess that the Lord has much against us, both of sin and error,
disorder, profaneness, blasphemy and heresy: but consider, all this cannot
unchurch us: this may de jure, provoking the Lord to remove his Candlesticks
away from us except we repent: but while we have these, I mean his
candlesticks, Word and Ordinances, our corruptions cannot de facto make us no
Church, nor yet a false: no more then it did the Church of Corinth: unless
there have been something revealed from heaven since then, that has placed the
essence of a visible Church in the conditions and manners of the members
thereof; which if, we pray, when, where, and how?

2. For matter of government, indeed of late we were under Episcopacy: all
whose appurtenances savoured of Antichrist: yet could they never denominate our
Churches Antichristian Churches: while our doctrine pure our heart was sound
though our heads did ache: for just so it was with the Church of the Jews in our
Saviors time; the Rulers were rebellious, the Priest corrupt, yet
notwithstanding (their doctrine pure) our Savior accounts them a true Church,
and accordingly advises his own Disciples to join unto them, as before we
showed, the doctrine heretofore among us, is still extant: and none can pick
any material errors in it, our Episcopal service, Courts, tyranny, etc. were
very gross, yet not inconsistent with true ^^^^rine, and much less doubtless
with true Churches; (...) were even then when such like abuses were highest,
ever acknowledged, sometimes defended by preaching and printing, against the
Brownists, as is very well known by those very men, that touching our
corruptions were Non-conformists. But suppose we should give you what you beg
for, that our Churches then under (I mean) the Episcopal government were
Antichristian thereby: what gain you? must we be therefore Antichristian still?
God forbid. Are we not reformed (at least so far) from that very thing for
which you impleade us? Are not Bishops gone? their Courts and Service Book, and
all their dependencies gone along with them? I hope then we are not
Antichristian still? because you and your brethren were Heathens and Infidels
before you were dipped, are you so still? that you will say is but poor
reasoning: what then is there left to make us Antichristian? You will not say
Presbytery, for that will be vain, vainer then vain, since as it can never be
proved Antichristian, so neither are we yet governed by it.

And as there is nothing in our Churches in England to 2. Nothing wanting in
them.
make them false, so is there nothing wanting in them to make them true; now we
can be pretended to want but 3. things that are necessary to a Church;
Church Governors, Church Government, and Church Covenant. Now as for
Church Governors we have so many of them as the being of a Church (though not
as the well-being of it) requires; since the form of a Church consists in
Ordinances (not in Discipline) and we have sufficient administrers of them, who
rule over us by speaking to us the word of God, Heb. 13. 7. 2. As for
Church Government in some places, in some branches, viz. of discipline, it is
wanting among us; but the want thereof cannot unchurch us, for the Church of
Corinth wanted the same ( Cap. 5.) and yet is saluted as the Church of God. 3.
And lastly, We want not either a Church Covenant, since the word of God
requires it not. 2. Since we have it implicitly, though not expressly: for we
must have some agreement or other who walk together in the same fellowship, for
how can two walk together unless they be agreed? 3. Besides our Brethren of
the Congregationall way that are so much for this Covenant, account us true
Churches, though we want it and should have it; What want we then? yea, what
have we not? have we not the Sabbath, Word, Prayer, Sacraments, and Censures
too in many places with us? however what want we, essential to a Church, who
have matter and form? matter, in that we have both real Saints to gratify
you, and visible professors to satisfy us! Touching the qualification of
Church Members in general, and of our own in particular, sufficient has been
said before: and for the first constitution of our Churches in England, though
that be nothing to our present condition, we have largely cleared it in the
debate related and printed after the Sermon.

The Churches that are now in England are the Churches of God, because they are
in Covenant with him. Cause in Covenant. Psalm. 50. 5.


Now the consequence here will not be questioned, however it is Analogicall,
upon that Text, Gather my Saints together unto me allye that have made a
Covenant with me, etc. implying hereby, by being in Covenant with God they are
really a Church, for that they have a right to be an Actual Congregation.

But the Assumption hence, viz. That we are in Covenant with God, calls for
proof, which is easily performed by three Arguments, viz. because we have the
Seal of the Covenant, the word of the Covenant, and the blessings of the
Covenant; all which we shall find not only to prove us in Covenant with God,
but immediately to conclude us a Church of God too.

Then first, We have the seal of the Covenant, the Sacrament 1. Having the Seal
of the Covenant.
of Baptism, which in its predecessor, Circumcision, was called the token of
the Covenant, or a token from God, whereby they should know themselves to be in
Covenant with God; and this token or seal was called by God (and commanded by
him to his people under the name of) the Covenant; intimating to us, that those
that denied the seal denied the Covenant, or exclude themselves from any
interest in it; as is the folly and weakness of too many with us, in
renouncing their baptism. Now as this is the seal of the Covenant, so is it
also the door of the Church; for persons though really converted by the
preaching of the Gospel, and the Children of Believers, born in the Church, are
not (though virtuall) actual members of the visible Church, before Baptism,
which seems to be built upon the known Text, Go, disciple all Nations,
baptizing them: that is, disciple, not by teaching only, not by teaching
properly, but by baptism: the participle using to signify the manner of doing:
Go, disciple, but how must we disciple? why as before by circumeising, so now
by baptizing, and in this Commission in Matthew to the Apostles, the Commission
given to our Father Abraham, is but enlarged: it is the same The Sacraments of
the Jewish Church in substance were one and the same with our Sacraments, Heb.
13. 8. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3. Joh. 8. 56. Joh. 6. 50, 51. Col. 1. 11, 12. 1 Cor.
5. 7. all say this except Papists, Anabaptists, Arminians and Socinians.
for substance though it differ in circumstance: the work is the same to
disciple, and make up Churches, though the matter is larger; Abraham chiefly,
that one Nation to come out of his loins, together with all that would join as
proselytes; and the Gospel Ministers must disciple all nations, (i.) so far as
they can, and the nation will submit unto them. Abraham was commanded to
disciple, by that initiating ordinance of Circumcision; and the Gospel
Ministers, by this of Baptism: indeed there is teaching prerequisite, to
prepare and fit men out of the Church for the ordinance of Baptism; and so much
was requisite to make men proselytes, for Circumcision: which thing makes it
clear, that not only Abraham's natural seed had right to this Ordinance, or
that his seed were circumcised as his seed, but, as they were capable of being
members of the visible Church: and therefore we find, that when heathen people
were willing to become members of the Church, they had the Ordinance of
initiation, Circumcision, to enter them in, and not them only, but their
children also: which is a clear pattern for the Ministers of the Gospel toward
the Gentiles: How shall we behave our selves to them? why, we have commission
to disciple them. But how? why as the Ministers of Law did proselytes, Gentiles
before us, by Circumcision; so must we now by Baptism: but whom among them?
why, as they before us, the prosely to Gentiles, and their children too; so
must we also disciple (by baptism) the nations of the Gentiles, and their
children too, so far as they submit themselves, and their children to the
Ordinance of Christ. But I must return; Baptism we see is the door of the
Church, which further appears by Joh. 3. 5. Except a man be born again of water
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: this Kingdom of
God, I conceive to be the Church (for Christ is telling Nicodemus here of
earthly things,) and you may conceive the Church invisible or visible: if
invisible, here is a door to let you in, the baptism of the spirit and
regeneration real: if visible, here is another door for that too, the baptism
of water, a regeneration visible: a man may be born again (i) become a new man,
two ways, and accordingly may have place in the Church two ways: he may be
born again indeed by a real work of the spirit within, and thus becomes a
member of the invisible Church: or else a man may be born again in show only,
from a visible member of the world and the devil, discipled by baptism, and
made thereby a visible member of Christ, and entered into the visible Kingdom
of Heaven, the visible Church: which indeed is sometimes first, according to
the order of the words, except a man be born again of water and of the spirit,
he cannot enter into (the visible or invisible Church) the Kingdom of Heaven.
Now to end with this, it cannot be denied upon a good ground, but we in England
are a discipled nation, and are entered into the Kingdom of Heaven, the visible
Church, being born again by water.

Neither have we the seal only, for we have the writings 2. And word of it.
Church is built upon the foundation of Apostles and Prophets.
too: not only a pledge or token of the bargain, but the word of the Covenant
also, the Scriptures in purity, and the Ordinances of them in power and
fullness: which is undeniable, and therefore we have the Covenant (Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
Heb. 9. 4.) also; above all reasonable contradiction; and therefore we are the
Churches of God for full satisfaction. To Romans 9. 4.
the Jews belonged the Adoption, glory, and Covenants; but how does it appear?
because to them belonged the giving of the Law, and the service of God. And
what advantage had the Jew by being a Church above the Gentile, that was none?
why, much every way, but chiefly, because to them were committed Romans 3. 1, 2.
The walls of the Church have their foundation in the Names (i) doctrine of the
twelve Apostles; and is therefore the pillar and ground of truth. Rev. 21. 14.
the Oracles of God: showing, that they were a peculiar privilege to, and a
distinguishing character of the visible Church: for God shows his word unto
Jacob, his Statutes and judgments unto Israel, and has not dealt so with any
nation, that is; among the heathen that have no Church. Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
compared with Cant. 1. 7 other nations doubtless might have the Bible among
them, as we at this day have the Turkish Alcoron; but here lay the difference,
God did not show, promulge or preach his word to them; it was not with them as
the Oracles of God, the word of the Covenant to them.

Gospel Ordinances, are a great part of the outward administration Ubi est
fides illic est Ecclesia, ubi non est fides, ibi non est ecclesia, Chryso.
of Gospel Covenant, where God is pleased to hold a visible communion with us,
and we with him (as before,) and so long as we have these we are no doubt in
covenant with God, and then, a Church of God.

And to make all sure, we have the peculiar blessings of the 3. And the
blessings of it.
covenant which God bestows on none but such as are in covenant with him, his
own Churches. These are chiefly three: the blessing of his spirit, of his
providence, and of his people: the first is inward, the two later outward, but
all spiritual and all special and peculiar blessings: but of them in order.

The first and inward blessing of the Covenant, is the blessing 1. Conversion.
(I mean not only the common convictions, enlightenings with the knowledge of
the Gospel, which is indeed peculiar to the Church however, but the special
blessings) of the Spirit of God, accompanying his word, for the work of
conversion, in the hearts of our hearers. This I make an infallible Mark of the
truth of our Churches, Conversion ordinarily wrought in our Churches.
Conversion may be extraordinarily wrought by discourse; what is that? we speak
of a usual and ordinary work: and it is vainer to say, we convert from sin to
duty and not to God: this is against charity, sense, and reason: first, against
charity, to damn all those that have no other grace then what was received from
the hand of our Ministry: against sense, for bloody experience has proved
that faith to be true that was wrought by our Ministry, in its subjects,
martyrdom: and lastly against reason, yea, I may say, all Scripture too, as if
duty was not in subordination to God. However you cannot over throw the
Scriputre, which faith, Faith comes by hearing, and that by the Word of God
preached, by a sent Minister, which is usually fixed in a Church; whence has
been written, and sealed by all ages, without contradiction, that good rule,
Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus, no ordinary salvation, and therefore no
conversion, is usually had out of the Church: which clearly concludes those
Churches true where it is so.

The second (outward) blessing peculiar to a Church in 2. Special Providence.
Covenant with God is his special Providence: for God has doubtless a
different care and providence over his garden the Church, and the common
wilderness of the world: now all his dealings with us since reformed and
separate from the Church of Rome, has plainly manifested his special
gardencare and providence over us, who can deny it? not the Papists themselves,
who have seen and felt such signal testimonies of it in 88. Powder Treason,
etc. Has God long agone cast us off as Antichristian Churches, and yet all the
while still so remarkably kept us from the slavery of Antichrist? what an
insufferable contradiction is this? nay more, consider his Providence toward
us of late years: how long has there been workings and stirrings in the bowels
of this Land for a further reformation and distance from Rome? and how much in
order thereunto of late has God wrought for us? and all the while that we have
been cleansing in the fire of affliction, what wonderful power and goodness
has he shown us? and is this the way that God uses to walk with a people
divorced and cast away? who can lift up his face against heaven and say it? no
rather, such a manner of neglecting the Apostle speaks of, if they be filthy,
let them be filthy still; and if they be Antichristian, let them be so still;
If not a giving them over to strong delusions to believe lies.

The third and last blessing of the Covenant, is outward 3. Salutation of all
Churches.
too, viz. the blessing of the people, and Churches of God: this I take to be a
peculiar Church-blessing, and sufficient to signify a people in Covenant with,
and a Church of God; which blessed be God, we have in abundance, who have the
salutation of all the Churches, which the Apostle sets down as matter of
comfort for us, Romans 16. 16. Consider now, Have not the Churches the keys of
the Kingdom, and power on earth to loose us from all those black aspersions you
cast upon us? have spirits judgment to try the spirits; and not Churches
judgment to try the Churches? Shall he be counted a Publican and Heathen that
sleights the judgment of a particular Church, and not he much more that
sleights the commendation of all the Churches? Consider what you do, beloved,
and lift not up so bold a face and voice against the verdict of all the
reformed Churches in the world: but if you will, remember what was said, You
engage against the hand of remarkable Providence, and have just cause to fear
some strange judgment will fall from heaven, to stop your mouths also, as it
has other of our enemies before you.

CAP. IIII. That the Ministry of the Churches of England, are the Ministry of
Christ.
ARe our Churches Churches of God and true Churches? Conclus. 3.
then hence it further follows that we conclude, The Ministry of our Churches
is the Ministry of God and the true Ministry; for where can we think or
imagine, the Ministry of God, the true Ministry should be, but where the
Churches of God, the true Churches are? and now had we nothing else to commend
us unto you (unless you recede from your own principles) you cannot deny us a
lawful Ministry, who have call and allowance from true Churches.

But I shall a little enlarge my Argument (which shall yet be but one, though
of many parts,) and prove our Ministry thus unto you.

The Ministers of our Churches in England must needs be the The Arg. in
general, to prove our Ministry.
lawful Ministers of Christ, because they have as much to make and manifest
them so to be, as their very Adversaries themselves either have or allow and
pretend unto; and over and above, what ever else their adversaries want, and
any other reasonable men may require more: together lastly with what the very
Scripture it self does require, or has set and left, as a canon or rule for
the making and discovering the lawful Gospel-Ministery by.

For the making good hereof I am to clear three things, The parts of the
Argument.
1. That our Ministers have that to make, and manifest them true Ministers,
that is agreeable to the principles of their very adversaries; and this being
found will easily carry us above contradiction. 2. To the principles of all
other indifferent men. 3. To the principles and rules of the Word of God: which
two last being cleared and proved, may serve I think for full satisfaction.

SECT. I.
First then, let us see what these busy men have, or rather would have, that
deny our Ministry, and proclaim themselves 1. From principles of our
adversaries.
to our people as the only lawful Ministry, in their public preaching: let
us examine the manner, and these men a little; and we shall see their boasting
vain, for they have no more in pretense then we have really: they acknowledge
they have (and plead for) no more to give them a call, then themselves
acknowledge many of us have: there is doubtless very much in this, let us
search it a little.

There are but four things left (since the men for shame have laid down their
claim and pretense to a call immediate Who lay claim to four things.
and extraordinary) that all of their party together profess to have any
influence upon their call; and we shall find them all four agreeing with us,
though scarce any of them lay claim to them all, only some of them to one, and
some to another. 2. Of them are inward, a secret impulse and gifts. The other
two are outward, and are the choice and desire of the people.

Some of them say, truth is like a fire in them; they cannot hold sire in their
breasts and not be burnt; it will have vent, 1. An inward impulse.
it burns in their bowels, inflames their tongues, they must declare what
things they have heard and seen: O brave, is this your plea for offering up of
your strange fire, that has so inflamed and almost consumed the Churches of
Christ? Is there no other way to vent the truth (if you know such a thing as
truth) but from a pulpit? to set up your fire as a Beacon on a hill, to make a
greater combustion among us? however my friends, consider a little, does this
give you a call? how can you then deny ours? do you think that none of our
Ministers can say from their hearts the love of Christ constrains us: and woe
is me if I preach not the Gospel? if so, then let that first plea fall to the
ground, or else give us leave to be preachers as well as your selves.

2. Some of them, and truly the chiefest of them plead their 2. Gifts.
gifts for calling: they are not, they say, since God has lightened their
candle for them, to put it under a bushel, but on the house top (upon the
mention of those things I cannot but say a word unto them, though their answer
is reserved for their proper place) to such I say, Cannot the stars shine and
glitter, unless they do manage the Chariot of the Sun? My Brethren, have you
gifts, as you say? be humble and thankful, have grace in your hearts, as well
as gifts in your heads; trust me then you would know your selves, your gifts,
and places better; yea. and shine more too, to the benefit of others: for we
are not the better for the light of the stars while the Sun shines: be not
angry though I call you stars, for your own hearts smite you, saying, Your
greatest light was borrowed from us; which may be my Apology if I boast not
when urged of our own gifts: however suffer me to beg this question of you,
what one gift have you wherein the Ministry you so much blame excel you not?
unless it be in boldness and out-braving confidence? there are two great
gifts the Apostle requires in a Gospel-Preacher, a being apt to teach, and able
to convince gainsayers: the first implying Rhetoric, the last Logic; both
which you call Antichristian, and disclaim as reprobate; certainly brethren, if
you are apt to teach, then the old rule fails (qui been distinguit been docet;)
for you are the worst at distinguishing that ever I knew any (though indeed too
cunning to divide) you cannot distinguish between extraordinary and ordinary
sending; between invisible and visible Churches: between private and public
pteaching; still apt to mistake the one for the other, and error for truth too
often; how then are you apt to teach? the rule is, he that is good at
distinguishing is good at teaching; but you are not able to distinguish well,
and therefore not able to teach well, yea, you are not able to distinguish at
all, and therefore not fit to teach at all, nor is it indeed fit you should:
the Apostle means by [apt to teach] an aptness of habit, not of exercise; an
ability and fitness, and not a propensity and pronenesse to be teachers: now
whether you allow the first to us or no, the latter of these we cannot deny
you, who are in this sense so apt to teach, that truly you Run before you are
sent: and are you better able to convince gainsayers? let your public disputes
throughout the Land be a witness between us: though we need not so much since
your own confessions declare against you, while you openly declare you are
enemies to, because ignorant of the very rules of dispute, which gainsayers
walk by, for how can you then convince them?

3. Others among them fly to the Election of the people.
choice of true believers, for the proof of their call: they are, they say,
elected to preach by precious, choice and holy people, whose call they cannot
but 3. Ames himself says thus, Populus in judicando dirigi potest, ac
ordinary debet a judicio aliorum pastorum electionem vel praeeunte vel
comitante. Cont. Bell. p. 96.
hear and answer: but as this can never create a Minister in a settled Church,
so is it greatest arrogance for you to claim it, with defect in charity or
excess in impudence to deny it us: yea we have this choice privilege of you,
in that we are elected both by Minister and people.

Lastly, Others of them mention the desire of the people, as giving them a
call; then these Itineraries must have as many calls as Sermons almost; for if
their call consists of the peoples desire, so often as they move to another
place where they were not before, they must have a new call, or else preach
there without a call, for the former people do not desire, cannot 4. The
peoples desire.
therefore call them to preach to others, but to themselves; however, can you
say, that you have this call, and dare you say, that we have it not? Alas!
Every one knows, if you do, the public proceedings of the present Authority,
and state of things, will give you the lie; for none are inducted into any
place according to the Rule and Order of Parliament usually, but such as are
chosen, desired and petitioned for by their people, provided they be capable of
such a privilege; besides, that desire and invitation to be preachers they
have from their friends and acquaintance, which is all for the most part that
any of you can plead or challenge.

Now consider, I beseech you, is not this all that you can say The conclusion
of the first branch of the Argument.
for your selves, and can you deny us any part of it? nay, dare you say, that
in those very things we have not the advantage? How then, I pray you, is it,
that you speak so boldly, that you rail so frequently, publicly, bitterly
against us? and tell the people with all confidence, That you are the men that
are called and sent by God himself to preach the Gospel, and that we have no
call at all; Have you one grain more? yea, have you not many grains less then
we, in these very particulars your selves boast of? I beseech you, in the name
of God, consider this, and let it for ever stop those mouths that preach so
much against our call; that they either preach no more who have no better call,
then what they condemn; or else preach no more against our call to preach, who
have the very same in every particular that themselves either have, or allow,
or pretend unto.

But here we must part, you can go no further in the way of a call: We must
step further, for assure your selves, Had we no better call to preach then you
pretend unto, we durst not presume thereupon, as you do, in a settled Church:
But I pass on, to show wherein we excel you, and what warrant we have above
you; for we have yet behind over and above what any other reasonable
indifferent men, and the word of God it self requires: To which we proceed for
your further (and if possible full) satisfaction.

SEC. II.
Now there are four other things which may be required The second part of the
Argument. Four other things the Ministers have which their adversaries want.
for the warrant of our preaching by other men; all which will be found to
commend our Ministry to you, as the want of the same will very much disparage,
if not wholly condemn the preaching of others.

The first particular of them, is, humane learning; this our adversaries allow
us to have, who do not so much for the general part of them as pretend unto
it: and be not now unwilling, beloved, to suffer that little we have of it to
commend Humane learning.
us so far above them that want it. O but alas! you abuse it, say they: so
beloved do you your gifts, and must you therefore despise and reject them? I
pray you, examine, does not your knowledge puff you up that lifts you so high
as the pulpit, and higher yet in your own conceit and vain-boasting? this I am
certain of, that if we do abuse learning, you abuse both it and us much more:
(I speak not here of your undervaluing, but slandering both:) while you say of
learning it is Antichristian, an Idol, and I know not what: and while you
deceive the hearts of the people, by a bold and more slanderous persuading of
them that we say, None may preach, unless he comes from the University, that
all our calling lies in our learning: which things you your selves either do or
might know we deny; we do not say, beloved, that humane learning does empower,
but enable to preach: it does not make us Ministers (for that I shall show you
anon, we have by Ordination according to the Word) but able Ministers. Beloved,
do not think that humane learning is an enemy to God, which is indeed the
chiefest outward blessing of this life, it being not obnox^ous to the Omnia mea
mecum porto.
worlds violence as all other outward blessings are, and so nearer to grace.
Think not humane learning is contrary to truth, which the God of truth himself
has made so much, and such honorable use, in all ages, of, for the
manifestation of his truth unto the world: Consider the penmen of holy
Scripture, and to whom among them, if it be safe to make such a comparison, are
we most beholding? and consider whether they had not the benefit of humane
learning. As for Moses, that public Minister and honorable penman of the very
The Prophets are but expounders of the Law. Calvin.
theme and ground of the old Testament, he was learned in all the learning of
the Egyptians: as for Solomon, Isaiah and Paul (to mention no more) whose
Songs, Prophecies and Epistles, you value above all the rest of the Bible; had
not these, all of them, the gift and blessing of humane learning? Solomon, the
wisest of men, the greatest Philosopher that ever was, who writ from the Cedar
to the Isop that grows upon the wall: Isaiah bred up at the Court, and had by
his own conf^ssion the tongue of the learned: and who know's not that Paul was
bred up at the feet of Gamaliel?

There are three parts of humane learning that are judged Three parts of humane
learning judged expedient for a Divine.
expedient to make a Minister such a workman as needs not be ashamed; History,
Tongues, and Arts, and these only so far as they are necessary helps for true
understanding and expounding the Scripture, which is our only text to preach
upon: I do not say we have all these so far as we should, yet this I say, that
so far as we want them, so far we are workmen that had need be ashamed; and
those that have attained a ripeness in them, are the more to be commended and
honored, by how much the more they are fitter for their work thereby. 1. For
History, 1. History.
the story of the Bible commends that to us, and not only in it self but in
other histories, besides it self, without which truly the history of the Bible,
nor Prophecies, nor Promises, belonging to our times, can well, if at all, be
understood. 2. For Arts, 2. Arts.
we require no more then may serve to answer the Apostles precepts before
named, that a man that desires the office of a Bishop be able to convince
gainsayers, and apt to teach; which cannot, indeed, as experience proves in
these times of ordinary acquiring abilities be gained and had without competent
acquaintance with Logic and Rhetoric. 3. And lastly for 3. Tongues.
Tongues, I only desire you to think with your selves, how it had been possible
for Apostles themselves to have kept their commission, and preached to all
nations, as in Acts 2. unles they had had the gift of languages: and whether
the gift of tongues be such a contemptible thing as you make it, if acquired,
which we see God made (when inspired) the great gospel miracle, and means for
the transplanting his Church from the Jew to the Gentiles? withal, how your
selves (your selves may consider) would ever have enjoyed the Bible in English,
or understood of it, so much as you do, had you not been beholding to the
humane learning of other men for it.

Yea, my brethren, if you recollect, you may easily remember All which three
the adverse partee had occasion to use in their dispute at Wiviliscomb.
that sensible experience showed you the good and need of all three, at that
one [late] conference with us at Wiviliscombe: where your selves had occasion
to quote the Original: to retire to the state of our Churches in England for
many years agon: and also to dispute in form and method; which if you remember
not, above a thousand of people I suppose will for you: and which, if you
remember, me thinks, should possess you with better conceit of humane learning
in all its parts, of History, Tongues and Arts.

A second particular that the eyes of men may look upon, 2. Allowance of all
the reformed Churches in the world.
and see in us, and not in you; is of great weight, and is this; that we are
members of, and allowed lawful Ministers by a true Church, yea, and by all the
Reformed Churches in the world. Then how can your blast possibly hurt, or your
pretenses reach or equal us; when alas poor men, you are neither members of,
nor allowed lawful Ministers, by any one true Church, but have been condemned,
and silenced, by the verdict of all the Churches and Councils that ever were.

I say, you are no members of a true Church; because you They are not so much
as members of particular, Nor of the universal visible Church.
have rent your selves, by dangerous schism, from all the reformed Churches in
the world: Besides, you are not in the universal visible Church: for why? you
were indeed, but by renouncing your Baptism, you are again gone out of the door
of that Church also: poor souls, you little imagine, of what dangerous
consequence, the renouncing of the ordinance of Baptism is, which was in due
time administered to you in a true Much less Ministers.
Church, by a lawful Minister; for the bare repeating of it, by one that is
neither a Minister nor member of the true Church. O which way, can you then
become true Ministers? or be allowed so to be by any lawful Church? out this
should seem to be according to your principles, which is so agreeable to many
of your practices; I mean, to be Preachers before you are Christians: there are
two fellows, within our knowledge here, within a few miles of this place, that
were public preachers, (and one of them to my knowledge has taken a Church, a
Parish, a Pulpit upon him, for a long time,) and yet were not rebaptiz'd
(though long before against Infant Baptism) till about a month ago: I do not
affect to relate such stories, but the passage was so full to my present
purpose, though so gross and ridiculous, I could not hansomely leave it out.)
Then no wonder if all Christian Churches and Christian Councils renounce and
condemn such unworthy preachers as you are; while we have the commendation,
allowance, and liking of all the reformed Churches in the world, and may
commend our selves to you and to all people else, without vainglory, as judged
worthy by the spirits of the Prophets, whom all the Churches of Christ salute,
a thing not slighted by modest men.

A third particular that men may justly look for in the Ministers 3. A being
fixed and settled in the Church. 1. In place.
of the Gospel is, that they be fixed and settled: and this may commend the
Ministers of England above their opposers, who are not fixed either with regard
to place or time.

1. With regard to place; we are fixed stars in the hand of Christ, having our
station and place in the body of the Church; every one knowing his particular
people and flock, over which he is made an over seer: while since the
Apostolical times, such a steering, Ministry was never known, in a settled
Church not under persecution that could make a lawful president, for our
wandering Comets, these itinerary ubiquitarian opposers of ours.

Indeed a settled Church of Christ may sometimes appoint Note.
some able men (whom with safety and prudence they may) to preach the Gospel
among the heathens: or upon some notable exigence, and want of Ministers, in a
true Church; that might bear the name and perform the Office of Itinerary
Ministers: yet in such an extraordinary case as this, these men should be sent
by the Church, and have their bounds and limits too. But our Itineraries are
without all order, bounds and calling, but what they allow to themselves, and
never remember themselves to be in a constituted Church, wherein indeed though
the laborers be few, yet is there no such extraordinary need of such preachers
as they.

2. We are fit in regard of time, while they (in all ages that 2. Of time.
have known such men) have risen and fallen, risen and fallen, risen and
fallen, like the proud inconstant waves of the sea in a storm, raving, raging,
roaring and dashing against the rock the Church (the fixed and abiding
foundation of our house) until they dashed themselves to pieces, fiaming out
their own shame, and fretting and chasing themselves away into air and nothing:
while the Church of Christ, and the settled Ministry has stood as mount Sion
that cannot be moved throughout both storms and ages. The Scripture does more
then allude to the difference in hand, describing them thus; false prophess
shall arise; 1 Cor. 12. 28.
but the lawful Ministers of the Gospel thus; He has set them in the Church.
1. False prophets shall arise, (i.) actively arise, Acts 3. 1 John 4. 1.
of their own accord raising up themselves; while the true ones are passive,
such as the Lord God shall raise upto us. Like to this is that other
expression, there are many false prophets gone out, of their own accord,
running before they are sent: while the true ones stay for Commission and
mission, for how shall they preach except they be sent, yea and thrust out too
sometimes? 2. False prophets shall arise (i.) from beneath: while the true ones
with Paul have their call from Heaven, and come down from above, as Eliah's
mantle, and the gifts and blessings of Christ's Ascension. 3. False prophets
shall arise (i.) of a sudden and unexpectedly, while the true ones God has set
(i.) fixed, posuit, has placed in the Church, to the end they Ephesians. 4. Mat. 28.
20.
may abide by the blessing of his presence, and fellowship with them, to the
end of the World.

Now let it be supposed that the scale is even in other respects, yet doubtless
there is something of weight in this in the balance of reason indifferently
carried: for who does not value staid constancy, before uncertainty? upstart
novelty may please the vulgar, while the old and standing truth will only
satisfy solid men.

The fourth and last particular thing I shall mention here, that men may expect
in the Preachers of the Word in a Christian Allowance and order from a
Christian Magistrate.
Commonwealth, is allowance and order from the Christian Magistrate: Which we
have, and you have not: you know well enough that the Laws of the Land, and two
Ordinances of Parliament never yet repealed, are against you; so that the
disorderly practice of public preaching by men unsent, is is a breach of the
Laws of the Land, which is manifest sin by the Word of God, unless the same
word does command you to do what the Magistrate forbids, which I am sure you
cannot, and think you dare not offer to prove: but as for us, the settled
Ministry of Christ in England, it is known to the world, we are owned and
authorized by the Christian Magistrate, which is more my brethren, for the
clearing of our call in a Christian Commonwealth then you imagine; yea, that
something is necessarily to be done by the Christian Magistrate for the full
and regular Ordination of Ministers, is jointly agreed on, both by Calvenists
and Lutherans, Pralatians, Presbyterians; and Ames the head of the
Congregationall way: and certainly such as deny it, are in this particular no
good friends to Ministers or Magistrates, to make such a distance betwixt them:
Caution. The particulars of a Ministers regular call.
but take heed, I say, not the power of ordaining is held by them, or by us, to
lie in the Magistrates hands, yet they and we say, that in a Christian
Commonwealth, something belongs to the Magistrate to do, in order thereunto:
the Lutherans whom you applaud so much for the making of a full and regular
ordination, Place somewhat in the hands of all the three Orders, Classes, or
Estates, (as they term them) viz. the Ministry, Magistracy, and people; Cura
etiam us omuia (speaking of the Ministers call) recte siant, pertinet ac
Magistratum, Ames. de consu. lib. 4. cap. 25. number. 27.
and to the Ministry they give examination, ordination, and inauguration; to
the Magistrate nomination, presentation, confirmation; to the people consent,
suffrage, approving, or as circumstances may require postulation: Not willing
to give all to the Minister with Papists; to the Magistrate with Erastians; or
to the people with Libertines, Anabaptists, Brownists, etc. and to the purpose
Amesius speaks, who goes as far in this as we desire, for the care that all
things (says he, touching ordination of Ministers he means) be done rightly,
belongs to the Magistrate, whose care and power does contribute to us; and
disown you.

It Is but vain to say, that this is to fetch our power from the earth, for we
rather look on the favor of Magistrates and their assistance, as a plain
performance of that Gospel-promise, Isa. 49. 23. And Kings shall be thy nursing
Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers; which I know not how can come
better to pass, then by their providing the sincere milk of the Word for us.

Now thus far we are come, having stepped beyond you four degrees into the
approbation of indifferent men, we are found to have for our wartant in
preaching what you have or allow, and over and above what may well be required
by any other men: yet one thing remains of greater concernment then all the
rest: for further yet we excel you in this, that we have besides what the Word
requires either to make or manifest us true Ministers, the sum of the following
Section.

SECT. III.
And we are not allowed true Ministers only by our adversaries We have what the
Word requires.
principles, by our own Congregations, by all the Reformed Churches in the
world, and by a Christian Magistracy, as has largely been showed, but by the
Word of God besides; we having whatever the Word requires to make us Ministers,
or to evidence us such. 1. To make us Ministers.


We have first, whatsoever the Word requires to make us Ministers, viz.
Ordination according to the Word of God: now The nature of Ordination.
that this may appear, I shall briefly unfold the nature of Gospel-ordination
of Ministers; and for that end, I pitch on, and desire you to turn to that of
Act. 13. 1, 2, 3. where we shall learn two things. 1. What the nature of
Ordination is. 2. In whose hands the power of ordaining lies.

2. Ordination is described here with respect to its substance; and so it is a
separating, v. 2. or a sending, v. 3. as also, with respect to its Ceremonies,
v. 3. which are fasting and prayer, and laying on of hands: Now from both these
we have this Rule.

That ordinary Gospel-ordaining of Ministers is a sacred separating and setting
them apart for the work of the Ministry, which ought to be solemnized, and
distinctly signified by fasting and prayer, and laying on of hands. Concerning
which I lay down these rules.

1. This Ordination is more or less necessary, the more or less Rules
touching the necessity of Ordination.
the means thereof may be had.

2. Therefore it is not simply necessary, or with a necessity of means, as if
in no case a man might be made a Minister without it.

3. Yet it is necessary, secundum quid, by Apostolical instruction.

4. Whole Ordination is of necessity required in a constituted Church, on the
Ordainers part, not on the part of the person ordained, I mean, though God
requires they observe his rule in ordaining, yet the omission of some
circumstances does not null the substance of any ordination had without them:
upon this Rule, M. Seaman In talibus non est aliquid iterandum, says a Canon
of the Papists themselves. Note. Because Calvinists and Lutherans place so much
in a Christian Magistrate.
the edification of the Church is so necessary that it must be endeavored as
providence makes way: and I had rather have the substance only, viz. a setting
apart by lawful Ministers authorized thereto by the Civil Magistrate, without
the other convenient ceremonies; then to have full Ordination, both substance
and ceremonies from men not allowed by public Authority.

5. We must then distinguish betwixt the substance and ceremonies of
Ordination; and then we say, that the substance which I take to be near the
same with vocation, is far more necessary then the circumstance of fasting, and
prayer, and imposition of hands.

6. The substance of Ordination is absolutely necessary to make a Minister a
lawful Pastor to any particular flock; though not so, to license a man's
teaching to heathens out of a Church: for suppose the highest case: a company
of Christians are cast upon the shore among heathens, and there is no returning
for them to the true Church again: one of these may be made Pastor and overseer
to the Church none doubt; but how? it must be by the calling of the rest,
whereby they separate him for the work, which is the substance of Ordination;
and without the same no man among them may take that honor unto himself.

All these ceremonies of Ordination are to be gladly received, The necessity of
imposition of hands in some respects, either for orders sake or to avoid
scandal, is acknowledged by these Protestant Divines who make least account of
laying on of hands. M. Seaman, p. 74. Note. Our Ordination is such as the word
holds out.
when they may be had and readily submitted to, not as the practice but the
plain institution of the blessed Apostles; and that that therefore will render
a man's call into the Ministry most clear from scandal or any touch of
offense.

These Rules I doubt not, to lay before you as the conclusions of Protestant
Divines, and very much favored by holy Scripture, which would easily appear,
should I not exceed the bounds of a Sermon.

Now as these do keep the middle way 'twixt Papists (upholding the absolute
necessity of Ordination in all cases) and Socinians and Anabaptists, that deny
it to be any way necessary at all: so do they allow and maintain the
lawfullnesse of out Ordination and calling to the Word of the Ministry, both
now and heretofore in the Church of England; being no other but what is most
clearly and evidently gathered from the Text before us, this Act. 13. 2, 3.
with many other places.

Barnabas and Paul?

extraordinary before: this their call then, must needs be ordinary: The
Ordination of Barnabas and Paul was ordinary.
which is more plain too, if we consider the work is the work of ordinary
Ministers hereunto they are called, viz. to preach, ver. 5. and to ordain
others, cap. 14. 23. they having an extraordinary call before, that need not be
repeated; but they being to be sent about the work of ordinary Officers; they
have therefore moreover an ordinary call and Ordination conferred, as a Rule for
the practice of suceeding Churches to the end of the world.

2. If we doubt of the meaning of the Text, let us weigh and consider its
interpretation in the practice of the Primitive Churches afterward, as also of
all the Churches of Christ since those days; for the practice of both does
undoubtedly conclude that this was ordinary Ordination: but the doubt lies not
touching the practice of future Churches; for that is without doubt, that all
the Records of former Churches since the Apostles mention Nos enim (sai. h
Tarno. of the business in hand) necessarium existionamus secundum quid, nimirum
quia citra scandalum omitti hodie non potest, qui tot annos in ecclesia
ufitatus fuit.
no other Ordination but this: and though this has much weight in it
doubtless, and nothing less then presumption will offer to question the
uninterrupted practice of the Churches throughout all ages, since the primitive
times yet let us consider, Was it not so also from the beginning? do we read
of any other Ordination in the Primitive Churches but this? Did not Paul and
Barnabas ordain others in the same manner? Act. 14. 23. Did not Paul charge
Timothy with the same order, (the negative command containing an affirmative)
when he said, Lay hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5, 22? and did not the
Apostles take the same course in Act. 6?

Indeed, the Scripture speaks more carelessly of the Ceremonies Note.
of it; in some places taking no notice of one, nor in some, of another, etc.
though we cannot thence argue they were omitted; and all that we can gather
from such a non-mentioning of them, is this, that the Ceremonies seem to be of
weaker necessity then the substance of our call, which is still most carefully
noted and expressed by the holy Ghost in every place, that mentions any thing
of Ordination; by the substance I mean here as before, a solemn separating and
setting apart by the Church for the work of the Ministry: but however, unless
you can show us some place of Scripture where this way of Ordination by fasting
and prayer, and laying on of hands, is forbidden, or where another way or
course is appointed and used? we may not safely lay aside the old, much less
presume to invent a new: alas! what harm or danger is there in fasting and
prayer? the most happy Christian means to solemnize and speed an important
business? or in laying on of hands; whose three uses in Scripture Genesis 48 14,
20
concur and meet in ordaining Ministers, viz. blessing, Number. 8. 12.
consecrating, and setting apart unto an office.

So much for the nature of Ordination it self, now follows the Persons
ordaining.
consideration of the persons in whose hands the power of ordaining lies.

Who are either principal (according to the Text) or ministerial. 1.
Principal, the holy Ghost.


The principal person ordaining here, is the holy Ghost: touching whose act in
this business, the Text affords two expressions; the one before, the other
after the mediate Ordination of the Church: the first, we have in ver. 2. the
holy Ghost said, separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work, whereunto I have
called them. Whence we note.

That an inward or secret call by the holy Ghost is not enough, according
Observe. 1.
to the order and rule of the Gospel, but requires for the regular making a
Minister, the formal Ordination of the Church besides. Or,

Whom the holy Ghost does call to be Ministers, he does hint to the Church to
be ordained.

ver. 3.) in ver. 4. so they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, Whence,

Those that be ordained according to the Rule by the Church of Christ, may be
said to be sent by the holy Ghost: And when they head fasted and prayed, and
laid their hands on them, they sent them away; and the very next words, are v.
4. so they being sent by the holy Ghost.

2. The Ministerial persons sending or ordaining here, you 2. Ministerial
ordinary teaching Elders.
have described in ver, 3. Such as ministered to the Lord, by office, Ministers:
and named, verse. 1. 1. From their Offices, Certain Prophets and Teachers. 2. By
their proper names, Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, and Saul. These were
ministering, these were spoke to by the holy Ghost, the rest fasted and prayed,
and laid on their hands on Barnabas and Saul, and sent them away. So then, the
persons ordaining here, were Prophets and Teachers; which names do signify
their offices, and are in this place sy^^nimous, as Marlorat judges: mark
then, they are not called Apostles to confute the Papist: nor yet can they be
the body of the people without any Officers, to silence the Anabaptists,
Brownists, etc. the power of ordaining lies then in the hands of Prophets and
Teachers: of ordinary teachers as well as of extraordinary Prophets, else it
would have been said, that the Prophets only laid hands on them: yea, of
Prophets, not as such, but as they were Teachers (the greater ever containing
the less) for as we never find that it was proper to Prophets, as so, to
ordain; so nor as extraordinary Officers only, for then Ordination had ceased
with extraordinary Officers, which would gratify the Seeker too much.
Therefore it is said both Prophets and Teachers, to intimate to us that
Teachers and ordinary Officers have a stewardly power of Ordination, and
Prophets, as supplying the place, and doing the office of ordinary Teachers,
that are to succeed to the end of the world, Ephesians. 4. Whence the note and
Observation is,

That the power of sending or ordaining Ministers lies in the Observe.
hands of ordinary Officers, as stewards of it: not in the hands of Five
Arguments to prove the power of Ordaining in the hands of ordinary Officers.
Apostles only; not in the hands of the people, ordinarily; for which I shall
but name five Arguments, two of which I hinted in the clearing of the Text.

1. If the power of ordaining had lain in the hands of extrordinary Officers
only, there had been no way left for the perpetuation of a Gospel-Ministery,
which Christ has resolved to continue in the world to the end thereof.

2. If Teachers had power to ordain, then ordinary Officers had power to
ordain, for Teaches were ordinary Officers, Ephesians. 4.

But Teachers we see in the Text, had power to ordain: Ergo.

3. If men, by virtue, and with and in their own Ordination, receive power to
ordain; then ordinary Ministers have power to ordain, for they are ordained.
But men by virtue, and in and with their own Ordination, receive power and
authority to ordain others; as appears abundantly, As my Father sent me, so
send I you, says Christ, this seems to be spoken in answer to secret
Objections which the Apostles made against their call to preach the Gospel: as
if they had said by what authority do or may we preach? why, do not doubt says
Christ, My Father sent me, and in his sending me he gave me Authority to send
others; As he sent me, so I say, or by that, I had power to send you, and give
you power to send others: He sent me to preach and ordain, I send you to preach
and ordain: and do you send others to preach and ordain, etc. therefore we
find the Apostles executing their Commission accordingly along, as occasion
requires. Paul sends Timothy, Titus, etc. bidding them ordain: and so
successively to the end of the world: which thing is most plain in the Text we
are upon, with regard to the persons ordaining and ordained: Persons ordaining
are Prophets and Teachers: and persons ordained in this ordinary sending what
power receive they? they are sent it is most apparent by an ordinary sending,
and what to do I pray you? why to preach ver. 5. and to ordain Elders in every
Church, c. 13. 23. clearly intimating, that Ministers by their very Ordination
have power to ordain as well as to preach.

4. If a Presbytery have power to ordain, then ordinary Ministers have power to
ordain: for a Presbytery is nothing but a Colledge-combination or company of
Presbyters or ordinary Ministers. But a Presbytery has power to ordain, for
Timothy was ordained by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.



as Elders and not as Apostles or extraordinary Officers: there being Apostles
in the Presbytery that does ordain, and yet Ordination is said to be done by
the Presbytery, clearly shows, that Ordination is a proper act of an ordinary
Presbytery, and not of Apostles as so; and to make it out of doubt, Ordination
is defined in that text to be the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. But
this hands me to another Argument.

5. If ordinary Officers had a hand in Ordination in Apostles times; much more
and safer may they ordain, now there are no extraordinary Officers among us.
The minor implied is already proved: and for the consequence, I say, much more:
but how so? why, because (a pari) the people, where there are no Ministers to
do their work, have power to Ordain, by the warrant of necessity: then much
more ordinary Ministers may: now there are none extraordinary left, if they as
so, had a hand in Ordination; by the like warrant and law of necessity. And now
that that confirms me about all doubting touching the Ordination of ordinary
Officers, is the practice of the primitive Churches, next the Apostles, and so
down along, through all ages and Churches to this day, without interruption or
contradiction, unless by a few inconsiderable men as the Seekers are.

Thus we have showed what Gospel Ordination is, and in Conclusion.
whose hands the power of ordaining lies; it is a setting men apart with
fasting and prayer, and laying on of hands by preaching Elders: which is indeed
in every jot and title of it, the very same with the Ordination allowed and
practiced in the Church of England time out of mind. The additional Ceremonies,
and harsh Oaths, are taken away, and we now have nothing left but pure
Ordination according to the word: so that the word does allow us lawful
Ministers, because we have what the word requires to make us so.

Obj. To say we were ordained by Bishops, is not worth the while: for still
there were ordinary Presbyters joined with them, and they themselves were no
more but ordinary Presbyters, though they thought themselves more: their
thought could not add one cubit to their stature, whom neither Church nor State
did ever declare to be a superior Order to other Presbyters. But for this I
refer you to Mr Seaman, who has given five Answers to this very Objection;
every one of which are so sound and solid, that they are single and apart from
each other, abundantly satisfying. See (...). p. 85.

viz. That we must needs be Antichristian, because by a line of succession we
descended from Antichrist: this indeed is all they have to say against our
Ministry.

knots in the line of succession of the Gospel-Ministery to our times: The
first is, as it passes the bounds of the Apostles days, and this the Seekers
tie: but we have already dissolved it. The other is, in the passage of it, from
the Church of Rome to the reformed Churches, as it lies in this objection, Four
Arguments to clear the succession of Ordination.
made by Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. which I shall now untie; I shall touch
but four Arguments (for I am in have) every of which experience has proved
very effectual.

1. I judge it a truth, not to be questioned, that there has been certain
Ministers of Christ in the world, ever since there were any: and more certain
it is, that there were true Ministers in the Church of Rome, when our first
Reformers began to think of breaking off from her: for there was conversion
there, else God would not have had a people there; and conversion is the work
of sent Ministers, Romans 10. 14, 15. now can any man in reason think, that those
that forsook both Rome and her harlotry, and obeyed that known command of God,
and come out from Rome, were not the best of the Ministers there, and so by
consequence the Ministers of Christ, if there were any, which may not be
doubted? Yea therefore remarkable providence did seal to their Ministry
immediately, upon their leaving Rome, being used by God to preach that doctrine
and press that command, Come out of her my people: and to prevail with a great
number to follow their steps and leave the whore. And when God by them had
drawn his people into the wilderness, he did feed them there by the same
Pastors, Rev. 12. 6, and 14. which helps me to conclude, that as the best of
the members leaving Rome were owned by God for the true Church; so the first of
the Ministers leaving Rome, were acknowledged by God for the true Ministry,
every man abiding in that calling wherein he was called, whether members or
Ministers.

2. Again, It is not so much as questioned, but that our first reformers had an
inward Call; and if their outward call be questioned, it is no great matter,
since both we and our adversaries agree in this, that in such a strait and a
case so extraordinary as that was, the people are bound to choose and call a
Minister; and theirs is valid, no man doubts, in such a case; and therefore the
Call of our first Reformers may not be questioned by our opponents any more,
until they leave their Principles, since it was confirmed by God and the
Church.

But as to their outward Call received in Rome, there may be Rome not
Antichrist, before the Council of Trent: though Antichristian, not wholly so.
more said than you can Answer, and that is this, That Rome was not so far
Antichristian then, but that she had some of the Ordinances of the true, though
not pure; and that though she had played the Harlot before, yet she had not an
express and absolute divorce till the Council of Trent. When she by a public
deliberate Council dis-own'd and razed the fundamentals of Religion, which she
had not done before: that that makes me of this mind is, Rome we say, was not
built in a day, Mystery of iniquity, that disease of Rome had its rise and
increase Because Rome was not at her height of sin, till that Council.
before its state: and so far its certain, that she was not at her height,
before this deadly and desperate fit of the Council of Trent, as appears,

1. Because those gross fundamental errors that are now so firmly laid in
the Church of Rome, by the Council of Trent, and which carries so great a
stroke in the seating of Which appears because there was never so many and
dangerous Heresies decreed before the Council of Trent.
Antichrist there; were not only complained of, declaimed against by private
single Ministers, both in their Preaching and Printing, but disowned by Decrees
made against the most dangerous of them by public Counsels: and we do hardly
read of any former Counsel, that did not only not establish all the Errors or
the grossest of the Errors of the Counsel of Trent; but that on the contrary
did expressly declare against some one or more of the very worst of them.
There are six chief or Cardinal Errors of the Church of Rome, The Popes
supremacy; the dividing of the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament; allowing the
people no Wine: the Worshipping of Images, the denial of the Bible to the
common people, Justification by works, and believing of Traditions. Now these
six were never established together by any Council, but the Council of Trent.
Ye^,

1. The Popes Supremacy was decreed against by the Councels of Calcedon,
Afric, Milevi, Constantinople, and Basil. 2. Communicating in both kinds was
decreed by the Council of Basil, 3. The Divine Worshipping of Images was
forbidden in the second Nicen Council. 4. The Council of Nice decreed, that no
Christian should be without a Bible. 5. And Thomas an acknowledged writer of
the Roman faith in his time, denies Justification by works, Ceremonial or
Moral. 6. And we were never bound or commanded to believe tradition until the
Council of Trent decreed it.
Now while Rome declared against, or had not by council decreed any one of
these errors, sure she was not at such a pitch of heresy, or so deeply died
with Antichristianism, as now she is made by the council of Trent; where they
are all and many more ratified as firm as hell can make them: yea, very much of
Antichristianism was brought to Rome with the last of these errors touching
tradition, which she had not before the council of Trent; for the Church is
built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, the Scriptures: and
what does weaken the Scripture more, and consequently the foundation of the
Church more then making tradition (contrary to it) a compartner with it in the
Churches faith? especially, if we add the abuse of originals; (the Greek and
Hebrew Text) preferring the latin corruption above them: which was with such
strictness and weight imposed by the Council of Trent, and never before, The
conclusion of the first Argument.
with the denial of the vulgar to read it. Now Physicians do not count a
disease in its state until it have reigned to its full height: and therefore
how to condemn the Church of Rome, as wholly Antichristian before Trent
council, I cannot see; the disease was daily increasing upon her, she seemed
not however to be at the height, or mortally sick before: for from what has
been said, the council of Trent did desperately wound the Church of Rome in
three respects.

1. In that it did heighten and multiply her damnable errors.

2. In that it did draw all the poison into one entire monster and body of
error, and presented it all to the world as the doctrine of the Church.

3. In that these were more solemnly, seriously, deliberately, publicly, by
the pretended representative of the whole Church, as the work of years
delivered, ratified, as the perpetual doctrine of the Church: which made the
errors rather the errors of Rome, Note.
though many particular persons were against, then if all the members of the
Church of Rome had held the same apart, that is, without a council.

My second Argument to prove, that Rome was not at the Because there were
strange mottions toward Reformation in Rome before, and somewhat effectual.
state or height of this her disease, till the Council of Trent is taken from
her strange motions all along after Reformation; every age almost complained of
abuses in doctrine and discipline, and were so urgent and impetuous, that they
prevailed to have a council called; for to advise about a Reformation, and
every council before this last, for ought I can find, did some good: and this
very wicked council, the council of Trent it self was occasioned by
universal and potent complaints of corruption and error: and such was the
power of the better people, that the malignant party were forced to yield, to
call a counsel, on which there lay great hopes, being called indeed upon
fairest pretenses: this I would infer from hence, that God had not wholly
cast Rome off: who does not leave The conclusion.
while and where there is any the least appearance of hope, of which it seems
there was not a little in the Church of Rome till the Council of Trent.

A second Argument to prove that there might be something A second Argument
that Rome was a true Church till the Council of Trent at least.
of Christ in Rome, that she was not wholly Antichristian, and no true Church,
till the Council of Trent; is taken from the concessions of most of our
Adversaries in this thing: the Brownists most of them acknowledge that the
Church of Rome had true Baptism, and some of them (as Johnson, etc. held, they
had true Ordination too: and such as broke off from Rome, had not any need of
the Repetition of either: Now let us consider, could there be true and valid
Ordinances in a Church, that was true in no respect? could there (do we think)
be Ordinances of Christ, in a Church that was wholly Antichrist? Suppose the
Church of Turks should baptize, In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
were that true Baptism if not, then a difference must be made betwixt the
Baptism of Rome and that: and if so, where lies the difference but in the
Church? and what is the difference, but that one is more, Christian then
another? and then there is granted some Christianism, and not all
Antichristianism in the Church of Rome: and she was, at least, before that
wretched Council of Trent, a Church of Christ.

Now my conclusion hence is this, That if it be granted, that Conclusion.
Rome was a true (though wicked) Church, before the Council of Trent sat, then
our first Reformers had a lawful outward call, a lawful Ordination unto the
Ministry: for were not they ordained Ministers of the Church of Rome? and
consequently of a true Church? were not they ordained Ministers Reformatio
Ecclesiarum per Angliam, An. Dom. 1547. See more Sleid. de statu Relig. page
599. l. 19.
by the Church of Rome before the Council of Trent? none can deny it: and then
we have a known visible succession of persons in the Office of the Ministry,
from the Apostles times to this day.

None may object, That this is nothing to the Ministry of England, for certain
it is, that the Ministry of England (as may be remarkably observed) had their
Ordination (if from Rome) before the Council of Trent sat; for they with the
Church of England broke off from Rome, even while that council sat.

Consider therefore these things. Seven Considerables to clear the Ordination
of our first Reformers in England. You may read those decrees in Sleidan. they
were made An. 1539. as page 346. and abolisht An. 1547. as page 399.


1. That Rome her self was a true Church, and her Ministers true Ministers
before the Council of Trent sat, and therefore much more the Churches in
England were true Churches, and the Ministry thereof true Ministers before
that time.

2. The Churches and Ministry of England, in the time of that council broke
off from Rome, abolisht her fatal decrees touching Religion, demolish't the
images and statues in the Temples, and thus began the blessed Reformation in
England, even then while Rome was declining toward Antichristianism.

3. Who then can choose but see and know that our first Reformers had (I mean
the Ministers) their Ordination in a true Church, from true Ministers? and we
from them, unto this very day, have had a succession of lawful Ministers in
our Churches, and upwards from them ever since we bore the name of a Church,
which may I suppose be computed to be upwards of 1500. years.

4. Moreover might Rome be said and acknowledged to be a true Church still,
though extremely corrupted, yet could not this blame but commend our leaving of
her; for we separate not from her as a Church, much less as true: but as a
corrupt and Apostate Church: that is, we separate from her corruptions, and
from her only, as we cannot join with her, but we must partake of her sins and
plagues: Just as the Non-conformists who did not join in some acts of worship
heretofore, because they could not safely do it, without having communion with
corruption in it; yet did not all the while disown our Churches, or separate
from them, but in them only, as Rutherford distinguishes.

5. But to clear the matter a little further; consider the Church as one
universal visible Church of Christ, and Rome to be but a member of it; and so
far as the state of Rome is Antichrist, but sitting in the Temple (or
universal Church) of God; (for though she would usurp her self to be the whole
visible Church, yet God accounts not so we see, for she is but in the Temple of
God, though she would be as God there:) Now is it a sin for one particular
Church to deny communion with a sister Church in those things wherein she
offends, both God and other Churches? no, doubtless; but a virtue rather, if
one particular Church should deny communion with the whole visible Church
besides her self in such a case. Now Rome of right, and in Gods account, is but
a sister, no mother Church, to the Church of England (what authority she had
over it was usurped on her part, and utterly unlawful (if yielded to) on ours;
Now had the sister (in the word) denied to commit that folly with her brother,
and escaped his hands by flying from him, she had done virtuously; then also if
England broke out of the hands of her sister Rome, and would not commit that
Adultery with her, she has praise of God for obeying his will and command, If
a sinner entice, consent thou not: One particular Church bears some Analogy to
another, like that of a member of a particular Church to another member of the
same: two particular Churches are members of one universal; as two particular
members are of one particular Church: Now therefore if a member of a particular
Church must not partake of the sin of another member; no more must one
particular Church of the sin of another: Again, so a particular Church may
not join with the sins and corruptions of the universal; no more, then one
member may join with the Church of which he is, in any sin or error
whatsoever. In We leave Rome in two things.
two things the Church of Rome is forsaken by us. 1. In her corruptions and
superiority of us; in neither of which without sin and loss, could we join
with her or yield unto her.

Now what has been said upon this particular, as it serves to plead for o^r
lawful distance to the Church of Rome, though she should be found to be a true
Church still; so also, to maintain the practice of Luther, etc. who left the
Roman Church before that wretched Council sat, we so much speak and complain
of.

6. Nor can there be any thing of moment urged, from any interruption of Popery
since; against our Ministry, or Churches in England; could it be granted that
the Council of Trent did wholly and fully make Rome Antichrist: for the
Protestant Religion flourished from Henry the eighth's, through Edward the
sixth's to Queen Mary's Reign: indeed she made havoc of the Churches: however,
she reigned but four years and four months: and what of Popery she brought
among us, was by force, so that by Q. Elizabeth's gentle commands, we easily
reduced our selves to our former profession of the Protestant truth: however
what could this short sword effect, as to the cutting the line of succession of
true Ministers? none can think that all were butchered, but that many of our
Ministers and people too did temporize throughout her Reign, not daring to
suffer for the truth, secretly believed, though not openly professed by them as
by others: And as to this worst of the cases; Johnson the Separatist himself
helps us: observing, that in case of Idolatry (in the time of the Law) the
Levites and Priests that had revolted, upon Repentance kept their first
functions without any new anointing or imposition of hands: and for this h^
quotes many Texts.
Again, many other Ministers might be blinded and fall away in time of
persecution for advantage sake; who yet being ordained (before Queen Mary)
lawful Ministers, might outlive both her and Popery, and come over again to
preach the truth, for which they were first ordained. And lastly and chiefly*
many that could not turn from the truth in judgment o^ practice, were known to
fly for safety hence to other Churches beyond the Seas, where they remained in
the day of our calamity, but when it was once over, they returned to us to
reduce our Churches, to reform our Ministry; and did with the gracious
assistance of God, and the Queen, bring us back into the former Channel of
Protestant profession: wherein we have freely (though sometimes foully run) to
this day.

7. But as for you, it may justly be feared, you came by a later and nearer
passage from the Church of Rome, though under ground. First, None can doubt but
we are as Full of Jesuits Now, (who love rather to fish in pudled waters,
where they, Our Adversaries may be feared to have to do too much with Jesuits.
nor their baits may be seen) as before these distracted, unsettled times, when
they were capable of gaining less; and more liable to be discerned by us.
Secondly, and if the Jesuits be busy among us (as no doubt they are) where
and with whom are they likeliest to be, with you or us? They cannot be thought
to be among the Ministers, for they are in a settled way, and known by all to be
the Jesuits sworn enemies. Thirdly, but your disorders, aptnes to receive any
opinions, indiscretion, etc. do indeed invite them to close in with you.
Fourthly, ye take it for certain, (though poor souls you see it not) you have
received of late, and been used by Jesuits, to vent at least twenty errors for
the Popes Advantage: which with little time and place convenient I could reckon
up, and one among the rest to the purpose in hand, That we are Schismatics to
the Church of Coll. Pulpitguard Routed,
Rome; and having unlawfully Rent our selves from her, we ought to return again
unto her. Which leads me on to the last Answer to the old Objection against us;
Because we came by succession from Rome.

Lastly, I Answer; Suppose what you will, that when we left Rome, she was a
true or a false Church, we have yet a defense invincible (though I suppose each
one of the former Answers are sufficient satisfaction to men that will take it)
it is this: I never heard or read of any that owned the name of a Christian,
(the Papist excepted) but did acknowledge, that Luther, and the rest of our
first Reformers, were lawful Ministers, whether their Call was an
extraordinary, or an ordinary Call. Now if so, Had not they power to ordain
others? The Apostles had no ordinary Call, yet they had power (as the greater)
to ordain ordinary Ministers, and to confer an ordinary Call: yet they
ordained ordinarily, and so did Luthrr, etc. And from thence we have had a
succession of a regular ordination to this day: and thus (though as it is
frequently used it will not hold) the distinction of ratione Principii and medii
touching Ordination, is of great use: for when our first Reformers ordained
others, they did not regard Ordination as the Channel of Rome had defiled and
defaced it; but they fetch the manner of it from the Fountain, the Scripture,
Apostolical Example, and Institution; and the Doctrine of Ordination as in the
Scripture was never touched, though the practice of it in the Popes hands was
very corrupt; and that their practice is now nothing to us, that have reformed
from it: our Reformers they were lawful Ministers, and they reformed abuses in
Ordination too, according to Scripture, and from them successively has it
passed true (not altogether pure sometimes) to us: and what corruptions it
received in Bishops days, it is reformed from, of late also, and our Ordination
is at this day, according to the Word in every thing: and therefore to
conclude, we are, as I said, true Ministers.

Thus far then we have proceeded, namely, to prove the Ministry of England to
be of Christ, from our adversaries own Principles, from the principles of any
indifferent men; and lastly from the grounds and principles of the Word: But
from the Word we promised two things: First, to make it appear that the
Ministers in England have whatsoever the Word requires to make them so: And
this we have largely handled, and whatsoever the word requires to manifest them
so: and this I shall as briefly touch.

If the Ministry be in question, the Scripture gives us two Our Ministry
manifested:
Rules to know it by: by which we are bound to try it, before we reject it.

The first is its fruit: By their fruit ye shall know them, says 1. From its
Fruit.
our Savior of false Teachers: By their fruit, that is, their Doctrine, you
shall know them; that is, whether they be of God: which makes it evident that
though we cannot clear a succession of persons, yet as all that Wright against
the Papists, hold a succession of Doctrine is enough to evidence the true
Ministry: Suppose it be doubted where the Ministry of Christ is, if it be but
granted that he has a Ministry somewhere in the world, it is easily
concluded to be, where the Doctrine of Christ is preached: where can it be
else? This I make a mark when there is just cause of scruple touching the Call
of a present Ministry: otherwise the very Ordination it self when known, to be
lawful, is a readier way to prove and clear a lawful Call. Now we that cannot
be denied to have both, have two strings that the adverse hand can never break.

The other is taken from its effects; whereby God is pleased 2. Its effect.
to own his servants, and do his work by them: Who is Paul, Who Apollos, but
Ministers by whom you believe? would you know who they are? observe their work,
by them you come to believe, and then do not question but they are Ministers:
why so? Because Faith is the gift of God, which he does not usually give but by
his Ministers hands: Ministers by whom you believe as God gave every man; for
how shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard; and how shall they
hear that is so as to believe without a Preacher, a sent Preacher? Whence we
conclude, that ordinary Conversion wrought by our Ministry is an infallible
mark of the truth of our Ministry, and that we are sent by Christ, who do the
work of Christ. I dare not say but a true and honest Minister may have cause to
Note.
complain, That he has stretched forth his hands all the day long unto
disobedient and gainsaying people. Yet this I say, that he that is so happy in
his labors as to convert some, and establish more, is hereby declared from
heaven, if questioned before to be both an able and lawful Minister: And
further, he that endeavors to wash a Black-more, to reform a people that hate
to be reformed, and reaps no visible fruit of his labors, he wants an apparent
Seal to his Commission, to make its authority known to such as question it: but
this is our comfort, that we can say without boasting (the Ministry of England
in every age) can say to our Churches, to our Friends and Enemies, Ye are the
Seal of our Apostleship, God has Sealed our Commission in your Conversion and
Confirmation, in your increase in knowledge, grace and comfort: in your
perseverance to the end, though through Fire and Sword, when occasion of
Martyrdom or Persecution has called you to it: thanks be to God for so good a
Seal both of your Redemption and our Commission, which the Devil or his
Instruments shall never be able to Cancel.

Now consider (in a word, and I have done with this) Can we (as I have showed)
have the Ordination of Christ, and yet be Antichristian? Can we preach and
uphold the Doctrine of Christ, and be Antichristian? Can we (to conclude) do
the work of Christ, and yet be Antichristian? Truly, whom these things will not
satisfy, I must leave unsatisfied.

CAP. V. That they are guilty of a great sin that presume to preach without a
Call.
THus we are come to the fourth Conclusion: for if our Churches, as (we have
proved) are true Churches, and the Ministry of them, true Ministers (as our
very adversaries cannot but grant, if they will but acknowledge themselves, or
God; their own principles are Gods Word;) then there is a The sin of unsent
Preachers.
great and heavy sin lying at the door of all such as do offer to preach
publicly without a Call. What! Preach without a Call, in true Churches, that
are blessed with a true and settled Ministry! Was ever such a thing heard or read
of, that was not pursued and overtaken by some horrid judgment? O who can
think of the sad effects that this one piece of mad disorder has wrought upon
this poor land of ours, without an amazed, bleeding heart! it has put the
Foundations out of frame; and what can the righteous do? But shall not God be
avenged on such a Nation as this? I wonder the earth does not open again, and
swallow both them and us up quick. Was not the sin of Corah and his Company
just the very same with the sin of these men? viz. A contemning of Gods
Ministers? and was not their plea the very same? viz. That all the Lords people
are holy; the sons of Levi, take too much upon them? Then, o then, what
patience is it, that bears up the earth under these men? that holds the heavens
from falling upon them, and dashing them down into hell? that they yet perish
not in the gainsaying of Corah?

But there are spiritual judgem^nts somewhat more suitable to spiritual times,
which I fear are prepared for these men; to be cast into a Gulf, (though not of
the earth) of error, which is worse, to be given over to a reprobate mind, and
strong delusions to believe lies. For I must needs observe, that they, so soon
as they fall to this trade of Preaching, they presently vent most dangerous
errors. Whence I conclude, that none dare presume to preach unsent; but men of
such erroneous and desperate principles these men are of; or else God punishes
this their disorderly sin, with delivering them up to such strong delusions as
they are in: which I am indeed inclined the rather to believe, because such was
the punishment of the Jewish Nation for the lik^ sin: and what was that, but
a killing the Prophets, and stoning them that were sent unto them? A rejecting
Christ in the Ministry of the Gospel: And what was the judgment that fell
upon them for this their sin? even that that has remained as a Plague to
their hearts; for above this sixteen hundred year. And what was that? Read
Romans 11. 8. and see how like it is, to that which these men, though
past-feeling labor under: God has (says the Text) given them the spirit of
slumber; eyes that they should not see; ears that they should not hear. O heavy
judgment, and so much the more, that it is insensible!

God has given them the spirit of slumber, and now I wonder not why they
pretend to dream dreams: but alas! they slumber with their senses locked, their
eyes are shut, their ears are stopped, they are in a maze, not knowing where nor
how they are, nor what they would have, possessed and troubled with the restless
spirit of Giddy slumber: They strongly persuade themselves and others, that
their eyes are open, and they see such things, as no men see, when alas! what
they see, is but a vision of the night, the work of inward fancy only, and
their eyes are shut all the while: and such is their misery, though men cry to
them, and in their very ears, to awake and rouse them out of their dream, their
ears are heavy, they cannot hear, or they cannot hear (at least) of that ear.



state of the place wherein we are: If it be that we are cast upon the
Heathens, Turks, or the like, where there is no Church nor Ministry, there
every man is bound to make known the Gospel of Christ, so far as he may with
prudence do: Or again, if Churches were not yet constituted, though the truth
of the Gospel was entertained by many; we may grant without danger, that then
men without a formal sending may exercise their gifts in such a way as is not
lawful in a settled Church. But in such a Church as ours is, that is already
constitute, and has within her a settled Ministry, for private men to presume
to Preach, is such a notable sin in the Scripture, that it is there condemned
from heaven, in as great a remarkable vengeance from God, in Corah's company,
and the Nation of the Jews, as any we read of. We therefore knowing the
terror of the Lord, persuade our brethren.

2. We must in a settled Church distinguish of Preaching publicly, and
Teaching privately; the later, which consists in private exhortation, reproof,
comfort, counsel, and the like, every member in private conference ought to
perform from a principle of love, for the edification of the whole body: but
for the first particular of the distinction, the thing we are only upon, the
public preaching of the word, it being an act of Office, does belong
peculiarly to Church Officers, and may not be assumed by any other (let their
parts and abilities be what they will) unless it be in order (as our
Expectants) to ordination, and that by the leave and invitation of the Church
wherein they are; I mean by public preaching, a presuming to declare the mind
of God by expounding and applying the holy Scripture in the place of our
Assemblies before the Church in the seat of the Minister or any other. For any
private man, or man uncalled, to offer this, is great presumption, condemned by
the Scripture throughout, and nothing warrantable with God or man.

Two things I should undertake here, viz. to show you the ground of this
distinction of public Preaching and private teaching; and to clear and confirm
my conclusion thereupon, Rutherford, Hall, Collings, Ferriby, etc.
viz. That though private teaching be the duty of all, yet public Preaching is
the sin of any, but men in Office; which (having been done so fully by others,
to whom I refer you) I shall dispatch in a word.

For the ground and reason of this clear distinction one instance (of many)
shall serve the turn: and it is of women, whom we find in Scripture commended
for private teaching, yet also forbidden there in public Preaching, see Act.
18. 26. There Aquilla and Priscilla took Apollos unto them (it is said) and
expounded the word: Mark, they took him to them, aside, into private, and there
the woman, as well as the man, expounded the way of God unto Apollos. Well
then, here is an example of a woman's teaching in a private way; but does this
allow a woman's public Preaching? no alas; that is clearly forbidden in another
text, which tells us, we must not suffer a woman to speak in the Church; neither
to the end she may teach or learn. And as women are forbidden to speak at all,
so are men forbidden to preach in the Church without a call; For no man takes
this honor to himself, unless he be called of God, as Aaron was: As if it had
been said, in the times of the Gospel Heb. 5. 4.
a call is as necessary to license a Preacher, as it was in the time of the
law: For how shall they Preach except they be sent? Romans 10. 15.
That is, none can perform the Office of a Preacher (as just before, How shall
they hear without a Preacher?) unless he be sent, that is, as we largely
explained before, ordained according to the order of the Gospel, by the power
of the Church.

Now, we never read of any in Scripture that were sent to preach, but they were
thereby put into Office: yea this Preaching in the Text is expounded there, to
be an exercise of one that is sent and none other: and this [being sent] does
expound it self, to make a Preacher, as in the last words of the fourteenth
verse; and this word Preacher is never given to any in Scripture but to men in
Office.

Then those that to presume to preach must needs pretend to be sent some way or
other: and I know no other sending but extraordinary or ordinary: now I wish
our Adversaries to take which they please. Are they sent extraordinarily? That,
though some of them have pleaded heretofore, they are all ashamed of, and do
not now so much as pretend unto it: for indeed it is great blasphemy. Neither
do they pretend to be sent in an ordinary way, according to the nature of the
word sending, or the Rule of the Gospel, as we have this day declared to you.
How? and yet dare to preach? upon what account I beseech you?

Object. There is a sending of Duty as well as Office, says one of them.

Answ. How many absurdities are couch't together in these few words?

1. It would devide betwixt the Duty and Office of preaching, which differ no
more than Ghost and Spirit; the same thing in two words.

2. It would devide betwixt a man's being sent by God, and put into Office by
him; still one and the same thing.

3. It is but the old distinction put into worse and harder words; which is,
That private Christians may exercise their gifts in a way of love, in a private
way: but there is a preaching in Office that only is lawful for men that are
sent.

4. To speak all in a word, this sending in the very nature of the word, and
sense of Scripture does plainly exclude what ever such men pretend unto; to
authorize their sinful disorderly practice of public preaching: even all the
four things we named before.

1. It excludes the secret impulse of their own spirit: for no man that goes of
his own accord, can be said to be sent; the one is Active, the other Passive:
and this is confirmed by that known Text, No man takes this honor to himself,
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, clearly expressing that going and
calling are two things.

2. Sending excludes the call of gifts also; for we not imagine that every man
that is fit (eo ipso) a Justice of Peace, ability is one thing, commission
another: as most evidently appears by that clear Text, Mat. 10. 1, 5. In the
first verse they have their qualification, and in the fifth they receive their
Commission, and are bid go: and therefore examination or proving of gifts is
but the way to Ordination: as in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus does plainly
appear.

3. Sending excludes Electing from the whole work: and therefore we find
sending and electing two things, and even performed in a different way, and by
different persons, in Acts 6. 5, 6. The people chose, and set the men before
the Apostles, but they are not sent yet, and therefore the Apostles lay hands
upon them.

4. Sending is more than desiring (lastly) for this is but an act of an equal:
but sending is ever an act of Superiors. Desiring does leave the power in the
partee desired: but sending implies the power to be in the partee sending.
Desiring does not, while sending does still put a man into Office: and a
Minister in special, giving him authority to deliver his Message entrusted to
him: for how shall he preach except he be sent? That is, perform the Office of
a Preacher, except he has received a Commission so to do, except he be sent?
Which I conclude with this argument as the sum of this matter.

None may preach except he be sent: But Self-will, Gifts, Election, Desire or
Invitations of the people are not sending. Therefore those that have no other
Commission then these four, may not preach.

examples of Scripture that favor our preaching.

Example will never warrant the practice of any, unless all circumstances of
time, place, person, etc. that are material, meet together: if thou be not
in all respects in the same condition, with that man thou lookst at in
Scripture, his action is no pattern to thee. 2. That Examples in Scripture are
not further to be imitated by us, then they are agreeing with the Word of
Scripture.

Word, so neither one Example in the holy Scripture that will stand you in
stead in the least.

Apollos preach?

Ministers, as he is called, 1 Corinthians. 3. 5.

Philip preach?

Philip was, Acts 6. and an Evangelist too, Acts 21. 8.

Preaching the Word? Acts 8.

scattered by Persecution among Heathen and Infidels as they were; though you
can never prove that any of them preached even in Persecution, but such as were
Officers; for which we have two Reasons. First, from the word there signifying
preaching, which is as Doctor Seaman observes, never made use of in holy
Scripture, but to express an act of Office and Officers: and indeed the very
(...).
word from whence this is immediately derived, does signify the Gospel, or a
good Message, and is derived from another word, which signifies a Messenger, or
one put into Office and sent to declare this happy Message to the sons of men:
intimating to us, that the word Gospel does carry a strong and invincible
Argument in it against all those that offer to preach it, and are not sent.
Which indeed the Apostle seems to laugh at, as a plain contradiction, in the
words before mentioned, How shall they preach, except they be sent?

prophecy one by one, in the Church of Corinth, why may not we?

Prophecy but Prophets: And are all Prophets? No surely: Therefore expound the
31 verse with 29. and 32. and the matter is ended: All may prophecy; that is,
All that are Prophets; let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other
judge, and all those that are Prophets may have time enough to speak by turn.

You have now no more to urge, but that of Paul; whom we made before to appear
to be a Minister, even as soon as he was made a Christian (though not before,
as some of you were) as you read Acts 26. 16.

What now can you further urge for your selves? No more? O that the Lord would
open your eyes, to see the Error and Danger of your ways: Alas! What can I do
more than to pray for you? and to him that is able to restore your souls, to
him to commend you, with him to leave you? Yet with you I desire to leave this
advice, before I take leave, That though it seem a hard matter, yet you would
take the Apostles Counsel,, and study to be quiet; henceforth doing no longer
ours, but your own Business; or else, if that be too hard, and you will needs
have the work that you would desire, seek and endeavor (by giving up your
selves to be proved and ordained) the Office of a Bishop; and be assured by me,
you shall find the 1 Timothy 3. 1.
Ministers very ready, upon the least desert, to afford unto you the right hand
of fellowship.

CAP. VI. That the People who leave the true Ministers to follow such as have
no Calling, are guilty of a very great sin.
WE are now attained to the last Conclusion, which is, That if for men to
preach in a true Church, where there is a lawful Ministry settled, be so great
a sin; then doubtless, for any to forsake a true Church and a lawful
Ministry, to follow and hear such sinful Teachers, is a very great sin
too; Though alas! poor ignorant deluded wretches think not so; they that offer
thus to preach, are deeply guilty, as I have told you, this very action of
theirs bringing so much disorder with it, and coming from such dangerous
principles, endeavors the subversion, and utter overthrow of all the Churches
of Christ in the world, and Charge Apostasy upon all the Churches that have
been in the world since the days of the Apostles: of so deep a nature is their
sin; and you by following of them, do plainly become partakers of their
sin; be it never so great or dangerous: and when Judgment comes, it is
special Mercy, if the Congregation that joined with them be spared, while
Corah and his company are swallowed up.

Many, in a sort, that are not approvers of the men and ways Hearers are
partakers of the sin of unsent Preachers.
we now speak of, are yet partakers of these men's sins, because they do not
what God requires and in them lies, to prevent the same: But how much more are
they that approve of, and join with them! as many hundreds of ignorant
Creatures do.

Besides, you are not partakers with them in their sins only hereby; but you
directly sin your selves many ways. I Sin in hearing of them directly too.
cannot tell you how many sins you commit in this one, of following these
unsent Preachers, nor indeed how sore judgments belong unto you for it. Sins
of omission, in that you neglect to attend on the public Ordinances to which
you are called: in that you cease to own, respect and countenance the
Overseers Christ has given you: of Commission, in that you rent your selves
by unlawful Schism from the Church of Christ, and his Ministry: in that you
do thereby what in you lies to break and ruin all the Churches and Ministers
of Christ in the world: in that you against express command, hear those
Prophets that God never sent; and have, to conclude, a very great stroke in all
these Confusions, Errors and Heresies, that now swarm within our Churches.

Consider, O consider, I beseech you dearly beloved, and lay these things to
heart: I persuade my self, that could you be serious and patient in weighing
these things a while, you would be at a stand, if not face about.

1. Consider, what good can you get (though you promise much) while you lie
under that heavy curse, They shall Jer. 23. 32.
not profit -- you: That is, they do you much hurt, and spiritual damage. And
do you not find it by daily experience? Whom among you, but at his very
entrance upon these ways, has the foundation of his whole Religion shaken
immediately? I have wondered often at the frequent truth of this Observation,
until I considered this Text and Curse, They shall not profit this people at
all. Oh that you would consider it also.

2. Consider what good you may do us too, by leaving them at last, and
returning again to the Fold and Shepherds of Jesus Christ. For as your itching
ears have heaped up such a multitude of Teachers; so your ears well bored
again would throw them down as fast. Alas! what does uphold them but the
pleasant Air of your Encouragement; would you withdraw, they fall immediately
with shame and sorrow: were there no Hearers, there would be no such Teachers.
For as we cannot hear without Preachers, so they will not preach without
Hearers: and now will you not recompense your former prejudice to the Church
and them, and your selves besides, while so fair an advantage remains in your
hands? However, if love cannot win and prevail, let the terror and fear of the
Lord persuade, whose strict command I read unto you, and leave upon you; Thus
says the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets that
prophecy Jer. 23. 16. with 21.
to you, they make you vain. And why? I have not sent these Prophets, yet they
ran: I have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied.

A Brief Narration of the heads of that long (yet happy) Discourse, betwixt M.
Fullwood (assisted sometimes with M. Wood, M. How, etc.) and M. Collier with
the strength of his party in the West, upon May 4. 1652. at Wiviliscombe,
commonly known by the name of Wilscome in Somersetshire.
M. FVLLWOOD, whose turn it was to preach there that day, having ended the
Sermon, which precedes this Narrative: the Adverso party flockt together as
near as they could to the Pulpit: and M. Collier in the Name of the rest,
declared himself unsatisfied touching what had been delivered.

We desired them to have a little more patience, and to attend the stating of
the question, touching the Ministry, which M. How had on purpose provided for
our Discourse that day, in private: they replied again, that there was more
matter in the Sermon delivered, then we should be able to discuss that day:
they would not yield to the motion of the stating the question, but with a
kind of violent importunity urged, that the Minister that had preached, would
maintain his doctrine: to which at length we yielded, and bid them object:
having chosen Moderators; M. Wood on ours, and a Captain on their part.

Coll. M. Collier began to this purpose: I shall go through the Sermon in
order: the first point was; That openly scandalous and profane persons with
true believers were not inconsistent with a true Church; but this I shall not
meddle with.


Full. I thank you for that Sir, yet if you have any thing against it, I pray
you say on.


Coll. No, I will let that pass; and come unto the second, which was, That the
Churches of England are true Churches: which I have four things to except
against; 1. That their constitution was false. 2. Their members are false. 3.
Their Ordinances are false. 4. Their Ministry is false.


Full. I deny them all: and first I deny our constitution to be false; and
would have you prove it.


Col. You were falsely constituted in Q. Eizabeths days, for you were made true
Churches by the civil power, the command of the Queen; and not by the Ministry
of the Word, as you should have been.


Full. That is denied: for we were not reclaimed from Popery by the Queens
command, without, but with the assistance of the godly Protestant Ministry (as
History makes to appear) and you cannot deny.


Coll. But did not the people turn for fear of the power of the Magistrate? and
I hope you will not say that the Cavaliers are good Subjects, and truly
converted to the Parliament, because they out of fear subscribe the Engagement.


Full. To say, that all did turn for fear is but a slander, and cannot be
proved; but however I had thought you had spoken all the while of a visible
Church, do you require real faith, to constitute a visible Church? I say, that
the outward subjection of the Cavaliers is enough to make them visible
subjects; and the outward profession of Christ, is enough to render men
external members of the visible Church.

M. Thomas Gorges a very worthy, godly, and learned Gentleman, and Justice of
Peace in the County.
Besides, the renoun^ing of Popery, and embracing the Protestant Religion, was
a voluntary act of the whole Land, in their Representative the Parliament, that
sat in the first year of Q. Elizabeth's Reign.


Full. M. Collier hearken to the Gentleman, he is a Statesman, and knows what
belongs to History better then you or I.


Coll. But you should have been constituted by the Ministry of the Word.


Full. I have told you we were: there were three special acts of grace seen in
our conversion from Popery; the first was upon the heart of the Queen,
inclining her Majesty to propagate the true and Protestant Religion; the second
was, in inclining the people to be some what wrought on, by the command and
influence of the good Queen; the last now was seen, in making effectual and
perfecting the former, by the Protestant Ministry. ^ Several Protestant
Ministers of England before Q. Mary's days, fled in the time of persecution,
and returned in the beginning of Elizabeth's reign, and preaching all over
England, reclaimed the people from Popery.



With this they seemed to acquiesce, urging their great objection no more at
all, which may hint unto us, that the most ready and surest way to foil such
adversaries, is by dealing with them in their own principles; which was M.
Fullwoods effectual course throughout: namely, to give them what they desire
(by way of medium) and then to wrest the weapon out of their hand, or to soil
them in their own play: thus it was here, supposing (as they would, though they
can never prove) that our Churches were constituted in Q. Elizabeth's time (who
were indeed reclaimed then, but constituted Centuries of years before) and that
there was no other means to bring a people to outward profession (which foully
crosses their own principles, as appears afterward:) or that the Civil
Magistrate is to have no hand in the reformation of a Church, which though
supposed may not be granted: or that, to conclude, that we cannot be a true
Church unless we know the means and manner of its constitution, which is
indeed absurd: if the essential marks of a true Church can be demonstrated; as
was in our Churches in the morning: Yet with all these (one of which they
cannot possibly maintain) they could not wield their objection: the very medium
it self, viz. that we were not converted or reclaimed by the Ministry of the
Word, being flatly false.

Then they broke off somewhat abruptly from this to Infant Baptism; and being
there was nothing objected by any of them afterward, against the two next
particulars; (Our Members and Ordinances) we suppose their Discourse of
Infant Baptism was in stead of them.

Coll. Infant Baptism is unlawful.


Full. Why should we step so large? What is Infant Baptism to the business in
hand? however take your liberty, and prove Infant Baptism if you can to be
unlawful, as you say it is.


Coll. That that has neither precept nor president in the word is unlawful,
but Infant Baptism has neither, etc. therefore it is unlawful.


Full. I deny both your Propositions; For the first, I say, it is not unlawful
to go to Taunton, and yet you cannot show me a precept or president in the Word
for it.


Hadridge. But M. Fullwood do not you know we speak of Ordinances?


Full. However M. Hadridge the Proposition is false, and deserves correction:
But (to come as near as you would have me) I pray tell me what you mean by
Precept here, whether an express command, or such a command as falls from the
Word by just consequence; if you require an express command in so many words,
(though I grant that requisite to the substance of an Ordinance, as this of
Baptism, yet) this is not absolutely requisite for every circumstance that
belongs to an Ordinance; not to the circumstance of time, when the children of
professors should be baptized; whether in Infancy or riper years, when we can
prove it by just consequence; for though the Ordinance of inclination be
changed, Circumcision into Baptism; yet that the time of administration is
changed, you can never prove: so that then, suppose your proposition be
touching Ordinances, it being only touching a circumstance and not the
substance of an Ordinance, it is false still. Nothing of answer was made to this
Reply; but M. Collier went from this to prove the minor, viz. That Infants had
no command to be baptized.


Col. There Is no command for baptizing Infants, for believers are commanded to
be baptized.


Full. This does not conclude at all: for though believers are, yet it does not
follow, That none but believers are to be baptized, which you are to prove: We
say, actual believers not yet baptized, are to be baptized; but we say also,
that they and their Children are to be baptized; it behooves you, if you can to
produce a command, wherein believers only are commanded to be baptized.


Coll. The Text says, He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.


Full. Alas! this is no command at all, but a Proposition only: much less that
believers only are to be baptized; and the truth is the force of this
Proposition is only this, That none but believers shall be saved, not
baptized, or rather, those that believe, as well as receive the Ordinance of
baptism, shall assuredly be saved; but as this excludes not children from
salvation, so neither from baptism.


Coll. But we pray you then, if there be a command for baptizing of Infants,
show it.


Full. This is indeed somewhat unreasonable M. Collier; especially considering
how weary you may easily imagine me to be, who preached, and since that disputed
so long with you; however give me leave for a little respite to choose a
second, that may stead me a while, and you shall have what liberty you can
desire.


Col. We agree, choose whom you will.


Full. I choose my Moderator, I pray you M. Wood give them a command for
Infant Baptism.


Wood. Choose you now, whether you will oppose or defend M. Collier, it is an
indifferent thing to me.


Col. I desire you will show us a command for Infant Baptism.


Wood. You may read a command for Infant Baptism, in Mat. 28. 19. Go teach all
Nations, baptizing them, etc. whence I argue thus.

Where we find a general command in the Word, we may not restrain or limit
the same without warrant from the Word.

But here we have a general command, Baptize all Nations.

And therefore we may not restrain or limit it to believers only, without we
can show a warrant from the Word so to do.


Col. It Is restrained to Disciples: for in the Greek, it is disciple all
Nations, baptizing them: first they must be made disciples, and then baptized.


Wood. You cannot conclude from the order of words in Scripture: for in Mark
it is said baptize and teach; whence we may argue as well, that we must baptize
before we teach. 2. I am very glad that you so translat^ the words; for
children are capable of being discipled, and therefore baptized.


Col. Children have no right at all to Baptism.


Wood. That I shall prove unto you thus, Those to whom the spirit of grace, the
Kingdom of God, and the blessing of Christ belongs; to those the Ordinance of
Baptism belongs; but to some children; ^he spirit of grace, the kingdom of God,
and the blessing of Christ belongs: therefore to them belongs the Ordinance of
Baptism.


Col, I deny your minor.


Woad. For the first, John was sanctified from the womb.


Col. That is, he was separated to an Office.


Wood. No, for we read of an inward work of the spirit, the child leaped for
joy in the womb; but the two other are more clearly proved in that known Text:
Christ took little children into his arms, and blessed them, and said, for of
such is the Kingdom of God.


Facy. That was meant of men like Children, in harmlesnesse, meekness, etc.


Wood. How, good Sir, do we think that they brought men to Christ in their
arms? or that Christ took men into his arms, and blessed them?

2. If our Savior should urge them to suffer little children to come to him,
because of such is the kingdom of Heaven, and yet mean by such here, men like
to children, the reason here were very improper, and would no way answer the
command.


Col. But what is this to Infant Baptism all this while?


Wood. Alas! I bring not this to prove the baptizing of Infants immediately; but
to prove the minor denied, viz. That Children are part of the Kingdom of God,
and by consequence only, that they may be baptized.


Here they stuck until they found out a way to get themselves out of the mire,
by desiring to return to M. Fullwood again, who they pleaded had had some
respite, which was accordingly yielded unto.

Full. You cry out for a Command for Infants Baptism, I will give you two.

The first shall be the same, my brother begun with, otherwise applied, it is
Mat. 28. 19. Go disciple (as you intepret well) all Nations baptizing them:
Here is a clear and express command to baptize all such as are made Disciples:
according to your own interpretation of the place; but now children of
professors are disciples ( de jure before, de facto by baptism;) therefore here
is a clear and express command for baptizing the children of Professors.


Coll. I deny that children are discipled.


Full. Those that are members of the visible Church are disciples: but children
of professors are members of the visible Church: therefore children of
professors are disciples.


Coll. I deny, that children of professors are members of the Church.


Full. If children of professors had the privilege of being Churchmembers
once; and that privilege was never taken away from them, they have it still;
but children of professors had this privilege of being Church Members once,
and it was never yet taken away from them, therefore they have it still.


Coll. That privilege of there is is repealed.


Full. If this privilege of children be repealed by God, it must be repealed
either in the Old or New Testament, but it was never repealed in the Old or new
Testament; therefore it is not repealed yet.


Col. It Is repealed in the New Testament.


Full. If so; It is repealed in the four Evangelists, Acts of the Apostles,
Epistles, or the Revelation; but in none of these, therefore not at all.


Coll. It is repealed in Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed are the
promises made; he says not, and to seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to
thy seed, that is Christ: Now therefore all the promises are resolved and
centered in Christ, and we have none but what we have from his hand.


Full. It is true, that all the promises are resolved and centered in Christ,
but that is, in Christ considered in Aggregato, that is, Christ consisting of
head and members, and which cannot be denied, because else, all the Covenant of
grace and promises, being Compare the Text with 1 Cor. 12. 12.
centered in the person of Christ, as you would urge, there should be none le^t
for the body of Christ, in the days of the Gospel, Now consider, what can you
gain by this Text? the meaning is, that the former Covenant of grace, and
promises made to Abraham, are all centred in Christ; that is, in Christ, both
head and members, in the days of the Gospel, as is better expla^^ed by the 14.
ver. of the same Chapter; the blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles
through Christ Jesus: that is, the promises and privileges of our Father
Abraham, the typical head of the Jewish Church, is come upon the Churches of
the Gentiles by Jesus Christ, the mystical head of the Gentile Church; and were
not the promises made to Abraham and his seed? and did not the privilege of
being Church Members, belong to Abraham and his seed? and therefore the same
promises and privileges belong to professors of the Gentiles and their seed
also.

Again, were this Text for you at all, it would only serve to prove, that
Christ's spiritual seed have the privilege of being Church Members alone: the
contrary we have proved in the Sermon above, showing you that not only
hypocrites but scandalous persons were members of the Church of God at Corinth,
against which you have nothing to say, they being members of the visible
Church, are members of the visible body of Christ, and by consequence have
visible interest in the promises and privileges, which you say are centred in
Christ.

I desire you M. Collier to show us a better Text then this, therefore, for the
repealing of Infants Church Membership.


Coll. But this is cleared by the last verse of the same Chapter; if ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.


Full. This text is clearer against you then the former was: what does it say?
it says, that the Gentiles by becoming Christ's or Christians, they become
thereby Abraham's seed, that is, by being united to Christ really, they become
Abraham's real seed: and by being united to Christ visibly, we become Abraham's
visible seed, and then accordingly we are interested in the promises and
privileges of Abraham, being heirs according to the promise.


Hadridge. There is now neither Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, male nor
female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.


Full. I thank you for that M. Hadridge, a most clear Text to prove the
partition wall is broken down betwixt the Jews and Gentiles; and that the
Gentile Churches being now made one with the Jewish (not as Jewish, but as a
Church) have a right to all the privileges of the Jewish Church: and among the
rest also, to Church Membership for themselves and children: if you have ever a
better Text, I pray produce it, for these will not do.


Coll. I pray then consider Romans 2. 28, 29. He is not a Jew that is one
outwardly, neither is that circumcision, which is outwardly in the flesh, but
he is a Jew which is one inwardly, etc.


Full. Alas this cannot be strictly and properly understood, but by way of
Comparison; for a man cannot be a Jew and not a Jew: that would be harsh: the
meaning is, that he is not a Jew in Gods account; that is, such a one as shall
have Verse. ult.
praise of God, that is only a member of the visible Church: God looks chiefly
to the heart: or rather the Apostle is abolishing the Ordinance of
Circumcision, and winding up their hearts to the truth of it, Circumcision that
is of the heart: not that in the days of the Gospel God does so much regard
the heart, as that he appointed no outward Ordinances, no visible Church, nor
visible worship; or not members of the visible Church: but such as are
Circumcised in heart: None of which you will offer to say; and yet the Text
taken your way, offers to prove nothing else, which I pray you consider. But
you must look for another Text: this only shows that Circumcision it self is
abolish't, but the Covenant of Circumcision, that abides, as commanded upon
Abraham and his seed, both of Jews and Gentiles for ever, Genesis 17. 9.


Col. But that Covenant was Circumcision, ver. 10.


Full. Give the holy Ghost leave to interpret his own words; and we read verse
11. That Circumcision was only a token of the Covenant: and though that sign
is vanished, the thing remains: unless you will make the substance of the
Covenant in the time of the Law one thing, and in the time of the Gospel
another thing: and so make two Covenants of Grace.


Col. I will not meddle with that now.


Full. But you must give us another Text, or else, we shall conclude, That
Children of Professors have the privilege of being Church Members still.


Hadridge. Matthew. 3. Think not to say with your selves, We have Abraham to our
Father; the Ax is laid to the root of the Tree; which has cut down all former
privileges.


Full. Alas, have not all the other Scriptures, which your selves have brought,
proved that we have Abraham to our Father still? and that we have no Promises or
Privileges at all, but as we are Abraham's seed?


Had. But we must do the works of Abraham, that we may become Abraham's seed.


Full. True; but as doing the works of Abraham indeed, we become his real
seed, and have a real right unto his privileges: so by doing the works of
Abraham in show only, we become his seed in show. Which though it will not
satisfy God, who looks to the heart, yet it gives them a title to outward
privileges, from the hands of men, who judge according to appearance: The
meaning of the place, with the extent of it, is plainly this; That God requires
more exactness and strictness in these days of the Gospel, then he did in the
times of ignorance under the Law: not that the Gospel can any way possible
deprive the Church of any Privilege, which made Grace to abound, and not to
diminish in this regard; and therefore not this privilege of having our
Children Church Members with us.


Col. It is a Privilege that our children are not Baptized; and that in many
respects.


Full. What are they I pray you?


Col, 1. It is a privilege for our Children to be in that condition that God
would have them.

2. Again, Because when your Children are once Baptized, you make it serve to
make them secure, telling them that now they are in a happy condition.


Full. Here are two privileges for our Children not to be Baptized. But to the
first, I say, is it not a goodly privilege for the Damned Devils to be in
Hell? yet that is the Condition God will have them in.

And for the second, it is a mere slander: for as we believe, so we tell our
Children, that they are obliged by Baptism, to serve God, own Christ, forsake
the World, resist the Devil, mortify their flesh the more; which if they
neglect, their condition is worse than the very Heathens.

Thus we have made good the first command of Matthew 28. 19.

We shall now proceed to the other; which you have in Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent
and be baptized every one of you, etc. For the promise is to you, and to your
Children, etc. Whence I argue:

The command of the Sign, is as large as the Promise of the thing signified;
but the promise is to you and your children: therefore the command of Baptism
reaches to you and your children too, upon your repentance: as to Abraham,
when he himself believed, God commands him to be circumcised himself and his
Children: So here, when you repent, both you and your Children are taken into
Covenant, and you are commanded to receive Baptism for your selves and
Children. Repent ye parents, and be baptized every one of you, both Parents and
Children (who have called for Judgment upon your selves and Children) for the
Promise, notwithstanding, is to you, and to your Children.


Col. But this promise here is a promise of the Spirit.


Full. And of the forgiveness of sins too, ver. 38.


Coll. But that promise however is a spiritual promise.


Full. Yet the promise which is said to be, to you and your Children there, is
more then Spiritual: indeed, it is only spiritually applied at this time: and
why? Because those to whom it is applied are at this time only spiritually
wounded, pricked to the hears: yet the promise here, is indeed the Covenant
which has both temporal and spiritual promises; which is very evident, if we
turn to the second of Joel; out of which the Text is taken: which Chapter is
almost made up of temporal and spiritual promises, as if it were an Exposition
of the Covenant. Which Chapter was openly read, and found to be so.

So this command was ended too: for they being urged to say what they could for
themselves, they refused to say any more, but would leave what had been said to
the judgment of the people; we being somewhat imboldened by their parties
silence, referred it to the people, as they desired; and asked them whether
they were not satisfied with what had been said for in-Infant Baptism? In
Answer to which, several persons cried out, They were; and not one of their
party said any thing to the contrary; but one who called to the people, and
asked them, Why they would say they were satisfied, when they were not:
Hereupon, as we remember, Master Hadridg stood up and asked these two
Sophistical questions.


Had. I have three Children, which were never sprinkled, and I would fain know
what Command I have omitted: I my self have been dipped; and I would fain know
what Command I have broken.


Full. As for your own being Dipped or Rebaptiz'd, you have broke the Command:
that is easily inferred from the words of Suppose I should say, I have two
children that have been both of them sprinkled, what command have I broken? And
for my own part I was never Dipped or Baptizd again, what command have omitted?
What Answer can you make?
the Apostle, there is but one Baptism; for you have had two. And for the
neglecting the baptizing of your Children, you have plainly omitted the
commands that have been pressed for Infant Baptism, which stand as yet unshaken,
notwithstanding what has been moved against them.

Now we have given you these Commands; we shall show you example also; which
has a probable Argument in it, that Children were baptized by the Apostles: It
was, That we have many examples of whole houses that were Baptized; and surely
those times were very barren, if there should happen to be so many households
without one child: and if it be probable, that there was but one Child, in all
these Houses, as it is a very probable Argument for Infant Baptism, since the
whole households (where ever they came) were Baptized, with the chief of their
houses, none ever excepted against, or rejected. There was some jangling about
some particular houses, but nothing of moment said to the Argument.


Then some indigested Objections were made against Sprinkling. The sum of the
Answer to them, was, 1. We do not exclude either Dipping or Sprinkling, though
we conceive that Baptism is rather a washing, then either Dipping or
Sprinkling, 2. It Is out of Charity, (as well as judgment) that we do not Dip
Infants; and we have Scripture-warrant for it; I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice. 3. The word (...) signifies Sprinkling or Washing, as well as
Dipping: they Baptized Beds, and Cups and Tables, etc. And when Beds and Tables
were Ceremoniously washed, or Baptized; no man will say they Dipped them under
Water.
The Adversaries unwilling to say any more against Infant Baptism, were urged
to return to their first Discourse, touching the Churches; and say what they
could against our Ministry, the thing mainly intended: to which they agree^*
but Master Fullwood being over-wearie desired respit: it was urged that Master
How, who had sufficiently provided for it, whose exercise was gladly and
thankfully read and transcribed by several Godly Ministers about us, might
state the Question, touching the Ministry; which was, Whether the present
Ministry of the Churches now in England, be the true Ministry of Jesus
Christ exclusively. Which they refused, pretending that would be too long; but
gave way, that Master How might bring an Argument or two for the Ministry of
England: for which he engaged, and performed as follows.

How. Those that are Instruments in the hands of Christ for the work of
Conversion, are the Ministers of Christ, 1 Corinthians. 9. 2. But the Ministers of
England, are Instruments in the hands of Christ, for the work of Conversion,
Romans 10. 11. Ergo. Again, Those that come in at the door of the Sheepfold, are
the true Shepherds. But the present Ministers of England came in at the door
of the Sheepfold; therefore they are true Shepherds.


Coll. I deny the Minor.


How. Those that come in after the mind of Christ, come in at the door of the
sheepfold. But we come in after the mind of Christ; therefore, etc.


Col. I deny the Minor.


How. Those that come in an Apostolical way, come in after the mind of
Christ; but so we come in.


Col. I deny the Minor.


How. Those whose substantialls in point of Call, were such as the Apostles
acted by in point of Ordination, came in the Apostolic way. But it was so with
us.


Col. I deny the Minor.


How. Four things only are required in Scripture so far as I can ^^nd, to make
a complete Apostolical Ordination. First, Examination for Abilities, 2 Timoth.
2. 3. Secondly, The Savor of good report from the Church, Acts 16. 2. Thirdly,
a time of seeking to God, Acts 14. 23. Fourthly, Imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 4.
14.


Col. You fail in the End.


How. Personal failings do not multiply the substance of the Act. And I pray
you give me a better Answer.


Col. You want a lawful Authority, if you have all those particulars. And
besides, you are not the Ministers of Christ, because you do not do the work
of Christ.

Master Fulwood stepped up and said.
Full. Master How, I confess I shall do you an unkindnesse; however be pleased
to let me speak with Master Collier a little. Master How, having received no
satisfactory Answer, gladly gave leave.

With your leave Master Collier; If I do not with this very Argument of yours
prove our Ministry to be of Christ, I Will be Baptized by you to Morrow. Thus;
Those that do the work of Christ, they are the Ministers of Christ. But the
Ministesr of England do the work of Christ; therefore they are the Ministers
of Christ.

As for the Major, your own Argument grants that; and for the Minor, viz. That
the Ministers of England do the work, of Christ is easily proved, if we
consider what the work of the Ministry of Christ is; namely, to beget and
increase Faith; to Convert and Edify, as Romans 10. 14. Ephesians 41. 2. Which
none can well deny the Ministers of England to do.


Coll. Men may be converted many other ways then by the Preaching of the word:
The Woman of Samaria brought many to the Faith.


^ull. You can never prove, that any person was truly Conver^ed by that Woman's
Discourse: Indeed she prevailed upon them for a faint Historical faith, not a
true justifying Faith: for none can imagine, that their faith exceeded the
woman's report.

Again, the Case is extraordinary, and no man can argue from thence to an
ordinary case. We say that Conversion is not ordinarily wrought but by the
sent ordained Ministry; which that, Romans 10. 14, 15. does maintain for ever,
without any colorable contradiction.


Col. I, but your Ordination came by succession from Rome.


Full. That Objection I fully answered (I thought) in my Sermon.


Col. You say the Church of Rome was a true Church, till the Council of Trent.


Full. Suppose it; you cannot deny it: though the stresse of the Answer lay not
there.


Coll. How could Luther without blame, leave a true Church?


Full. Though the Church of Rome, was a true Church when Luther came off, yet
she was a Church very corrupt. First, in Doctrine and Worship; in which he
could not join, but he must partake of her sins. Secondly, in Discipline; if
he would not embrace her corruptions, he must venture his life to stay there.


Coll. Could Rome be a true Church, and yet offer to kill so good a man?


Full. As well as the People of the Jews, when they would Crucify Christ.


Col. But were the Jews a True Church, till Christ his Death?


Full. Yes, else there had been no true Church in the world at that time, which
is an Article of our Creed, wherein we believe the universal Church.


Col. True.


Wood. I see you can say nothing against our Call: I pray Master Collier now
prove your own Call.


Col. I grant that none may preach, but such as are sent; (...) I believe that
many are sent to Preach that are not in Office.


Full. I pray you look over the Scripture, and see whether you can find one Text
for that, Master Collier.


Col. The Prophets were not in Office in the time of the Law, yet preached.


Full. The Prophets were in Office: the word Prophet is a name of Office, though
extraordinary.


Col. But Paul preached before he was called.


Full. Not so; he preached indeed before he received an Ordinary Call, but not
before he had an extraordinary Call: for Christ, when he came to call him to be
a Christian, he made him a Minister; as is plainly expressed by Paul himself,
Acts 26.

They answered no more; and indeed it was now late: we did mu^ually
congratulate the happy meeting and discourse of the day.


Col. I bless God, that we have met with so moderate a man as you Master
Fulwood.


Full. Truly, I did not expect to find a man so sober and rational among you,
as you have been Master Collier.


Barb. Master Fulwood, I profess seriously in the presence of God, and all his
people, that I love you as well as the dearest friend I have in the world.


Full. I thank you heartily Master Barber: but, truly, Master Templer I thought
not to find such incivilities from your hands.


Templ. Truly Master Fulwood, I little thought to have heard you dispute so
well, when I heard your Sermon.


Full. Alas! then I preached; and now I dispute.


There were kind Salutes on both parts, and a fair end. Only some were urgent
when we were parting, that they would prove their re-baptizing; For which they
brought, Luke 19. To which Master Wood gave several Answers, and nothing of
moment was replied. So the Company parted.

This we publish as a true, though short, sum of that large Dispute.

Ministers, and Witnesses.
Mr How. Mr Wood. Mr Bindon. Mr Wakely. Mr Ball. Mr Darby.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader.
THese new Books following are Printed and sold by W. Roybould at the Unicorn
in Paul's Churchyard, near the ^^ttle North-Door.

THe Holy Arbor; containing a Body of Divinity; or the Sum and Substance of
Christian Religion, in Folio. By John Godolphin, J. C. D. 1651.

The History of the Bohemian Persecution, from the beginning of their
Conversion to Christianity, to these times, in 8o.

The Ladies Vindication, or the Praise of worthy women in 12o. 1651.

A further Discovery of the Mystery of the last times, in 4o. 1651.

The Life and Reign of King Charles, in 8o. 1651.

The Antiquity of Commonwealths, instanced by that of Holland, in 8o. 1652.

Church-cases cleared with a Pacificatory Preface to reconcile the difference
between the Presbyterians, Independents, and Anabaptists: by Dr N. Homes, in
8o. 1652.

A Sermon Preached the ^th. of October. 1650. before the L. Mayor, etc. By Dr
Homes.

The Mischief of mixed Communions, in 4o. By Dr Homes.

A Plea for the Ministry in 4o. By Mr VV. Wickins.

A Sermon Preached November. 5. 1651. By Mr Jenkins, being the first he preached
after his Releasement.

The Lawful Preacher. Or, A Discourse, proving that they only ought to preach
that are ordained Ministers. Also, The Pulpit-Guard Relieved, in Answer to
Colliers Pulpit-Guard Routed, By Mr John Ferriby, in 4o. 1652.

The Ordering and Settling of Ireland, in Folio. 1652.

Christ alone exalted, in 17 Sermons, by Dr Crisp, in 8o.

The Assertion of Grace, by R. Town, in 8o.

A Sermon Preached at Taunton, by Mr Newton, May 12. 1652.

Poems with Additions. Also, The Muses Looking-glass. Amyntas. Jealous Lovers;
and Aristippus the jovial Philosopher. By Tho. Randolph, M. A. in 8o. 1652.

The Life of Mr Marriot the great Eater in 4o. With all his merry Actions and
Travails.

A Cat may look upon a King. Or, A Character of the Lives and Actions of all
the Kings, from William the Conqueror to King Charles, in 12o. 1652.


