A Funeral Monument: or the manner of the Hearse of the most Renowned Robert
Devereux, Earl of Essex and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, L. Ferrers of Chartley,
Bourchier and Lovaine, Englands late Lord General, who deceased September. 14.
1646. With a brief Recitement of his valor and fidelity in the Kingdoms
just Cause, against the Enemies of Religion, Parliament and Kingdom, whose
Funeral is to be solemnized on Tuesday the 13. of October, 1646.
funeral cortege

ENgland's great Essex Death has snatched away,
That faithful friend, in her distressed day:
London, thou know with what a willing mind,
This Peer adventured, when thy men did find
Such rare encouragements from their General,
With resolutions, being inflamed all,
To live and die with Him, they all were bent,
In maint'nance of just Laws, and Parliament.
What hardships He endured for thy good;
Nothing too dear, he thought, for England stood:
Opposing those unnatural homebred Foes,
That unto ruin did themselves expose.
Let Worcesters faithful sons now him bewail,
That did relieve them when their help did fail.
Let adverse Enemies, sound Fidelity,
At Edgehill Battle, where undauntedly
This General did appear, in dangers great,
Adventuring to give the foes defeat;
Reading, Cirencester, thy Acts let sound,
And Glocesters tidings, when relief was found,
By means of this thy Friend, whom now lament,
In thy most sad distress, thus did attempt.
And you that know the gain at Newbery,
Seeing this General, how undauntedly
He then encouraged you, for Englands right,
When Royal Forces fled, he stood the Fight;
Croyland and Barnstaple shall sound his praise,
That gained them liberty, in inthralled days.
Mount Stamford, Plympton, Saltash, Launceston,
And Greenvile-house, proclaim his praise, each one;
With many other, whose laborious pain,
Most noble Essex valiantly did regaine:
Whom though by times untimely stroke deceast,
His fame still lives, that enemies decreast.
And now to you, unthankful hearts, a while
I shall address me; you that durst revile*
And mutter out, whilst basely you neglect
Your duties you do owe with great respect.
At first, how many prayers did ascend
From thousands, that did afterward offend
In murmuring at all Gods dispensation,
Forgetful of this Isles abomination:
This, this, O England, has prolonged thy war,
With great unthankfulness, of which beware.
And now Malignants, by your base expression
Full often uttered against this worthy Champion,
Fearlesse of death, that durst look death in the face,
When your stout friends have fled, to their disgrace:
Go search the Records of the Wars progress,
And then constrained, you all can say no less.
By might or Majesty who prosper shall,
When as injustice is the cause of all?
That opposition which thus long has dur'd,
And at the last perpetual shame procured,
This sin cries loud, and vengeance is not far
From you, that thus procured Englands War,
Which has been managed by your contribution,
This you will lament, before your dissolution.
Take timely warning, therefore, and repent,
For this reviling of the Excellent:
Though he be gone to his appointed place,
Your sins remain that have sought his disgrace:
And therefore now, to mourn for Englands loss,
Add something toward it, by that sins remorse.
But now to that, which is my chief intent,
To you, I mean, that really lament
This trusty friend to England, in distress,
Do you bewail, for I can do no less.
What great advantage did he stand upon,
When freely for this bleeding Nation
He offered up himself, to lead on those
That did the proudest enemy oppose.
Should you forget those great Returns of prayer,
Which by this Instrument accomplished were,
The stones would utter out your base neglect,
And this great sin would sadly back reflect.
With what rejoicing, in your saddest days,
Did you erect loud songs of thankful praise
To God, that in so many great attempts
Preserved and regarded Innocents;
Exposed in battle shrill, wherein there fell
Full often many; that did first rebel:
Yet God the Lord of Hoasts did still appear,
To guard his servants, that did truly fear.
Your trust committed to this General,
Whose loss we now lament, and let tears fall,
Let them dissolve themselves into a flood,
For loss of him, that hazzarded his blood
Full often in Field, against the treacherous,
Wilfully bent to ruin him and us.
Since tall Oaks, deeply rooted, do begin
To fall, be warned, let not murmuring
Remove more Oaks, that yet unmoved stood
In great combustious storms, for all our good.
This noble Champion, like an unmoved rock,
In battle that adventured many a shock,
Amidst the Forces, fearlesse, where grim death
Gave way to him, yet now, has caught his breath;
Since tears are small expressions for this loss,
That calls for floods, fit to express remorse;
The masterpiece of friendship now discover,
Raised up with sense of loss, bedewed all over,
With doleful Ditties, now let freely fall
Those fit expressions for this Funeral;
Whose fame now stands, Acts Chronologicall
Perpetual, his fame to after-ages shall
Sound out in praise, his trust that faithfully
Discharged, whom now thus most solemnly
We celebrate, most worthy great desert,
And justly as becomes, with sadded heart;
Love to his Country, and Religions Cause,
Now He Is dissolved, speaks loud against all those
That were not moved with such consideration,
But in distress were helpless to this Nation:
Essex was constant, free from that great sin,
And thus unmoved, lived and di'd therein;
With King and Country both, and Commonweal,
Our noble Essex faithfully did deal.
Noble Devereux sadly's bid Adieu,
And much lamented for, as it is our due.
The Parliament has now received a loss,
This noble Peer is gone, their number's less;
London has also lost a precious friend,
Whom none but death could put unto an end.
He Is worth lamenting for, that at her need
Unto poor England was a friend indeed.
Then shall a Kingdom, and a Parliament,
Shall great and good men for this loss lament;
Shall rich and poor bemoane this Sable Hearse,
And shall not thou and I bedeaw the Verse,
That speaks out cause sufficient to bemoane
This loss of him (before us) that is gone:
Death being armed has cut down such an Oak,
Prepare to meet, and so prevent his stroke.
From earth, great Essex, Englands General,
Has led the way, that we must follow all.
Printed for J. Hancock in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.


