THE INFANTS Advocate. Of Circumcision and Baptism on Jewish Christian
Children,

DEUTERONOMY. 29. 11, 12. Your little ones -- shall enter into Covenant with the Lord
thy God. Origin. lib. 5. ad Romans c. 6. Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem
accepit parvulis dare Baptismum, quia essent in omnibus genuinae sordes
peccati. By THOMAS FULLER, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for J. Williams, at the Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. M.DC.LIII.

To the Right Honorable, JAMES EARL of CARLISLE, my most Bountiful Patron. AND
To the Right Honorable, LIONEL EARL of MIDLESEX, my Noble Parishioner.
I Shall be censured for a Solecisme, in Dedicating this my Infants Advocate
unto your Honors, not only for the meannesse of the Present, but because the
one of you being hitherto Childless, and the other not as yet Married, seem not
so proper persons to be presented with such a subject.

But give me leave to acquaint your Honors, that this my Treatise, Janus-like,
looks backwards, and forwards; backwards to vindicate and assert the
lawfulness of their Baptism which (now arrived at Maturity) were in their
Infancy Baptized; and in this capacity your Honors have an equal concernment
in this subject with any others.

Forwards, to justify and avouch the acts of those Parents who hereafter shall
fix the Sacrament on their Infant Children: Your Honors in Gods due time, may
for the future be interested herein, a favor the more fervently to be desired
from Heaven, both of you being the sole surviving Males of your Families; and
the single threads whereon all the hopes of your Noble houses do depend.

Give me Leave therefore who here am the Advocate to plead for the Baptizing of
others, to be also the Orator to pray for the Birth of your Children, till
which time, may the blessings of the right and left hand plentifully fall, and
peaceably rest on you both, which is the daily desire of

Your Honors most obliged and humble servant THO. FULLER.

To the Right Worshipful, Edward Palmer, Henry Wollaston, and Matthew Gilly,
Esquires; John Vavasor, Francis Bointon, Gent. with all the rest of my Loving
Parishioners in Waltham Holy-Cross.
WHen I consider the many worthy works which had their first being within the
bounds of this our Parish, I may justly be ashamed, that my weak endeavors
should be borne in the same place.

For first, the book of Mr. Cranmer (afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Martyr) containing the Reasons against King Henry the 8th his Marriage with
Queen Katharine Dowager, was compiled in our Fox Acts and Monuments, page 1860.
Parish, whilst the said Cranmer retired hither (in the time of a Plague at
Cambridge) to teach his Pupils. Thus did Waltham give Rome the first deadly
blow in England, occasioning the Popes primacy to totter therein, till it
tumbled down at last.

The large and learned works of the no less Religious then Industrious Mr. Fox
in his book of Martyrs was penned here, leaving his posterity a considerable
estate at this day possessed by them in this Parish.

What shall I speak of the no less pleasant then profitable pains of Reverend
Bishop Hall (predecessor in my place) the main body of whose Books bears date
from Waltham.

And shall my unworthy pamphlet presume to follow such able works from the same
place? However seeing my public promise is solemnly past to you, to Print the
same (hoping some profit may thence arise to you and others) let it as a Page
at due distance wait upon the works of those most eminent Authors.

Some will say this your Infants Advocate has almost been as long in the
breeding, and birth, as Infants use to lie in their Mothers womb; so many
months has past betwixt the promise and performance thereof. But let none
grudge the time if it appear at last in its perfect shape, coming forth soon
enough for those who will reap benefit thereby; Too soon for such who will take
causless offense thereat.

Some perchance will take exception at the plainness thereof which by me was
purposely affected herein. It is a good leslon which may be learned from the
mouth of a bad master, even Railing 2 Kings 18. 27.
Rabshakeh, not to deliver a message of public concernment, in a language
which a few Courtiers only do understand, but in a tongue whereby all the
people on the wall may partake thereof. And seeing the generality of our
opposers are unlearned, I conceived it my duty to decline all difficult words
and phrases, that all might more easily and perfectly perceive the truth therein.

Some perchance might expect a confutation of their practice which are
Rebaptized; a task needless for me to perform. For such repetition of Baptism
will follow of course to be vain, if not wicked, unneedful if not unlawful;
where the lawfulness and needfulness of Infants Baptism has formerly been
proved. Baptism once well done on Infants, I may say, is twice done, which twice
done is once ill done, namely when it is iterated the second time without any
just reason for the same.

What remains (dear Parishioners) but that I pray that my weak Preaching may be
powerful and profitable unto you, that you may do and suffer cheerfully
according to the will of God; Remember the addition of the name of your Parish,
HOLY CROSS: It matters not though Cross be the sur-name, if Holy be the
Christian name of our sufferings: whilst that God who sends them sanctifies
them unto us, which is the daily prayer of

Your unworthy Pastor in Jesus Christ, THO. FULLER.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AMongst the many Lying Miracles reported by impudent, believed by ignorant
Papists, in their Leaden Golden Legend; it is not the last, and least what they
tell of one See Camdens Brittania, in Northampton shire.
Rumball (Son to an English King) whose Saint-ship in those dark days was
superstitiously adored at Brackley in Northampton shire: Of him they report
that he spoke as soon as ever he was born, and professing himself to be a
Christian already in his heart, requested (or rather required) that he might be
Baptized, which done, he instantly ended his life.

I know not whether to call this a Child's fable from the subject, or in the 1 Timothy 4. 7.
Apostles language, an old wives fable from the inventors thereof: Otherwise,
were this true, and all children like him, this our Infants Advocate were
utterly useless, and our pains for the present altogether superfluous, which
now we believe and hope may be profitable for those who cannot plead for
themselves. For though I cannot with Job 29. 15
Job be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame; that is, relieve their
poverty, out of a plentiful estate; yet I will endeavor to be a tongue to the
dumb, and plead as well as I may, in their behalf.

True it is, I must confess with that good Jer. 1. 6.
Prophet, not in respect of my age (being past the vertical point thereof) but
of my other infirmities, behold I cannot speak for I am a child, and if a child
be advocate for children, the cause is likely to be poorly pleaded: However I
will endeavor to supply in integrity, what I want in ability; and sometimes a
cordial counsel, who zealously engages for his client, is to be accepted for
his hearty intentions and affections, though falling short of others in his
performances.

Indeed great is the multitude of pleaders, who have undertook this cause, and
truly the more the better, such the worth thereof to deserve, the weight
thereof to require, many defenders against the fierceness and multitude of
modern opposers. But here give me leave to bemoan a sad accident, that the
council cannot agree amongst themselves how to manage their clients cause. Some
found it on a Jewish ceremony of washing; others fasten it only on the ancient
practice of the Primitive Church; others graft it on the Analogy of
Circumcision; others bottom it on an implicit precept; others on express
arguments in the New Testament. And which is the worse, many of these are not
content alone to prefer, and advance their own opinion, except also they decry,
and destroy, confute, and confound the arguments of others, by which discords,
our adversaries in this point gain to themselves no small advantage.

I am confident those our adversaries long since had wanted weapons, had not
our friends furnished them with all manner of munition out of our own magazins.
Yet dare I not challenge such pleaders for Infants Baptism of disloyalty, as
if they wilfully betrayed their trust herein; though I cannot excuse them for
indiscretion, whereby they have prejudiced that cause, they endeavored to
defend.

It would be well therefore for the time to come, if the assertors of
Pedo-Baptism, on what bottom soever they builded, ( store in this kind is no
sore, and the firmer it is that stands on so many foundations) raise their own
Reasons without opposing the arguments of others who agree with them in
judgment, though going by different ways to the end of the same place.

It is said of every Locust, that marched in Gods Army they shall Joel 2. 8.
not thrust one another, they shall walk every one in his path, on Gods
blessing; let the assertors of Childrens Baptism (what way soever they embrace
for the proof thereof) proceed fairly and friendly in their own tract, and
leave off justling those who go next to them in another path. Thus desiring,
Reader, Gods blessing on thy perusing my weak pains, I remain,

Thine in Christ Jesus, THO. FULLER.

THE Infants Advocate.
CHAP. I. Of Circumcision.
What it was, on whom, by whom, and when to be administered. The Penalty of
wilful Recusants there in.

CIRCUMCISION was the cutting off of a skin, in those parts which nature has
covered with shame, which might be spared without danger of life, hinderance of
generation, or visible deformity.

The solemn Institution hereof we find Genesis 17. where it was commanded to
Abraham and his seed; before which time (though allowing something Sacramental
in the Tree of Life, Ark, etc.) the Church of God had ( Sacrifices but) no
constant and continuing Sacrament.

This Circumcision is subject to many carnal objections, which corrupt Nature
may urge against it. First, some accuse it as an immodest Ceremony; whereas
indeed no such wantons as such, who pretend to more modesty then God commands.
If a strict enquiry should be made into their lives, it is more then
suspicious, Ephesians. 5. 12. It would be a shame to speak of those things which are
done by them in secret.

Others are offended at such Cruelty therein exercised on a small Infant, as
probably with the pain thereof, might drive it into a Feavour.

It is answered, that was cruelty indeed which will worship commanded
superstitious Parents to afford to their Idols, when 2 Kings 17. 31. They burnt
their children in fire to the gods of Sephar Vaim: Call not Circumcision
Cruelty, but what indeed it was, Mercy, Pity, and Compassion; that such who by
nature were children of wrath, and deserved damnation, had by Gods mercy, their
sufferings commuted into the short pain of Circumcision.

Besides, we are bound to believe that God doubled the guard of his providence,
to preserve such infants as were ordered according to his command. Indeed if
the Priests of Baal, who with knives, and lances cut themselves till the blood
gushed out, 1 Kings 18. 28. I say, if such superstitious Bedlams, should have
their wounds fester and gangreen, they dyed felons de se, and the Devils
Martyrs; seeing God never required it at their hands. But if any infant
miscarried under Circumcision, (the precedents whereof we conceive very rare)
being a divine ordinance and injunction; the Parents might comfortably presume
of the final good estate thereof; who rendered his soul in service to Gods
command.

Come we now to consider on whom Circumcision was to be administered. These were
all the males, and only the males of Abraham's family, Genesis 17. 13.

All the Males 1. Born in his house. 2. Bought for money.


In the latter observe a miraculous providence: How many of these persons being
taken prisoners, and sold, like beasts in the slave-market, accounted
themselves utterly undone for the loss of ( the life of their Life) their
Liberty? What sighing, what sobbing, what grieving, what groaning for their
forlorn condition? But oh! Let them not sorrow that they are sold, but rejoice
that Abraham has bought them; How had they been undone, if they had not been
undone? Sold under sin for ever, Romans 7. 14. if not sold unto Abraham. See here
in some cases it is better to be a good man's slave, then a great man's Son.

Only Males.

Object. How comes it to pass that so many as amount to the half of
reasonable ^ouls were excluded the Sacrament. If the Grecians Acts 6. 1.
murmured against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the
ministration of Alms, had not the weaker sex cause to grieve and grudge at men
that neither their widows, wives, nor virgins, were included in the
administration of Circumcision? Besides, no Sacrament, no Salvation. Their not
partaking of the sign, might cause them to suspect the substance, and question
their title to Heaven and happiness.

Answ. Before we come to the particular answer hereof, be it premised, that had
God created at the first two distinct, and absolute, (as to the mutual
dependence each on other) principles of man's being, the one male, the other
female; and had they both, wilfully forfeited their integrity, then some
necessity might have been pretended that to Re-covenant them both, both Sexes
should have been signed with Circumcision. But Divine providence otherwise
ordered the matter, only making man at the first, and woman of the man.

This laid down, we answer to the Objection; though women were not formally,
they were vertually circumcised in the males. What is done to the head none
will deny done to the body; The man therefore being the head of the woman, 1.
Cor. 11. such females as died in their virginity were circumcised in their
Fathers; such as survived to be married were circumcised in their husbands;
Their nearer relation ( one flesh) swallowing up that, which was more remote in
their Father. And thus all, though not directly, reductively Circumcised.

It follows, by whom it was administered; this generally was the master of the
family, Abraham Circumcised Isaac, Genesis 21. 4. As for Zipporahs Circumcising
her sons, Exodus, 4. 25. in a case of extremity, and her husbands indisposition,
it was an irregular act, not to be drawn into precedent* but to be recounted
amongst those, which when performed are valid, but ought not to be performed.

Come we now to the time, When; eighth day Here I will not search with some for
a secret sanctity in the Number of eight, (as consisting of seven, the Emblem
of Perfection, with the Addition of one, that is Entireness) lest our
Curiosity reap what Gods wisdom never sowed therein. The plain reason is this.
Before the eighth day, a child was not conceived to be consolidated flesh, but
till then in the blood of the mother. And for the same cause, when a bullock,
sheep, or goat was brought forth, Levit. 22. 27. Then it shall be seven days
under the dam, and from the eighth day and thenceforth, it shall be accepted
for an offering made by fire unto the Lord.

Quest. What became of the souls of such infants, who died before the eighth
day, and so wanted Circumcision?

Answ. They wanted not Circumcision. For want is the absence of that which
ought to be had; now there was no necessity of, (because no command for) their
Circumcision, before that time; God the Grand Lawgiver, though tying others,
is not tied himself to his Law: But can, and no doubt did, give spiritual grace
to many infants, (chiefly if children of believing Parents) dying in their
nonage, of their nonage, (before the eighth day) and incapacity of the sign
of Circumcision. He who, Romans 4. 17. calls things which are not as if they
were, can call children, which are, but are not circumcised, as if they were
circumcised. And although properly, amongst men, they were not named till the
eighth day, Luke 2. 21. Yet such infants, nameless on earth, might Phil. 4. 3.
have their names written in the book of life.

An instance we have hereof plain and pregnant to such, who read the place
without prejudice in David's child, 2 Samuel 12. 18. And it came to pass, on the
seventh day that the child died: That is, seventh day a nativitate, from the
birth thereof, as Tremelius expounds it; the more probably because no mention
is made of any name imposed upon it. This child, besides the natural stain of
original corruption, had also the personal blemish of adulterous extraction;
And yet how confident David was of the final happiness thereof, appears by
this expression, verse. 22. I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

Let none strangle the life of so comfortable a passage, with too narrow an
interpretation thereof, as if nothing therein were imported more then that
David should die as well as his child. This had been but cold comfort unto him,
and would never have invited him to such cheerfulness of spirit, so freely to
have refreshed himself: Whose joy was founded on the comfortable assurance of
his child's final happiness, and that one day they should both meet in Heaven
together.

It remains that we treat of the punishment on the refusers of Circumcision,
expressed in these words, Genesis 17. 14. That soul shall be cut off from his
people, he has broken my covenant. A threatening capable of three several
senses.

1. Severe. That is, by the sword of Ecclesiastical censures; They shall be cut
off from the visible congregation; they shall most justly (as the blind man was
injuriously, John 9. 33.) be cast out of the Synagogue, not to be restored unto
it without their solemn and sincere repentance. Parallel to S. Paul's
expression, Gal. 5. 12. I would they were even cut off that trouble you: Though
both phrases by some Divines be expounded in a sense. 2. Severer. That is, the
Magistrate shall cut them off with the sword of Justice, and as Capital
offenders they shall be put to Death. In this sense, God had last used the same
words, Genesis 9. 11. neither shall all flesh be cut off any more; that is, their
lives shall no more be taken away, by an universal destruction. 3. Severest.
That is, they shall be cut off from the congregation of the righteous, by a
final perdition of soul and body in Hellfire.
These three interpretations do not cross but crown one another, being no
contradiction unto, but a gradation one above another. The Refuser of
Circumcision, first shall be cut off by excommunication: that not causing his
amendment, shall be cut off by the Magistrate, and the pain and shame of
temporal death not reclaiming him, he shall be cut off with Eternal Damnation.

Quest. Here is a heavy punishment indeed; But who is the person, on whom it is
to be inflicted? It was the Disciples question to our Savior, John 9. 2. Who
did sin, this man or his parents, that he was born blind? But here the question
will be, who shall be punished, this child or his parents? seeing betwixt both
Circumcision is neglected?

Answ. First negatively, surely not the child, for it is said, He has broken
my Covenant. The Covenant may be said to be broken on him, but not by him,
being purely passive therein. Were the child sensible of the benefit, by the
having, damage by the loosing thereof, and might it but borrow a tongue of the
standers by, never was Rachel more impatient for children then this child would
be importunate for Circumcision; Give me Circumcision or else I dye. Now
positively that the Penalty falls not on the child, but on the parent, plainly
appears by Gods proceedings, Exodus 4. 24. When he sought to kill Moses, and not
his children for being uncircumcised. However if a child left uncircumcised by
his Parents neglect, afterward arrive at man's estate, and pertinaciously
persist in the contempt of Circumcision, he equally entitleth himself to the
fault, and is also liable to the punishment in my text.

Quest. Seeing so sharp and severe the penalty, how came that suspension of
Circumcision full forty years in the wilderness, Josh. 5. 7 to be connived at,
God not only not punishing, but, (for ought appears in Scripture) not so much
as reproving the same?

Answ. In the first place I cannot approve the answer of S. About the end of
his first Book on the Galatians, Theodoret. 2. Quest. on Joshua.
Hierom and others, affirming that Circumcision was given to difference and
distinguish the Jews from other Nations; and seeing no Nations were near them
during their travel in the desolate wilderness, Circumcision was therefore
purposely omitted. For (beside that sundry people, and particularly the
Amalekites, dwelt in the desert) Circumcision was principally ordained, (not to
be a badge of distinction, but) a Seal of the consecration of the Jews unto
God. More probable therefore it is, that because the Jews during that forty
years were always (though not actually moving) disposed to move at a minutes
warning, when ever they received orders from the removing of the Pillar, God
the Lawgiver dispensed with them to defer Circumcision, till they were fixed in
a settled condition, affording conveniences for the curing of that soreness,
which otherwise by constant journeying would be chafed, and inflamed.

CHAP. II. Circumcision considered as a Seal of the Gospel Covenant; and what
spiritual Graces were conveyed and confirmed thereby.
MAny behold Circumcision with a flighting and neglectful eye; as a mere legal
Ceremony, an outward Type and shadow; having nothing Evangelical therein. But
on serious Enquiry it will appear, to have a Gospel groundwork under a
Ceremonial varnish.

The clearing hereof is of great consequence to our Present Controversy: For
if the Covenant of God made with Abraham at Circumcision was merely typical,
then it died at Christ's death with the rest of the Ceremonies; But if it were a
Gospel Covenant, then it descends at this day to all the faithful. It is our
present endeavor to evince, this Covenant of Abraham was Evangelical, eternal,
and hereditary to all the Faithful.

For proof hereof take notice that God never made but two grand and spiritual
Covenants: Though the latter has been manifested by different degrees, and
dispensations thereof.

The old Covenant.
1. Made with Adam and Eve, and (in them, as representatives) with all mankind.
2. In Paradise, whilst as yet they persisted in their original innocence. 3. On
the condition, that they should observe Gods law in refraining from the
forbidden fruit. 4. Promising to the observers thereof a perpetuity only in
Paradise. Indeed some Divines say, (but they only say it) that Adam on his good
behavior should have been translated from Paradise to Heaven, but this is more
then can be demonstrated from Scripture.
The New Covenant.
1. Made with Adam and Eve, and such only as should succeed them in the visible
church 2. In Paradise, after their fall, when the seed of the woman was
promised to break the Serpents head. 3. On the condition, that with a lively
faith they should believe in the promised seed. 4. Putting believers into
possession of a comfortable subsistence here, and the reversion of heaven* and
happiness hereafter.
This second, or New Covenant is the sole subject of our present discourse,
which God made first with Adam without a seal, and now renewed it with Abraham,
with a seal, when the sign of Circumcision was affixed thereunto.

Here we must be cautious not to mistake the several declarations of this New
Covenant to sundry person^, to be so many new distinct Covenants. For,
afterward the same was repeated to Isaac, Jacob, Moses, the whole body of the
Jews at mount Sinai, Joshua, (I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, a
promise applied by the Apostle, Heb. 13. 5. to all Christians) David, and
others. Yea, scarce any of the Prophets wherein this new Covenant is not
reinforced. Now, suppose a man causes his will (formerly roughly drawn up in
paper) to be afterward engrossed in parchment, then fairly to be transcribed
in vellome, afterward to be severally written in Roman, Secretary, Court, and
Text-hands, so long as the same and no other legacies, are on the same terms
bequeathed to the same, and no other legatees, all will acknowledge these no
distinct Wills, but the same in substance, and effect. As here the same new
Covenant, at sundry times, and in diverse places was made to the Fathers, by
the Prophets, and at last most plainly by Christ himself.

Object. 1. If this were a new, or Gospel Covenant made with Abraham at
Circumcision, then was there a third, and newer then this made afterward to
the Jews. For, so says the Prophet, Jer. 31. 31. Behold the days come says
the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah.

Answ. Nothing more usual, and obvious in Scripture then to call that new,
which is renewed; especially if what was but dark and obscure before, has the
old impression set forth in a new and fairer edition thereof, John 13. 34. A
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; and yet this new
commandment was from the beginning, John 2. 5. though lately almost antiquated,
and obliterated by man's vindicativeness Christ Heb. 10. 20. consecrated for us
a new and living way, yet is it the same with the Prophets old path, Jer. 6.
16. traced with the feet of Adam, and Eve, and through which alone all the
Patriarchs made their passage into heaven, yet termed a new way (as a new
Covenant) because after Christ's coming, more cleared, explained, and enlarged
then before.

Object. 2. It is improbable that this covenant with Abraham at Circumcision,
should be, a Grace-Gospel-new-Covenant, because God four hundred years after,
(namely Exodus 20. at Mount Sinai) gave the Law, or Covenant of Works, to the
Jews the children of Abraham. Now Gods mercy observes a progressive motion, it
does, not (with the Sun on Ahaz his Dial) go backwards; but with the master of
the feast, John 2. 10. He keeps the best wine unto the last: They therefore
in a manner degrade Gods goodness, set it retrograde, who make his covenant
with Abraham a new covenant of Grace, when He gave an old covenant of Works so
many years after it.

Answ. They are much mistaken who account the Law given to the Jews, a mere
Covenant of works, though indeed there was very much of workish-ness mingled
therewith. The face of the new covenant at the giving of the Law, is dressed, I
confess, in old clothes; many old forms are used therein, alluding to the
covenant of Works made with Adam. Yea, the erroneous Jews (partly through their
own Ignorance, partly through their Rabbis, and Pharisees false glosses
thereon) mistook it for a direct, downright covenant of works, resting in the
Rind, or outward Bark thereof, and depending on the performance of it for
their Salvation.

But let not this Covenant be denominated for the most, but the best part
thereof, let it be expounded, (not as the blind Jews misinterpreted it, but) as
God graciously intended, and the good Patriarchs and Prophets wisely accepted
it, for a covenant of grace, wherein Messiah (though obscurely) was tendered to
such, who could not perform what the rigor of the Law required. There is one
word in the second Commandment, which demonstrateth this Law, to have Gospel in
the bowels thereof, namely the word Mercy, Exodus 20. 6. showing Mercy unto
thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments. Now Mercy is a
Shiboleth which a covenant of works can never pronounce, as utterly destructive
to the very nature thereof, and keeping commandments there must be taken, for
such as desire and endeavor to keep them, though falling short of legal
exactness

But we leave the farther prosecution of this point to those learned Divines,
who have written just Treatises thereof; conceiving it more proper for our
present purpose, to prove this covenant with Abraham a new-Gospel-covenant; and
the serious perusal of one verse, Genesis 17. 7. will afford us three arguments
for the evincing thereof.

And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee,
in their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and
to thy seed after thee.

Hence we collect it a Gospel Covenant.

From 1. The language, and expression of it. 2. The continuance, and duration
of it. 3. The blessings, and benefits conveyed by it.


For the language, and expression, the voice is the voice of Jacob. The speech
agrees thereunto (not to betray it as it did Peter to his shame, and sorrow,
but) to discover this covenant to its honor, and our comfort, to be an
Evangelical Covenant. That very phrase, to be a God unto thee, is a
Gospel-phrase. Otherwise, how comes he, who upon the breach of the covenant of
works, was left our enemy, our enraged judge, to be a God unto us? I see here
Matthew in Moses, the New couched in the Old Testament. Parallel is the
expression, Mat. 1. 23. And they shall call his name Emanuel, which (being
interpreted) is God with us. God with us, and to be a God unto us, differ
something in sound, nothing in sense.

Secondly, for the continuance and duration of it. An Everlasting Covenant,
that with Adam was but a short-lasting covenant. Some conceive Adam never
naturally slept in his Innocence, (accounting that caused deep sleep, Genesis 2.
21. before Eve her creation, supernatural) but forfeited his Innocence before
night. As there be some kind of insects, (called (...)) which, Naturalists say,
survive but a day; so some conceive Adams integrity of no longer duration And,
though we dare not certainly close with their opinion (the Scripture not
acquainting us with the date of Adams perseverance in paradise) we may be
confident, that covenant of works was of no long continuance before it was
broken.

This short-lived covenant thus expired, it was never revived again on the same
conditions, but utterly extinguished. Yea, herein God magnified his mercy, that
upon any terms he would treat with mankind, whom he might have condemned as
incapable of any future contract, for once breaking of Covenant. Yet now he
draws up a second agreement with them, being a covenant of grace, and that
everlasting; such his goodness, that, though we (if strictly examined) break
it with him, he will not break it with us. I confess everlasting in Scripture
is sometimes taken for long-lasting (in which sense the Hebrew tongue accepts
of an ever after an ever) but here it is taken truly for eternity, seeing, whom
God loves he loves to the end, without end.

The third argument to prove the evangelical nature of Gods covenant with
Abraham, is drawn from the blessings, and benefits conveyed thereby; whose size
and measure is so great, they are only of a Gospel proportion, to be a God unto
thee. Could less be said then this, so short the words? yet could more be said
then this, so large the matter? All things herein are comprised, a promise to
give repentance, faith, hope, and charity; patience in afflictions,
preservation from, or in them, competency of outward maintenance, perseverance
unto the end; in a word, grace, and holiness here, glory and happiness
hereafter. How tedious are the instruments of our age (a span of ground being
scarcely passed under a span of parchment) in comparison of the concise Grants
of our ancient Kings, some of whose Charters contain not so many words, as they
convey Manours therein. Yet even those Patents are prolix, if compared with
Gods Covenant in my text, to be a God unto thee, promising therein more, then
what man can ask, or desire. God has set us a pattern, therefore let thy words
be few, Eccles. 5. 2. not to be babbling to him, in our prayers, seeing he is so
plain, and pithy to us in his promises, couching all things in so short an
expression.

To put all out of doubt, this Covenant of Circcumcision made with Abraham and
his seed, appears to be a Gospel Covenant, because S Paul so expounds it. If
any scruple arise about the sense of a Law, to whom should people repair for
satisfaction, but to the makers thereof, if alive. Thus on the emergency of
doubts, about the nature of this Covenant, we may and must have recourse unto
the Author thereof. Now the same spirit, who indicted Genesis by Moses, indicted
the Epistle to the Romans by S. Paul, who plainly affirms, Romans 4. 11. that
Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, the seal of righteousness by faith.

Object. It is strange to conceive how in that age there could be a Covenant of
faith, the word faith appearing properly but once, Habac. 2. 4. in all the old
Testament, (and once afterward with a negation before it in reference to the
Jews) Deuteronomy. 32. 20. Children, in whom is no faith: Seeing therefore such
silence of faith in the Old Testament, (so frequently resounded in the New)
this Covenant with Abraham seems suspicious, to be an old Covenant of Works,
and to have nothing of Gospel therein.

Answ. The word Faith only, not the thing signified thereby is wanting in the
old Testament. What Christ and his Apostles call faith and believing, that the
Prophets and penmen of the old Testament express by Trusting. The Religion
and Creed of the Ancient Patriarchs is briefly drawn up by David, Psalm. 22. 4.
Our Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted and thou did deliver them; they
cried unto thee, and were delivered, they trusted in thee and were not
confounded. I will not say the Triplication of the word Trust, denotes their
belief in the Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Spirit; but here it plainly
appears, they had their confidence in, and dependence on God; (though then not
so clearly revealed unto them) which shows the sameness in substance of their
belief with ours.

Use. This serves to confute such who account the Jews a mere husk, shell, and
shadow of Gods people; as if all the promises made unto them, merely terminated
in temporal happinesses. Thus they feed the Jews bodies with milk, and fill
their bellies with honey (even to a surfeit) flowing from the fruitfulness of
the land of Canaan; whilst in the mean time they starve and famish their
souls, excluding them as incapable of heavenly, and spiritual blessings.

Their uncharitable error is grounded on this argument; because when their
blessings are reckoned up, Deuteronomy. 28. 3. it extends only to the city, field,
fruit of their body, ground, cattle, kine, sheep, etc. but no mention of their
eternal beatitude hereafter in heaven. Yea, when Isaac cordially blessed Jacob,
desiring no doubt to make the same as complete, as he could bestow, and Jacob
receive, his expressions, Genesis 27. 28. amount no higher then to the dew of
heaven, the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine. On the other
side, when the Jews curses are solemnly pronounced, Deuteronomy. 28. 16. they are
confined to city, field, basket store, fruit of the body, land, kine, sheep,
etc. Here a deep silence of hell, and damnation, so that the smiles or frowns
of God to the Jews, seem to reach no farther then to their well or ill being in
this life.

To this it is answered, first in general; by the same argument one may
conclude, that under the Gospel no temporal, or outward happiness is promised
to those that fear, and serve God,; because no expresses thereof (descending to
the like particularities as in the old) are found in all the new Testament. I
meet but with one in that nature (tendering an exact Inventory of earthly
wealth) namely, Mark 10. 30. And the same has bitterness as well as
sweetness therein; save that the close thereof makes recompense for all the
rest. But he shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, houses, and
brethren, and sisters and mothers, and children, and lands with persecution,
and in the world to come eternal life.

To come closer to their argument. Though generally temporal blessings are only
expressed in the Old Testament, yet in and under them, is spiritual happiness
contained. Thus when in the fifth commandment, long life in the land which God
shall give them, is promised to dutiful children, eternity in heaven is
included; and so did the judicious amongst the Jews always accept, and expound
the same.

Most true therefore is S. Paul's position, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. But where has
it the promise of this life? Chiefly in the old Testament, where temporal good
is largely, and clearly; spiritual, briefly, and dimly propounded. Where has
it the promise of the life to come? Principally in the new Testament, where
spiritual blessings are fairly and fully; temporal, shortly, and slenderly
presented. Stock thy self with the one out of the Law, with the other out of
the Gospel, with both out of the Bible.

So much for the Covenant made as inherent in Abraham's person; come we now to
consider it as hereditary, and descending on his posterity. I could name the
Castle, and rich Manor in England, which was settled by Patent from Queen
Elizabeth on one of her Courtiers. But, when the Grant came to be examined
under King James, those operative words, to him and his heirs, were found
omitted in that emphatical place of the Patent, where the estate therein should
have been effectually conveyed. Whereupon the Grant was interpreted merely
personal, and forfeited to the Crown on the attainture of the foresaid Courtier.

God makes sure work in his Covenant of Circumcision. To prevent all
miscarriages, and to intail the same on Abraham's posterity, how often does he
insert, and repeat him and his seed, Genesis 17? twice in the 7th verse, once in
the 9th verse, once in the 10th verse, again, in the 12th verse, and thy seed
after thee. If in after-ages a wicked son chance to descend from- Abraham, and
the same prove a spiritual unthrift, yet God has put it past his power to
alienate the spiritual inheritance of the Covenant from his children, they
shall not suffer for their fathers default; the same being made over to Abraham
and his seed; and now we come to show what persons are included within the
compass of that relation.

CHAP. III. Of the several Acceptations of the Seed of Abraham in Scripture.
THe seed of Abraham as it occurs often in Scripture, so several are the
senses thereof, and all of them worthy of our especial notice: But before and
above all other Acceptions, know first it is taken eminently and transcendently
for Jesus Christ, in whom all Nations should be blessed.

Even this seed of Abraham was Circumcised, Luke 2. 21. Merely out of
conformity, that Christ might show himself born under the Law, as sent not to
destroy, but fulfill it. Indeed those few drops of blood, presumed shed by our
Savior at his Circumcision, might both in their own Preciousnesse, and Gods
Appreciation of them, have been satisfactory for the sins of al mankind. But a
Testament was intended, by Divine Providence; and that could not be made
without the Testatours Death, and therefore the very heart Blood of Christ, on
the Cross, was adjudged necessary for man's salvation.

So much for Abraham's extraordinary, come we to his ordinary seed. This either
was immediately, or mediately begotten by him. We find eight sons of the first
sort, namely, Ismael begotten of Hagar, Isaac of Sarah, and six more, (see
their names, Genesis 25. 2.) of Keturah.

Object. How comes it then to pass that the Apostle Paul, Gal. 4. 22. says,
Abraham had two sons, the one by a Bond-maid, the other by a Freewoman,
omitting all the rest, as if no such persons in Nature.

Answ. These two are mentioned eminently, but not exclusively of others. I will
not say, because Keturah (though sometimes called the wife) is elsewhere, 1
Chro. 1. 32. styled but Abraham's concubine; therefore his Issue by her is left
out by the Apostle; but because (though there was History of more, yet) there
was Mystery but in these two sons of Abraham, whose two Mothers represented
the two Testaments. Had Abraham afterward begotten an hundred sons, they all
had not amounted to the making of one Testament, (but were all reducible to one
of the former Testaments, completed in Ismael, and Isaac.)

As for Ismael, In his Comment on Genesis, chap. 17.
Luther is peremptory and positive, that, (though the type of a carnal people)
yet, in truth, his own person was saved; grounding his charitable opinion on
that expression, because it is said of him, Genesis 25. 17. After death that he
was gathered to his Fathers. A phrase in the same chapter spoken of Abraham,
and not applied in Scripture to wicked men; though it is said of Ahab, 2 Kings
22. 40. (which amounts to the same effect) that he slept with his Fathers. I
will interpose nothing to the contrary, but had been more confident of Ismaels
final happiness, had it been said of him that he was gathered to his father
Abraham's bosom being a noted place, Luke 12. for blessed repose.

Abraham's immediate seed were either such as were begotten, by him,

1. In his life, or

2. After his death.

Of the former were Esau, and Jacob, both of them, being 15. years old, whilst
Abraham was yet surviving, as may be demonstrated by the following Computation.

1. Abraham was an hundred years old when Isaac was born, Genesis 21. 5.

2. Isaac was forty years old, when he took Rebeccah to wife, Genesis 25. 20.

3. Isaac was threescore years old, when Esau and Jacob were born, Genesis 25. 26.

4. All which years cast up together, amount to an hundred and threescore years.

5. Abraham, when he died, was an hundred threescore and fifteen years old;

6. Ergo, Esau and Jacob were fifteen years old before Abraham's death; an Age
capable of Instruction. Therefore when God says of Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. I
know that he will command his children, etc. to keep the way of the Lord. Esau
and Jacob, his Grandchildren were literally intended: The latter, no doubt,
being as willing to learn, as his Grandfather Abraham was able and industrious
to instruct him.

Abraham's seed mediately begotten from him after his death, were either

1. Literally and spiritually, as the believing Jews.

2. Literally, and not spiritually, as the unbelieving Jews, of whose foederal
right, largely in the next chapter.

3. Spiritually, and not literally, as Proselytes, and believing Gentiles.

Proselytes, or Advenae, were Aliens by extraction, and Jews by profession;
and these again were either the Primitive Proselytes, or their successors in
all Ages.

By Primitive Proselytes I understand, those of Abraham's family when
Circumcision was first instituted therein. These I may call the Founders of
that Order, and the first stock wherewith that Society began.

Amongst the succeeding Proselytes, we may take notice of two most memorable
and conspicuous accessions to their company. The one, when Israel came out of
Egypt, and Gods miraculous hand made many Converts to their Religion; when
besides the six hundred thousand Israelites, and their children, Exodus 12. 38.
and a mixed multitude, went up also with them, and although this mixed
multitude, Numb. 11. 4. afterward fell a lusting, infecting also the
Israelites therewith; and probably many of them then perished; yet certainly a
competent Representation of Pious proselytes still continued in the congregation
of Israel.

The other remarkable Addition of Proselytes was Joshua 9. 27. When the
Gibeonites were condemned by Joshua to the servile work of the Temple, hewing
of wood, and drawing of water; Whereby no doubt, thousands of them got the
knowledge of the true God; and were therefore called Nethinims, people given
over to divine service. Yea, what an estimate God set upon them, plainly
appears, by his careful counting them, after their Return from the Captivity of
Babylon, Ezra 2. 43. (with the children of Solomon's servants) in all three
hundred ninety two.

Besides these two grand and conspicuous Additions of Proselytes, there was
scarce any Country confining on Canaan, (as some, a good way distanced thence)
but now and then did drop in a Proselyte into the congregation of Israel;
Rahab, the Hittite, Ruth, the Moabite, Naaman, the Assyrian, etc. And, (to show
God stands as little on the difference of colors as Countries) Ebed-Melech the
Black-more, the Treasurer of the Queen Candace the Ethiopian.

Indeed these Proselytes amongst the Jews, were divided into two sorts; some
Proselytes of the gates, admitted only into civil society, and cohabitation
with them: others called Proselytes of Justice, who did profess, and undertake
all the Law, and these only we account the seed of Abraham.

Secondly, believing Christians are the spiritual seed of Abraham, and are so
generally reputed in the Scripture. These to be true born on both sides, must
have,

1. Abraham to their Father.

2. Sarah to their Mother.

When we see a child like unto his father we use to say of him, Thy father will
never be dead whilst thou art alive: so Abraham surviveth, and Sarah is still
alive in those, which John 8. 39. do the works of Abraham. What these works
are, must be collected out of Abraham's life, who was, faithful to God, loving
to his wife, tender to his children, equal to his servants, kind to his nephew,
courteous to his neighbors the children of Heth, just in his bargains, valiant
to his enemies; in a word, worthy in all his relations. Sarah likewise is
exemplary for her duty to her husband and other feminine virtues, and all those
are her daughters, 1 Peter 3. 6. which imitate the same.

I need not be longer in so plain and pregnant a point; that believing Gentiles
are Spiritually Abraham's Seed, so frequently inculcated by the Apostle in his
Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, who were as mere Gentiles as we
Englishmen are. Come we now to show, how far the Seed of Abraham Naturally,
though not Spiritually, participate of the covenant in Circumcision, conceiving
the clearing thereof, of concernment to our present controversy.

CHAP. IV. That all visible Members of the Jewish Church had a foederal Right
to the Sacraments.
WE must carefully dinstiguish betwixt the reaping of spiritual Benefit by, and
the having of a temporal Right to the Sacraments. It is confessed that the
former belonged wholly and solely to the true Israel of God; but in the latter
the worst and wickedest Jew equally shared with the best and holiest of that
Nation, as all alike corporally descended from Abraham.

For the proof whereof, in the first place it is worth the observing, how our
Savior in the same chapter, and discourse, namely John the 8th* affirms and
denies the wicked Pharisees to be, and not to be the Seed of Abraham.

To be, verse 37.

I know that you are Abraham's seed, but you seek to kill me, because my word
has no place in you. Not to be, verse 44.

Ye are of the Devil, and the lusts of your father you will do. Here is no
contradiction, but a consent, if the several respects be considered: By
Pedigree they were; by Practice they were not; by Lineage they were; by life,
they were not; by extraction they were, by conversation they were not the
children of Abraham.

Now to look only on the Jews in the first capacity, who are Israelites
according to the flesh; we find S. Paul, Romans 9. 4. giving in an Inventory of
their Privileges which amount to eight particulars; and it were high injustice
in any Christian to deny the least branch thereof. Theirs were 1. The adoption.
2. The Glory. 3. The Covenants. 4. The giving of the Law. 5. The service of
God. 6. The promises. 7. The fathers. 8. Christ conceived in the flesh.


Herein the Apostle intends not only the elect Jews, but the diffusive body
of that Nation. Yea, in this present point, with heaviness of heart, he sadly
singleth out such Apostate Jews, for whom verse 3. he desired in exchange to
be accursed, and yet even to those did this survey of privileges belong.

This is farther cleared by the acknowledgement of the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.
2, 3, 4. affirming that all the Fathers were baptized into Moses, all ate and
drank of the same spiritual meat, and drink, yet adding afterward, that with
many of them God was not well pleased.

Lastly, it is evidenced by those frequent phrases in Scripture, wherein the
disobedient Jews are threatened to be cut off from his people, and from Gods
presence. Levit. 22. 3. Such could not be cut off from spiritual holiness, or
happiness, wherein they were never truly planted, and whereof never really
possessed, but only from being outward members of that Church, which entitled
them to a true right of the aforementioned prerogatives.

Indeed one reason, which makes many men loath to entertain this truth, to allow
a foederall right to the worst of the Jews, is a suspicion, that the holding
hereof will betray them to the dangerous opinion of falling off from grace, if
that such who once were actually estated in such a Covenant-right, should
afterward make a final defection from the same. Now, as I cannot blame them
to be jealous with a godly jealousy, and to decline what is introductory of so
comfortless an error, as maintaining the apostasy of Saints: so I must
condemn their over caution herein, to fear where no fear is. For, this
foederall right which the wicked Jews had, never stamped upon them any
character of saving grace, but was only a right of capacity, putting them into
an actual possession of the means, and a possibility of salvation it self, if
not frustrated thereof by their own wilful default.

Suppose now there should happen a Contest betwixt the worst of Jews, and the
best of Heathens, about their spiritual condition, should the Pagan be so
presumptuous as to affirm himself equally advantaged to a capability of
happiness with the Jew, the other might justly confute his impudent bragging
therein, alleging that his extraction intailed on him, a right to
Circumcision, with the Covenant therein, and all the promises thereto belonging.

All will allow a real difference betwixt an Usurper, and a Tyrant (though
both be bad) the former, invading what is none of his own, the latter abusing
what is truly his. Now, should a Pagan, qua Pagan, pretend to the Covenant of
Circumcision, he were guilty of notorious usurpation; whereas the wicked Jew
too often tyrannically abused that Ordinance, having a right unto it, but
making no right use of it. And, although some civil Pagans did outstrip many
impious Jews in Moral performances, the Jews might thank their own laziness,
falling so far short of the Mark, having such advantage at the starting, as a
true right, and title to all Gods Ordinances.

This foederall right therefore must not be denied to the worst of men, within
the Pale of the Church, lest the godly receive prejudice thereby. The Story is
sufficiently known of a landed Innocent, whose Estate some Courtier begged, on
pretense that he was unable to manage the same. The Innocent being brought for
trial into the Princes presence, and questioned about his ability, returned
this answer; My father being a wise man, begat me who am a fool, and why may
not I who am a fool, beget a son, who may prove a wise man?

To apply this story: Many now adays seek to disinherit wicked men of their
Covenant-right in the Church, alleging their profaneness to be such, as does
disfranchise them of those Privileges. May not such wicked men, ( fools in
Solomon's phrase) plead for themselves; My father being a Saint begat me a
wicked wretch, and why may not I beget a son that may prove a saint?

See we this in Ahaaz, the posture of whose generation was such, that he was
fixed in the middle betwixt Jotham his godly father, and Hezekiah his gracious
son; he himself being the worst of men, 2 Chronicles. 28. ^2. Who in the time of
his distress did trespass yet more and more against the Lord, mending for
afflictions as a Resty-horse with beating, only the more untoward for the
same. Yet this Ahaaz by his foederall-right, served to receive a true title to
Circumcision from Jotham his father, and to reach the same to Hezekiah his
son; though enjoying in himself no spiritual benefit thereby.

And thus having concluded the whole Body of the Jewish Nation, comprehended
within the compass of the Covenant of Circumcision, I proceed to show how the
Jewish children at eight days old, were capable to covenant: A Point having
more verity, then evidence therein.

CHAP. V. The Grand Objection answered, drawn from the Incapacity of Jewish
Infants to Covenant at eight days old.
THE Goliath-Objection, generally brought against the Jewish children bing
Covenanters, is taken from their seeming inability to perform the stipulation,
or counterpart of a Covenant. Is not a child called (...) in Greek, from (...)
not a word in his mouth, and Infants in the same sense from a negative in and
fando speaking? Yea, so much as a child can speak, and so much as may be
conjectured by his outward carriage, he makes use of his negative voice, and
remonstrates against the Covenant, as unwilling to receive the same, seeing
every Infant may probably be presumed to cry as forced from him by the pain of
Circumcision.

In answer hereunto, first in general; It is enough to satisfy a sober soul,
and content a modest mind herein, that God has appointed such children at
eight days old to be Covenanters, and that also nomine poenae in case the same
be omitted. That God, who never calls any to any employment, but ever inables
them for the same, at leastwise with such a degree of sufficiency which he is
pleased to accept. Such as question the truth hereof, do tacitly, and
interpretatively, charge God with want of wisdom in his proceedings. Let them
whisper no longer, but plainly speak out, that He lacks discretion to manage
his matters, Isai. 40. 13. Who has directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being
his counselor, has taught him? The proud objecters might well give him their
advise, hereafter to choose wiser parties with whom to make a Covenant, then
children of eight days old.

What Charter has this whole World to show for its being, other then Gods bare
fiat, Let it be. I have blessed him, (says Isaac of Jacob, Genesis 27. 33.) yea,
and be shall be blessed. God has made eight-dayes-old-children Covenanters,
and they shall be Covenanters.

More particularly, to come to the Objection: I conceive the soul of an Infant
may fitly be compared to the cloud which went before the Israelites, Exodus 14.
20. dark on the one side, but light on the reverse thereof. That part of the
Infants soul exposed to humane eyes, is dark and obscure, no abilities at all
discoverable therein; whilst the bright side of Infants souls is objected to
Gods eye, beholding in them what we cannot perceive.

No wonder if men be non-plust about the actions of Infants souls, when every
Infant is an heap of riddles cast together, whereof the least and lowest is too
great, and high for man to understand. David ingenuously confesses, Psalm. 139.
6. that he was fearfully and wonderfully made. The fashioning of the members of
his body being so strange a work in nature, that the knowledge thereof was too
wonderful for him, and so high that he could not attain unto it. If he was
posed with the cask, the case, and the shell, the admirable structure of a
babes body, let it not seem strange to us to be puzzled with the operations of
an Infants soul, how the same is able to covenant with God.

It passes the skill of the greatest Divine, to clear and evidence the
entrance of Original sin into an Infants soul: Whose spirit, coming
immediately from God, must needs be pure, and perfect like the maker thereof.
Nor can this soul, thus pure in it self, be infected from the body, which being
but a livelesse lump of flesh is incapable of sin, especially so as to make an
active impression on the soul. Soul, and body of Infants, thus being severally
sinlesse, who can conceive that the union of two clean things, can produce one
unclean? I mean, original corruption. Yet we all see by woeful experience,
that Infants from their conception are infected therewith: That it is there we
know, but how it came thither, God knows.

If we cannot perceive the manner of sins poison, no wonder if we cannot
conceive the method of graces antidote in Infants souls. Let us allow heaven to
be as incomprehensibly miraculous in healing, as hell has been insensibly
subtle in hurting the same. And, seeing God has expressed thus much, that
Infants are called by him to be Covenanters, let us with humility, and modesty
believe them, to be enabled with a proportion of grace, to discharge their
covenant in relation, though it transcend our capacity to clear all doubts, and
difficulties, which may be multiplied about the manner thereof.

In further clearing this Objection, know, that besides such graces which we
are bound to believe in Infants hearts, they have three things else which
assist them in this Covenant.

1. Their Parents faith tendering them to God.

2. Gods goodness accepting the tender.

3. Their own actual performance of the Covenant, if living to years of
discretion.

First, their Parents faith in tendering them. Appliable to this purpose is
that expression recorded by three of the Evangelists, brought in a bed by four,
who finding no door in the side (such the press of people) made one in the
roof of the house, and let him down by cords into the room where our Savior
was. Jesus seeing their faith, Matthew. 9. 2. When Jesus saw their faith, Mark 2.
5. And when he saw their faith, Luke 5. 20.

Two things herein are considerable; first, that the faith of the bearers was a
motive, and inducement to our Savior the more speedily with favor to reflect
on this sick man. Secondly that the words their faith, are taken inclusively,
taking in a fifth faith to the former four, namely the faith of Him, who lay
sick on the Bed. However, here we see that the beheste of friends, concurred to
the expediting of his Cure, and (though let down but by four cords) he was
lifted up into Christ's favor with a five-fold Cable of faith, which cannot be
broken.

Nearer is the Relation betwixt Parent and child, then friend and friend. When
therefore a pious Father, Mother, or (best then, when) both, shall with the
arms of their faith, offer an Infant (who indeed is a part of themselves) to
God in Circumcision, this must needs be a main Motive (through Gods mercy, and
no otherwise) to induce Him graciously to behold the Present tendered unto Him.

Thus the faith of Abraham and Sarah advantageth Isaac into Gods love, the
faith of Isaac and Rebeccah recommended and preferred Jacob at his Circumcision
into Gods favor.

Secondly, at Circumcision the childs weakness to covenant is assisted by
Gods acceptance thereof. That is well spoken, which is well taken. How simple
and slender soever a child's performance is at Circumcision, how low and little
soever his faith is, God stoops (such his gracious condescension) to take it
up; He makes, (as I may say) a long arm, to reach a short one, and so both meet
together.

Lastly, this strengthens the Covenant then made by the child, that
afterward, if arriving at years of discretion, he publicly ratifieth, and
confirms the same with his own actual faith, evidenced to others in his
pious conversation. Men used to say of Plato his Scholars, That their Masters
Precepts, did freez in them, till they were about fifty years old, and then
began to thaw in them, till the day of their death, meaning that the good
counsels he gave them made no visible impression on the amendment of their
manners, till the heat of their youth was overpast, and they come to their
reduced age. Circumcision, may be said to freez in Infants, as to any eminent
outward effect thereof, during their Minority, the vigor and virtue thereof is
dormant, and seemingly dead in them, but when come to the use of Reason, then
it raises and rouzeth it self, namely when the Party makes good the Covenant,
made by him before, and then the strength of that Sacrament had a powerful
influence on their souls all the days of their lives. And although there ought
to be no iteration of outward Circumcision, which done once, is done for ever,
yet inwardly to circumcise their souls, was the daily task of all devout Jews,
and ought to be our constant employment, and a word or two briefly of the
nature thereof.

CHAP. VI. Circumcision considered as a sign, and what Mysteries were
signified therein.
THe Principal Mysteries couched under Circumcision, as a sign, are reducible
to seven particulars, 1. That our carnal corruption may be spared. 2. Cannot
be cured. 3. Must not be covered. 4. Must be cut off. 5. This cutting off must
be timely. 6. Must be total. 7. Will be painful.

1. May be spared. Listen not to the suggestions of Satan, persuading us, that
sin, by long custom, is grown so essential to our souls, as if our minds
should be maimed, and faculties thereof be cripled, should corruption be taken
from us; Wherefore laying aside (says James 1. 21.) all filthiness and
superfluity of naughtiness, not that we may still retain in our hearts so much
wickedness, as shall fill them, (only parting with that which runs over)
but all natural filthiness is superfluity, it may be spared.

2. It cannot be curred. What is capable of Cure, must have some soundness
(though more sickness) therein; for Nature distressed, but not wholly
destroyed, is the subject of Art, which must have a sound bottom, or foundation
to work upon. If therefore there were any thing good in our natural
corruption, there were some hopes of amendment in the rest. But what says S.
Paul, Romans 7. 18. For I know that in me, (that is in my flesh) dwells no good
thing. It cannot be cured.

3. It must not be covered. The only way to make God hide his face from our
sins, is for us to open, and not to hide our sins from him.

4. Must be cut off. Dream not of curing a gangrean with a lenitive plaster.
Hophni and Phinehas are too incorrigible to be amended with a few fair words.
Say not to thy corruption, as Eli to them, 1 Samuel 2. 23. Why do thou such
things? Nay my corruption, it is no good report I hear of thee, etc. All this
is useless, no way but one, cut it off.

5. The cutting off must be timely* Abels sacrifice had 3. excellent
qualities; Of what was first, Genesis 4. 4.
fat, and Heb. 11. 4.
faithful. Our service of God ought to be early; defer it not above eight
days, that is, do it as soon as it is do-able without danger. Indeed the
longer Circumcision is delayed, the greater will be the pain thereof. Witness
the Shechemites, circumcised in their full strength, Genesis 24. 25. And disabled
by the Arrears of their pain, to defend themselves though three days after.

Too blame they, who put off the circumcision of their hearts, and on frivolous
pretenses defer their Repentance. We read of Harpsfield in his Eccl. Hist.
saec. dec. 5. p. 625
Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of Canterbury, that the Pope dispensed with him
by reason of his state Avocations, and other impediments, to perform his
prayers (which ought to be in the morning) in the afternoon, on condition they
were done before night. But many men through their laziness, give liberty to
themselves to put off their setentance, which ought to be in their youth, to
their declining Age, conceiving all will be well, if it be but done before
their Death. Whereas indeed soul- Circumcision ought to be timely.

6. Must be total. Jewish Circumcision, say the Rabbis, consisted of two
principal parts.

1. (...). The cutting off 2. (...). The casting away
of the forekin.

The ruins of the latter Custom, remain in Zipporahs behavior, Exodus 4. 25.
though distempered with passion, she might over act her part, when casting her
sons foreskins at her husbands feet, and both are spiritually united in our
Saviors Precept, Matthew. 5. 30. If thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and
cast it from thee.

7. Will be painful. Such therefore as indulgently hope of themselves, that
they have circumcised their souls, and yet can never remember that they offered
any violence to their own Nature, never put their selves to any pain in curbing
their corruption, may justly suspect their spiritual condition. Had ever any a
Tooth drawn, and was insensible thereof? Surely such Incisions into our souls,
with the lancers of true repentance, leave an indeleble impression behind them,
and that pain too probably, was never at all endured, which so soon is wholly
forgotten. It is to be feared rather; the pain will prove insupportable unto
us, some counsel therefore will be good to mitigate the same. Surgeons, when
forced to cut off a limb, generally use two ways to ease their Patient. One by
casting him into a sleep, lately disused because dangerous, sleep being so
immediate a donative of God himself, ( Psalm. 127. 2. For so he gives his
beloved sleep) that humane receipts for the same, either under, or over-do the
work. The other by stupifying, and mortifying by degrees the part to be cut
off, so to render the party less sensible thereof. The same way is prescribed
us by the Apostle, Col. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon
the earth, fornication, etc. The torture will be intolerable to have our souls
circumcised, and corruptions cut from us whilst we are in the full feeling
thereof, and therefore ought it to be our endeavor by daily mortification to
dull our sense of the same.

So much of Circumcision; and now let us briefly recollect with the Reader,
what progress we have made in the present controversy; and by what degrees we
have proceeded. First, we have proved the Covenant made with Abraham at
Circumcision and Evangelical Covenant. Secondly, that the same descends on
all the children of Abraham. Thirdly, that all believing Gentiles are Abraham's
children. Fourthly, That eight-dayes-old-Jewish-children were accepted of God
as capable to covenant. Come we now to show that Baptism with Christians, is
what Circumcision was to the Jews; whence this will naturally and necessarily
follow, that Christian children at the same age, have as much right to the one,
as Jewish infants had to the other.

CHAP. VII. That Baptism succeeds to all the Essentials of Circumcision.
A Successor must be, as after in time, so really distinct from that, which
precedes it; otherwise it is not the successor, but the same. Those,
therefore, who endeavor to disprove Baptism's succession to Circumcision, by
alleging many differences betwixt them, do our Work in desiring to destroy it,
whilst the same differences are but accidental betwixt them.

We shall first observe what such accidental differences are betwixt
Circumcision and Baptism, and they will appear such as do not dis-essential the
one from the other.

It is remarkable that all the differences betwixt Circumcision and Baptism,
are on the gaining side for us Christians, whose estate is not impaired, but
improved thereby, Baptism being milder in the sign, freer in the time, larger
in the subject.

1. Milder in the sign; the Law says, cut off, and be clean, which is Painful;
the Gospel says, wash and be clean, which is easy. At Baptism no violent
Impression is made on the Infant, only a little water powered on his Face.
Washing is so far from doing wrong even to a new born Infant, that his natural
wel-being cannot be without it, Ezekiel. 16. 4. When thou wast new Born, thy navel
was not cut, thou wast not washed in water to soften thee.

2. Freer in the time; Circumcision was confined to the eighth day, and those
equally guilty who anticipated or protracted the same. God, in the Gospel has
left Baptism to the discretion of Christians, to accelerate or retard it, as
they are advised by the child's strength, and their own convenience: He has
given Parents as much liberty herein, as kind Elkanah allowed Hannah his loving
wife, 1 Samuel 1. 23. Do what see meth good unto thee. Presume we here that pious
Parents will not create needless delays to Baptize their children, Ne quod
differatur, auferatur, Lest God, in the interim, take their child away from
them. In which case, as I will not be the Judge to condemn the Child; so should
I be one of the Jury, I would not acquit the Father.

3. Larger in the subject; Circumcision left out, a just half, or full moiety
of Mankind, confined only to the Males; whereas Baptism takes in the weaker
sex. Indeed we have but one woman, signally named, whom we find baptized;
namely Lydia, Acts 16. 15. the seller of Purple, in Thyatira; But the
precedents of more: And let the ensuing parallel in the same Chapter be
observed.

Acts 8. 3. Saul made havoc, and haling men and women committed them to
prison. Acts 8. 12. Philip preached concerning the kingdom of God, and they
were baptized both men and women. See here the weaker sex jointly partake in
persecutions, and (which was but equal) did also communicate in the comforts.
It was just that those, who with men had drunk their share in the cup of bitter
affliction, should also have their part in the cup of Sacramental consolation.

Let none be troubled that only two places expressly mention the baptizing of
Women. For Scripture proofs are not to be taken by their number, but weighed in
the balance; One witness from an infallible mouth is as valid as one
thousand. Yea, one testimony of Scripture, coming from the Spirit which is 1
Cor. 15. 28. all in all, is as much as if all the Scripture, and every verse
therein had avouched the same.

Here let the weaker sex enlarge their gratitude to God, on this very account,
that he has cleared their title to this Sacrament in the Gospel; whose right
to Circumcision under the Law was encumbered with some difficulty. For, suppose
a Jewish woman distressed in conscience, and complaining that she was excluded
the Sacrament of Circumcision, because not actually signed with it; and,
suppose a Rabbin, or Levite, endeavoring to satisfy her by the answers
Chapter 1. formerly alleged, ( viz. that she was vertually, or reductively
circumcised in her father, or husband) possibly all this might not pacify her
mind; and, though such a scruple be but a mote in it self, yet might it prove
painful in so tender a place, as conscience, the eye of the soul, is How
thankful therefore ought Christian women to be to Gods goodness, expressly
admitting them to Baptism, and having equal right with men in that Sacrament.

These three forenamed circumstantial differences between Circumcision, and
Baptism, are not of such consequence, as to disessential them, or to make them
distinct Sacraments; both remaining the same in effect, those accidental
variations notwithstanding.

For the like may be observed between the Passover, and the Lords Supper, and
those alterations also for the benefit, and behoof of Christians, the later
being both cheaper in price, and freer in time then the former.

In the Passover, a lamb was offered; which, many Christians (such is their
poverty) cannot provide for themselves; and rich men (such is their
covetousness) will not provide for others. It is therefore commuted in the
Lords Supper, into a bit of bread, and sip of wine, which on easier rates may
be obtained.

Freer in time; The Passover was but once a year, Exodus 12. 6. on the
fourteenth day of the first month; In the Lords Supper we are left at large,
stinted to no time, 1 Cor. 11. 25. Do ye this as often as ye drink it; we may
take it for food, or for physic; when ill, to remove; when well, to prevent
diseases; once a month, once a week if we will; always provided, that the
frequent repetition of it hinder not the solemn preparation for it. But to
return to Baptism, that it succee^^ to all essentials of Circumcision, is
proved by these Arguments.

Either Baptism succeeds to the Sacrament of Circumcision, or else some other
Ordinance does succeed, or else nothing at all remains in lieu thereof: But
that Sacrament root and branch totally extinguished in Gods Church. But nothing
else succeeds Circumcision; and that Sacrament is not abolished, but still
vertually extant. Therefore Baptism succeeds in the place of Circumcision.
The Major we presume of unquestionable truth, where the distribution is
incapable of any other member therein.

For the first part of the Minor, if any other heir (besides Baptism) can be
found out, let our Adversaries in this controversy assign it: What is the
name, or the sons name thereof, if they can tell? surely no such successor to
Circumcision can be produced.

Now to maintain that Circumcision died issueless, and left no ordinance behind
it of Divine institution, to inherit the power and place thereof in the Church,
is what none ever defende^^ For seeing Sacraments are the Pillars of the
Church, supporting the whole fabric thereof; how much would it weaken the
structure totally to take away one pillar, without substituting another in the
place thereof?

We proceed to a second Argument after this manner.

If all such graces conferred on Gods children in Circumcision formerly, are now
bestowed on them in Baptism: Then (notwithstanding some accidental differences)
Baptism succeeds to the essentials of Circumcision. But all graces formerly
conferred in Circumon, are now bestowed in Baptism: Therefore Baptism succeeds
the essentials of Circumcision.
The minor, which (alone is questionable) may easily be proved: Graces in
Circumcision are comprised in that expression, Genesis 17. 7. To be a God unto
thee, whereof largely before; and the same is performed in Baptism; whein God
solemnly contracts with his servants to receive them into his Covenant, and
conveyeth unto them Grace necessary for their Salvation.

But what need we more Reasons, when the very words of S. Paul, Col. 2. 11, 12.
attest the same? In whom also ye are Circumcised with the circumcision made
without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ; buried with him in Baptism.

Christians are here said by Baptism to be spiritually Circumcised; and by the
same proportion, the believing Jews may be said by Circumcision to be
spiritually Baptized; such the affinity or rather the essential samenesse
betwixt these two Sacraments: Thus Solomon says, Eccles. 1. 4. One generation
passes away, and another generation comes, but the earth remains for ever:
So one Sacrament of Initiation [Circumcision] passes away, and another
[Baptism] comes; One Sacrament of Confirmation [the Passeover] passes away,
and another Sacrament [the Lords Supper] comes; But the Church remains for
ever.

Ob. Baptism cannot succeed to Circumcision, because what succeeds must come
after in time, when its predecessor is departed: But Baptism for some years
went abreast with Circumcision, both were set a foot together in Church
practice. For Baptism was instituted in our Saviors life time, used by his
Disciples, John 4. 2. to the Jews, and enjoined immediately after Christ's
Ascension, Mat. 28. 19. to be practiced upon all Nations: Now Circumcision held
in force many years after, see in Timothy (a Jew by the half blood) Acts 16. 3.
was Circumcised by Paul himself. Wherefore Baptism contemporary ^^th
Circumcision, could not be successor unto it.

Answ. It is confessed, that for some years Circumcision remained in the Church
after Baptism was ordained. Have we not often seen the Moon shining in Heaven
even after the Sun some hours has been risen therein; But then she shines
dully and dimly, with a faint and feeble light as conscious to her self of
usurpation, and guilty of intrusion to the territories and dominion of the Sun;
the Moon being only made to rule the night. So may I say there was a weak and
wan appearance of Circumcision in the Christian Church after Baptism was
ordained, and that for these two reasons.

First, It was continued some time in the Church for the more decent expiring
thereof. God would not have that Sacrament, which had lived so long in luster,
dye in shame: And therefore it was thought fit, that Circumcision, as it began
on a good man, so it should expire on a gracious Saint: Abraham being the
first, and Timothy the last; whom we find Circumcised in Scripture.

Secondly, God foreseeing what an advantage Satan might take, if his Church
were left Sacramentless, to assault the same in the interval of the going out
of the one, and coming in of the other (as Ahab was wounded, 1 Kings 22. 34. in
the naked place betwixt the joints of his harness) would have his Sacraments
(rather then they should fall short) one lap, and fold over the other, that
both should be in being at once. Probably, had another government of the Church
been prepared, and fitted; yea, and set up (rather two together then none at
all) before the old one was demolished, profaneness, and damnable heresies,
which we now behold, and bemoan, had not made their progress so fast, and so
far into the English Nation.

The result of all is this: Though Circumcision did for some time rather
languish then live after the institution of Baptism; and for the Reasons
aforesaid, was continued in the Church (used on Timothy not so much to
sanctify him, as to satisfy his half-Countrey-men the Jews) yet soon after it
decently expired, leaving Baptism to succeed in the Church to all the
essentials thereof; amongst which, this was one of main importance, That as
Children were admitted to Circumcision, so they should also participate of
Baptism; Which by reasons out of Scripture, God willing, shall plainly appear.

CHAP. VIII. What it is to reason out of the Scriptures; and what credit is due
to deductions from Gods word.
WE do freely confess, that there is neither express Precept nor Precedent in
the New Testament for the Baptizing of Infants; and yet are confident, by
necessary and undeniable consequence from Scripture it will be made appear to
be founded thereon. Let us here premise and explain a practice of the Apostle
Paul, as much conducible to our purpose. He coming to Thessalonica, Acts 17. 2.
Reasoned with the Jews out of Scripture.

Three things herein are considerable. First, being to prove, that this Jesus
whom he preached was Christ, he neither did nor could produce a positive text
of Scripture, wherein the same was affirmed syllabically, or in so many very
words.

Secondly, in proof hereof he did not bring bare reason, which would be but
ineffectual; especially to prove that which was merely an article of Faith.

Thirdly, in his disputing he made a wise composure of both, joining Scripture
and reason together. Scripture was the Well, Reason was the Bucket, S. Paul was
the Drawer.

Paul's precedent ought to be followed by our practice herein. Scriptura non
scribitur, otiosis: The Scripture was not writ for the idle, but the
industrious. Yea, to what intent has God bestowed reason upon us, improved in
some with Learning and Education, together with the promise of his Spirit to
conduct us into all necessary truth; but that we should improve the same in the
serious searching of the Scripture?

One main motive which induced Columbus to believe the other side of this Globe
to be peopled with reasonable souls, and invited him to undertake the discovery
thereof, was a firm apprehension, and belief, that God would not create so
glorious a creature as the Sun to shine to Sea and Fishes alone; but that
surely some men did partake of the benefit thereof. Is it probable that God
would light the threefold lamp of reason, learning, and grace in men's souls,
for no other purpose, or higher design, but merely that men should make use
thereof in perusing of pamphlets, and reading the works of humane writers;
chiefly in examining the word of God, with such consequences, which naturally
may be extracted from the same?

Some things are, in Scripture, as grass on the ground, which on the surface
thereof, is apparent to every beholder; other things are, in Scripture, as
mines, and minerals in the bowels thereof, no less the product of the earth
then the former, though more industry must be used for the eduction thereof.
Circumcision is of the first sort, obvious to a child that can read the 17th
of Genesis; But he must be a 1 Cor. 14. 20.
man of understanding, (which we all ought to be) to whom Baptism is visible by
deduction from Scripture.

See we here not only the usefulness and convenience, but even the absolute
necessity of the profession of Ministers; not only for the administration of
Sacraments, but for the clearing those necessary consequences from Scripture,
which at the first view are not apparent to every ordinary capacity.

S. Paul says, Romans 12. 6. Let us prophecy according to the proportion of
Faith. Now I believe it will generally be granted that by Prophecy here is
meant the preaching of the word. Know then that the proportion of Faith,
consists not in one, or some, or many, but is the result of all places of
Scripture; the universal Symmetrie of them all, concerning such a point which
is treated of. Here then is the office of the Minister, to present to his
people (in any matter necessary to be believed or practiced) the sense of the
Old and New Testament; This is sometimes not conspicuous in any one place, as
being the collective, and constructive Analogy, amounting from many particular
places compared together.

Here, I say, the Ministers office is called upon; (in whom Reason is or ought
to be cleared and strengthened by his learning) to manifest and evidence to the
people of his flock, the rise and result of such deductions, how naturally and
necessarily they flow from Scripture. This done, such of his flock, who of
themselves could not see, will see when shown; who of themselves could not go,
will go when led; enabled by Gods blessing on his help, will both easily
apprehend in themselves, and communicate to such in their family, such
Scipture-consequences, which their simplicity could never first have found out
by themselves.

Then will it fare with such people as with the Samaritanes, John 4. 42. who
came to Christ, at the woman's invitation, but believed on him, not because of
her saying, but because they heard him themselves. Unlearned people receive not
such consequences for truths, on the credit of the Learning and Religion of
their Minister, (though by his direction first acquainted therewith) but
because that since they have been convinced in their own judgments and
consciences of the truth thereof, as no doubt the Thessalonians were, when S.
Paul (as is aforesaid) reasoned with them out of Scripture.

But a greater then Paul is here to avouch this practice, even our Savior
himself; Who, being to confute the Sadduces, who not only denied the
resurrection of the dead, but also that there was neither Angel nor Spirit,
Acts 23. 8. (existing separate from the body) so that at death the souls of men
expired, and were utterly extinguished. In refutation of which error, our
Savior reasoned out of Scripture, Mat. 22. 31. 32. But as touching the
resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by
God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. God is not the God of
the dead, that is, he is not God to that which is annihilated, and null in
nature, but that thing must have an absolute being in it self, before it can be
so related that God becomes a God unto it.

This text in it self seems at great distance to prove the Resurrection, and
never likely to meet the matter in controversy; unless Reason intercede to
join them both together. The argumentation being thus framed, and that to which
God pronounces himself a God* has a true and real existence. But God
pronounces himself God to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, some hundreds of years
after their death; Therefore Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, had still a true and real
existence. And thus an argument, which formerly was vertually in the text, is
by the assistance of Reason actually extracted thence, and effectually applied
to the preset purpose.

Say not, Christ might have chose in the old Testament, more pregnant and
pertinent places then this by him cited to prove the resurrection; as that Job
19. 26. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall
I see God: For, first it is presumption for any to teach Christ; which stone
out of the brook to choose (as the smoothest, and fittest) when he is to
encounter the Goliath of any error. Secondly, the Sadduces only allowing the
Pentateuch, or five books of Moses; Christ worsted them at their own weapons
out of that Scripture, which they acknowledged for Canonical; setting us an
example by reason out of the Word, to prove those points which are not expressly
contained therein.

To conclude this point; when Eve was brought to Adam newly awaked out of his
deep sleep, Genesis 2. 23. he gazed not on her as a stranger, but welcomed and
entertained her with this cheerful and courteous expression, This is now bone
of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called woman, because she was
taken out of man. So should Scripture behold those legitimate deductions, which
by right reason, and lawful rules of Logic, are thence drawn, and derived, it
would instantly own and acknowledge them for its undoubted issue and
offspring; commanding them to be called Derivative Scripture, because taken
out of the body and bowels thereof.

Here I plead not for such violent and forced consequences, ( bastards of men's
brains) which some unjustly father on the Scripture, wresting it, 2 Pet. 3. 16.
and not reasoning, but wrangling from it. Natural and necessary deductions, are
by me alone intended; by which we proceed to prove, that Baptism is bottomed on
Reasons out of Scripture.

Here make we this motion to the Reader, and may he resent it according to the
equity thereof. Though we propound, and he peruse these our reasons out of
Scripture severally, our desire is they should all be compounded together, and
jointly presented to his judgment. This desire proceeds not from any jealousy
and suspicion we have of their invalidity, as taken single, but out of a
confidence, that though they may be cavilled at (and endeavored to be broken)
as single arrows, they will be unbreakable to him who here may have his Quiver
full of them. For as in a regular Fort, though single flankers thereof may be
assaulted, yet the whole will be impregnable; wherein each part receives
strength from, and returns strength to another; so we conceiv though each
reason severally may be subject to captious exceptions against it, yet the
total sum of them all (besides many more which Godly Divines have and may add
unto them) amount to the convincing of such as do not wilfully boult their eyes
against the beams of truth.

CHAP. IX. The first Reason for the Baptizing of Infants, taken from the
Analogy of Circumcision.
THe first Reason for Infants Baptism is grounded on proportion of Circumcision
in this manner. If that the children of Jews were admitted to Circumcision, and
thereby made members of the Church; the children of Christians ought to be
admitted to Baptism, and thereby be made members of the same. But the children
of the Jews were admitted to Circumcision, etc. therefore the children of
Christians ought to be admitted to Baptism.

Herein the Major which alone is subject to doubt and debate, may be proved by
what formerly was explained, in Baptisms succeeding to all essentials of
Circumcision.

Object. To this your arguing from proportion of Circumcision is of no
validity; yea, and of very dangerous consequence: For on the same account you
may extend the Analogy to the reviving of all the Jewish Ceremonies, long
since dead and rotten in the grave of our Savior; Such Necromancy in Conjuring
up the Ghosts of dead Judaism, is unlawful of it self, and prejudicial to
Christian liberty; should we be put under the Gospel to such slavish
conformity, as to practice something parallel to each Ceremony in the old
Testament.

Answ. We confess this exception true and just, had Circumcision been but a
bare Ceremony and no more; But Circumcision had in it more of what was
Sacramental then Ceremonious. The Ceremonious part thereof is utterly extinct,
and dyed Issueless. But the Sacramental or Gospel part thereof, as it contained
an everlasting Covenant made with Abraham's seed; that is, all true believers,
may be said to survive, in Baptism the true heir thereof; Sacramenta non
moriuntur, Sacraments die not, (whilst the Church Militant is alive) nor is
there any intervals betwixt them; Baptism immediately succeeding Circumcision,
as is before declared.

Proceed we to prove the former Argument with a new Syllogism; They who once in
Circumcision were made members of the Church, and never since were solemnly
outed of the same, remain still in the state of their membership: But
Circumcised Children under the Jews were made members of the Church, and never
since were solemnly outed of that condition; Therefore they still remain
members.

Here the Minor alone is exposed to suspicion of falsehood; and that only in the
later part thereof: Now let the denyers of it assign the time, place, manner,
and persons, when, where, how, and by whom they were cast out of that
membership. Sure I am, seeing the old Testament leaves them in peaceable
possession thereof; And no firm ejection of them appears in the new Testament;
it must needs be some Apocrypha writing, or forged deed, which depriveth them
of their true title thereunto, and tenure thereof.

For the further clearing hereof, Let us suppose, a Jew about the time of S.
Paul converted into a Christian, and soon after made father to a son. If this
child in his infancy may not be admitted to Baptism, what cause had it no less
justly then Grievously to complain? Might it but borrow a tongue from the
standers by, how pathetically would it expostulate his condition? Alas, how sad
is my estate? My father being but a Jew, was at eight days old made a member of
the Church by Circumcision: His infancy was no bar and obstacle unto him, to
render him incapable of the Covenant. I had thought now my Father is turned
Christian, that the Child should not be impaired because his father is
improved? Is a Christians son found in a worse case then a Jews son was left? I
thought the alteration of our condition by Christ's coming was to perfect not
diminish what we had before? Christianity may be a good Religion for men to die
in, but Judaism was better for Children to be born in: We Infants who signified
some. thing under the Law, are made ciphers under the Gospel, no notice being
taken of us, until we are arrived unto years of discretion.

This complaint might be largely prosecuted with more earnestness, but a word
is enough, the rather if we consider what S. Paul says, Heb. 8. 6. But now
has he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is a mediator
of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises. What a Scale
of melioration have we here, better, and better, excellent, and more excellent.
But if Children since Christ's coming are excluded the Covenant, which were
admitted unto it before, his is a less excellent Ministry, and he the Mediator
of a worse Covenant upon worse promises, seeing the same is not extended now as
formerly, to all ages, Sexes and conditions of people, (children, included
under the Law) being omitted therein?

Now though many Infants of Bethlehem, and the coasts thereabouts, Mat. ^.
suffered for him, surely none suffered by him. But he continued their condition
as good, yea, and bettered the same by his Incarnation. He who himself was a
child, as well as a man, and a child before he was a man, did tender and
improve the condition of children as well as of men; and leaving this we now
proceed to a second Reason out of Scripture.

CHAP. X. The Second Reason, drawn from the birth-holinesse of Christian
Infants.
OUr Second Reason out of Scripture, is bottomed on S. Paul's expression, 1 Cor.
7. 14. for the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy. Now because there is some difficulty about the meaning
of the words, we will be the larger in explaining the same.

It appears by the first verse in this chapter, that the Corinthians by letter
had requested from S. Paul, solution and satisfaction to sundry Queries by them
propounded: Wonder not that they, who 1 Cor. 1. 5. were commended by S. Paul to
be enriched in all knowledge, should now desire further instruction. For first,
they had all knowledge, but not all the degrees of knowledge. Secondly, they
had all knowledge, in fundamental necessaries to salvation, not in all cases of
occasional emergency, such as their questions were. Thirdly, grant that even in
these, they had information before, they now sue for further confirmation from
the infallible spirit of the Apostle.

Alas, will some say for the loss of this letter of the Corinthians to S.
Paul: Pity it was that providence did not transmit the same to posterity; How
useful had it been for us if it had come into our hands? Let such know, first,
this their letter was no part of Canonical Scripture, penned by a fallible
Spirit. Secondly, we have still this letter in effect, because we have Saint
Paul's answers to the questions therein. Thirdly, men generally are more curious
to enquire about those parts of Scripture which they suspect to have
miscarried, then careful to improve those which remain, and are sufficient for
our salvation.

Amongst these Questions, this was not the easiest, whether a believing husband
or wife were to continue in wedlock with an unbelieving wife or husband, if by
providence it so came to pass that one was an Infidel, the other a Christian.
The Negative no doubt seemed probable to some, and on this account, that if he
who is joined to an Harlot is one body, then by the same consequence, Idolatry
being spiritual whoredom, Copulation with an infidel is unlawful, and
infectious.

But S. Paul in the foregoing verse determines the contrary; That in case the
Infidel is pleased to dwell with the believer, they ought so to continue;
rendering a reason thereof in the words before alleged for the believing
husband, etc.

The words contain 1. A Proposition. 2. The proof thereof.


The Proposition is reciprocal, it turns and windeth backwards and forwards,
the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by the husband; the proof thereof is in the ensuing words* else were
your children unclean, but now are they holy. In the proposition the Cardinal
word Sanctify, (as being the main Hinge whereon the same turns) deserves our
serious examination.

Sanctified here is not taken, quoad personam, to enholy the party so, as to
procure his or her eternal salvation. If the holy Triumvirate of Noah, Daniel,
and Job, Ezekiel. 14. 20. could save neither son nor daughter, but their sole
selves from a temporal destruction, much less can the sanctity of a Christian
husband or wife, operate so effectually on his, or her Pagan Partner as to
estate them in a saving condition. Indeed the wives holy conversation may be
instrumental to her husbands conversion, 1 Pet. 3. 1. But it is God alone who
sanctifies, in this high acception thereof.

Sanctified then here is taken quoad usum, that is eousque, they are made holy
so far in relation to Marriage, that the christian may have a lawful, and
comfortable converse, and cohabitation in bed and board with the counter-Pagan.
Thus all meats (though some of them formerly forbidden as unlawful by the
Levitical Law) 1 Timothy 4. 5. are sanctified by the word of God and prayer; that
is, the use of them is legitimated, and they made healthful to the bodies, and
lawful to the souls of such praying Christians as feed upon them.

See we here first, Grace where it came, did not always take one and all in a
family; God in dispensing thereof, deals as Jacob did in blessing Ephraim and
Manasseh, Genesis 48. 14. He crosses his hands wittingly, taking a husband out of
one house, a wife out of another; a wife out of one house, a husband out of
another. The reason hereof, Mat. 11. 26. even so father, because it pleases
thee, John 3. 8. the Spirit blows where it lists. Thus Amos 4. 7. the earth
is often chequered with moisture, and drought, with barrenness, and
fruitfulness, the effects thereof; I cause it to rain upon one city and not
upon another.

Secondly, Hence we may learn, that Dominion is not founded in Grace: Had it
been so, then the believing wives to unbelieving husbands, had a just title to
deny any obedience, pleading that their husbands by their Paganism had
forfeited all power over them; yet the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3. 1. enjoyneth
subjection, even to such husbands who did not obey the word, and who as yet
were without the word.

Lastly, and chiefly hence we observe, Mixed marriages made against Gods will, do
defile the Religious, but continued according to Gods will, do sanctify the
profane person. Solomon may be a proof of the first, 1 Kin. 11. 4. not
converting his Idolatrous wives, but perverted by them. Namely, because he
crossed Gods commandment, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Neither shall thou make Marriages with
them; and the reason is added, for they will turn thee away from following me.
And although the husband was doubly advantaged, both with his marital
authority, and a good cause on his side, rather to prevail on his wife then to
be imposed on by her; yet because there was Laesum principium, a fault in his
first Match, the edge was taken off from all his arguments to her, and added to
her arguments against him* making them by Gods just judgment, twice more
piercing and powerful to seduce him.

Should then a Christian Man wilfully take a Heathen wife, he could not pretend
that his Christianity should sanctify her Infidelity, so far as to make his
bed and board comfortable and lawful unto him, because he crossed a positive
precept, which enjoins the believing party if at liberty, 1 Cor. 7. 39. to
Marry only in the Lord: The Physicians observe, that faults committed in the
first concoction, are seldom amended in the second: such men had small hopes to
better their condition by converting their wives after Marriage, who before
Marriage ran so desperate a hazard against Gods will in his word.

On the other side, when mixed Marriages are continued according to Gods will,
they do sanctify the profane person: I mean when both parties at Marriage were
originally Pagan, and one of them afterward converted to Christianity. In such
a case a separation is not to be made, (as was done, Nehemiah 13. 30. when he
cleansed the Jews from all their strange wives) but the Christian may continue
in wedlock, with the Pagan, without fear of infection, and with a double
comfort.

1. That hereafter his, or her Pagan partner probably may be made Christian,
verse 16. for what know thou O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband,
etc.

2. That for the present the Pagan company is so sanctified unto him, or her,
that all conjugal acts qua-conjugal may be performed betwixt them, without the
least suspicion of sinfulness therein.

Come we now to the proof of the proposition: else were your children unclean,
but now are they holy: Not to speak of natural uncleanness (as alien from the
purpose:) We will principally insist upon a threefold uncleanness mentioned in
Scripture, with a holiness parallel thereunto.

1. A Ceremonial uncleanness. Common or unclean, Act. 10. 14. Such uncleanness
was now quite grown out of fashion under the Gospel. Ceremonial holiness,
whereby things were legally purified from pollution, which holiness was quite
out of date with the Jews, and never in date with the Gentiles when S. Paul
wrote this Epistle.

Such as understand, uncleanness or holiness in the Text, in this low acception
of the word, under-shoot by much the true meaning thereof.

2. A Spiritual uncleanness putting the person into Gods displeasure, and a
damnable condition. Spiritual holiness, which mounteth a man into the favor
of God, and setleth him in the state of salvation.

Now we have over-shot the mark, and are as much above the meaning of the Text.
For no good parents can make their children thus holy, many of them being*
humbled in Scripture, (as Eli and Samuel) with a profane issue which lived and
died impenitent: It is an impudent slander, wherewith the Rhemists (in their
notes on this text) charge us to maintain, that from these words we collect,
the children of pious parents, to be so holy, as that they need no Baptism.
Whereas indeed hence we gather, such children to be so holy, that they have a
lawful right to Baptism. Which has brought us to the third and last acception
of the word.

3. Sacramental uncleanness rendering the ^ person unfit to partake thereof,
and receive any benefit thereby. Sacramental holiness which entitles a child
to a true right, to participate of those Initiating Ordinances of God, whereby
he is made a member of the Church, and admitted to the means of Salvation.

Now are we just level, and even to the sense of the words, and conceive our
selves, to have hit the mark, or meaning thereof: And thus it is expounded by
all our Protestant Divines. Musculus alone excepted, who (though otherwise a
stiff Champion for Infants Baptism) accounts the argument drawn from these
words not cogent thereunto.

Quest. If you call this Sacramental holiness, why do you confine the effect
thereof to Baptism alone, and why are not the children of pious parents
admitted also on their parents account without any further examination to the
Lords supper, by the virtue of this (which you term) Sacramental holiness.

Answ. It is the method of the Church, not to entrust a member therein with
this second Sacrament, of confirmation, until first he has given testimony of
his good improving of his first Sacrament of Initiation. Besides, a child,
while a child, is more properly a part of the parent, and may be said to trade
under him. Whereas when grown a man he sets up for himself, and takes up a new
stock, on his own account; This Sacramental holiness therefore estates a
child in a real right to Baptism, and only in a capability of the Lords Supper
in due time, except excluded thence by his own wilful unworthiness.

Thus amongst the Jews every child* descended from Abraham, might challenge
Circumcision as due unto him, but could not so lay claim to the Passover (of
which some of his own intervening uncleanness might make him incapable) except
he was adjudged fit by such, whose place was to search into peoples purity, who
were to partake of the same.

The main observation is this, Such as are christianly extracted, though but by
the half blood, have a whole right to the Sacrament of Baptism, Romans 11. 16. If
the Root be holy so are the Branches. Say not in such mungrel matches, the root
is but half holy, and therefore but semi-sanctity, is as much as comes to the
share of the branches thereof.

For herein the mercy of God is magnified, that whereas he might have made the
child, as the conclusion to follow what was worst in the premises of either
Parent, his mercy interprets all according to the better part thereof. What
result could be expected from the joining of hot and cold but lukewarm? What
product from the blending of white and black but a motley? What amounts from
the mixture of light and darkness but twy-light? but such is Gods goodness to
pass over and take no notice of the Paganism in one parent, whiles the child
shall solely succeed to the purity in the other. Now if Christian children by
the half-bloud be holy* how clear is those Infants title Religiously descended
on both sides? when Deus est in utroque parente, Let none be so cruel as to
question their title to the Sacrament.

IF any then ask, what advantage then has a Christian, and what profit is
there of pious parentage? We answer, much every way; chiefly because extraction
from them entitles to the Sacrament of Baptism. They have also the benefit of
their parents dry and wet prayers, (even before their conception) petitioning
to God importunately, to make them be instruments not to People Hell, but Plant
Heaven. When growing up, capable to learn, they have advantage of precepts
(Abraham will teach his children) of good precedents, whiles the children of
wicked parents see daily what they should fly, these see what they should
follow; the advantage of correction moderately and seasonably used. All these
are the sap which the root of holy parentage sends up into the branches
thereof, though all of them too often prove ineffectual, and God (who finally
saves not children for their parents sake, but parents and children for
Christ's sake) justly condemns many children of good parents, for neglecting
all these precious advantages to salvation.

To conclude. In the Low Countries, the eldest son of a Commission Captain,
being born there whilst his father is in the service of the State, is by the
courtesy of the camp, enrolled in the soldiers list on his birthday, and by
the allowance of the State, receives pay from the time of his nativity. In the
Christian warfare, though Christ alone be our Captain, every common soldier
(male or female) enlisted under him, derives this privilege to all his
children; that from their very births they are thus far entered into the
musterroll of the Church, as to receive pay; I mean the right, and title to the
Sacrament of Baptism, as being by their very extraction, not unclean, but
Sacramently holy.

CHAP. XI. The third Reason, taken from the Holy Spirit, which is given to
little Infants.
THe Third Reason out of Scripture, is thus framed: Such who receive the Spirit
of God may and ought to be Baptized; but infants receive the Spirit of God,
therefore they may and ought to be Baptized.

The Major hereof is in effect the words of the Text; Peter says, Acts 10. 47.
Can any man forbid water that these should not be Baptized, which have received
the holy Ghost as well as we? Can he? that is, can he justly? can he lawfully?
can he so do it, as to avouch it to God and man, when he has done it? Though I
confess too many de facto, do it now adays. Can any man? we can do nothing,
says the Apostle, against the Truth but for the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. It is not
strength, but weakness; for one to be able to do that which he ought not to
do. Can any man? Be he an Apostle, or even Peter himself, MAN. He must be
either worse then a man for his Envy, or less then a man by his Ignorance.

The Minor remains to be proved, that Infants receive the Spirit of God,
whereof we have two pregnant proofs, one in the old Testament, Jer. 1. 5.
Before I formed thee in the womb I knew thee, and before thou came out of the
womb I sanctified thee, and ordained thee to be a Prophet unto the Nations.

Object. This sanctification of Jeremy, intends not such as accompanies the
salvation of the soul, but merely imports a designation of him to the
Prophetical function, with qualification for the discharge thereof. It is
therefore impertinently alleged to prove, that Infants have the saving Spirit
of God.

Answ. It is confessed that Jeremy his destination to be a Prophet, was a
principal part of his sanctifying here mentioned. Yet was it not the total
thereof, as being but a sprig and branch of the same, which extended to Gods
forming him according to his knowledge of approbation and hallowing him as yet
unborn, to be his Saint and servant.

The second instance in the new Testament is that of John the Baptist, Luke 1.
41. Leaping in his mothers womb at the salutation of the virgin Mary. Not that
(as some have mistaken it) that then his Mother was first sensible that she
quickened of him, seeing it was said before, verse. 36. This is the sixth month
with her which was called barren; but as it is verse. 44. the babe leaped in my
womb for joy, knowing and acknowledging Christ the Savior of mankind, and
transported with transcendent gladness for the same.

Object. But Jeremy and John the Baptist, were Jeremy and John the Baptist, I
mean, signal persons of extraordinary stature of grace, above the size of
common Christians. Your Logic is but bad, if from the induction of two
instances, you infer a general conclusion: As soundly you might prove, that all
David's worthies were equal in valor and atchivements, 2 Samuel 23. 19. unto the
first three, as that al infants of Gods children may for their abilities be
matched with these two by you alleged.

Answ. I grant no less, That these two instances were extraordinary: However
thus much advantage we gain thereby, that they plainly prove the state of
Infancy to be receptive of grace, and of ability to entertain the same. Let
none look on Infants as so indisposed and unorganized by reason of their
weakness, but that the lowness of their age is capable of the elevation to
sanctity.

Secondly, though we acknowledge such redundancy of the Spirit in the
extraordinary and miraculous proportion thereof confined to a few persons, in
Christ's and the Apostles time, yet we may no less truly then confidently
maintain, that a sufficiency thereof as to salvation, is conferred on all Gods
servants now adays, as well as before; Nor is Gods Spirit super-annuated with
aged Naomy, Ruth, 1. 11. or grown so barren, or effete, but that it is still
procreative, and produces the effects thereof in Gods servants now, as
vigorously as ever before.

Otherwise, most doleful, yea, indeed desperate were the conditions of Gods
servants now adays, if devoid of the Spirit of God, as to the essentials
thereof, having now a fiercer foe and worse weapons to encounter him, then the
Christians had in former ages: A fiercer foe, Satan himself growing subtiler,
with the addition of fifteen hundred years experience; and crueller, Rev. 12.
12. because the shorter his reign, the sharper his rage: Worse weapons if we be
left altogether naked of the offencive and defencive armor of the Spirit of God.

And here I cannot but admire at the practice of some persons now adays,
boasting of strange measures of the Spirit bestowed upon them (and we must
needs believe them, for they say so themselves;) yea, such prodigious
proportions thereof, whereby per saltum, they conceive themselves enabled for
such offices, for which they were never fitted by their education. And yet the
self-same persons who are thus prodigal in the praise of their own perfections,
assuming so much of the Spirit to themselves, are most miserably nigardly to
others, and especialy to Infants denying the least degree of the Spirit unto
them.

Whereas let matters be beheld with an unpartial eye, and it will appear, that
it is more probable children should partake of the company of the Spirit, then
men now adays: May it not justly be suspected, that the spiritual pride,
uncharitableness, self-interest, sinister respects, cruelty, and oppression of
many men do fright away the spirit from them, how highly soever pretending to
holiness: whereas the mildness, meekness, silence, humility and patience of
a child, may invite the society of the spirit the sooner unto it, and the Dove
converse rather with Doves then with Vultures.

To put all out of doubt, we can plainly demonstrate the fruits of Gods Spirit
and Sanctification in Infants, dying Infants, and therefore the root thereof
must be granted to be in their hearts, which we thus prove.

Whatsoever is saved is fully sanctified, for Ephesians. 5. 5. no unclean person
has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ. But many children (especially of
Godly parents) dying children are saved. Therefore they are fully sanctified.
He wants judgment that denies the Major or former part of the syllogism; And
he lacks as much charity who questions the Minor hereof; otherwise Herod the
cruel Tyrant, who killed only the bodies of the babes in and about Bethlehem,
was all mercy to such Bloody Monsters, who (so much as lies in their power) by
this their Murdering opinion, Massacre the souls of so many Infants, depriving
them thereby of salvation.

CHAP. XII. The fourth Reason drawn from some degrees of Faith, conferred on
little Infants.
THe Fourth Reason out of Scripture is thus formed; They that have some degree
of Faith, may and ought to be Baptized; But Infants have some degree of faith;

Therefore they may and ought to be Baptized.

The Major is the very same with the words of the Scripture: The Eunuch asked of
Philip, Acts 8. 36. See here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized?
Philip answered, if thou believe with all thy heart thou may.

All the difficulty is in the proof of the Minor; For our Adversaries will say,
if the Infant could rejoyne with the Eunuch in the same place, I believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, then the [now most zealous] opposers would be
the most earnest advancers of their Baptism.

For the proof then of Infants faith, let us bring another Reason, but still
out of Scripture.

Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. But Infants please
God; Therefore they have Faith.
Herein the Minor alone is dubitable, and may manifestly be evinced. All men I
know are ready to pretend that they please God; And Hypocrites themselves most
(odious unto him) as forward as any to claim this privilege to themselves. To
put this therefore out of question, it matters not what men say, but what God
says herein: We appeal to him (who best knows his own mind) and he has judged
this case already, That Infants please him.

Say not if so small then, were they insensible of any benefit by the blessing?
not conceiving the meaning of our Savior therein.

This appears by Christ's carriage toward the little children brought unto him
in the Gospel; Concerning whose years be this premised, that though we have not
the Register books of their several ages, yet we may conclude (at least some
of) them no bigger then Babes. First, because called (...) by S. Mark 10. and
judiciously rendered by our Translators, verse 13. young children, verse 14.
little children; The diminution in the Original word, being equally appliable
either to their age or stature. The same are termed by S. Luke 18. 15. (...),
and translated Infants, always used in Scripture for such as suck on their
mothers breast. Secondly, they are said to be brought by their parents, as
unable to bring themselves. Thirdly, Christ took them up in his arms, as not
big enough to kneel down and be blessed, which otherwise was the posture of
striplings upon the same occasion.

That these little children pleased Christ, is proved by his expressions (the
best interpreters of love or hatred in that heart which could not dissemble)
concerning them, Mark 10. 14. Suffer little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God. Of Such, that is not only
of those who are like unto these, (in which sense our Savior might as
significatively have said the same of Doves or Lambs, that the kingdom of
heaven consists of such who are like unto them) but of these, and also of those
who imitate them in their innocential qualities. Such make strange
interpretation of the words, who exclude the Original, and only admit the Copy;
let in such as are like to children, and shut out children themselves from the
kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, The complacency Christ took in these little children appears by his
actions unto them, verse. 16. he took them up in his arms, laid his hands on
them, and blessed them; See we such Infants were in a blessible condition.

Here we distinguish between childrens being sensible of the meaning, and their
being capable of the benefit, by a blessing. Probably some of the smallest
children here presented unto Christ, understood not our Saviors language, nor
the meaning of his gestures, until their parents afterward interpreted the
same unto them as they grew up in years. And yet such Infants might effectually
partake of the vigor, and virtue of Christ's benediction. Thus as many though
by natural defect they never had, or by sickness have lost their Taste, and by
their pallat cannot distinguish betixt sweet, bitter, sharp, sour, etc. (and
consequently take no pleasure or delight in what they eat or drink) yet by the
receiving thereof, may have their hunger and thirst satisfied, and their
strength daily increased; So these Infants purely passive in our Saviors Arms,
brought thither without their knowledge, and blessed there above their
understanding, did nevertheless (some of them no doubt) really participate of
the spiritual comfort which the emphatical blessing of Christ impressed upon
them.

CHAP. XIII. The Fifth Reason drawn from the Malady of Original Corruption.
THe Fifth Reason out of Scripture may thus be contrived; They who are subject
to the malady of sin, ought to partake of the remedy against it; But Infants
are subject to the malady of sin; therefore they ought to partake of baptism the
remedy against it. For the proof of the major or first part thereof, I appeal
amongst Christians, only to the married; amongst the married, only to the
parents of children. These cannot deny it, but that against their wills, as the
unhappy instruments, they have derived corruption to their infants, as conveyed
in the same charter of their being unto them.

If any should be so senseless as to deny Infants infected with Original
Corruption, the contrary will be sadly demonstrated by those several diseases,
and death it self, to which they are subject, before they have or can commit
actual sin. All will confess no suffering can follow but where sin has gone
before, and that Infants deeply share in sufferings, daily experience
approves. Some of them whilst they lie in the Cradle, how lie they on the
rack? Such sighs, such sobs, such gripes, such groans, such convulsions, such
distortions, enough almost to kill the hearts of the beholders, relating unto
them, if all pity be not dead in them before: Nor can all the rending of the
fathers hair, abate the aching of the child's head, nor all the rain of the
mothers tears, allay the wind in the babes body. Quid teneri infantes in te
committere tantum? quid pueri potuere. But these little Lambs wherein have they
offended? Their hands did never hurt others, which could not help themselves:
Their tongues did never lie, swear, etc. which cannot speak; Their feet were
never swift to shed blood which cannot go. All these miseries, and death at
last, falls often, on Infants incapable of actual sin, because of the corruption
of their nature wherein they were born and conceived.

Seeing therefore Infants are subject to the malady of sin, what a cruelty were
it for parents to leave them in this pitiful case neglecting the remedy for
the same? By the Levitical Law, Exodus 21. 33. If a man shall open a pit, and
not cover it, he was to pay the owner for the loss of those his cattle which
fell into it: Parents having opened a pit of original corruption by the
sinfulness of their nature, if they labor not to cover it again, as much as
in them lies, by using the ordinance God has appointed for the same, shall not
the souls of their children, if finally falling into that pit, be heavily
required at their hands? Yea, shall man be careless and cruel, where God has
been so kind and careful in his instituting of Baptism? Romans 6. 3. That we may
be Baptized into Jesus Christ his death, as it follows verse. 6. that the body
of sin may be destroyed, To conclude, Infants having the body of sin as well as
adult persons, and Baptism being appointed for the destruction thereof, such
parents are wanting to their own duty, undervalue Gods ordinance, and are cruel
to the souls of the flesh of their body that deny Baptism unto Infants.

CHAP. XIV. The Sixth Reason, drawn from the constant Practice of Christian
Churches in all Ages; what credit is to be given to a Primitive Custom.
I Shall now be challenged by such, who herein dissent in judgment from me,
for breach of promise, starting from my own principles; that having promised
Reasons out of Scripture, I fly now to Church-Practice, and Ancient Tradition.
Wherefore to vindicate my self, and (which is far more considerable) the Truth
herein, I will first prove by Gods assistance, by Reason out of Scripture, that
the Practice of the Catholic Church, in all Places, and at all Times,
(especially in such matters, wherein nothing appears contrary in Gods Word)
obliges all conscientious Christians to the observation thereof. And in the
next Chapter we will show, that the Baptizing of Infants has been the
uninterrupted Custom of the Church.

Be it premised, that if we look on Customs simply in themselves, we shall
find them generally, like the men of Sodom, not ten good ones, amongst the many
thousands of them. For what is Custom, but the practice of most men time out
of mind. Now seeing most men, yea, all men by Nature, Genesis 6. 5. have the
imaginations of their hearts evil, and that not for a day, week, or year; but,
as the Text says, continually; no wonder if Customs be commonly wicked. Yea,
such errors, and vices, which at the first are soft, and supple, pliable to
Reproof, and sensible of Refutation, contract an hardness, by custom, in
continuance of time; yea, get an incrustation, and such scales over them, that
they become impenetrable to Scripture and Reason brought against them. And as
Lahan deceived plaindealing Jacob, in his Marriage, Genesis 29. 26. by pleading
the custom of the Country, so it is confessed, that too many in all Ages, in
matters both of faith and fact, have alleged Custom to Patronize their
erroneous opinions, and injurious practices.

But all this ought not to beget in us a neglect of such Customs, which like
Melchisedec, are Heb. 7. 3. without father, without mother, without descent;
whose first original cannot be found out; as practiced in the Church, time out
of mind; no remembrance, or record extant to the contrary. Now as Melchisedec,
in the same place, is said to have neither beginning of days, and what
necessarily follows thence, nor end of life; so it is but just and equal that
such Ancient Customs in the Church, which never had memorable Rise, should
never have Fall therein; but that such which probably began at the first,
should constantly be continued till the last coming of our Savior.

Here I plead not for such misshapen Customs, which either run up all in
length, narrow, and slender, which (though long in use) never extended to any
wideness in the Christian World; or else so low, and thick, they only spread in
breadth, (as many Popish Customs, generally, but not anciently used) but never
shot up to the just stature of Primitive Antiquity. We only defend such
wel-grown Customs which I call square ones, (the form of firmness and
stability) whose height and breadth are well proportioned, put in ure by
Christians at all times, and in all places; conceiving we can demonstrate it,
by reason from Scripture, that such Customs must be presumed, grounded on the
word and will of God.

For proof whereof we produce Gods promise, and Lo I am with you always unto
the end of the world, Amen. Mat. 28. 20. Every operative word herein deserves
our serious consideration

I am with you unto the end: I am, A verb of the present, joined with words of
the future tense; to show Gods Instantaneous assistance in every moment of
extremity, Psalm. 46. 1. God is our strength and refuge a very present help in
trouble.

With you: This cannot be meant only of the Disciples personally, none of them
living to the end of the world, seeing John himself, (the surviver of the whole
Jury) died about the year of our Lord* 102. It is therefore meant extensively
of the Disciples, as they were an immortal corporation. With you: Selves, and
successors, persons, and posterity. As Christ: John 17. 20. Did not pray for
these alone, so here he did not promise to these alone; but to them also which
should believe on him through their word.

These words, To be with you, import not only a promise of protecting them from
all dangers, but also of directing them in all doctrines, necessary to be
believed and practiced for their salvation. And this promise being made not so
much to the particular persons, as to the collective body of the Church, is not
so effectually performed to every individual Christian, as to the Universal
Church, which amounts from them all.

We confess that notwithstanding the foresaid promise of protection and
direction, many good men have been guilty of great errors, and have also
fallen by Gods permission, and just punishment of their sins into grievous
dangers. However Divine goodness so doubleth his Files about his Church in
general, that he will not suffer the same to be universally infected in all
Ages with any one dangerous Error. And therefore a Church Custom in all times
and places, must be presumed conformable to the will of God, because were it
erroneous, it were utterly inconsistent with that solemn promise which God has
passed to his Church, to be with them unto the worlds end.

Such who on the contrary side are highly opinioned of their private
Judgments, and will not confide in the Universal Customs of the Church: I
know not whether therein they do show more want of Charity in condemning so
many Christians at once, or plenty of pride in overprizing their own
judgments; or store of profaneness in doubting, yea, denying the performance
of Gods promise so solemnly made of his protecting presence in the Church, who
surely will dispatch and destroy an error therein, before it grow up to be so
long lived as to become a Custom.

What a high valuation S. Paul set on Church Customs, appears by his
expression, 1 Cor. 11. 16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God: For the better understanding
whereof, know that the Corinthians were guilty of an innovation* wherein they
were an exception from the rule of the general practice in all Christian
Churches: The Innovation was this, that their women used to pray uncovered, the
men covered; that is, as it is generally interpreted, the women with short, the
men with long hair. This ill fashion S. Paul confutes with several reasons
drawn from the power of man over his wife, appealing also to natural decency
therein. And at last concludes all with this close; But if any seem to be
contentious, we have no such Custom, nor yet the Churches of God. As if he had
said, could you Corinthians prescribe any custom, that in Gods Churches grave
and godly men and women have prayed as you do, the former covered the latter
uncovered. Then should you allege much in your own justification. But I am
confident on the contrary, that no such custom can be produced, and therefore
your singularity, is condemned by the joint practice of all Gods Churches
against them.

Object. These words, But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God; Import only, that Gods Churches have no
custom to be contentious: Christians ought to be of a quiet and peaceable
mind, and not to delight in vain janglings and dissentions.

Answ. This cannot be the meaning of the words: For was ever man so silly as to
suppose and conceive that Gods Churches should be so irrational as to have a
ridiculous custom of being contentious? The Church is so far from having such
custom (which is a habit resulting from many acts) that it condemns each
single act of causeless contention as wicked and ungodly. Yea, no civilized
estate, though consisting of mere Pagans, ever had any custom to be
contentious, or did ever delight in Barrettors: More then must be meant herein,
that Gods Churches had never any such Custom for the two Sexes so to pray as
the Corinthians did, who herein ran counter to the Universal practice of
Christianity; the Apostle naming Churches in the Plural, which are the single
instruments (as the whole Church is the consort) all of them harmoniously
agreeing in this custom, save only the jarring Corinthians, who are out of
tune by themselves.

If a Church custom carried weight with it in S. Paul's time, when amongst
Christians it could not be above forty years standing; what a reverence is due
to those customs which have continued in Gods Church above sixteen hundred
years, amongst which the Baptizing of Infants is a principal; and if S. Paul's
argument followed negatively, women ought not pray uncovered, because the
Church has no such custom; the consequence is no less strong from the
affirmative, Children ought to be Baptized, because the Church in all ages has
had such a Custom; The proving whereof is the subject of the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. XV. The Antiquity and generallity of Baptizing of Infants, proved by the
confession of Pelagius.
Diverse Learned and Godly Divines, have undertaken, and performed this task, to
prove the constant practice of Infants Baptism in the Primitive Church, by the
induction of the Authorities of several Fathers to that purpose. And as the
Angels in Jacobs Ladder, Genesis 28. 12. Some ascended, others descended upon it;
so in this scale of authorities, some have deduced the practice downwards from
Christ's time to our days; others by an inverted method have raised it upwards
from our days to Christ's time, both by different motions meeting in the same
point.

It is our hap, like Ahimaaz, to be sent last on the same errand: the proof of
this point. And although far be such arrogance from me as to hope with him to
come first to our journeys end (and to do better then my betters have done
before me) yet thus far will I follow the example of Ahimaaz, 2 Samuel 18. 23. To
run by the way of the plain. Having to deal with people who generally are
unlearned, and therefore the heaping of Quotations in unknown tongues, were
probable to offend, and incense, rather then to edify and inform them, we will
embrace the plainest way to make the Baptizing of Infants appear an Ancient and
general Church Custom unto them.

This will be proved by the confession of Pelagius, when first we have given an
account to the Reader what he was, when, and where he lived, and what opinions
he maintained.

He was a Britan by birth, flourishing about the year of our Lord four hundred
and ten; a man of great learning, and greater parts, had the same been
sanctified unto him.

In the time of this Pelagius, only three parts of the world were known,
Europe, Asia, and Africa; all which were traced with the feet of Pelagius, who
though born in a corner of the World, quickly quitted his native soil, and
enriched himself with the experience of Church-practice in all parts.

In Europe where he was born in Britain, and where he lived a long time in
Augustine Epist. 95.
Rome it self, gaining there great acquaintance with Ruffinus) which may pass
for the Epitome of the then Christian world. Asia, where in the Island of
Rhodes, or thereabouts, he first scattered his dangerous Doctrine. Afterward
he went to Augustine Epist. 92.
Jerusalem. Africa, where for some times he continued in Egypt, working
himself into the familiarity of the learned men therein.


Yea, it is laid to the charge of Pelagius, that to disperse his poisonous
opinions with the more advantage, saepius mutavit loca, he often purposely
changed the place of his habitation.

Amongst the many dangerous doctrines which Pelagius maintained, we will insist
on that alone; the confutation whereof, makes mainly for our present purpose.
He defended that Infants were conceived and born without original sin, which
came unto them (when growing in years) not from an inward principal of
corruption, but from their imitation of outward ill examples presented unto
them. S. Augustine undertakes his confutation, and amongst many other solid
Arguments to that purpose, principally insisteth upon this, that it was the
custom of the Church in all ages to Baptize Infants; which plainly proves that
they were conceived in original sin. For that which is clean needs not to be
washed.

This Argument is often inculcated by S. Austin in several places, as namely in
his 150 Epistle unto Sixtus.

Likewise in his second book of Marriage and concupiscence, in the eighteenth
chapter.

Likewise in his four books to Bonifacius, and every where in his six books
against Julian, one of Pelagius his scholars.

Likewise in his first book of imperfect work against the same, chapter 48. 54.
and 115.

Lastly, in his second book of imperfect work, chapter 120. and 180. To spare
making more instances, the matter being notoriously known to any, who have the
least skill in the works of that worthy Father.

Now how easy had it been for Pelagius to answer this argument, by denying
childrens Baptism to be a Church custom, had not his conscience been convinced
of the truth thereof: How might he have rejoyned, Original sin cannot be proved
from the Baptizing of Infants, which is but a modern custom, and an innovation
in the Church of God. What the Sodomites said of Lot, Genesis 19. 9. This one
fellow came in to sojourn and will he needs be a judge? may be said of Infants
Baptism: This custom is new and novel, lately crept into the Chuch (as yet
rather a sojourner, then an inhabitant therein) and must this regulate matters
in a judicial way, so that arguments must be deduced from the same? Besides, I
have been a Traveller, and have conversed with most Churches in Christendom,
being born in Britain (a little world by it self;) I have been in the great
world abroad: Jew and Gentile, East and Western Churches have I observed:
Jerusalem that was, and Rome which is, so eminent for Religion, are places
wherein I am well acquainted. This I know some Churches observe, others
neglect, some use, others slight the Baptising of Infants. Nor can it be
accounted a general custom of the Church which is but local, and partial, in a
word, both NEW and NARROW, as neither coming down from Christ, nor extended
over all Christendom.

But Pelagius endeavored to evade S. Austins argument by another device;
namely, by pleading that Baptism was admitted to Infants, not to wash away
their Original sin, but to bring them to the kingdom of heaven. A fancy which
he was the first, and (he and his) the last to maintain it.

The result of all is this; Seeing Pelagius was so great a scholar, knowing
full well how to manage a bad cause to its best advantage; and seeing he was so
great a Traveller, who had not eat his bread all in one place, but had roved up
and down to know the customs of the Church, and yet feeing by his silence
(urging nothing against it) and by his shifting (seeking otherwise to evade it)
he acknowledges the truth of Infants Baptism; we conclude the same in his days
received for an Ancient and Universal practice of the Church. For why should he
adventure the breaking of his bones, (or at leastwise the bruising of his
flesh) by leaping out of the window, who has a wide door set open unto him?
Why should he make so poor and pitiful, so base and beggarly an escape, to
avoid S. Austins argument against him (by forming a frivolous fancy of his own)
who had a full, free, and fair passage at pleasure to go forth, durst he but
have denied the Baptizing of Infants to have been a general Church custom in
his time?

To conclude this point, the argument of Jephthah to the King of Ammon,
carries great weight therewith, Judge. 11. 26. proving Isreal's right to the
Land which they possessed, and the Ammonites pretended unto: When Israel dwelt in
Heshbon, and her towns, and in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that
be along by the coas^s of A^^on three hundred years, why there fore did ye not
recover them within that time?

In like manner may we urge it against the adversaries of childrens Baptism. If
the Ancient Church conceived the Baptizing of Infants an usurpation, and
incroachment, injurious and unlawful, why did not the Church of God in so long
a time cast out the custom which made so unjust an invasion therein? For S.
Austin lived about the fifth Century after Christ* when Pedo-baptism was in a
peaceable passission of Church practice, and Pelagius himself (sufficiently
impudent) was so modest and ingenious not to deny the same, though such a
denial had conduced much to his own advantage.

I have done, when I have told the Reader that S. Austin brought the Baptizing
of Infants as an argument to prove Original sin; and in our age (wherein
Original sin is on ought to be granted by all) we allege the same as a reason
to prove the necessity of Infants Baptism; and surely so solid is the argument
reciprocally, that both may be firmly grounded on the same.

CHAP. XVI. The Grand Objection, drawn from the silence of Scripture herein,
Answered.
OUr Adversaries in this point, gain not a greater advantage against us amongst
common people, then by urging of that, which indeed we confess, no literal
precept or practice for Pedo-baptism in Scripture. By popular improving of
which argument, they not only gain to themselves the reputation of a strict
adherence to the Word, and will of God, but also asperse us with the dangerous
imputation of will worship, and Popish inclinations.

Yea, which is more, they threaten us with a curse pronounced, Rev. 22. 18. If
any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that
are written in this book.

In Answer whereunto; In the first place we request our Adversaries to
remember, that this place by them cited out of the Revelation, like a two edged
sword, cuts on both sides; for it follows immediately, And if any shall take
away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part
out of the book of life. See here a curse incurred, as well by the defect, as
the excess. And be it reported to our opposites in this point, whether denying
such consequences, which infallibly flow from Scripture, be not taking away
from the words, as well as mutilating, or abstracting the numerical words from
the same.

More particularly I answer; Baptizing of Infants appears not to such who only
read the Scripture, but is plainly visible to those who also search the
Scriptures, (which John 5. 39. is the duty of all judicious Christians) as by
reasons out of Scripture we have made it to appear.

Here will it not be amiss to mind our adversaries in this point, that they
account themselves concerned in conscience to believe and practice many things
as necessary to salvation, which notwithstanding are built on the same
foundation with the Baptism of Infants, namely not on the express letter of
Scripture, but undeniable consequences arising from the same.

But I conceive such instancing, though lawful yet not expedient, in this
unhappy juncture of time, lest Satan get an advantage over us, for we are not
ignorant of his devices; and lest such instancing, though intentionally good in
us, prove occasionally evil to others, by casting scruples into men's
consciences who are quiet, for the present. There needs more allaying of old,
then raising of new jealousies in divinity, more needful to settle, then
scatter men's belief, in our days, wherein so many deniers, and more doubters,
in most Articles of Faith.

Indeed the words of the wise, Eccles. 12. 11. are as goads or as nails
fastened by the masters of the assemblies; But such builders must be wary, lest
whilst they fasten one nail they do not loosen another.

However to prove this point, I will embrace a way, as sure to clear the
matter, and more safe, not having any dangerous influence on the times. This
may be done by removing the instance, from our age; and fixing the same in the
time of Gods Church amongst the Jews* Now none will deny but that will worship,
or adding to Gods Word, and his Service, was as utterly unlawful amongst them,
as amongst us Christians; Yet the most religious amongst them, used that as
their bounden duty, and necessary to Gods service which has no original
expressly in the word of God.

For proof hereof, we shall offer three things to the readers consideration.

1. Repairing to Synagogues amongst the Jews, was a necessary part of Gods
service.

2. The same was not grounded on any express of Scripture.

3. But consequentially on several places, prudentially joined together.

For the first, It plainly appears by Christ's constant practice, Luke 4. 16.
And as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day. As sure
as a seventh day returned every week, so certainly did our Savior visit the
synagogue. It is also evident by the continual custom of all pious Jews, Acts
15. 21. For Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, being
read in the synagogues every sabbath day. To destroy these synagogues was
accounted a wicked work, witness Gods servants their passionate complaint,
Psalm. 74. 8.

And again, to erect them was an acceptible act, alleged by the Pharisees as
an argument to endeer the Centurion unto our Savior, Mat. 8. he loves our
nation and has built us a synagogue. Lastly, it was esteemed a heavy
punishment, equivalent to our excommunication, John 9. 2^. to be put out of the
synagogue.

Yet repairing to synagogues, or the erecting of them was not founded on any
positive precept in Gods word. Indeed the Tabernacle, and afterward the Temple,
were of Divine institution where all males were commanded to present themselves
thrice a year; namely at the Passover, the feast of Trumpets, and Tabernaclos.
But these synagogues (which I may term Chapels of ease, to the mother-Temple)
no written law obliged men either to the founding or frequenting of them.

Yet that the same was grounded on rational deductions from Scripture, may
infallibly be evinced. The text says, Exodus 20. Remember thou keep holy the
sabbath day. And reason dictated unto them; First, that peoples presence at
public service was a principal part of sanctifying the sabbath. Secondly, that
it was impossible for them to repair to the Temple, and return to their houses,
such their distance betwixt them. Thirdly, therefore it was necessary some room
of receipt should be provided, sequestered from common uses, wherein people
should meet together. Lastly, another text affirming, That the Priests lips
should preserve knowledge. It was proper for them, and the Levites dispersed in
all Israel, on the sabbath, in the synagogue, to read Moses to the people. Thus
we find the first foundation of synagagues, not on the floating sands of humane
fancy, but firm rock of Gods Word; Though not directly, yet by consequence
collected from the same.

In a word, as chambers and houses were for men's personal and family devotions,
every day, or as often as they pleased, and as the Temple was for the national
service of the Jews, thrice every year, so Synagogues were interposed in the
middle betwixt both; for Towns and Cities to serve God on the Sabbath day: the
whole nation meeting thrice a year, every City once a week, as private persons
every day, and as often as they pleased.

Suppose now that a Priest amongst the Jews, should press an obstinate Jew to
repair to the Synagogue, how might he have returned this answer according to
the Principles of our Anti-pedo-baptists? I will go up to the Temple thrice
every year, and there I will not appear empty-handed: But I will not on the
sabbath present my self in the Synagogue, which meeting is not JURE DIVINO, a
mere civil institution, groundless on Gods word; show me a place of Scripture
injoyning my attendance in a Synagogue, and I will become your convert; Till
which time I will not only my self refrain my appearance there, but will also
account it wilworship, in all such as there assemble themselves.

I believe not one of our Adversaries, in our present Controversy, which are
ingenuous, but will condemn such a recusant, amongst the Jews, for refractory
and obstinate: Yea, they will conceive him, if persisting herein, to deserve
Church-censure, for his schismatical singularity. Yet give me leave with love,
grief, and anger to say unto him, as once Nathan to David, thou art the man, in
denying Infants Baptism, which (though not in so many words expressed) is by
necessary consequence infallibly founded on Gods Word.

Now although I freely confess, no litteral precedent of Pedo-baptism in
Scripture, yet such an one therein is presented unto us, which although it will
not confute our opposites, it will confirm us in our judgments; and though it
be not able, Titus 1. 9. to convince the gainsayers, yet it will strengthen us
in the Truth: When the principal is known of him self to be sufficient, any
security with him will be accepted, and the following instance may be cast in,
as over-weight, to such minds, who already have their full measure of
persuasion in this point.

Namely, when it is said, Acts 16. 15. Lydia was Baptized and her household: And
again, Acts 16. 33. of the Jailer, was baptized, he, and all his, straight way.
Also 1 Cor. 1. 16. I baptized also the household of Stephanas.

For the Jailer; That Children (if he had any) were comprised under the
expression, of all his, is sufficiently known by Satan's interpretation, Job. 1.
12. of Gods commission, Behold all that he has is in thy power; and Gods
consenting thereunto, when permitting him by virtue thereof, to destroy all
Jobs children. And whereas in the other two instances, the baptizing of whole
households are expressed, we must rationally conceive that some infants were
amongst them.

I must confess I can tell the time, when there were three households of young
folk in the world (and then but three households of young folk in the world)
namely, the three sons of Noah, and his daughters in law in the Ark, and yet
not one Infant betwixt them all. But this was a rare and mystical accident:
Again to hold the balance even, I can tell the time when in a large Country
every famil^ offered a firstborn, namely in Egypt, Exodus 12. 3. There was not
a house where there was not one dead. Which S. Austin accounts miraculous, God
purposely making every family fruitful, that it might yield a fit object for
his own justice.

But to wave these instances of extraordinary dispensation; take three houses
together, indifferently numerous, such as those of Lydia, the Jailer, and
Stephanas must be presumed to be, (considering the garb of that age, wherein
most of men's moveable wealth consisted in men and maid servants, with the
children begotten by them) and it is utterly improbable but some infants will
be amongst them. For a great family is like unto an Orange tree, which at the
same time has buds and blossoms and knobs, and green and half ripe, and full
ripe Orenges on it all together. I mean, infants, children, striplings, youths,
men of perfect, reduced, decayed ages.

CHAP. XVII. An Objection Answered, drawn from the inability of Infants to
repent and believe.
ALthough we conceive this formerly satisfied, yet finding it to recur in our
proceedings, we will repeat something in our larger Answer thereunto. We
perceive many men infidels in the point of infants faith, and do not believe
that they do or can believe; whose distrust is principally grounded on these
two causes; partly because infants cannot evidence their believing to others,
partly because men cannot conceive the manner of infants belief.

To the first of these we say, it is injurious to conclude infants incapable of
believing, because they cannot manifest it to others. On the same account, and
with as much truth and right, one might deny reasonable souls to infants,
because they neither do nor can make any expression thereof.

Let matters be measured by outward appearance, and the young ones of bruit
beasts, seem more rational, (though indeed it be but natural instinct in them)
then any child whatsoever. A Lamb new weaned, and Chicken new hatched, know
their Dam, can stand, go, do many things in order to their self-preservation
better then a newborn infant, and yet no wise man will pronounce them more
reasonable then a child.

Yea, give me leave a little here to make an useful digression.

There is no one mistake which has betrayed men's judgments to more absurdities,
in the points of Circumcision and Baptism, then a misapprehension in making the
body the standard of the soul, and measuring the same by the proportion
thereof. I am afraid there be too many, who conceive souls like the pipes in an
Organ, some longer, some shorter, some lesser, some larger; and fancy degrees
of their dimensions, variable with their ages. So that a newborn infant should
have a small soul, a weaned child a soul somewhat greater, and so successively,
that the souls of boys, youths* striplings, men, should gradually exceed one
another in greatness.

Yea, I am afraid, that some do farther extend this their false apprehension,
even to imagine, that at the last day of Judgment, the souls of such who died
in their infancy shall appear before Gods Tribunal, little diminutive Spirits.
This conceit makes men behold infants with disdainful eyes, accounting them but
Ciphers, which signify but little in nature, and nothing in Religion. To
rectify their erroneous judgments, let them know, that all reasonable souls
as created by God, and first infused into bodies, are equal in their essence;
and that something extrinsical and adventitious, causes that grand disparity
betwixt souls in their natural, moral, and supernatural operations.

1. In their natural, as the wise man, and the fool are equal in their death,
Eccles. 2. 16. so also in their birth, not only in the manner thereof* but in
this respect of an adequation of all the essentials of their souls. The
different tempers of their brains, and more or less perfect fabric of their
bodies, differenceth them in their actions, who in their beings are alike.

2. In their moral. That which makes the difference betwixt them is this*
First, education bestowed on one more then another, whereby he arrives at a
perfection above his equals. Secondly, Habits of virtues or vices, which one
has acquired more or less then the other.

3. In their supernatural. Only the distinction arises from infused graces,
more plentifully conferred on one then another, and from the holy improvement
thereof, which one, frugal in goodness, makes above him which is an unthrift
therein.

Thus the species, or kind with all specifical perfections, are not partial to
one individuum, to make that a favorite more then another, but all
indifferently partake thereof: And as amongst the Israelites, Exodus 16. 18. all
had their just omer of manna; so the man, yea the giant, has no more of the
reasonable soul then the Dwarf or the Infant, all share alike in the essence
thereof.

The same may be said of the souls of Children and men. The essentials of a
child's soul are as large and ample to all purposes and intents, as that of a
man. The housekeeper is the same, though pent for rooms he cannot make the like
entertainment.

Indeed we read, Rev. 20. 12. I saw the dead, great and small, stand before
God: and the books were open, etc. But the inequality there, relates not unto
their souls and the essences thereof, but to their conditions wherein they were
estated when alive, Psalm. 49. 2. Low and high, rich and poor together.

What matters it then, though Children cannot discover, and though men cannot
perceive their belief? It follows not but that God may see, what a child is not
sensible of in it self nor others in it. God judges not as man judges, nor
does he see as man sees. Man only beholds the outside of childrens
operations, laden with defects arising from their bodily indisposition; Gods
sees the heart, and (what mainly moves therein) the soul, and (age being
meetly circumstantial and accidental thereunto) it makes no odds at all in
Gods discovery therein, who can see in them that belief, which we cannot
behold.

But suppose the worst that Infants neither do nor can believe, yet this cannot
be a bar to their Covenanting in Baptism, no more then it was to the Jewish
children in Circumcision. Their tender age knew not what a Covenant with God
meant. Nor had they feeling how thereby they were engaged to keep the Law; Nor
understood what did belong to the inward Circumcision of the heart, yet were
vouchsafed to be foederati cum Deo; So it can be no bar to the children of
Christian parents to receive a seal of covenantship with Christ, albeit they at
that time want reason to know the nature of a Covenant, nor how they put on
Christ, nor what it is to believe, and to be washed clean from sin. There is no
more absurdity or inconsequence upon one then the other.

CHAP. XVIII. Other Objections Answered.
THe Grand Objections thus cleared, such as remain will be easily satisfied, as
follows.

Object. It is pride and presumption for any to account themselves fitter and
forwarder for Baptism, then Christ himself was. Now Christ himself was not
Baptized, Luke 3. 23. till he began to be about thirty years of Age, none ought
therefore to prevent that date of time in their Baptism.

Answ. Though Christ was not baptized till thirty years of Age, remember he was
circumcised, Luke 2. 21. on the eighth day. Secondly, Christ was not Baptized
out of necessity, (needing no soul-physick, who had no soul-sicknesse) but a
voluntary design to Baptize baptism, and to give a sovereign virtue thereunto.
Thirdly, Many of Christ's actions were for our instruction, not imitation.
Christ presently after his Baptism fasted forty days, and forty nights, which
the urgers of this argument will not pretend unto.

Discover we here a corruption too rife in all our hearts: Such is the
frowardness of our crosse-grain'd nature, that we lazily stand still and
admire such actions of Christ, which we ought to follow, and vainly strive to
follow those his actions which we ought to admire. Oh that we all would learn
of him, Mat. 11. 29. to be meek and lowly of heart, to think more humbly of our
selves, and more charitably of others; I say would we could learn this thing of
Christ, and leave such things to Christ, which were personal in him, and not
precedential to us.

Object. Had Christ in his judgment, allowed, and approved the baptizing of
Infants, surely he would have baptized such children, which, Mark 10. were
brought unto him, whereas his omission thereof, plainly argues Christ's
disaffection to the same.

Answ. Christ in his own person Baptized none at all, as we read, John 4. 2. an
office improper for him to perform. How unfit had it been for our Savior thus
to Baptize those Infants, I Jesus Baptize this Infant into the Name of Jesus?
If S. Paul accounted it beneath his place to Baptize, 1 Cor. 1. 17. For Christ
sent me not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel: How much was the ministration
thereof too mean for our Savior? Indeed Christ came in all humility, to be a
pattern of patience unto us, and condescended to mean employments, as ( John
13. 5.) the washing of his Disciples feet; yet always he observed, (though not
state) decency in all his actions, and stood much, though not on the pomp, on
the propriety of what he performed; as here in his declining to Baptize any.
When a Lord has signed a Letter with his own hand, it is usual with him to
consign the sealing thereof to his Secretary or some other servant; so when
Christ had instituted Baptism, and with his own hand confirmed the sovereign
virtue of that Sacrament, it well befitted his dignity to command, and his
disciples duty to perform the administration thereof.

Object. Grant that Christ, for the reasons by you alleged, concluded it
unfitting for himself to Baptize those Infants, yet had he approved
Pedo-baptism in his own judgment, he would have designed some of his Disciples
for the doing thereof. This not done, we may infallibly infer his dislike of
the same.

Answ. A negative argument of this nature is of no validity. No mention is made
of these Infants Baptizing. Ergo, they were not Baptized: we may observe a
gradation in the Evangelists relating this story, Luke 18. 17. mentions their
blessing only without any manner of gesture at all used by our Savior unto
them. Mat. 19. 15. only takes notice that Christ laid his hands on them, and
departed thence, Mark 10. 16. registreth all three remarkable actions, He took
them up in his arms, laid his hands on them, and blessed them; Saint John
adds, chap. 21. 21. And there are also many other things which Jesus did,
which are not written, amongst which for ought appears to the contrary, the
Baptizing of these infants might be one of them. However grant they were not
formally and solemnly Baptized, yet we may observe Baptism consists of two
parts, the application of water, which we may call the body, and the impression
of the blessing, which we may term the soul of Baptism. The later which indeed
was the principal, was here conferred on babes, which shows them capable of the
other, as being the less Spiritual part of the Sacrament.

Object. Sacraments ought not to be prostituted to profane persons, Mat. 7. 6.
cast not pearls before swine; But many Infants are impious and profane,
therefore they ought not to be Baptized.

Answ. This Objection may with equal advantage, be also enforced against the
Baptizing of men arrived at years of discretion, many of them are profane in
their hearts, though they cunningly dissemble the same. Hypocrites will never
be kept out of the Church; Be the doors thereof barred and bolted never so
close, they will creep in at the windows; yea, through the chinks and crevesses
thereof: As for Infants, Baptism ought to be denied unto them if they
manifested any profaneness: Till which time charity commands us to believe
them not Swine, but Lambs, and capable of the Sacrament.

Object. Children are unable to discharge an essential requisite to Baptism:
Seeing what equipage Baptism is martialled by Christ's own Commission, Mat. 28.
19, 20.

1. Go ye therefore and teach all Nations.

2. Baptizing in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,
etc.

3. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.

Here we have the safe and sure position of Baptism as God himself ordered it:
It is placed in the middle betwixt adouble teaching, one in the front, and
another in the rear thereof; a precedent teaching must usher in Baptism, and
the subsequent teaching must afterward wait upon it; Children therefore being
incapable of this praevious and preparative teaching are incapable also of
Baptism which depends thereupon.

Answ. The method prescribed here by Christ to his Apostles, was only to be
used by them in their preaching to pure Pagans grown up to be men, and this
their commission properly extended unto the Gentiles, (...).

(...), Going therefare, that is in due time leaving this land of Palestine,
(wherein you live for the present) when you shall be accomplished with the
Spirit, make your progress into far distant parts, and there teach.

(...), All Nations, the word properly importing Heathens formerly unacquainted
with God and his word. Such people must first be taught before they may be
Baptized.

This text therefore may justly be charged against the Papists in America,
where thousands of Natives were cruelly driven with whips to the Font to be
baptized, before they were ever Catechized in any rudiments of Christian
Religion, but cannot at all be objected against the baptizing of infants, the
children of Christian parents; the teaching of Heathen (and those of full age)
being only intended in this command.

Thus have we given the true and genuine sense of these words, Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations baptizing them, etc. However we will not omit another
interpretation which godly Divines give thereof, consonant to Scripture phrase.
They render the word (...), make disciples, in which sense they maintain that
infants are capable of disciple-ship, and may be inlisted therein. For proof
hereof they produce Acts 15. 10. why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck
of the disciples. Now this yoke was Circumcision, which some stickled so
zealously for, and these disciples were infants eight days old on whom that
Sacrament was fastened. In this sense children may be taught, that is,
discipled before baptism, and so the text nothing favoring the purpose of the
objectors, though I rather adhere to the former answer, as most proper to the
text.

Here will it be seasonable to interpose an admonition to parents. You see in
Christ's commission to his Disciples, the Divine method in dispensation of
ordinances to Ethnicks: 1. Teach. 2. Baptize. 3. And Teach. But toward the
children of Christian parents, it is, 1. Baptize. 2. Teach and teach. What is
wanting in the precedent, Teach, let it be supplied over and above in the
consequent Teach, to make amends for the preparatory Teach, before baptism
(whereof infants age is incapable) let there be a duplicate, double your
endeavors in the confirming Teach, so soon as they shall be able to learn. Line
upon line, Precept upon precept* here a little, and there a little, dropping in
instruction as the vessel is able to receive.

(...) in Scripture, (as we have formerly observed (always signifies a sucking
child: Now it is said of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15. that (...) from a child he had
known the holy Scriptures* Not when a child, but from a child. Infancy was the
terminus a quo, from whence his learning of Scripture bears date: How timely
did he start in the race of Religion, by the direction of his devout parents,
who herein may be exemplary unto all others.

Now let parents think to cast off their care on those who are Sponsores or
Susceptores, Godfathers to their children: as I deny not an ancient and useful
institution of them in the Primitive times, so can I not but bemoan, that our
age has turned the same into a formality or Christian complement: Judah said
to Simeon, Judge. 1. ^. Come up with me into my lot, and I likewise will go up
with thee into thy lot; So men exchange and barter this office betwixt them,
answer thou for my child to day, and I on like occasion will answer for thine,
the civility is discharged by both, when the christianity too often is performed
by neither: I look therefore on Godfathers generally, as on brass Andirons,
standing more for sight then service, ornament, then use, whiles the main
weight and stresse in performing the promise, must lie on the parents
themselves do discharge, in teaching and teaching their Baptized Infants.

Object. The deaf and dumb are not to be admitted to Baptism, though adult and
full grown, because of their inability to give an account of their faith: But
children are ranked in the same form with the deaf and dumb, therefore they
ought not to be admitted unto Baptism: This is the thirty sixth* and last
argument, (amongst many frivolous ones) alleged by the Transilvanian
Anabaptists, against the baptizing of infants, placing, belike, much confidence
therein, to hem and conclude all the rest.

Answ. Both propositions are false: First, If the dumb and deaf can with signs
and gestures (which nature has made in them marvelously expressive) evidence
and testify their faith, they must be admitted to Baptism, as the third
Council of Carthage did decide. Secondly, Children are not in the same, but a
better condition: Those Mutes after maturity, can never recover their hearing
and speech but by miracle, whereas Infants naturally are capable of both in due
season.

We read Mark 7. 32. that they brought one to our Savior that was deaf, and
had an impediment in his speech, not that he was only troubled with a lisping,
or stamering, but that he was directly dumb, as appears by the peoples
acclamations, verse. 37. when the miracle was wrought upon him, he makes both
the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak; and generally those infirmities are
twins, going both together; yet Christ discovered in him a sufficiency of
faith, such as he was pleased to accept for his bodily cure.

How more comfortably then may Christian parents presume that God will
graciously behold their Infants, who though deaf (that is not hearing to
understand) and dumb, not able to speak, may in process of time arrive to the
use of both. That God I say, who when with a favorable eye he looks for
goodness in any heart, finds and fixes it there by his favorable looking
for it.

Besides, such persons defective in their senses, (though full in age) may,
ponere obicem, by their prave dispositions put a bar or obstacle, wilfully to
defeat the effect of Baptism, and their right thereunto.

This cannot be done by infants; their very worst enemies who deny them actual
faith, yea, any dispositive degree thereunto, dare not charge them with what I
may term positive infidelity. As for original sin, that can be no bar, because
Baptism was designed by God for the washing away thereof.

God is no Mountebank, his receipts do the deed for which they were prescribed:
Indeed if the patient, (besides that disease for the cure whereof Gods receipt
is given him) shall by his own intemperance wilfully contract a new malady, no
wonder if this Physic fall short of the cure for which it was intended; But
infants, not being able to draw on themselves any other sin, we cannot but in
charity believe their undoubted right unto, and benefit by baptism.

CHAP. XIX. Whether the Children of Profane Parents, Bastards, Exposed
Children, and the Captive Infants of Pagans are to be Baptized.
SOme maintain that infancy alone, is the requisite to qualify Infants to be
Baptized: Others upon just grounds conceive a choice must be made of the
infants admitted thereunto, and those most scrupled at, fall under the
following Quaternion.

The first are the Children of Profane Parents, living within the pale of the
Church, such as I may sorrowfully term Pagan Christians; Christians by their
profession; Pagans by their notorious visible debauched conversation: Otherwise
I confess the words pious and profane in our modern Religious Canting, made by
many words of party and interest, to cry up or decry such who in private
opinions, or civil concernments agree with, or dissent from them; The question
is if such profane Parents alone tender their children to baptism, and desire
the same, whether or no ought they to be admitted thereunto? I say alone, for
if a good Grandfather or Grandmother (the mediate Parent) survive, conjoyn
with them in such a tender, the case is sufficiently clear, that Baptism cannot
be denied unto it.

I answer. If any one, related as kindred or friend to this child, will
undertake conditionally ( viz. if he himself live, and God bless his
endeavors, farther then which, parents themselves ought not to promise and
cannot perform) for the education thereof, as Judah in another case, for the
bringing up of his brother Benjamin out of Egypt, Genesis 43. 9. I will be surety
for him, at my hands shall thou require him, baptism ought not to be denied
unto it.

Quest. But suppose such an undertaker cannot be found, seeing he who hates
[especially Spiritual] suretiship is sure, Prove. 11. 15. and one may justly
suspect according to the proverb, Ezekiel. 16. 44. As is the mother, so is the
daughter; that such a child will follow the vicious examples and dispositions
of his parents.

Answ. Here I desire the Reader to call to mind (to spare my repetition
thereof) what formerly Chap. 4. we have written of wicked men's sharing in the
foederal right to Circumcision. Let him also consider the Apostles words, Romans
11. 16. If the root be holy so are the branches. Now the root we know is under
ground, and unseen; and, although the immediate parents be bad, yet charity
commands us to believe, that, some generations removed, the ancestors of this
child (whom Divine Providence appointing the bounds of habitation, Acts 17. 26.
would have born within the pale of the Church) might be holy and religious. We
have a saying, Every beggar is descended from some King, and every King is
descended from some beggar. Truer it is, that (if the pedegrees of people were
strictly examined) every pious person is extracted from some profane, and every
profane from some pious ancestor; a motive in my opinion not to deny baptism to
the child of bad parents if desiring the same. Pass we from them to Bastards,
against whose baptizing some object.

Object. Bastards amongst the Jews were not to be Circumcised, which may thus
be proved: It was fashionable for the mother at her purification, to present
her Circumcised son in the Temple to the Lord, as may appear by the example of
the Virgin Mary Luke 2. 22. But Bastards, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. were forbidden entrance
into the congregation, unto the tenth generation: Therefore they were not
Circumcised.

Answ. By the not entering into the congregation of the Lord, is meant, munus
publicum in populo Dei ne gerito; let him not bear office in the people of God.
Indeed Jephthah, though the son of an harlot, Judge. 11. 2. was chosen a
General, because necessity constrained it; and Military offices; (where valor
alone was a sufficient qualification) were not confined to the regularity
requisite to religious employments: Otherwise certain it is, first, that
wantonness in this kind was too frequent amongst the Jews; our common
expression to commit folly with a woman, being borrowed from Thamars words to
Amnon, 2. Sam. 13. 12. do not thou this folly. Secondly, that bastards so
begotten, were excluded Circumcision, is what no wise or learned author durst
ever affirm.

More particularly: If the parents of bastards publicly profess their
penitence to the congregation, they are remitted to the same estate they were
in before the fault committed, and their children to be held as of unstained
extraction. Far be it from me to scatter any thing, which may occasion the
least countenance to wantonness in any. What said the rest of the Israelites,
to the Reubenites? Josh. 22. 17. Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us,
from which we are not cleansed until this day? that they should contract (as
they suspected) the guilt of a new idolatry. Is original sin too little to
condemn a child, but that parents must double-hatch their children with guilt
of their adulterous nativity? However, for the comfort of the penitent, know
that only four females are mentioned in our Saviors pedigree, and all of them
stigmatized. 1. Thamar incestuous. 2. Rahab an harlot. 3. Ruth a Moabitesse
(and therefore a dog, no sheep of Israel:) And 4ly the wife of Vriah, certainly
an adulteress, and too probably privy to the murder of her husband. Thus
Christ came, as for sinners, so from sinners, and those noted ones, for
uncleanness, whose children notwithstanding were undoubtedly Circumcised. As
no bar of bastardy can bolt out an infants right to the Sacrament, nor his
benefit, by it if God will have it enter therein. Proceed we from these, to
exposed children, left on bulkes and benches by their parents deserting them,
whose title to baptism seems doubtful, and difficult to many on this account.

Object. The Children of those who are worse then infidels may not be baptized.
But the parents of these children are worse then infidels, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
because, not providing for them of their own house. Therefore they ought not to
be baptized.

Answ. Such who out of carelessness or cruelty, wilfully refuse to maintain
their own, are in this particular act morally worse then infidels (of whom many
high Christians fall short in civil performances;) yea, worse then birds, and
beasts, which hatch, and suckle their own young ones. Yet they are not in a
spiritual capacity worse then infidels, as if thereby they had forfeited their
Sacramental right for them, and theirs. Besides, charity herein commands us to
presume the best. That these parents are not with the Ostrich, hardened against
their young ones, as though they were not theirs; but that there being a long
combat betwixt their industry, and poverty, the latter at last got the
conquest; and they thereby forced to leave their children to a general
providence. An act which may rather be in some sort excused, then defended;
yea, the cause thereof rather pitied, then the deed it self in any sort
excused.

Say not, such poor parents, overburthened with charge of children, ought to
complain to the officers of ^^^ Church, who (no doubt) on the discovery of
their sad condition, would order their relief. Yea, it is suspicious the cause
of their poverty is not excusable, whose pride is so damnable, that they would
not seasonably confess the same to such, who might, and ought to be helpful
unto them. All this is confessed, with many more grains of guilt, which might
be cast into the scale of the parents; but of no weight on the other side,
against the children, and therefore ought not to hinder their baptism, I mean
conditionally, in case they were formerly baptized. Here I will not instance in
exposed children, who afterward have proved eminent instruments of Gods glory
in the Church and Commonwealth; so that, Psalm. 27. 10. when their father and
mother forsook them, then the Lord took them up; yea, advanced them to high
preferment: I say, I purposely forbear such instancing, lest the remembrance of
the meannesse of their original, should any whit abate our deserved respect
unto their memories.

It is fashionable in such cases (especially in popular places) for the whole
parish to be loco parentis, and to be interpreted as the parent, for the
education of such exposed children. For my own part I had rather bring oil to,
then cast water on any charitable design. Yet give me leave, only to admonish
such to take heed, that that be not neglected of all, which is expected of
many. It is the argument urged by Aristotle against Plato's fancy, that all
children should be brought up by the care, and at the cost general of all
alike, that what is every man's work is no man's work; and it is to be feared,
the catechizing, and instructing such children, will not effectually be done by
any, where all are equally engaged unto it, except some be eminently and
particularly designed for the same.

Children of Pagans remain, taken from them when infants: What the opinion of
the Ancients was herein, we may learn from Fulgentius, De Veritate praedest.
lib. 1. who says, Parvulum parentibus infidelibus violenter ablatum, aut furto
surreptum, si ad sanctum baptismum quorumlibet Sanctorum pia charitate
producatur, and mox ut baptizatus fuerit de hac vita discedat, factum esse
haeredem Dei, and cohaeredem Christi. That a little child violently taken, or
secretly stolen from infidel parents; if by the pious charity of any Saints, it
be brought to holy baptism, and by and by so soon as it has been baptized
depart this life, is made the heir of God, and coheir of Christ.

However, because some may think this goes too far, and that a difference ought
to be made betwixt children of Christian parents, who have (as Tertullian
phraseth it) Seminis praerogativam, The privilege of the seed whence they
spring; and those of mere Heathens: And because all things ought to be done in
the Church, decently and in order; it is fittest and safest, that the baptizing
of such infants be deferred, till they be able in their own persons to give an
account of their faith. Such cautious deferring of the Sacrament, offers no
injury, nor occasioneth any danger unto them, but will tend at last to their
greater advantage.

When Mr Cranmer, (after Archbishop of Canterbury and Martyr) was appointed in
Cambridge, Poser extraordinary of the sufficiency of such who Commenced in
Divinity; he denied many their Degrees for want of competent ability for the
same: Some of these, compelled by their repulse to an harder study of the
Scriptures, arrived at eminency afterward (and by name Mr Barret of Norwich)
and would commend Fox Martyrol. p. 1860.
and extol Dr Cranmer, who by putting them back, put them forward to attain a
better degree of knowledge, and perfection. If the Church bestows her negative
voice on such children of Pagans, refusing to baptize them till responsible for
themselves; they will have cause hereafter to bless God, and thank the Church
for the same, when the principles of Religion shall be more firmly fastened,
and the practice thereof more kindly ripened in them by such forbearance of
Baptism.

CHAP. XX. Two historical Observations, on the Adversaries of Infants Baptism.
IT is worth our observation to consider, who was the author from whom, and
what the company with whom this opposition of Infants Baptism began

For the first; I find one Balthazar Pacimontanus, about the year of our Lord,
1527. first spreading this doctrine: pretending, belike, that he fetched the
first principles thereof out of Luthers works, which gave Luther the occasion
to writ against him, justly to assert himself herein. This Balthazar was
afterward burnt at Vienna for an Heretic.

I cannot learn what heretical opinions this man maintained, that the demerit
of them should deserve death. If it were only for denying infants baptism, I
conceive all the spectators at his suffering bound to have endeavored by their
tears to have quenched the fire. Indeed I would have all of his opinion burnt;
but how? as Luther says, Igne charitatis: and as Solomon said long before him*
Prove. 25. 22. By heaping coals of fire on their heads, of meekness, and
moderation, if in any competent time they might be reclaimed. Possibly Vienna,
being the Emperors Court, where the Roman faction managed all at their
pleasure, some mixture of Protestant Doctrine in his opinions might sharpen the
rage of Papists against him.

But it is more then suspicious, that not this, but the complication of other
pernicious tenants caused his execution. The rather because we find, that the
Transylvanian Ministers, Anno 1567. set forth two books, one against the
Trinity, the other against the Incarnation of Christ; and at the end of both
added their thirty six arguments against the baptizing of infants.

Men who are dark, and concealed in themselves, lying at a close guard, are
best discovered by their society; Company is the clearest comment on the text
of a reserved person. True, this held not in our Savior, being piety it self,
though conversing with Publicans and sinners, for whose conversion he was sent,
and ordained. But generally it fails not but that men conjecture, and conclude
the inclinations of persons, from those with whom they constantly associate.
Would it not therefore make any conscientious Christians, justly wary to
entertain the doctrine of Anti-pedo-baptism, when he sees it ushered into the
world, with two such hideous and hellish Heresies going before it?

Some will say, there was no affinity in kindred, or familiarity in
acquaintance, nor dependency of interest, but a mere casual coincidency betwixt
these three Treatises. Who knows not, but an honest man may on the road
accidentally travel with strangers, whose faces he never saw before, without
any privity to their bad designs? For my own part I was never bred in the
school of Tyrannus, and am loath to load the doctrine of Anti-pedo-baptism,
with the burden of more badnesse then it has of it self; yet give me leave to
say, it may and ought be taken on suspicion, because coming in the company of
two such Blasphemous books from the same Authors; yea, let it be confined, and
kept in durance, until it has cleared its own innocence, which must be done by
showing better testimonials for the truth thereof, then any which hitherto it
has produced.

My prayers shall be, that what is said of Jeconiah, Jer. 22. 30. write ye this
man childless. So this error in denying baptism to infants, may not be
procreative of any other in the maintainers thereof. May he, who binds the Sea
in a girdle of sand, and says to the waves thereof, Job 38. 11. Hitherto shall
thou come, and no farther; erect strong rampires to bound and bank the
defenders hereof, that here they may stop* stay, stand still, without making
their progress into worse, and more dangerous errors. Amen.

The Infants Advocate. CHAP. XXI. How we ought to behave our selves to those of
a different judgment herein, in order to reclame them.
Preached in a Sermon at Mercers Chapel. Febr. 6. 1652.
Phil. 3. 15. And if in any thing, ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you.
1. IT is no less pleasant than profitable for a Christian soul seriously to
consider the admirable unity and comfortable concord which was betwixt the
Saints and Servants of God in the infancy of the Church, after Christ's
ascension, Acts 1. 14. These all continued with one accord. Acts 2. 1. They
were all with one accord in one place. 2. 46 Continuing daily with one accord
in the Temple. So again, Acts 4 24. Lift up their voice to God with one accord.
And again, Acts 5. 12. All with one accord in Solomon's porch.

2. Some perchance may impute this their unity to the paucity and fewness of
the Professors of the Gospel in that age. It is no wonder (will they say) if
an handful of men did agree, which is impossible now adays in the numerosity
of so many Christians. But know, that even then there were enough, even amongst
the three thousand Converts made by S. Peter's Sermon, to furnish out (allowing
a Leader, and Follower to each Faction) fifteen hundred several Divisions. No,
it was not their small number, but the vigorous acting of the Spirit of unity
on their Hearts which kept them in such agreement. God foreseeing, Rents would
quickly ruin his Infant Church, bound them together the faster in the hand of
Peace.

3. But alas, this unity was too fine ware to have much measure thereof. The
virginity of it was first lost, Acts 6. 1. about a money-matter, (and money we
know parts the dearest friends, many differences arising about the question,
what should be jure divino, and what jure humano, but more about meum and tuum)
the unequal [conceived] distribution of the collection-money for the Poor. The
Heathen Philosopher bitterly inveighed against the Schismatical Number of Two,
which durst make the first defection, and departure from the intireness of One.
But we have too just cause to bemoan this unhappy difference, which first brake
the Ranks, made the first jarring in the music of the Primitive Church.

4. The second sad difference was, Acts 15. 1. about the unseasonable and
unreasonable pressing of Circumcision, by some as absolutely necessary to
salvation, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be
saved.

5. The third doleful falling out, we find in the same Chapter, v. 39. being
so much the sadder than either of the former, because happening not btwixt
infirm and ignorant (though pious) people, but those, who for grace and
knowledge were most eminent, and formerly had been familiar and intimate
bosom-friends, Paul and Barnabas. Then the Devil endeavored to deal with Gods
Church, as Sampson served the Temple of Dagon, Judge. 16. 29. He took hold of
the two middle pillars, upon which the house stood, and on which it was born
up, and no doubt by shaking and clashing them together, had shattered the whole
Fabric, had not divine providence prevented it, sanctifying their division
into the multiplication of the Gospel.

6. It is enough to satisfy, (if not to surfeit) us, to insist only on this
first three, these original dissentions in the Primitive Church, which ever
since have too truly been copied out. As lately in the Acts of the Apostles, we
often met, with one accord, with one accord, with one accord; so looking into
their Acts, who (though no Apostles) are Christians* we more frequently find,
with many discords, with many discords, with many discords, such their
dissenting in opinions, and disagreeing in affections. It will therefore be a
seasonable subject for us to treat of, how we ought to behave our selves to
such Brethren as for the present dissent from us in judgment, and what hope we
may justly conceive of their future agreement with us. Hearken herein to my
Text, out of which we may extract, not only counsel what to do, but also
comfort what to hope in this kind. And if in any thing, ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you.

7. The words, (though short in themselves) contain the Uuhappiness, and the
happiness, of the Servants of God. And know to your comfort, the Unhappiness is
first, and the Happiness comes after, to close and conclude all; and and all is
well, that ends well, yea the unhappiness is but suppositive, what may be; the
happiness positive, what shall be. The unhappiness, is this, a possibility of
good men in matters of religion, to be otherwise minded one from another. The
Happiness is a gracious Promise, that such who erroniously dissent, from their
Brethren, shall in due time agree when the Truth shall be revealed to them.

In the supposition the Emphasis of two words must be examined. And if in ANY
thing. YE.


8. Ye, that is, literally, ye Philippians in the pale of Gods Church. However
let us give this Ye the true dimensions thereof. Let us not extend it too far
as to include Pagans or such pretended Christians, as willingly overturn all
the foundations of Religion. Nor let us contract this Ye too small, as to
confine it to the Philippians alone, which reaches all Christians, though
dissenting in the superstructures, consenting in the Fundamentalls of Religion.
If there be a Ye or a Your in all this Epistle, to the Philippians (as Chap 4.
5. Let your moderation be made known to all men) which enjoyneth any precept,
certainly all Christians, as well as the Philippians, are obliged and engaged
to the performance of it; at their own pain and peril of the neglect thereof.
Wherefore by the same rule of proportion, Every Christian may justly claim a
right and interest in all promises made to the Philippians, and this among the
rest the Revelation hereafter of truths unto them, hitherto concealed from them.

9. And if in any thing. Any thing. Far be it from us to shrink a larg Text
with a narrow comment S. Paul says any thing, let not us say something, Be
they otherwise minded, in matter of Fact, or of Faith, or of Doctrine, or of
Discipline, what ever it be, (for it needs must be nothing, which comes not
with the reach or compass of any thing) God will reveal it unto them. Here let
us take notice, what was the last matter, which immediately moved S. Paul to
fall on this expression.

In the foregoing verses S. Paul had propounded a Riddle or seeming
contradiction to flesh and blood; for he had said.

Verse. 12. Not as though I were already perfect, etc. Verse. 15. Let us
therefore as many as be perfect, etc. That perfection which first he denied in
himself, presently he avoweth both in himself and many others. This Riddle it
seems it would not sink into the Heads of some of the weaker Philippians, how
the same Person at the same time should be imperfect in deed, execution,
performance, yet perfect in desire, intention, endeavor. But well it is for
us, that some amongst the Philippians, through ignorance were otherwise minded,
whose error herein gave the happy occasion to S. Paul, from Gods mouth to
pronounce this comfortable promise, both to them and us and all dissenters,
that if any be otherwise minded, God will reveal even this unto them.

10. DOCT. Godly men as long as they live in this world will dissent in many
matters of religion. The reason is, because none know either Perfectly or
Equally, in this life. Not perfectly, 1 Cor. 13. 12. Now we know in part. Not
equally; for though men understood imperfectly in this life, yet if all
understood equally imperfectly, upon the supposition of equal ingenuousness to
their Ingenuity (that is, that they would readily embrace what appears true
unto them) all would be of the same judgment. But alas, as none sees clearly,
so scarce any two see equally some are thick-sighted, some short-sighted, some
pur-blind, some sand-blind, some half-blind, and the worst of them (blessed be
God) better then stark-blind. These different degrees of sight, cause the
difference of judgment amongst Christians.

11. A sad instance, hereof, we have, in the differences about the Sacraments
of Baptism and the Lords Supper. What by divine goodness was intended and
instituted to unite and conjoyn Christians, has by man's frailty, and Satan's
subtilty been abused to make many Rents and divisions. About the time when, the
Parties on whom, the manner how, Baptism is to be administered. But where
Baptism has divided her Thousands, the Lords Supper has divided her Ten
Thousands.

12. Amongst all the ordinary pot herbs which grow in Gardens none more
wholesome than sage, (especially at some times of the year,) whose Latin name
Salvia, carries much of health therein. Whereupon it is, that the envious Toad
commonly nesleth it self under the roots thereof. Spitefully to impoison that
which otherwise is so useful for mankind. Satan being sensible of the great
good which generally may redound to men by the charitable receaving of the
Lords Supper, has imbittered it with discords and dissension, betwixt Papists
and Protestants about Transubstantiation; Lutherans, and Calvinists about
Consubstantiation; Calvinists and Calvinists about the gesture of genuslection
and Persons to be admitted to the Sacrament. And thus men's dissenting in
judgments being too plainly proved, arising from their proness to err, come we
now to the gracious promise of their information in the truth, God will reveal
even this unto you.

13. See here S. Paul's charity. He says not, let him be Anathema Maranatha,
or let him be cast out of the Synagogne, or let him be to you as a heathen or a
Publican but only God will reveal even this unto him. Here take notice of S.
Paul's different proceedings with three sorts of people. First, with thee
otherwise minded in my Text, such, who though not Orthodox, are peaceable in
Israel* and err only in the lesser and ligher points of Religion. For these,
no punishment capital, or corporal, no penalty of pain, or shame in purse or
person, but only a patient expectation of their amendment, with a comfortable
promise of the same.

14. Secondly with such as make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience,
understand it only in relation to their own adventure therein, maintaining
Doctrine destructive to Salvation. Of these were Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy
1. 20. Whom he delivered unto Satan, that is (as it is generally expounded) by
Church Censures cut off from God in the visible Church and then being cut off
from him, we know to whose share they do fall.

15. Thirdly, to such, as not content to confine their damnable errors to
their own bosom, are active to infect others therewith: of these he speaks,
Gal. 5. 12. I would they were even cut off that trouble you. In which phrase
surely more is imported than a bare Excommunication. For that spiritual
Artillery S. Paul ever carried about him: why then should he wish what he could
work? desire what he could do? if so pleased. It is probable therefore that he
could have wished them cut off with temporal death.

16. Here we say nothing of such Doctrines as bear Heresy and treason
impaledtogether, pregnant with Sedition to raise tumults in a State. These we
leave to the cognizance and censure of the civil Authority; and shall proceed
on the promise of the Revelation of truth to the first sort of dissenting
brethren.

17. Quest. What, more Revelation still? When shall Christians come to an end?
When shall we say, It is finished? When shall they certainly know the full
measure of all which they are to believe and practice as necessary to salvation?

Answ. Here be it premised, that the Philippians at this time wherein S. Paul
wrote unto them might expect extraordinary Revelations, (and those additional
to the Scripture then in being) on an account more probable to receive them,
than any now adays can expect the same. For when S. Paul wrote this Epistle,
some of the Gospels (and particularly that of S. John's) were not yet penned,
which though placed before the Epistles (as containing the History of our
Saviors life which was first in time) yet were written afterward. But seeing
long since the Canon of the Scripture is completed, yea, signed and sealed by
God, and delivered to mankind, it is not only vain, but wicked for men to
look for more Revelations, of such things which men ought to know and believe
to their salvation. But to answer the question more particularly.

18. There are two sorts of Revelations. One does revelare credenda, reveal
those things which we are to believe. The other does make us credere revelatis,
more quickly and firmly assent to what has formerly been delivered in the
Scripture.


The first sort of Revelations are ceased in this Age. As for the second sort
we may look for them, pray for them, and labor them, as which God has
promised to bestow, and which the godly daily receive. Such Revelations our
Savior gave to the two Disciples traveling to Emaus, Luke 24. 27. When he
expounded unto them all the Scriptures. And in the same Chapter, v. 45. to the
rest of the Disciples, When he opened their understanding, that they might
understand the Scriptures. He made not the Scriptures more* but more plain unto
them; not larger, but clearer unto them. Such a Revelation is intended in the
text, to make erroneous persons more clearly to apprehend, and more firmly to
adhere to the truth in Gods word.

19. But quando, when, and quousque* how long Lord holy and true, how long
shall thy servants go on in their errors and ignorance? When shall they
without fail receive this promised Revelation, to have the truth manifested
unto them. I answer, my text (beloved) has not told the time, and therefore I
cannot tell it you. You will say, If the text had told the time, you could have
told it me. Be it so, and now both you and I must contentedly be ignorant
thereof. Yet, not to satisfy the curious, but the conscientious so far as I
may, I will more than conjecture that the punctual time, when this Revelation
shall be made.

20. Of all the years of thy life, in that year, month, week, day, hour,
minute, and (if any will be so hypocritical as to subdivide minutes) in that
moment wherein the hid providence of Heaven shall discover to be most for Gods
glory, and for thy good. Thou can not wisely wish it to be any whit before
that time, and I do confidently assure thee, it shall not be any whit after it.

21. And yet I dare not be over confident to promise thee, that such Revelation
of the truth shall certainly happen to thee in this life. Many of Gods good
servants have gone to the grave with grievous errors which they have
maintained. Yea, it is no absurdity to maintain, that the blessed in Heaven are
as yet ignorant of many truths, and that there shall be an accession unto them,
as of glory, so of knowledge in the Day of Judgment. Yea, many things of Gods
proceedings shall not be revealed unto them, until Romans 2. 5. the day of the
Revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

22. Quest. But suppose it be never at all revealed unto a man, what is to be
conceived of his final condition who lives and dies a stiff defender of a
damnable doctrine?

Answ. Give me leave in the first place to distinguish of damnable doctrines, a
phrase acceptive of two senses. If damnable be taken passively, for that which
ought to be damned or condemned, then every error is in it self a damnable
error. Discretion advises us to refuse not only poison, but unwholesom food;
and we ought to condemn a falsehood quatenus a falsehood, though it may be
consistent with salvation. But if damnable be taken actively (in which sense it
is used, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Who privily shall bring in damnable Heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them) for that which damneth or condemns the
maintainer thereof, then only fundamental errors in Religion are damnable
doctrines. This premised, we answer to the question, Gods goodness so keeps
his servants, that he will not suffer them to fall into damnable errors in the
last and worst acception thereof. As for smaller errors, which deserve to be
condemned, but are not so pestilent as to destroy the maintainers thereof, they
are pardoned through the mercy of God and merits of Christ, on the deathbed of
such as defend them.

23. All good Christians pray with David, if not in the same words, to the same
sense, Psalm. 19. 12. Cleanse me from my secret sins. Whereby is meant, not
only such sins, as we desire and endeavor to hide and keep secret from men,
but also such as are hidden and kept secret from us, such our ignorance as not
to know, or self-love, as not to acknowledge them to be sins. Now all such
errors consistent with salvation are remitted unto the maintainers thereof,
under the mass, bulk, and heap of secret sins, though they be not, and indeed
cannot be particularly repented of, because concealed from him; who commits
them.

24. Come we now to show how men ought to prepare their own hearts for the more
speedy receiving, and sure retaining of such Revelations. Say not, all such
preparations are useless. The Dove of the Spirit will not build in a Nest of
this making, but in one of her own providing. For such previous disposing of
our selves is acceptable to God, and will expedite the coming of Revelations
unto us. Indeed in the first act of Conversion we are purely passive, and can
in no degree prepare our selves being dead in trespasses and sins. But being
once freed by grace, we are free; and may, and must by lawful means move Gods
Spirit to move us, according to S. Paul's counsel, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the
grace of God that is in thee.

25. First, divest thy self of Pride. What says Solomon: Prove. 13. 10. Only
by pride comes contention. Only by pride, as if such were the pride of pride,
that it scorneth and disdaineth to admit a partner, or fellowcause with it self
to cause contention. And although pride sometimes be pleased out of state, to
accept of other vices in raising of Discords, yet still she preserves her self
Paramont, making use of all the rest only as subservient unto her.

26. Now proud men create to themselves two needless fears, which make them so
obstinately embrace their errors. The first is, that if they alter their
opinions, they must confess that formerly they have erred, which confession
stabbeth Pride, (and Pride is dextrous in stabbing others) under the fifth rib.
For all men by nature desire to be, and to be accounted petty Popes, having the
spirit of infallibility fastened unto their chairs, so that their opinions
shall pass for oracle of undeniable truth.

27. The other is, that they shall be branded by men for levity and
inconstancy, if once they offer to change their judgments. This makes many of
them to say sullenly and surlily with Pilate, John 19. 22. What I have written
I have written. What I have said, I have said; what I have done, I have done;
what I have defended, I have defended; I will not abate an ace, remit a tittle,
recede an hair from my former opinions. Whilst others turn as fast as the
Weathercock, I will stand as firm as the Steeple, the rather because otherwise
I shall incur the infamy of inconstancy.

28. Whereas let it be but seriously considered, and the renouncing of an
error which we formerly maintained, argues not frailness but firmness, not
levity but constancy in us. For this is or ought to be the grand and general
resolution of all Christians to embrace any truth, which appears unto them
out of the Word of God. Wherefore when a Christian renounceth a particular
error, this is not inconstancy; because crossing the late and lesser boughs,
but it is constancy; because concurring with the first and fairest Root of his
Resolution, namely, always to those with the revealed truth.

29. This has been the practice of pious people in all ages. The hand of S.
Augustine never seemed so fair and so handsome, as when he wrote backward, I
mean, when he wrote his Retractations. Pale faces, which otherwise are well
proportioned, never look so lovely, as when they are casually betrayed to a
blush, which supplies that color in their cheeks which was wanting before.
Good men who once maintained an error, never appear more amiable in the eyes of
God and the godly, as when blushing with shame (not to be ashamed for) at the
remembrance of their former faults, which makes them more thankful to God,
more humble in, more careful over themselves, and more charitable to others.

30. Well in the first place divest thy self of pride, and know that David tells
us, how all those ought to be qualified, whom God intends to teach, Psalm 25.
9. The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach in his way.
The proud are improper to be Gods Scholars, who conceive themselves able to be
his Teacher* and wise enough to instruct him.

31. Secondly divest thy self of Passion, than which nothing more prejudicial
to the judgment. Fire is accounted an hurtful object to the eye, as water is
esteemed an helper thereof to look upon it, comforting and uniting (as the
other scatters) the visive beams. What then when the beholder is all fire, I
mean all passion and choler, is it probable that during this temper, the
spirit will descend upon him? Observe the carriage of Elisha, 2 K. 3. 15.
(being in an high rapture of anger with Joram. King of Israel for his
submissive applications unto him in his distress when he and three Armies were
likely to die of thirst) and now says he, bring me a Minstrel namely, by
Music to pacify himself and to dispose his soul for the regular reception and
solemn entertainment of the spirit* which accordingly came to pass when the
Minstrel played the hand of the Lord came upon him.

32. See we here in the first place, that it is lawful to use all good means
to invite the Spirit to descend upon us. The Spirit of the Prophets, was never
so subject to the Prophets, as to come at their call and command. Secondly
though Eshishah in anger for the man was holy anger (justly offended with King
Joram, for making Idolatrous Priests his choice in prosperity, and Gods Prophet
his refuge in adversity) yet he was sensible to himself, that he was disturbed
and discomposed therewith. And though the cause of his anger was just, and
matter of his anger commendable, yet possibly the measure thereof, might be
faulty, ( Elisha being like Eliah, and Eliah a man subject to like passions as
we are, James 5. 17. And He might see in himself (what others saw not in him)
that he was too much transported with passion, and perchance did too much
insult on the present perplexity and extremity of King Jehoram. Wherefore
conceiving that He in the still voice, would not come to one in so loud a
passion, he calls for a Minstrel, so to reduce, pacate, and compose his Soul,
that it might return to a quiet temper: Whence it plainly appears, what an
enemy Passion is generally to the receiving of Gods Spirit, and that all those
which desire a Revelation of the truth unto them, must labor to divest
themselves thereof.

33. Thirdly divest thy self of Covetuousness. Here take notice, how easily men
are persuaded to embrace those opinions (though never so erroneous,) which
bring in profit unto them: for instance; One with weak sinnews of Logic, and
worse colors of Rhetoric will quickly persuade a Countryman to be a convert
in this point, that he is not bound to pay Tithes to his Minister.

34. On the other side it is hard to wean men from sucking on those Opinions
which are sweetened unto them by commodity. For by this craft we get our gain,
Acts 19. 25. No wonder if the Pope zealously maintains Purgatory, seeing that
Purgatory so plentifully maintains the Pope. The same may be said of other
lucrative errors in their Religion, Pilgrimages, Pardons, Prayers to the
Saints, Prayers for the dead, etc. Scylla omnes suos divitiis implevit, it was
the policy of that cunning Senator to enrich all of his party tied by their
purse-strings the faster unto him; whereas the Antifaction of the Marians being
nothing so well monied by their Patron cleaved not so steadfastly unto him.
Gainful errors soon gain and long keep such as desire them; whereas
speculative opinions which terminate only in the brains having little
influence on men's practice and less on their profit are nothing so taking of
men, and men nothing so tenacious of them.

35. As for the error of such as deny the Baptising of Infants, we have cause
to conceive the greater hopes of their returning to the truth, because that
their Opinion can not make them a thread, or a shoolatchet the richer by the
maintaining thereof. Tully says of our Brittainy in his time, (when Caesar
rather discovered than conquered it) that it had naturally, Ne micam auri aut
argenti, not a crum of gold or silver, as within the bowels of the earth
thereof. So may I say of the Doctrine of Antipoedo-baptism, it is a bare and
poor opinion, Gold and Silver it has none, and therefore, (alone of it self)
is never probable to enrich the patrons and defenders thereof.

36. And yet as Tully: went a little too far, in condemning Britain, as
utterly devoid of Silver oar, and is disproved by the industry of our Age,
which some years since has discovered Silver mines in Wales, so possibly this
opinion may be more advantageous to the defenders thereof, than is obvious to
the eye of every common beholder. It may be it may make them more capable of
preferment, and that either they are or conceive themselves to be in a better
proximity to advancement by maintaining thereof as more favorably reflected on
than others; as if this opinion gave the most real testimony of their good
affections to the present government, whereby they apprehend themselves: the
next reversions to preferment I believe they mistake themselves therein, and
that no such partiality is in the present state. However let them examine their
own souls and divest themselves, of covetousness in case they be conscious to
themselves that expectation of profit inclines them to this opinion.

37. Come we now to Positive counsels, what we ought to perform. And here I am
afraid some will be offended at the simplicity and plainness of them. There is
a book entitled, De medecinis facile parabilibus, of medicines which may
easily be procured, and very good for such which take Physic in forma pauperis.
Yea generally it is conceived nothing so much detracteth from the worth of
those medicines, as the cheapness and commonness thereof, so that if we did but
fetch from the East Indies, what now grows in our gardens, it would then be
accounted a precious Drug which now we esteem a common Potherb. In like manner
I fear that these our counsels, shall be undervalued for the usualness and
obviousness of them. If a Soul-Mount-abank, should prescribe such new fangled
means, which was never heard of before, he should get more patients than all
the grave Physicians of the City. However we will adventure to prescribe these
plain means which God has prescribed unto us.

38. First, pray to God, that he that opens and no man shuts, and shuts
and no man opens, would be pleased in his own due time to reveal all
necessary truths unto thee. Secondly, be diligent in reading Gods Word. Luther
did profess that when he first began to write against the Pope, many fancies
were put into his head, plausible to flesh and blood, but groundless on
Scripture, which made him daily to pray, Domine in verbo, Domine in verbo, Lord
teach me in thy Word.

39. Thirdly, be careful in keeping the Lords day, not with any superstitious
but godly observation thereof. On what day did God reveal the Revelation to S.
John? On the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. Thus Princes use to bestow their Boons, and
confer their favors chiefly on those days, which more properly are called their
days; as on the Anniversaries of their Births or Coronations. Fourthy, Repair
to the place of Gods Public Service. Fifthly, as the Magistrate bears not the
Sword in vain, the Minister bears not the Word in vain. But least we Ministers
should seem to plead our own cause herein we leave this to God to plead for us.

39. Object. But some erroneous persons will be ready to say unto me, as the
young man did to our Savior in the Gospel, All these things* have I done from
my youth. I have constantly prayed, and carefully read, and conscienciously
kept the Lords day, and diligently repaired to the public Ministry, and have
endeavored to divest my self of pride, passion, and covetousness, and yet no
error is revealed to me, which I formerly maintained. Hereupon I conclude my
self to be in the right. Our English Proverb, as it has much of rudeness, so
it has no less of truth therein, One is not bound to see more than he can. And
I conceive I am in no error, because I follow my present light, and all the
means of your prescription have made no alteration on my understanding.

40. Answ. Give me leave to be jealous over these Objectors, with a godly
jealousy. I exspect not the validity of my Receipts prescribed, but suspect
their effectual application thereof, whether or no they have sincerely
practiced the same; this I am sure, as men can scarcely (for the main) give
other, so Angels can give no better.

41. And here I shall deceive their expectation, who conceive that on the ill
success of the former Receipts, I should proceed to prescribe other means,
whereby a brother dissenting from the truth, shall be reclamed unto it. Only I
remember a passage of Eliah, 1 Kings 18. 34. when according to his command,
they had once poured water upon the Altar, And he said, Do it again, and they
did so the second time; and he said, Do it the third time, and they did it the
third time also. The next seven years, (if thou live so long) pray, read,
keep the Lords day, attend on Gods public Ordinance, and in case the truth be
not then revealed unto thee, the next seven years (if thou live so long) do
the like. I have no alteration, but a mere repetition, of what already has
been prescribed: and therefore we proceed to give instructions to such who by
the benefit of these means are actually reclamed from their errors A word or
two how they should behave themselves.

42. First, practice our Saviors precept to S. Peter, Luke 22. 3^. When thou
art converted strengthen thy brethren. Never conceive thy self in the peaceable
possession of a truth, until such time as thou have imparted it to others: the
rather because it is more than probable, that by thy example, (if of any
eminency) thou have invited others to, or confirmed others in their errors*
and therefore in civility and Christianity thou stand'st obliged to undeceive
them.

43. In Hungaria they have a custom, that a Gentleman wears so many Feathers
as he has killed Turks And truly, a Feather may pass for the lively Emblem of
the glory of this world, wagged with the wind, and lighter than vanity it
self: Alas, what a toy is a Feather? It is real happiness indeed, Dan. 12. 3.
They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.

44. But O how glorious in Heaven will S. Peter appear? who at the preaching of
one Sermon gained Acts 2. 4. three thousand souls. What a Constellation, what a
Firmament of stars will he alone be?

45. See the pathetical expostulation, and the ingenuous confession of S. Paul
before King Agrippa, Acts 26. 8. His pathetical expostulation, Why should it be
thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? His
ingenious confession* I verily thought with my self that I ought to do many
things contrary, etc. How freely and fully does he acknowledge his fault,
laboring to lessen the errors of others by the alleging the example of his
own former infirmities.

46. This wrought so far with Agrippa, that it made him a Demi, Almost a
Christian. Paul did both in his own and Apollos part to plant and water, but
God was not pleased.

47. Who knows what may come to pass? Happy Music if in like manner we might
but live to hear some of our; yet dissenting brethren, after their returning to
the truth, to argue the case thus with those which as yet remain in their
errors. How ought they to counsel others to the truth, and Paul-like, to
comfort them with their own Precedent, that such as err may seasonbly be
reclamed.

48. Come we to show how the standers by, and all other orthodox Christians
ought to contribute their assistance to the reclaming of their erroneous
brethren to the truth. Hippocrates speaking of Cures, says, that all parties
concerned must lend their assistance, as the Physician, Patient, and (...),
those that are present, (conceived related to the sick man) must all lend their
assisting hand to the work. So in spiritual Cures, even the spectators (idle
ones Christianity allows none) are parties, and must contribute their help in
so good an employment. For whom these councels are proper.

49. First* load them not with opprobrious Language, of Heretics, and the
like. Be more charitable in thy words to them, and thoughts of them. Though
they should account us Dogs, let us account them Sheep, but what Sheep?
wandering Sheep. Though they esteem us Bastards, we will esteem them children,
but what children? prodigal children. We will think better of them than they
think of us, (though not so well as they think of themselves) and no discreet
person will conclude, our faith the worse, because our charity is the more.

50. Secondly, widen not the wound betwixt us, to make it worse than it is. And
if thou have occasion to state the controversy betwixt us and them, deal
fairly in the matter. Do not paint them of a blacker complexion than they be,
neither represent their opinions partially to their disadvantage.

51. Here under favor I conceive, that it is fit at a Disputation in the
Schools, to charge them home, with all the dangerous or absurd Consequences,
which result naturally from their erroneous opinions. We may bring a just
action against them, and at the suit of Logic arrest them for maintaining such
abominable Consequences: we may lay the ugly Brats at their fathers doors, that
they may have the shame and pain in getting them, the cost and charge to
provide for them. As is the Mother, so is the Daughter.

52. But in case our dissenting brethren shall disclame such Consequences, and
sincerely from their hearts detest and abhor such damnable Deductions which
notwithstanding naturally and inevitably flow from their own erroneous
principles, conceive that, though they may be pressed with such consequences in
the Schools they may not be charged with them in foro conscientiae. But that
only they are answerable to God for the primitive error, and not for such
derivative ones, which notwithstanding are the undoubted offspring thereof.

53. Lastly, when they shall recant their errors willingly, cheerfully,
greedily, give unto them Gal. 2. 9. the right hand of fellowship. Indeed the
left hand by vulgar tradition (not to say mistake) is presumed nearer to the
heart, but the right hand if not by nature (by custom) is the stronger and
firmer. Say not, I must make some difference betwixt those, that never left,
and those who lately returned to the truth. My right hand I must reserve for
such who never wandered from the right way, my left hand shall serve those who
were brought back unto it. O no, love both alike, and though the affection of
thy heart be equal to both, if there be any odds in thy behavior, express most
love to those Reverts, so to invite more to come over to the truth.

54. Do any hear my Sermon this day who dissent from me, and many other, (and
indeed from all the practice of the ancient Primitive Church) in the point of
baptizing of Infants. O let such consider what has been said by us in this
point, and God give them understanding, and on the appearing of truth unto
them, let them ingeniously renounce their own erroneous opinions.

55. Never be ashamed to do that, which will bring safety to your selves, glory
to God, joy to Angels, grief to none but such as rejoice at your destruction.
We may observe in Horses, that after a stumble, for some paces they go better
and quicker than before. Some impute this to their fear, to be beaten, and
desire to avoid it; others to their generosity, to make amends for their former
fault, with double diligence.

56. Be not like the Horse and Mule which has no understanding, Psalm 32. 9.
that is, do not imitate them in their brutish headstrongness. Yet be like the
Horse and Mule in their commendable conditions, (as creatures far above
Pismires, and Lillies) imitate those generous principles which the instinct of
Nature has put into them. Recover what is past in your stumbling by your
future activity; in going the faster in the path of truth and righteousness.

57. To conclude, there is for the present a great Gulf and distance betwixt
you and us in our opinions. Indeed though we should desire it, we dare not
approach nearer unto you in point of judgment. S. Paul says even of his
brother S. Peter, Gal. 2. 5. To whom we gave place, no not for an hour, that
the truth of the Gospel might continue with you. We may not yield to you, no,
not a hairs breadth. We have already in stating the Controversy betwixt us,
drawn as near as we can without betraying the truth, prejudicing Gods cause,
and our own consciences. And having gone to the very marches and outbounds of
the truth, we there stand on tiptoes ready to embrace you if you come to us,
and no otherwise.

58. But as for difference in affection, seeing we conceive your error not such
as intrencheth on salvation, (because not denying but deferring Baptism) and
only in the out limbs (not vitals of) Religion, wherein a latitude may and
must be allowed to dissenting brethren, we desire that herein the measure of
our love may be without measure unto you. Lightning often works wonders when it
breaks the Sword, it does not so much as bruise the Scabbard; Charity is a
more heavenly fire, and therefore may be more miraculous in its operations. You
shall see that our love to you, as it does detest and desires to destroy your
errors, so it will at the same time, it will safely keep, and preserve your
erroneous persons.

59. For mine own particular, because I have been challenged (how justly God
and my own conscience knows) for some morosenes in my behavior toward some
dissenting brethren, in my Parish, this I do promise, and God giving me grace I
will perform it. Suppose there be one hundred paces betwixt me and them in
point of affection, I will go ninety nine of them, on condition they will stir
the one odd pace, to give them an amicable meeting. But if the Legs of their
Souls be so lame, or lazy, or sullen, as not to move that one pace toward our
mutual love, we then must come to new propositions. Let them but promise to
stand still and make good their station, let them not go backward, and be more
embittered against me than they have been, and of the hundred paces, in point
of affection, God willing, I Will go twice fifty to meet them. As for matter of
judgment I shall patiently and hopefully expect the performance of Gods promise
in my Text, when to those which are otherwise minded in the matter of Infants
Baptism, God will reveal even this unto them. Amen.

FINIS.
PERFECTION AND PEACE: Delivered in a SERMON preached in the Chapel of the
Right Worshipful Sir ROBERT COOK at DYRDANS. By THO. FVLLER B. D.

LONDON Printed by Roger Norton for John Williams at the Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1653.

TO The Honoble and truly Religious GEORGE BERKELEY* Sole Son and Heir to the
Right Honorable GEORGE Lord BERKELEY, etc.
SIR,
WHen I look on the Crest of your ancient Arms, (A Mitre powdered with Crosses)
I read therein an abridgment of the Devotion of those darker days: the Mitre
showing your Ancestors actions in Peace; the Cross, their achievements in the
Holy War: the Mitre, their doings at home; the Cross, their darings abroad.

Yea I fancy to my self each ancient Lord Berkly, like one of the Israelites
at the walling of Jerusalem, Neh. 4. 17. With a Trowel in one hand, and a Sword
in the other. We always find him either fighting or founding, either in a
Battle or at the building of some Religious Fabric, as (besides others) the
entire Abbey at Bristol, (afterward converted into a Cathedral) was solely
founded by one of that Family.

This was the Devotion of those days, wherein the world knew no better, and
scarce any other. Since the Reformation, your Noble House has not had less
heat for having more light. Your Charity has not been extinguished, but
regulated, not drained dry, but derived in righter channels; and flowing with a
clearer stream free from the mud of superstition.

As for your particular, that your ancient Crest is worthily born by you, the
Mitre speaking you a Patron of Learning; the Crosses, a Practicer of Religion.
Qualities which encouraged me to present this small Treatise unto you.

Acceptance is more then it can expect, pardon being as much as it does
deserve, being so long in coming, so short when come. But because it had its
first Being by your Command, it hopes to have its well-being by your
Countenance.

Should I desire so many Lords of your Family hereafter, as heretofore have
flourished in a direct line, by desiring a particular Happiness to your House,
I should wish a general mischief to mankind* that men should live so many years
in sin and sorrow before the coming of the necessary and comfortable day of
Judgment. My prayer therefore shall be, That the luster of your House may
continue with the lasting of the World, (so long as God will permit the badness
thereof) in that honorable Equipage of your Ancestors: May Perfection here,
and Peace hereafter light on you, your virtuous Lady, and hopeful issue; which
is the daily desire of

Your Honors most bounden Servant THO. FULLER.

PERFECTION AND PEACE.
PSALM. 37. 37. Mark the Perfect, behold the Upright; for the end of that man is
Peace.
THIS and the 73. Psalm are of the same subject, wherein David endeavors to
cure an Epidemical disease, with which the best Saints and servants of God are
often distempered: Observe in this Disease, the nature, danger, cause and cure
thereof.

The Nature, namely fretting fits of the soul, at the consideration of the
constant peace, plenty and prosperity of wicked men.

The Danger thereof, It causes the Consumption of the spirit, and is
destructive to the health of the soul. Yea, when this disease comes to the
Paroxism, the height and heat thereof, it becomes dishonorable to God;
aspersing and be-libelling him, as if he wanted Goodness, and would not; or
Power, and could not; or Justice, and does not order matters better then they
are.

The Cause thereof it proceeds from a double defect in men:

1 Want of Faith to trust in God.

2 Want of Patience to wait on God.

This is the reason why the practice of these two graces is so often inculcated
by David in this Psalm.

The Cure thereof: David applies many Cordials, (for less then Cordials will
not do the deed) seeing by his own confession, Ps. 73. 21. His heart was
grieved with his fretting fits. We will only instance on the two last.

One is a serious consideration, ver. 35 of the short pleasure and certain pain
of the wicked. It was a good prayer of a good man, Lord keep me from a temporal
heaven here, and an eternal hell hereafter. True it is, Psalm 73. 4. that to
the wicked, there are no bands in their death: and no wonder, when they have
all bands after death.

The second is a studious observation of the perfect Man's condition, who though
meeting with many intermediate broils and brunts, and bickerings in this life:
yet all at last winds up with him in a comfortable close, and happy conclusion,
Mark the Perfect, behold the Upright, for the end of that man is peace.

Observe in the words two general parts:

1 The description of the Dead.

2 The direction to the Living.

In the description of the Dead, we have two particulars:

1 What he was. A practicer of Perfection and Uprightness.

2 What he is. A possessour of a peaceable end.

In the direction to the Living we have an invitation, or rather an injunction
to mark and behold.

1 What was done by the man, when living: his Holiness.

2 What was done to the man, when dead: his Happiness.

This our Sermon being now preached in the juncture of the old and new Year:
What better subject to end the old, then to speak of the description of the
dead? What fitter matter to begin the new, then to treat of the direction to
the living? Mark the Perfect, behold the Upright: for the end of that man is
peace.

Before we enter on the words, it will be a charitable work to reconcile the
seeming variance betwixt the two Translations: I mean that which is commonly
prefixed at the beginning, and what is constantly inserted in the middle of our
Bibles.

The Old Translation.

Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right, for that shall
bring a man peace at the last. The New Translation.

Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that man is
peace. See here a vast difference betwixt the diverse rendering of the words: If
the Trumpet, 1 Cor. 14. 8. give an uncertain sound, who shall be prepared for
the battle? But where shall the unlearned, though honest hearted Reader,
dispose of his belief and practice, when there be such irreconcilable
differences in the Translation of Gods Word.

I answer, the seeming difference arises from the latitude of the Hebrew
words, so extensive in their signification: for Shemor which in my text is
translated, Mark, according to the first and most frequent acception thereof:
signifies also in a secondary sense, to Keep, seeing those things which we
mark, we also keep, at the least for some short time in our memory. The same
may be said, that the word Behold, in my Text, is rendered in the Old
Translation, take heed, seeing the Hebrew will bear both: Tham and Jaschar, most
commonly and constantly denote the Concrete, Perfect, Upright, Righteous, and
Innocent: But sometimes signifies the abstract also, Perfection, Uprightness,
Innocence. Let not therefore the two Translations fall out, for they are
Brethren, and both the sons of the same Parent, the Original: Though give me
leave to say the youngest child is most like the father, and the newest
Translation herein, most naturally expresses the sense of the Hebrew.

Let none cavil that such laxity in the Hebrew words occasions uncertainty in
the meaning of the Scripture: For God on purpose uses such words importing
several senses; not to distract our heads, but dilate our hearts, and to make
us Rechoboh, Room for our practice in the full extent thereof, Psalm. 119. 92.
Thy commandment is exceeding broad, and is penned in words and phrases,
acceptive of several senses, but all excellent for us to practice: So that both
Translations may be happily compounded in our endeavors, Mark the perfect,
keep innocence, and behold the upright, and take heed to the thing that is
right; for the end of that man is peace: and that shall bring a man peace at
the last.

Begin we with the description of the dead, Perfect, and what is a good Comment
thereon, Upright.

Object. It is impossible this world should afford a perfect man. What says
David, Psalm. 14. 2. The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of men,
to see if there were any that did understand and seek after God. They are all
gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is none that does good, no
not one. But what says Solomon, Eccles. 2. 12. For what can the man do, who
comes after the King, even that which has been done already. But what shall
he do that comes after the King of Heaven? can Subjects hope that their
discoveries will be clearer then their Sovereigns? shall man living on earth
see more then God looking from heaven? he could not meet with one good, where
then shall we mark a perfect man?

Answ. David in the place alleged, describes the general corruption ad prae
varicationem of all mankind by nature; in the latitude whereof we confess the
perfect man in my Text was involved. As all Metals when they are first taken
out of the earth, have much dross and oar, but by art and industry may
afterward be refined: so the man in my text was equally evil with all others
by nature, till defecated by grace, and by Gods goodness refined to such a
height of purity as in some degree will endure the touch, and become perfect.

In a fourfold respect may a servant of God be pronounced Perfect in this life.

1 Comparatively, in reference to wicked men, who have not the least degree or
desire of goodness in them. Measure a servant of God by such a dwarf, and he
will seem a proper person, yea, comparatively perfect.

2 Intentionally: The drift, scope, and purpose of such a man's life, is to
desire perfection, which his desires are seconded with all the strength of his
weak endeavors: He draws his bow with all his might, and Perfection is the
mark he aims at, though too often his hand shakes, his bow starts, and his
arrow misses.

3 Incho^tively: We have here the beginning and the earnest as of the Spirit, 2
Cor. 1. 22. So of all spiritual graces, expecting the full (not payment,
because a mere gift, but) receipt of the rest hereafter. In this world we are a
perfecting, and in the next, Heb. 12. 23. we shall come to the spirits of just
men made perfect.

But blame me not, Beloved, if I be brief in these three kinds of Perfections,
rather touching then landing at them, in our discourse; seeing I am partly
afraid, partly ashamed to lay too much stress and weight on such slight and
slender foundations. I hasten with all convenient speed to the fourth, which
one is worth all the rest. A servant of God in this life is perfect.

4 Imputatively: Christ's perfections through Gods mercy being imputed unto him.
If I be worsted in my front, and beaten in my main Battle, I am sure I can
safely retreat to this my invincible Rear: In the agony of temptation we must
quit comparative perfection.

Alas, Relation is rather a shadow then a substance: quit intentional
perfection, being conscious to our selves how often our actions cross our
intentions. Quit inchoative perfection; for whilst a servant of God compares
the little goodness he has with that great proportion which by Gods law he
ought to have, he conceives thereof as the pious Jews did of the Foundation of
the second Temple, Haggai 2. 3. Is it not in your eyes in comparison of it as
nothing? But stick we may and must to imputative perfection, which indeed is
Gods act, clothing us with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

This is the reason the Saints are unwilling to own any other perfection: for
though God Job 1. 1. is pleased to style Job a perfect man, yet see what he
says of himself, Job 9. 20. If I say that I am perfect, it shall also prove me
per verse. God might say it, Job durst not for fear of pride and presumption.
Indeed Noah is the first person, who is pronounced perfect in Scripture, Genesis
6. 9. But mark I pray what went in the verse before: But Noah found grace in
the eyes of the Lord. Not that his finding grace is to be confined to his
particular preservation from the Deluge, (which was but one branch or sprig of
Gods grace unto him.) But his whole person was by Gods goodness accepted of,
Noah's perfection more consisting in that acceptance then his own amiableness,
approved not so much because God found goodness in Noah, but because Noah found
grace in God.

Come we now in the description of the Dead, to what he is, The end of that man
is peace.

Object. Some will object that daily experience confutes the truth of this
Doctrine, what more usual then to see Gods servants tossed, tumbled, tortured,
tormented, often ending their painful lives with shameful deaths. Cushi being
demanded by David to give an account of Absaloms condition, 2 Samuel 18. 32. made
this mannerly and politic return: The enemies of my Lord the King, and all
that rise up against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.

But some will say, if this be a peaceable end, to lead an afflicted life, and
have an ignominious death, may the enemies of God and all goodness, the
infringers of our Laws and Liberties, the haters of Learning and Religion, the
destroyers of Unity and Order, have their souls surset of such a peaceable end.

Resp. In answer hereunto we must make use of our Saviors distinction, the
same for substance and effect, though in words there be variation thereof.
Being taxed by Pilate for treason against Caesar; he pleaded for himself, Ioh.
18. 36. My kingdom is not of this world: So say we, to salve all objections,
our peace, that is the peace in our Text, (and God make it ours, not only to
treat and hear, but partake thereof,) is not of this world, consists not in
temporal or corporal prosperity; but is of a more high and heavenly nature.
Indeed this peace is in this world, but not of this world; begun here in the
calm of a clear and quiet conscience, and finished hereafter in the Haven of
endless happiness. When the man in my Text, becomes perfectly perfect, he shall
then become perfectly peaceable.

However we may see that sometimes (I say not always) God sets a signal
character of his favor on some of his servants, enjoying at their end a
general calm, and universal tranquillity toward all to whom they are related.
Amongst the many privileges of Saints reckoned up Job 5. none more remarkable
then that verse 23. For the Stones of the field shall be at league with thee,
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Have we here a
Dichotomy of all wicked men, or a sorting of them all into two sides.

Some are Stones, like Nabal 1 Samuel 25. 37. stupid, sottish, senseless; no
Rhetoric with its expanded hand, no Logic with its contracted fist, no
Scripture, no reason, no practice, no precedent can make any impression upon
them, so that the best of men may even despair to get their good will. Well the
way to do it, and procure a perfect peace with them, is to please God.

Others are beasts like the Cretians, Tit. 1. 12. (...), so fierce, so furious,
so crafty, so cruel, no meddling with them without danger. As the former could
not conceive, so these will not abide any rational debate with them. The former
were too low and silly, too much beneath: these high and haughty, too much
above persuasion to peace; mention but the name thereof, and they Psalm. 112.
prepare themselves to battle.

The art then to make these friends with a man, is only this, to endeavor to
please the high God of heaven; and then Solomon's words will come to pass, Prove.
16. 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at
peace with him.

It once came to pass in England (and but once it came to pass in England)
namely, when See his life lately printed.
Sir Thomas Moor was Lord Chancellor, that the Crier in Chancery being
commanded to call the next cause, returned this answer, there were no more
causes to be heard. Not that there was no more on the file for that day (which
is ordinary and usual) but, which is strange, that then there was no more suits
depending in the whole Court of Chancery, but that all ripened for Trial, were
decided. Then was Janus his Temple shut clean throughout England, in Cases
betwixt Plaintiff and Defendant, relating to equity and conscience. Whether
this proceeded from the peaceableness of people in that age, not so quarrelsome
and litigious as in ours: or from the goodness of the Judge, either, happy,
privately to compound differences without any suit; or dextrous, publicly to
decide them with all expedition.

But when some good man has lain on his death bed, though having many suits in
his life, all then are ended and composed. Call the suit betwixt this man and
his God, long since it is attoned, and both made friends in Christ. Call the
suit betwixt this man and his conscience, it is compremised, and both of them
fully agreed. Call the suit betwixt this man and his enemies, Stones and Beasts,
it is compounded, and they at peace with him. Call the suit betwixt this man
and all other Creatures, it is taken up, and he and they fully reconciled. Thus
I say sometimes, not always, God graceth some of his servants that they depart
in an universal peace, a personal favor indulged to some select Saints. But
generally and universally all the true servants of God, whatever their outward
condition be, go from peace to peace; from the first fruits of peace in their
conscience, to the full fruition thereof in heaven. Mark the perfect, behold
the upright: for the end of that man is peace.

Come we now to the direction of the Living: Mark the Perfect, behold the
Upright.

It is not said, Gaze on the Perfect, Stare on the Upright, this men of
themselves are too prone to do without any bidding: nay, contrary to Gods
positive command, Heb, 10. 33. Whilst ye were made a gazing stock by
reproaches and afflictions. And David in the person of Christ complains, Psalm.
22. 17. they look and stare upon me: partly with eyes of wonder, as on so many
Monsters and Prodigies, 1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein they think it strange that you run
not with them to the same excess of Riot: partly with the eyes of scorn, as on
so many miserable wretches. Indeed God and wicked men agree in this point, that
good men are not worthy to live here. But upon different, yea, contrary
accounts, God esteems them too good to live here, Heb. 11. 38. Of whom the
world was not worthy. Wicked men conceive them too bad to live here, Act. 22.
22. Away with such a fellow from off the earth, for it is not fit that he
should live. Which makes them to behold the perfect and upright, with scorn and
contempt.

However mark the Just, behold the Upright, do it solemnly, do it seriously,
not with a cursory look, fix thy sight, and for some time; let it dwell on so
eminent an Object. Mark the perfect, as a Scholar marks his copy to write
after it. Then will it come to pass with thee as with Moses, Exodus 34. 29. He
so long had seen the back-parts or Suburbs of Gods glory, that the skin of his
face shone, gilded with the reflection thereof. So those who mark the Perfect
and behold the Upright, not only with a forecast, but chiefly with a reflexed
look, cannot but be gainers thereby. For the godly, who, as S. Paul says,
Phil. 2. 15. shine as lights among a crooked and perverse Nation in the world,
will make such as effectually mark them, become like unto them, and shine
accordingly. We see that such who look on Bleer-eyes, have their own sight
infected therewith; and those who diligently mark, and steadfastly fasten the
eyes of their souls, on the perfect and upright man, will in process of time,
partake of their perfection.

Use. 1. It serves to confute such, who, though living long in this world, and
conversing with variety of persons, yet mark and observe nothing at all. If a
privy inspection might be made into the Diaries and Journals of such men's
lives, how would they be found filled with empty ciphers, whose total sum
amounts to just nothing. When Messengers and Trumpeters come into the Castles
and Garrisons of their enemies, commonly they are brought blindfolded, that
they may make no dangerous discoveries to report to their Party at their
return. What out of Policy is done to them, that many out of idleness and
ignoranc^ do to themselves, mask and hood wink their souls, do take notice of
nothing in their passage through this world.

Others mark but only such things which are not remarkable. Dina marks, but
what? Genesis 34. 1. The fancie-ful fashions of the daughters of Canaan: and we
may generally observe, that all observations follow the humor of the
Observers, so that what vice or virtue in him is predominant, plainly appears
in their discoveries. The Covetous man marks, but whom? those who are rich and
wealthy. The ambitious man, but whom? those that are high and honorable. The
lascivious man marks, but whom? such as are beautiful and wanton: few there be
of David's devout disposition, who mark the Perfect, behold the Upright; for the
end of that man is peace.

2 Use. Let all who desire this peaceable end, labor whilst living to list
themselves in the number of those who are perfect and upright.

King Ahaaz coming to Damascus, was so highly affected with an Idolatrous Altar
which he there beheld, that he needs would have that Original Copyed out, 2
King. 16. 10. And the like made at Jerusalem, according to the fashion of it,
and all the workmanship thereof. Fool, to prefer the pattern of the infernal
pit, before the pattern in the Mount. But this his profane action will afford
us a pious application.

You that have marked the Just and beheld the Upright, ought to be affected
with the piety of his life, cannot but be contented with the peaceableness of
his end. This therefore do; Such who are pleased with the pattern of his
perfection and uprightness, go home, and raise the like fabric, erect the like
structure for all considerable particulars in your own soul.

Vain and wicked was the wish of Balaam, Numb. 23. 10. Let me dye the death of
the righteous, and let my last end be like his. He would commence per saltum,
take the Degree of Happiness, without that of Holiness; like those who will
live Papists, that they may sin the more freely; and dye Protestants, that they
may be saved the more certainly. But know that it is an impossibility to graft
a peaceable death upon any other stock, but that of a pious life.

3. Use. Let it retrench our censuring of the final estate of those whom we
know led godly lives, and we see had shameful deaths. Let us expound what seems
doubtful at their death, by what was clear in their life. A true conclusion may
sometimes be inferred from false premises: but from true premises the
conclusion must ever be true. Possibly a good life in the next world, may
follow a bad one in this; namely, where (though late) sincere repentance
interposeth. But most certain and necessary it is, that a good life here must
be crowned with a good condition hereafter. What then though. John Baptist lost
his head by Herod's cruelty, he still held his head in the Apostles phrase, Col.
2. 19. By a lively faith continuing his dependence on, and deriving life and
comfort from Jesus Christ, in which respect he may be said to have dyed in
peace.

There is a sharp and bitter passage in Scripture, Luke 9. 23. And yet if the
same be sweetened with a word or two in my Text, it may not only easily be
swallowed, but also will certainly be digested into wholesome nourishment: the
words are these, and let him take up his Cross daily and follow me. His Cross;
some will say, I could comfortably comport my self to carry such a man's Cross,
his is a slight, a light, and easy; mine a high, a huge and heavy Cross. Oh
but children must not be choosers of that rod where with they are to be
corrected; that is to be let alone unto the discretion of their father. Men may
fit clothes, but God does fit Crosses for our backs: no Cross will please him
for thee to take up, but thy Cross, only that which his providence has made
thee the proprietarie thereof. Well take it up, on this assurance, that the end
thereof shall be peace.

Take up thy Cross. Is it not enough that I be passive, and patiently carry it
when it is laid upon me? What a Tyranny is this for me to cross my self by
taking up my own cross? But God will have it so, thou must take it up: that is,
First thou must freely confess that nothing has befaln thee by chance or
fortune, but by Gods all-ordering Providence. Secondly, Thou must acknowledge
that all afflictions imposed upon thee, are the just punishment of thy sins
deserved by thee; if inflicted more heavily, seeing all things is mercy which
is on this side of hell fire. This it is to take up thy cross do it willingly,
for it will be peace at the last.

The last is the worst word, Daily. Not that God every day sends us a new
affliction, but he requires that every day we should put on a habit of
patience, to undergo whatsoever cross is laid upon us. This I conceive to be
David's meaning, Psalm. 73. 14. and chastened every morning. Daily, superstitious
Friars never esteem themselves ready till they have put on their Crucifix, and
religious Protestants must never account themselves ready till they have put on
their cross.

The Papists have besprinkled their Calendar with many festivals, having no
foundation in Scripture, or ancient Church History. One day they call the
Exaltation of the Cross, which is May 3. another the Invention of the Cross,
which is September 14. But we must know there is one day of the Cross more, Day
which continues from the beginning to the end of the year, namely, the
Assumption of the Cross; every one must take it up daily, do it, and do it
willingly, for the end thereof will be peace.

And yet there is a fourth thing remaining in the Text, when we have took up
our Cross we must follow Christ; it is not enough to take it up, and then stand
still, as if suffering gave us a supersedeas for doing; but God at the same
time will have our hands, back, and feet of our soul exercised; hands to take
up, back to bear our Cross, and feet to follow him; and happy it is for us,
though we cannot go the same pace, if we go the same path with our Savior; for
the end thereof will be peace.

O the amiableness of the word Peace! oh the extensiveness of the word End!
Peace? what can be finer ware? End? what can be larger measure?

The amiableness of Peace, especially to us, who so long have prayed for it,
and paid for it, and sought for it, and fought for it, and yet as yet in
England have not attained it. For the Tragoedy of our war is not ended, but the
scene thereof removed, and the Element only altered from earth unto water.
Surely had we practiced David's precept, Psalm. 34. 14. Eschew evil and do good.
seek peace and ensue it, before this time we had obtained our desire. It is to
be feared we have been too earnest prosecutors of the last, and too slow
performers of the first part of the verse: great have been our desires, but
small our deeds for peace. Had we eschewed evil and done good, God ere this
time, would have crowned our wishes with the fruition of peace.

The Mariners Act. 27. 30. (men skilful to shift for themselves at Sea) had a
private project for their own safety, namely, to quit their crazie ship, (with
the soldiers and passengers therein,) and secretly to convey themselves into
the boat. But their design miscarried being discovered by S. Paul to the
soldiers, who cut the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off.

All men ought to have a public spirit for the general good of our Nation, the
success where of we leave to the al-managing providence of the God of heaven
and earth. But I hope it will be no treason against our State, and I am sure it
will be safe for us, who are but private persons to provide for the securing of
our souls, and to build a little Cock-boat, or small Vessel of a quiet
conscience in our own hearts, thereby to escape to the Haven of our own
Happiness? We wish well to the great Ship of our whole Nation, and will never
desert it so, but that our best prayers and desires shall go with it. But
however providence shall dispose thereof we will stick to the petty Pinnace of
Peace in our own consciences. Sure I am, no soldiers shall be able to cut the
Cables, I mean no forcible impression from without, shall disturb or discompose
the peace which is within us.

O the extensiveness of the word End! It is like the widows oil, 2 King. 4. 6.
Which multiplied to fill the number and bigness of all Vessels brought unto it,
so here bring days weeks, months, years, myriads, millions of years end will
fill them all, yet it self is never filled, as being the endless end of
eternity.

We will conclude all with a passage of Columbus, when he first went to make
discovery of the new world. Long time had he sailed and seen nothing but Sea,
insomuch as the men and Mariners with him begun to mutiny resolving to go no
further, but return home again. Here Columbus with good words and fair language
pacified them for the present, persuading them to sail forward for one month
more. That month elapsed, he overintreated them to hold out but 3 weeks longer:
that three weeks expired, he humbly and heartily sued unto them, that for his
sake they would sail on but 3 days more, promising to comply with the
Resolutions of returning, in case that within those 3 days, no encouragement
to their contrary was discovered. Before the ending whereof they descryed fire,
which was to them a demonstration that it was not subjected on water, and which
invited them for the finding out of those Islands, whereby others afterward
discovered the whole Continent.

Whilst we live here below in our bodies, and sail toward another world in
our souls and desires, we must expect to meet with much disturbance in our
distempered passions: yea, such as sometimes in the hour of temptation will
amount to a mutiny; and much dishearten us when tossed with the tempest of
afflictions we can make no land, discover no hope of happiness. It must then be
our work to still and calm our passions, persuading them to persevere, and
patiently to proceed, though little hope appear for the present. Not that with
Columbus we should indent with our souls to expect any set-time of years,
months or days, (this were unlawful, and with the wicked, Psalm. 78. 41. To
limit the Holy One of Israel) but indefinitely without any notation of time:
Let us till on our souls by degrees, a while, a little while, yet a very little
while to depend on God, and go on in goodness. Then at last a pillar of fire, a
comfortable light of a conscience cleared through the blood and merits of
Christ will appear unto us, not only contenting us for the present, but
directing us for the future to that bliss and happiness enjoyed by the Subject
of my Text, Mark the Perfect, behold the Upright; for the end of that man is
Peace. AMEN.

FINIS.
Page 7. l. 4. for ad praevaricationem r. and prevarication, p. 12. l. 5. for
(...), r. (...).


