A Fuller RELATION OF The taking of Bath by Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX his Forces: With
the conditions of the surrender.

Sir Thomas Bridges the Governor, and his Officers gone to Bristoll.

Taken therein,

200. Prisoners. 300. Arms. 6. Pieces of Ordnance. 10. Barrels of Powder. 10.
Barrels of Match, and much Ammunition. Diverse heaps of Bullet. Great store of
Beef, Corn, and other provisions. The Standard colors upon the Fort-Royall,
and all other Colors in the Town.
ALSO,

The proceedings of the Scottish Army, and their march toward Monmouth after
the King. With the manner of the Kings escape at the late taking of 80. of His
Lifeguard at Black-rock, intending to pass over Severne.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates, at the sign of the Mayden-head on Snow-hill
near Holborn-conduit. 1645.

A Letter from a Gentleman of Gloucester to his friend in London.
SIR,
FOr news here, the Scots Army are now quartered upon the Forest side of
Deane, their headquarters at Ludbury; yesterday their foot had a Rendezvous at
Newant. I doubt not but you have already heard of their taking of Cannon
Froome, where most of the enemy refusing quarter were put to the Sword.
Collonell Harvey is appointed by the General to garrison the place with the
foot he has raised in this County, and our Committee here do furnish him with
Powder and Arms for the garrison of Cannon Froome. The Scots had intelligence
that the King is passed over the River of Severne at black Rock toward
Bristoll, it is conceived they intend to follow him. It is credibly informed
here, that 80 horse endeavoring to pass over the Severne at black Rock were
this week taken by the Parliaments Frigot, or shallop, the countrey-people
there do say it was the Kings, Lifeguard, and that his Majesty upon their
taking drew back. There are many of the Welsh quartered about Bristoll on this
side of it, and Prince Rupert labors exceedingly in fortifying the Town; he
has had several meetings with the Wiltshire and some Somersetshire Clubmen
upon Lansdowne, but they refused to take up Arms, or join with him, to which
he pressed them very earnestly. This day the Scots brought their sick and hurt
men into this Town (the L. General Leven having before spoken with our
Governor about it) they are this day marching through the Forest side toward
Monmouth. Sir, This is all for the present from him, who is,

Yours, etc.
Gloucester, July 1645.
A Letter from the Army to a Gentleman in London.
SIR,
IT having so pleased the Almighty still to go along with us, and to prosper
our adventures in these parts, I thought good, having so fit an opportunity to
make you acquainted with the late successful proceedings of our Army. Our
General Sir Thomas Fairfax his headquarters is at Wels, from whence he has
sent a party against Sherburne, and another party of two Regiments of Horse and
two Companies of Dragoones under the command of the ever-honoured Colonel Rich
toward Bath to view the Town, and give them an account thereof. At the
approach of Colonel Riches Dragoones near the Town on Tuesday last, and
coming down the hill at the bridge end the enemy in Bath took an Alarm and
discharged their Ordnance, whereupon some of our Dragoones let fly at them
their Musket Shot, and thereupon sent them a summons, upon which (so great a
terror the Almighty struck into the enemies hearts) that although there were
none of our soldiers on the other side of the Town, yet the next morning the
enemy sent for a parley; At which they agreed to surrender the City, with all
the common soldiers, Ordnance, Arms and Ammunition therein to our Forces upon
this pretty condition only; That Sir Thomas Bridges the stout Governor
thereof, and his brave spirited Officers should march to Bristoll, which was
condescended unto by our Forces, who thereupon entered the Town took therein
six pieces of Ordnance, 200 common prisoners, 300 Arms, ten Barrells of Powder
and other Ammunition and provisions. Colonel Massey is gone with 8000 horse
and foot toward Exeter, from whence we hear the enemy have drawn their
horse and foo^^ out into the field, and some field Pieces into their
out-Workes, the intentions of the enemy are as is conceived to join all their
forces together, the better to enable them (if they cannot avoid it) to give us
Battle.

The report here is, that Prince Rupert went Tuesday last out of Bristoll, and
is not since heard off, the valiant German has behaved himself so gallantly
that he is shamed to show his head. The enemy in Bristoll are much distract
for fear of our forces.

Comb near Bath, July, 30. 1645.
A List of the particulars taken in Bathe by Sir Thomas Fairfax forces.
TWo hundred prisoners. Three hundred Arms. Six pieces of Ordnance. Ten
barrels of Powder. Ten Barrels of Match, and much Ammunition. Diverse heaps of
Bullets. Great store of Beef, Corn, and other provisions. The Standard
colors upon the Fort-Royall, and all other Colors in the Town.
FINIS.

