The Faithful Young Man and Constant Maid; OR, The Unexpressable Love between
sweet WILLIAM and fair ELENOR.
To the Tune of, The Plowman's Health
This may be Printed.

R. P.





WE will leave all the thoughts of the world for a while
and in this sweet Grove an hour beguile,
We will ever resolve to be constant and true
And Innocent Ioys we will now renew,
To my Fair pretty Elinor faithful I Will prove,
If beauteous young Elinor me will love;
To my fair pretty Elenor, faithful i will prove,
if, etc.
I will love my sweet William above all mankind,
And ever be true, and at all times kind,
All young Lovers hereafter shall learn by us two,
To be always constant, and always true,
No Fortune shall make me, from thee er'e depart
And to my sweet William i will give my Heart;
No Fortune shall make me from thee e're depart,
And, etc.
No Youth to a Beauty more constant shall be,
Then I will be always, (fair maid) to thee
No Fortune or Fate, shall extinguish this Fire,
Nor no other Beauty create desire,
It Is only fair Elenor that I will love
And ever to her will I constant prove.
It Is only fair Elenor that I will love,
and ever, etc.
When Marriage shall bring me into thy soft Arms,
How happy shall I be in thy charms?
How happy each day, and how happy each night?
The day bringing Pleasure, the night Delight.
I shall then be happy all days of my Life,
Possessing all Ioys in a virtuous Wife,
I shall then be happy all days of my Life,
Possessing, etc.
We will leave this lewd World to it is wretched Estate,
And now we will love before it is too sare,
Each Grove, and each Fountain a witness shall prove,
How dearly we will live, and how well we will Love.
The Pleasures of Lovers we here shall obtain,
And after we shall in Elysium reign;
The Pleasures of Lovers we here shall obtain,
And, etc.
If lovely fair Maids will resolve to be coy
They loose those sweet minutes they might enjoy,
If Beauty, to Beauty, will only be kind,
Young Maids to themselves must be then confined,
And Lovers but vainly those Beauties do serve;
But Maidens may give what Men don't deserve,
And Lovers but vainly those Beauties do serve,
But, etc.
Then let us enjoy while our Passions are strong
A minutes delay will appear too long,
Though Beauty is lovely and always does please,
It Is kindness that only can Flames appease,
It Is kindness that always creates a desire,
And is the sweet Fuel to Cupids Fire;
It Is kindness that always creates a desire.
And, etc.
Fair Elenor thus let us Pleasures pursue,
And let us (like Turtles) be ever true,
That young Men and Maidens our praise may proclaim
And by our example may live in Fame,
That Ages hereafter may learn for to prove,
More true and more constant, and always Love,
That Ages hereafter may learn to prove,
More True and Constant, and always Love.
Printed for J. Back at the Black Boy near the Drawbridge on London Bridge.


