A funeral Ellegie, upon the death of Mr. John Pim one of the worthy Members
of the house of Commons Deceased the 8 of December.

depiction of tomb
Has Fate, and Time, conspird, to send thee Death,
In spite of all the life guard of his breath:
Health, Wit, and Courage, strength for to withstand*
Natures declining age, by temperance hand:
Grew not his senses like the laurel green,
By years experience still more riper seen,
Grew not his care still for his countries good;
A Bulwark that false Antichrist withstood:
Was not his care his study, and his mind,
To beat down Vice, and have the Church refined:
Did not his Judgment in the knowing Laws,
Both Temporal and Divine deserve applause:
Did not his care spread like a saving shroud,
With wholesome Counsel fit to be allowed,
Like to a reverend Rabby of the Land.
Judgment possessed his Brain, Justice his Hand;
Patience and temperance both lived in his mind,
Pity his heart, his eyes always inclind,
To look upon distresses of the poor, and apply help,
What can a man do more.
His well pend Speeches, grave, discreet, and good,
Has been approved, by those that understood,
To savor nothing, but of care, and weal,
To public health, who their defects would heal.
Harsh roughness mixture had not in his blood,
Meekness, and patience in his actions stood,
Petition^ given him from humble hands,
As humbly he takes, and for them stands;
So far that if they righteous things require,
It Is hard if he cannot finish their desire:
And what gained he for all his well inclind,
But censure evil from the base of mind,
Hate of Malignant Papists, Cavaliers,
With their abusive libells, still appears,
To fling at him reproach, and scandalls base,
Which backwards still returned unto each face:
And still in spite of their weak Etnian ire,
His perfect gold outlived their hateful fire,
And I could wish that that from his ashie urne,
That his new Fenix might to us return.
AN ACROSTICK on his name.
I do not grieve but thousands more,
Over thy marble drops a second shower.
Hearts filled with sorrow, eyes still overflowes
Nothing but tears can ever drown sad woes.
Peace quiet rest give thee, yet thy name shall be
In every heart worn for thy memory:
Mean time we stand engaged thou have discharged thine.
EPITAPH.
Here Is Earth in Earth involved Oh such a mold!
Whose ore is purer then refined gold.
Worms touch it not it is such a sacred clay
You cannot rape, remain then till the day
Your separations meet, when both may be
Happy revived in blessed eternity.
Finis.
Printed by John Hammond according to order.


