MENENTO MORI


A FUNERAL ELEGY, IN COMMEMORATION Of the sadly Deplored and much-Lamented and
Unhappy DEATH of that Unfortunate Knight, Sir John Johnston; Who was Executed,
at Tyburn, the 23th. day of December, 1690. for Felloniously forcing away the
Lady Wharton, an Infant, etc.
LICENSED, according to Order.



Since unto me, Unworthy, you commit
This worthy Task (for better Muses fit)
To Sing (nay rather, sadly to deplore)
This common Loss, that nothing can restore.
You, Sacred Brood, born of Celestial Race,
You Virgin-Youths, that pour down the Grace
Of Arts and Learning on your Servant, dear,
Vouchsafe Assistance to my Mourning here:
Teach me sad Accents, and a weeping Measure,
To strain forth Pity, not Revenge and Pleasure.
And you, my Private Cares (although the cause
Of your Despairs; does never; never Pause)
Pause you a little, and give ear awhile,
'Midst public Griefs, my private to beguile.
Give leave, I pray you; for a private Case
Unto a public, ever must give place.
Alas! how fitly is this Life of ours,
Compared to Field Grass, and to fading Flowers?
Fresh, green and gallant, in the Morning-Sun,
Withered and Dead, before the Day be done!
Did ever yet the Worlds bright Eye behold
(Since first the Eternal Earthly Slime enfoul'd)
A Frame of Flesh, so Glorious here beneath,
But has been ruined by the rage of Death?
Of Death, dread Victor of all Earthly thing,
Who in a moment equals Clowns with Kings.
No Wealth can wage him, nor no Wit prevent him;
No lovely Beauty can at all relent him:
Nay, (which is worse) no Virtue can avail;
Ah me! that Death on Virtue should prevail!
But it is decreed, Death is the Mead for Sin;
This, by Ambition, did our Grand-Sire win:
And We, the Heirs both of his work and wages,
Must all Dye once, throughout all after-Ages.
And Here, for instance, see this Sable Hearse,
Shrowding the Subject of my Mournful Verse!
What shall thou see more, far more living here?
This Heaven, this Sun, thou often before have seen;
And should thou live another Plato's Year,
This World would be the same that it has been,
Death's end of Ills, and only Sanctuary,
Of him that cannot 'scape the Grudge and Gall
Of a Potent and Mighty ADVERSARY:
It is a Point, which Heaven appoints to all.
There Is Rest Eternal for thy Labors, rise;
There Is for thy Bondage, boundless Liberty:
There when Death ends, she begins thy Life:
And where is no more Time, there is Eternity.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Millet, at the Angel, in Little-Brittain.


