FALSE PROPHETS Discovered.

Being a true story of the Lives and Deaths of two Weavers (late of Colchester)
viz. Richard Farnham and John Bull; who affirmed themselves the two great
Prophets which should come in the end of the world, Mentioned Revel. 11. Also
that the Plague should not come nigh their dwelling. Nevertheless being
Prisoners, the one in Old-Bridewell, the other in New-Bridewell, by a strange
Providence of Almighty God, both the one and the other dyed of the Plague in a
House where they usually met, in Rosemary-Lane, in January last, 1641.

Here also is laid down their strange Prophecies, and the Scriptures which they
most blasphemously wrested, to the seducing of diverse Proselytes, who yet
remain obstinate, and confidently affirm that they are risen from the dead,
and gone in vessels of Bullrushes to convert the ten Tribes; the which they
will also seem to prove, as may be seen by this ensuing discourse.

Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

1 Cor. 10.12. LONDON, Printed for I. W. 1642.

False Prophets Discovered.
RIchard Farneham and John Bull late of Colchester weavers, do hold themselves
to be Prophets not ordinary, but the two great Prophets that should come in the
end of the world which were spoke of in Zach. 4.4. Which says, these are the
two anointed ones that stand before the Lord of the whole earth: they were also
spoke of said they in Revel. 11.3. where they be called the two witnesses,
Verse 4.2. Olive trees and two Candlesticks, Verse 5. Out of their mouths
proceeds fire, Verse 6. They have power to shut Heaven that it rain not in the
days of their prophesies; and power over waters to turn them to blood, and to
smite the earth with all plagues as often as they will, and they shall prophecy
1260 days, Verse 3. And having finished their testimony the beast that
ascended out of the bottomless pit should kill them in Jerusalem where
Christ was slain, and the Nations should not suffer the dead bodies to be
buried for three days and a half, because they were the men that tormented
them that dwell on the earth, Verse 9.10. But after three days and a half the
Spirit of life should enter into them and to the amazement of all their enemies
they should stand upon their feet, and Richard Farnliam should be King upon
David's throne, and John Bull should be Priest in Aarons seat, and they should
reign for ever. They instructed such as came to them in diverse points, but
because those things that God has revealed to them are of a high nature,
therefore they question men and women in the first place of certain points,
that if they cannot answer to them, then they concluded that they were not
capable of the high mysteries that God has showed them, and therefore they
questioned, 1 Whether they were actually justified before they did repent, or
repent before they were actually justified. 2 If actually justified, then they
asked how long since, for they supposed every one knew the direct time of their
assurance.) 3 They ask some other questions touching the manner of that work
of their assurance of salvation, election, etc.
which if the Catechumists can answer, then would they declare other doctrines
of higher matters touching the new Jerusalem and resurrection of the dead a
1000 years before the end of the world, and in this they agreed not with the
ancient Chileasts or Millinaries but with the Corinthians that held marrying
and getting of Children in that thousand years, they hold that Christ's death
is not for mankind, but for some certain persons and that his death only
purges away sin before justification, but not after, saying that such sins as
are committed after justification are not expiated by the sacrifice of Christ,
but by his alone intercession; they also hold that all such as commit the sin
against the Holy Ghost shall certainly be saved; because say they, none can
commit that but only such as have repented and received the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.
and been sanctified by the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10. They are certain
such cannot be damned, howsoever such shall lose their assurance, their joy,
and comfort in God, and in conscience be as Spira was even in Hell here, such
they say are delivered up unto Satan, and are not to be prayed for. Moreover
that Christ's prayer, John 17. when he prayed not for the world, but for such as
were already converted or should be converted. Out of the world, they said that
prayer was not for any, before justification, nor after apostasy, and yet those
that once have faith, cannot for all the apostacies in the world be damned;
therefore they held that Hemeneus and Philetus, and Simon Magus, were all
certainly saved: they also hold, God Almighty is the author of sin, and that
all the mischiefs that are done in the world were by God decreed: they also
held that no manner of death could ceaze of themselves till they came to be
slain in Jerusalem, they said this Kingdom of England is full of abomination,
idolatries, and whoredoms, in token of which God has moved Richard Farneham
the Weaver as he did Hosea the Prophet, to take to himself another man's wife,
viz. a wife of whoredoms, Hos. 3. Which Richard Farneham accordingly did, a
Seafaring man's wife, a woman of fine parts for knowledge in the Scripture,
which he deluded, and persuading her that he was a Prophet, she in obedience to
him as a Prophet, (so she said) was married to him notwithstanding her husband
alive at sea, who shortly after coming home, laid his wife in Newgate, where
she was arraigned and condemned for having two husbands, but Farneham and she
both were confident that she should not dye for that; as the Harlot did abide
for Hosea many days, so they were confident this Seafaring man's wife should
for Farneham, which accordingly came to pass, for she being a deluded woman,
through mercy, did obtain a reprieve, and it was ordered that the Seafaring
man should have his wife again, who accordingly took her, and lay with her in
the prison; which as they said did occasion the fulfilling of the third
Chapter, which says, Love a woman beloved of her friend, yet an adultresse,
which this woman was now to her husband Farnham, because she had played the
whore with the Seafaring man to whom she was given by the Justices; yet not
married to him as they said, which by law she ought to have been, so that now
they said this is by them made a national sin, Ier. 3.1. And as they were
confident she should not die, but abide for Farneham, so in this they be true
Prophets, for the Seafaring man is gone to the East Indies, and she returned to
Farneham in Newbridewell, where he was a prisoner till he sickned, and John
Bull in Old bridewell, Only through favor had liberty to go abroad, and often
met at one Curtains house in Rosemary lane, where they both dyed, but Farneham
dyed the first, and there was between Farnhams death and Bulls ten days;
that is, those ten days in which they suffered great tribulation, which they
say were foretold. Rev. 2.10. Where it is written, the Devil shall east some
of you into prison, and ye shall suffer tribulation ten days. Be thou
faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life: in which time
they did daily exhort one another to constancy, and not to be staggered by the
things that then happened. One of the women seeming to utter but some doubtful
words, John Bull said away devil, and both John and the women said that
Farnham overcoming that great temptation, and holding fast his confidence to
the end, meaning his opinion he then should receave a Crown only he should lie
three days and three nights in the heart often e earth, as Jonah was in the
whales belly; but then he should rise, which accordingly he did, viz. upon
January the eighth, 1641. And that then that Scripture was fulfilled, and not
before: most impudently affirming, that only in Farnham that Scripture is
fulfilled. Also most blasphemously they affirm, that Farnham is that Prophet
which Moses spoke of, Deuteronomy. 18 18. which was there promised to be raised up
like to Moses. This said they was not Christ, for which they allege John 1.21
where say they, that Prophet, Christ, and Elias, are esteemed three distinct
persons. In like manner most blasphemously they applied many Scriptures proper
to our Lord, to Richard Farnham, as Psalm 21. The King shall rejoice in thy
strength, thou have given him his hearts desire, and have set a crown of pure
gold upon his head. Also Daniel 9.26. Where it is written that Messia shall be
cut off, but not for himself, this they say was Farnham Gods anointed. Also
Isay 53.8. He was taken from prison and from judgment, namely Farnham, and who
shall declare his generation, the heavens must contain Christ's body till the
restitution, say they, Acts 3.21. And therefore al these Scriptures and many
more are to be fulfilled in Farnham, say their deluded proselites; and that
Christ does make him his substitute to do his work on earth, Psalm. 89.19. I
have laid help upon him that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the
people, that (say they) is Farnham, so that he is termed Gods battle-axe, Ier.
20.21. Thou art my battle-axe and weapon of war, for with thee will I break
in pieces the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms.

It would be too tedious to cite the multitude of Scriptures peculiar to the
Messia that Farnham and his Proselites most blasphemously applied to that
seducer: for John Bull that he is to be a Priest in the new Jerusalem, and
after his death to be raised again. For that purpose they bring, 1 Samuel 2. and
2 last verse. I will raise me up a faithful High Priest, says God, that shall
do according to that which is in my heart, and he shall walk before mine
anointed for ever. That King Farnham that is there styled Gods anointed, before
whom John Bull must be a Priest for ever. But if any move a question where
these two Prophets spend their time now, seeing they did with such confidence
(before they died) affirm, that within three days they should rise again,
and also that diverse women which were of their company affirm, that they be
for certain risen from the dead.

The women answer, viz. Farnhams wife, which was the Seafaring man's wife, and
one Cortius wife, in whose house they dyed, Cortin himself had been of their
opinion, who also died of the plague. Also one Ticknals wife a Carpenter at
Wapping, these three seduced women, say that Farnham and Bull are gone to
convert the ten Tribes, which said they had traveled a long journey of a year
and a halfes voyage to find a country to serve their God in a country in
which no man had ever dwelt, 2. Esdras 13.41. To that place they women are most
confident they be gone, and that as Moses was hid in an Ark of Bullrushes so
Farneham and Bull are gone in vessels of Bullrushes, say 18.1 2. Woe be to that
land which they say is England, that sends Ambassadors by the sea, even in
vessels of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, go ye swift messengers to a
nation scattered and rooted, but terrible from the beginning, these be the ten
Tribes say they to whom these swift messengers be now fent: that this is truth,
they allege another place, Isay 41.25 where they say that Farnhams
resurrection and journey is recited in that he was then raised from the North,
and he shall come from the rising of the Sun, and shall come upon Princes as
upon Mortar, and as the Potter treads the clay. This is that say they the
Apostle speaks of, Acts 13.40, 41. Beware therefore lest that come upon you
which is spoken of in the Prophets, which, say they, is that Farnham the Lords
anointed shall come upon the Princes as upon Mortar; and as the Potter treads
the Clay: yea, they are so confident of this that they boldly say, if the
Scriptures be the Word of God, then are these things certainly true: and so
bold and confident that they will in drinking one to another drink to these
dead friends, Farnham and Bull, saying that they be certain they are alive,
and shall return to rule this kingdom with a rod of Iron. Thus we see how
fearfully these poor souls are deluded; but more especially may the fruits of
their delusion be discerned, for that we may perceave by discoursing with them
how they rejoice in it; ye it is even meat and drink to them; and moreover they
rejoice to be evil spoke of, and to suffer shame and reproach, which
doubtless they do very much: yea and say, that these Prophets left them in
charge to suffer as much shame as was laid upon them, either by following their
corpse to the grave, or otherwise, for the more their shame was, the greater
should their glory be. Ye Farnhams wife, whose husband coming home from sea,
and finding his wife deluded, and so married to Farnham, to fulfill (as they
did conceave) that in Hosea, where the Prophet was commanded to take unto
himself a wife of whoredoms Mrs Haddinton (for so I take it her name was) she
was content to lose the glory of being esteemed an honest woman, and to be
accounted a wife of whoredoms that she might occasion as she did conceave the
fulfilling of that prophecy. But O the Devil that subtle Serpent, who has
entangled the minds of these poor women, for that there was one that would have
been at cost of opening the graves, though six or seven weeks after they were
dead, that so the sight of the dead corpse in graves might have convinced their
follies. But O the deepnesse of Satan, he had persuaded them how this was the
very time that Scripture was fulfilled, Mat. 22.39, 40. An adulterous
generation seeks a sign, but no figne shall be given but that of the prophet
Jonah where as they said our Lord showed many miracles, but said they the men
of this generation, have often times sought a sign from Farnham, but no sign
must be given and therefore if their graves be opened and the simillits of
their bodies should appear, to our senses, it is but what they do expectt,
for that to this generation no sign shall be given, notwithstanding they are
certain as they say, that their true bodies are not there; the consideration
of which delusion may make any honest Christian even with a sad heart to pour
out prayers for them, and to move those that be able with patience and
meekness to prove, if by any means they can recover them out of the snare of
the devil, for that these three with some others setting their delusion aside,
are esteemed by understanding men, to be women of good parts, honest of
conversations, and very ready in Scriptures, and therefore it is hoped that it
would not be labor lost, forsomeable divines to labor their redusing: let him
know that he that converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a
soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, James 5.20.

The wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.

FINIS.

