TWO LETTERS From His Excellency Sr. THOMAS FAIRFAX. One to the Commissioners
of the ARMY, the other to the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council of the City, of London. As it was presented, July 29-1647.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving resolved upon this enclosed dispatch from the City of LONDON, I thought
it my part to give you an account of it, and to give you all assurance that my
heart is deeply affected with the late carriages to wards the Parliament. And
however others have neglected their duty toward them for their security and
defense; yet as God shall enable me, it shall be my great business, to improve
all that is in my hand for the preserving of them, and in them the interest of
this Nation, and what construction soever, some formerly may have put upon the
proceedings of this Army: I trust the Lord will by his good hand lead us into
such good actions as shall witness our end answerable to all our profession,
to wit, for the good of the Kingdom, and there into be an effectual saving to
great authority of the Kingdom in the parlia. I rest,

Bedford July, 29. 1647. Your most assured friend Tho. Fairfax.


To the Right honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
YOu may please to remember the forward compliance of this Army with your
desires to remove to this distance, and that upon the assurance you gave them
of your concurrence with their declared d^si^es, for the settling the liberty
and peac of this Kingdom, (against which you never yet offered us one exception
or any ground of diss^nt) as also of your great tenderness and resolution to
secure the, Parliament and their Privileges, from any violence or attempt, the
ch^ife reason given us of your late listing of new forces, and wherein we did
most acquiesce.

That upon this confidence we had disposed the Army into several parts of the
Kingdom; for the ease of the whole to above 100 miles distance: we had given up
ourselves, to the effecting of such proposals as might tend to the comfortable
settlement of this poor Kingdom, and we were in a hopeful way for the speedy
releif of Ireland.

We cannot then but be deeply sensible of the unparalleld violation acted upon
the Parliament, upon Monday last, by a rude multitude from your City, because
therein (the guards sent from the City did not only neglect their duty for
the security of the Parliam. from such violence, and the whole City to yield
any relief to the houses in that extremity, but I am assured from eye and care
witnesses that diverse of the Common Council gave great encouragement to it,
which does not only gainsay your former professions, but does violence to
those many obligations that (by your Charter Protestation and sundry
otherways) lie upon you to protect the Parliament.

For my p^rt I cannot but look on yourselves (who are in Authority) as
accomp^able to the Kingdom, for your present interrup^ions of that hopeful
way of Peace and set^lement, things were in, for this N^tion and of releiveing
Ireland occasined by the late Tresonable, and distructive Engagemen^:
Especially by the latter Prodigius and horid force done upon the Parliament,
tending to Dissolve all Government upon which score w^e and the whole Kingdom
shall have cause to put ev^ry thing of the like nature that may h^ppeen to the
Parliament, or to any who are friends to them and this Army except by your
Wisdom care, and Industrey the chief Acters in the premises, may be Derected
secuted and given up to the procuring of justice for the same, and the best
Endevonis used to prevent the like for the future And so I rest.

Bedford 29, July; 1647. Your most assured Friend to serve you Thomas Farirfax.


FJNJS.

