A TRIPLE RECONCILER, Stating the CONTROVERSIES

Whether Ministers have an Exclusive power of Communicants from the Sacrament.
Whether Any persons Unordained may lawfully Preach. Whether The Lords Prayer
ought not to be used by all Christians.
By THOMAS FULLER, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by Will. Bently, for John Williams at the Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard.

Anno Dom. 1654.

TO THE Right Honorable, and truly virtuous Lady, ANNE Vicountess BALTINGLASS,
the blessings of this life and a better.
MADAM,
THis my Book addresseth it self to you, as once the Dove to NOAH in the Ark,
bringing an Olive branch with three sprigs in the mouth thereof. It is of a
Peaceable nature, and desires to be a Peacemaker betwixt the opposite parties
in the three Controversies handled therein. My humble request to you is, that
with NOAH you would be pleased to put forth your hand and receive it into the
Ark of your protection. I know what success commonly attends all Umpiers and
Arbitrators, that often they lose one, and sometimes both of their friends
betwixt whom they intercede. Meek Moses could not escape in this kind, but when
seeking to atone two striving Israelites, the party who did the wrong, fell
with foul language upon him. I expect the like fate from that side which does
the most injury, and am prepared to undergo their Censure, which I shall do
with the greater alacrity, if these my weak endeavors may find your favorable
acceptance.

The Lord bless your Honor with your Noble Consort, and sanctify your former
sufferings, which a National calamity has cast upon you, that your last days
may be your best days, both in temporal and spiritual improvement, is the daily
desire of

Your Honors truly devoted servant THOMAS FULLER.

THE FIRST RECONCILER.
LEVITICUS 13. 3. And the Priest shall look on him, and pronounce him unclean.
The words contain an Examination, and the Priest shall, etc. Condemnation, and
pronounce him, etc.


WHich words we will handle first Literally, of Corporal leprosy; then
Analogically, to show by proportion how far Ministers under the Gospel are
inpowered to pass censure on the goodness, or badness of men, so to admit, or
exclude them Gods ordinance.

2. Be it here premised that the leprosy we speak of, called the plague of
leprosy, is not what proceeded from natural causes or distempers (in which
cases the patient might be more properly sent to the Physician) but was
immediately inflicted by Gods hand, dedecus medicinae, and a principal if not
peculiar disease to the Jews, not finding in the Acts, that the Apostles, when
preaching to the Gentiles out of Palestine, cured any of that disease.

3. I will not stir a step farther before I raise one observation. Great is
gods goodness that we English men generally, live now in the happy ignorance of
the height of leprosy. I say generally, a Leper is a rarity, some few in
Cornwell caused, as Physicians conceive from the frequent eating of fish new
taken out of the sea, I say new: I confess there is Lazars Bath, but though the
Bath be there, thanks be to God, but few Lepers. Indeed some hundred years ago,
when the holy war was continued by the English, our intercourse with eastern
people in Palestine made the leprosy here epidemical, and Hugh Orwell a Bishop
of London dyed thereof Anno 1085. But with the end of that War ended the
leprosy of England, as to the generallity and malignity thereof. Every scab,
or scurf, or scale, observing Tides in the body, is not presently the leprosy,
but know, as the Jews had a disease we have not, so we have a disease the Jews
had not: excuse me for naming it, you may easily conceive what I would
willingly conceal, it is the last rod that God made therewith to whip
wantonness, and which he handselled on the French at Naples two thousand miles
from this place. How came this malady to climb and clamber over the high
aspiring Alps? when got into France? England being an Island secured from the
diseases of the continent how came it to swim over into England, did wicked
Foreigners bring it hither, or wanton English fetch it thence? how ever it was
so, it is, and is a disease so much worse than leprosice, as sin is worse than
suffering, transgression worse than affliction.

4. Now shall we make a brief paraphrase on every word, the Priest, not every
ordinary Levite, but either Aaron or one of his Sons.

Quest. Why was not this power rather committed to a corporation of Priests, as
being too great a charge to be trusted in one person? why were not a vestry of
Lay Elders admitted as Assistants herein.

And the Priest herein was a Type of Christ, who was to be but one* Individual
Person, and therefore a single Priest alone was employed therein.

Shall look on him. But what if he were blind as in the case of Eli? 1 Samuel 4.
15.

And the Commission of trying was granted to the High Priests or one of his
Sons, as it is verse* the 2. who in such a case was to officiate for his Father.

Look. Herein 2. things contained, the inspection of the eye, and the
circumspection of the judgment. For the latter the Priest might not proceed on
his own Arbitrary principles, but was confined to Gods directions prescribed
unto him; and principally he discovered it by 3. signs 1. Depression, by the
subsidency or the sinking of the malady when it entrenched it self in pits and
holes made in the flesh. 2. Diffusion, when the malignity thereof contained not
it self to the first place, but dilated it self over the body. 3.
Discoloration, when the hair therein was turned white, arguing the debility of
nature, white commonly a color of innocence, now of infection; commonly the
livery of cheerfulness, now of sadness; a black white, sable and sorrowful.

Now whereas the Priest was to look on the Party trusting no other evidence
than his own eyes, we learn men's censures must not go on heare-says but be
grounded on their own knowledge. I will go Genesis 18. 21 down and see whether
they have done altogether, etc.

And Pronounce, him the Priest must not be skeptical and suspend his verdict,
but must give sentence to condemn or acquit.

Pronounce. That is positively and publicly; he was not to mutter his
sentence, as the Popish Priests in the mass the words of consecration, no
Clandestine dealing in matters of public concernment.

Unclean. Not as the Apostle says, no unclean thing shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, but ceremoniously unclean, so as to be expelled public
society.

Question. How came it to pass that the Priest was not infected therewith,
seeing sometimes such was the pestilent malignity of the leprosy, as to taint
the clothes, yea the walls of the house? Hard walls scarce penetrable to a
bullet, yielded to the impression of leprosy. Answer, he was secured by his
calling and employment, obeying gods command in his vocation.

Doctrine. A lawful calling is the best Armor against an infection. One in
his calling is armed, out of his calling is naked; at least lasily following
his calling, his Armor, like Ahabs, is not close joynted, and he left
woundable in the internal chinks: with what confidence do we see Brick-layers,
Carpenters, Plummers etc. clambering up high pinnacles, and walking in narrow
places, where our feet cannot stand theirs will run; double the cause thereof,
a lawful calling and long custom which has inured them thereunto. Thus
searchers are not so soon infected with the plague. I confess the plague is
resembled to fire, save that it burns green wood sooner than dry, and young
people more subject to be tainted than old; however this is not the main reason
why such searchers escape, but because in their vocation.

The Ministers under the gospel have not the like calling, and therefore not
the like warrant to approach infectious persons. And we may remember the story
of Mr. Stafford (Divinity Professor in Cambridge) who to convert Sir Henry the
conjurer (the story in Mr. Fox) lost his own life. Come we now to the second
part, the condemnation and pronounce him unclean, him, be he friend or foe,
high or low, without partial respecting of persons.

Doctrine. Gods ministers ought without fear or favor to perform their office,
neither to be frighted nor flattered. It is observed that Moses first hanselled
this Law on his Sister Myriam, Numb. 12. 15.

Secondly, we find it served by Subjects on their Sovereign in the case of
King Uzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 20.

Observe herein the Priest thrusted him out (say not that this was uncivil and
unmannerly violence) touch not mine anointed, seeing the high Priest did it in
obedience to an higher Kings command, yea Uzziah sensible of his sin, says the
Text, hasted out himself. Gods servants left to themselves may fall into sin,
but when it is discovered unto them, as they run into it, if possible they
would fly out of it.

Doctrine. Sad and sorrowful the condition of a sequestered Leper. Indeed some
of us have been sequestered, and blessed be God we have born our yoke in our
youth, hopeing that more freedom is reserved for our old age, but our
sequestration is not to be named with that of a leper, whose sadness consists
in four particulars.

First, they were debarred the access to the place of Gods public worship, and
might not approach the Temple, nor be present at their sacrifices, nor partake
of the Passover.

Secondly, they were debarred from the embraces of their nearest relations.

Thirdly, they could not expect cure but by miracle. Heavens hand, which laid
it on, could only take it off: nor was a leper capable of the benefit of the
pool of Bethesda, not but that undoubtedly cured if cast first into it, but
because those porches John 5. 3. Contained only the impotent, blind, halt,
withered.

Question. Whether lepers were admitted into the society.

Fourthly, dying lepers they were not buried with other people. Thus Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 23. Was buried with his Fathers in the field belonging to the Kings,
for they said he was a Leper, in the suburbs of the place of sepulture.

This serves for a sufficient warrant to justify this City in a practice
which some do behold as over rigid and severe, namely the shutting up of
infected persons at the beginning of the plague; some would have the sick and
the sound to go promiscuously together, as they do at Grand Cairo in Egypt.
Indeed if they be poor to shut them up in their houses and to shut up relief
from them is murder, otherwise if well considering, they have no cause of just
offense who so are shut up from public society.

Here give me leave to take an occasion to raise the gratitude of this City to
God. He that with Jess passes for an old man in London, cannot remember it so
long without the plague, this City was never more populous, surely there being
more hives there are as many Bees: daily increase of houses argues no decrease
of Households. Secondly, never more filth, the kennels and streets are not kept
more clean than before. Thirdly, never more sinful, as much pride as ever
though removed from those whose births still may, and whose state did once
countenance gallantry to such who growing great will grow gaudy in an instant.

Gracious Gods goodness, who sent Christ in the flesh to cure both our corporal
and spiritual leprosy: I shall confine this days Sermon according to promise,
only to corporal leprosy: Herein observe the first particularized miracle,
having the circumstances thereof related in the first gospel which our Savior
did, was on a leper Mat. 8. 2. And he gave him in charge to show himself to the
Priest, and to offer the gift which Moses cammanded for a testimony unto them.
A testimony not so much to testify that the party was not palliately but
perfectly cured, but for a testimony to the Priest to evidence to them, that
Christ was come in the flesh, the expected Messia, as appeared by his miracles,
and had they not been willingly and wilfully blind, barring and bolting their
eyes against the beams of truth, they could not but be sensible that the
Savior of mankind was come. Surely the sacrifice for the cleansing the Lepers
Levit. 14. 4. formerly seldom used, when God, thrifty of his miracles, was
pleased now and then to drop down one from Heaven, began now to be so ordinary
with the Priests, that it could not but mind them that the Messiah was come.

Secondly, Christ cured more lepers at once than of any other disease; Christ
cured two blind men together, Math. 9. 27. two men possessed with Devils,
Math. 8. 28. whilst he healed a whole society of Lepers (poor people being
parted from all others, it was some comfort to them to keep company together)
Luke 17. 12. ten at a time, on that sad token that nine of them prooved
unthankful.

Thirdly, in the Commission to the Disciples, Math. 20. 8. Heal the sick, it
follows, cleanse the Lepers. The curing of that malady alone (with the casting
out of Devils) are expressed in particular words, all the rest in general
terms. Either to show that more than ordinary power was requisite for the
healing thereof, or that leprosie-cureing was their proper and peculiar
masterpiece, to evidence to all, that they were sent by him whose calling was
to cure the leprosy of our souls.

1. COme we now to handle these words Analogically conceiving them of
sufficient latitude, to give us just occasion to enter on the enquiry, whether
Gods Ministers under the gospel have a sufficient commission to examine, and
exclude Persons from the Sacrament. But first let me acquaint the Audience with
the integrity of my intentions herein.

2. There was a sect of Philosophers called (...), which were none of the four
Elemental sects of stoics, Peripateticks, Academicks and Epicures. These would
be bound to no one opinion that any of the other maintained; only they would be
left at large to pick and chose what they conceived sound and solid in any of
their opinions, refusing the rest what they esteemed otherwise. In a word,
these Eclectici were the Quint-essence of the former four Sects of Philosophers.

3. I intend in like manner to be a Chooser in this point. (Grand the
difference betwixt a Chooser, and a Seeker of our age, the former is positive,
the latter skeptical, hovering over all, settling on nothing) I know no reason
that we are bound to take one and all in any persuasion. Three great Interests
may be named in England, one that was the Prelatical, one that is the
Presbyterian, one that would be the Independent. I shall embrace what I find in
any of their practices commendable, and consonant to Gods word, making use of
my Christian liberty, to leave the rest which in my weak judgment may seem
subject to just exception.

2. Proposition, there is no pregnant place of Scripture which expressly
impowereth the Ministers of the gospel with authority of Examination and
Exclusion from the Sacrament: I have looked for it in the place where I was
most likely to find it, namely, 1 Cor. 11. where Saint Paul at large
condemns the abuses at the Sacrament in their Church. Here I expected the
Corinthian Ministers should have been checked for keeping no stricter guard
about Gods Table, and that the main fault of this profaneness should be
charged on their negligence. What said David to Abner 1 Samuel 26. 16. When he
fetched the Spear and Cruse of water, from the head of sleeping Saul? Ye are
worthy to die, because you have not kept your master, the Lords anointed; such
a sharp reproof I expected from S. Paul to the ministers of Corinth for being
no more vigilant (as being Gods lifeguard) in securing the Body and blood of
Christ from unworthy Communicants. But not the least check to them, only a
general exhortation to others to examine themselves.

2. Proposition there are some places of Scripture which by proportion and
consequence do more than probably insinuate such a power in the Minister. First
for examining Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.
God foreseeing that in after-ages the Minister in a Church might be but One,
the Parishioners many, he perchance poor, they rich, he possibly young, they
grave, and ancient, saw there would be an humor of opposition in them to
submit to their Pastor, and therefore thought it necessary to leave this
command on record. Now the best Auditour cannot give an account of them whose
receipts and expenses he has not examined, and therefore by consequence it may
be collected that they may and must try the conditions and abilities of their
people, Prove. 27. 21. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy Flocks, and
look well to thy herds.

6. Secondly, for Excluding, where be it premised, that if an Examining power
can be demonstrated in the Ministers, a power of Exclusion does by necessary
and undeniable consequence follow thereupon: For the Ministers Examination
would be altogether useless, if such, who thereby shall be detected unfitting
or unworthy may in defiance of the Minister, intrude themselves Communicants to
the Sacrament. If therefore the Ministers Examination be as a weapon without an
edge, and be only to make a noise without any further power, it would render
him ridiculous to Profane persons, and expose his pains and profession to
contempt. Surely therefore, his Examination is seconded and attended with
authority to admit and exclude from the Sacrament, as he finds persons fit or
unfit for the same.

7. Of places importing an Excluding power, many insist on the 2 Chronicles. 23. 19.
And Jehojada set the Porters at the gates of the house of the Lord, that none,
which was unclean in any thing should enter in.

8. In the new Testament many allege, Matthew. 7. 6. Give not that which is
holy unto dogs. What more holy than the Body and Blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, who more Dogs, more Swine than those wilfully wallow in wickedness?

To these add the words of my Text, And the Priest shall look on him; There is
Examination, and pronounce him unclean, there is Exclusion. Yet let not too
much improvement be made of those words, lest they stretch so far as to break.
If the proportion be applied in all particulars, the High Priest alone, being
empowered with this authority, will advance the Hierarchichal power farther
than such as make use of this place will well approve.

Object. You have out of ignorance or envy, concealed one of the most
effectual Scriptures in the New Testament, instructing Ministers with an
Examining power of all in the Flock, namely, 1. Pet. 3. 15. Be ready always to
give an answer to every one that asks you a reason of the hope of that is in
you with meekness and fear. It seems you are willingly ignorant (to use the
Apostle's phrase) of this Text so pertinent to the purpose.

Answ. I know many behold it as the Champion of their cause, and have used it
to order their refractorie Parishioners into Examination. For my own part I
look on it as nothing to the purpose. It is better to fight naked, than with
bad Armor. For the rags of a bad Corcelet, make a deeper wound, and worse to
be healed than the bullet it self. None such foes to a cause as such friends
who will defend it, Argumentis non cogentibus, with reasons of such strength
which compel not a rational man into the free belief of them. The words, as
appears by the coherence, are principally calculated for the Climate of
persecution, when men suffer for righteousness sake, and enjoin all a free and
fearless profession of the Faith, when called thereunto. Besides, the command
being general, Ministers are as much obliged thereby to give an answer to their
Parishioners, if asking them as Parishioners, are bound to give an account
thereof to the Minister: And therefore I purposly declined the mention of this
place.

3. Propos. Children, Madmen, Idiots, during their condition, are not to be
admitted to the Sacrament. The reason is plain, because they cannot perform an
Essential requisite thereunto, namely, examine themselves. But when such
Children shall arrive at years of discretion. Madmen shall, by Gods blessing on
Physic, or otherwise, either return to their Lucide intervals, or be totally
cured of their distemper. Idiots, (which seldom comes to pass) be enlarged in
their understandings, they may be admitted Communicants. Till when, the Church,
as Guardian in their minority, does not finally withhold the Sacrament from,
but seasonably reserveth it for them.

4 Propos. Young Persons utterly ignorant in the Principles of Religion, are
not to be admitted to the Sacrament till improved in knowledge.] Yet Ministers
ought to be very tender in this particular, lest they mistake small yet true
knowledge for utter ignorance. Know, that we have no certain standard in
Scripture to measure peoples knowledge by. There is not set down the minimum ut
sic, the least and lowest degree of knowledge which puts one into a
communicating capacity, which should make Ministers the more favorable,
especially to such who discover a desire of information. Lest also the more
heat plead for the less light, such as are conscientious in their conversations.

5 Propos. Persons actually or virtually excommunicated durante statu, are to
be excluded the Sacrament. For we behold them as no Members of the Church at
all, but in the language of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 1. 20. delivered unto Satan.
Now 1. Cor. 10. 21. Ye cannot be partaker of the Lords table, and of the table
of devils. Surely such who are delivered to him are Satan's guests, and in
commons with him, until on the public confession of his fault in practical,
or profession of his faith in dostrinal offenses, they be restored to the
Congregation.

Secondly, Persons virtually excommunicated, by whom I understand such who
wallow in a notorious sin excommunicable in it self, though the sentence be not
solemnly passed upon them. I say, notorious sin. Blessed be God, surreptitious
sins of infirmity do not render us incapable of the Sacrament; If they did,
Gods table would stand utterly unfurnished, without any either to Administer or
Receive those holy Mysteries.

Now sins must be notorious two manner of ways, 1. Quoad naturam. 2. Quoad
notitiam.


First quo ad naturam, the sin being horrible and heinous in its own nature,
such a sin as is not only mortal, as all sins are, but mortiferum, if Gods
mercy does not interpose: an enumeration whereof is needless as generally
known.

By the way there is a notorious sin in the nature thereof, which
notwithstanding in defiance of opposition, forces his access unto the
Sacrament, namely the sin of oppression. How great this is, does appear by the
words of Solomon, Eccles. 7. 7. Oppression makes a wise man mad; that is, Wise
men being oppressed above their strength, to comport therewith, oft-times break
forth into mad extravagancies. Now having formerly showed how Madmen are to be
prohibited the Communion, quod efficit tale magis est tale. What makes so, is
more so. Oppressors sure ought not to receive. But alas! in all ages such their
power, that if pleased, they will command their own passage to the Communion in
spite of the Ministers opposition, God alone being able to punish their
presumption therein.

Secondly, the sin must be notorious, quoad notitiam, so that general
cognizance is taken thereof, to the public scandal of the Congregation. If it
be done in a corner known to few, no pregnant proof nor public appearance
thereof, the admission of such an offender, is so far from being offensive to
the Church, that the exclusion of him, will rather be scandalous: But where
notice of the fault is arrived at many, and the noise thereof at more,
amounting to a considerable part of the Congregation, either in quality or
number, there lies a just prohibition against the receiving of such an
offender.

When therefore the drunkard shall hold his quaffing-cup in the one hand, and
yet desire to take the Chalice in the other, when he shall maliciously vow to
shed the blood of his Brother, and yet in the next moment desire the blood of
Christ to be tendered unto him. When men shall come reeking from their lust, or
reeling in their drunkenness; when any offender with the Adulteress John 8. 3.
(...), and with Cosbie and Zimri shall boldly brave out a sin; the Minister may
and must, with well tempered zeal, forbid them partake of the Sacrament.

This liberty was allowed the Ministers under the Episcopacie by the words of
the In the Order of the Administration of the Communion, or at the least
declare himself to be in full purpose so to do, as soon as he conveniently may.
Rubric. And if any of those be an open and notorious evil liver, so that the
congregation by him is offended, or have done any wrong to his neighbor by
word or deed, the Curate, having knowledge thereof, shall call him, and
advertise him in any wise not to presume to come to the Lords table, until he
have openly declared himself to have truly repented and amended his former
naughty life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, which before were
esteemed, and he have recompensed the party whom he has done wrong unto.

Now because only sins notorious, quo ad notitiam, disable a Communicant from
the receiving of the sacrament. Hence it is that Hypocrites in all ages will
repair thither in despite of the greatest caution. Let the Lords board be
raled about never so high, never so low, never so close, yet Hypocrisy will
either climb over it, or creep under it, or wind it self through it. The black
devil may, the white devil never will be kept out of Christian Congregations.

Propos. 6. Young people, be they never so great or gracious, are at first to
be examined by the Minister before admitted to the sacrament. Most Noble
Theophilus may be an instance hereof, Luke 1. 4. that thou may know the
certainty of those things wherein thou have been instructed;.i. catechized.
And although it apears not in the Text that such catechizing of him was done by
the Minister, yet it is easy to prove out of primitive antiquity, that
Catechumeni was a degree of young Christians Candidates for the sacrament.

Here it were to be wished, that Ministers questions in this case might be
confined, if not to sacramental, yet to soul-concernment. They are not to come
to the people as the Queen of Sheba did to Solomon, to urge them with hard
questions, 1. Chron. 9. 1. nor to propound riddles to them as did Sampson to
his thirty Companions, Judges 14. 32. but only to demand of them such
essential points of Religion, the not knowing, or ill holding whereof, maimeth
the vitals of the soul of a Christian.

I speak it upon the complaint of those (whose report with me is above
exception) how many difficult, yet frivolous questions have been propounded
unto them; as what God did before he created the world? Where the soul of
Lazarus was in the three days interval, whilst his body lay in the grave? A
question which he who propounded it, I believe was as ignorant of, as the
party to whom it was propounded.

Others have been too stern, and morose in not accepting true and pertinent
answers, if not coming up to the very top of what was demanded. Thus when one
was asked what God was, the party no less modestly than truly replied, God is
a Spirit, to whom the Minister returned, and so is the devil too; enough to
dash and daunt a softly spirit which rather deserved encouragement. Fox Act.
and Mon. page 1503.
It is reported of Bishop Hooper, that worthy Martyr, in the days of Queen Mary
(and a Cartwright before Mr. Cartwright, I mean the great Patron of
non-Conformists) that when an honest Citizen, in a conflict of conscience came
to his door for Counsel, being abashed at his austere behavior, he durst not
come in, but departed, seeking remedy for his troubled mind at other men's
hands. We see good men may be faulty in this particular, and many modest
people, examined by rigorous Pastors may be frighted into ignorance or
forgetfulness, or silence of those very things which formerly they knew,
remembered, and could express.

Propos. 7. Such who once have been admitted by the Minister to the Communion,
are not afterward to be excluded the same, except since their first admission
they may be challenged of some notorious defection from the Faith, or
corruption in manners. And if they can be challenged, they fall under our
former exception.

This last Proposition is grounded on that Foundation which few of the
Presbyterian party use to deny, namely, that they, who once have saving
knowledge, always have it; and are rather finally improved than impared
therein, Psalm 92. 14. They shall still bring forth fruit, they shall be fat
and flourishing. A Minister therefore ought charitably to presume (nothing
appearing to the contrary) that the souls of his people move a progressive,
not a retrograde motion in piety: especially if he constantly and conscionably
prays for them and preaches amongst them.

I say such are not of necessity to be reexamined by the Minister. Indeed, if
out of humility they will tender themselves of their own accord to their
Minister, and submit to a second examination, (or as often as they please to
receive) the sacrament, I commend their meekness, and account it an acceptable
offering in the eyes of God. However their act ought not to be obligatorie to
all others, so as to be pressed to that which some voluntarily did perform.

Use 1. To confute such who are overremiss in administering the sacrament,
requiring no more than the general profession of Christianity, a reverend
posture of the body, and a hand reached out to receive, to qualify one for a
Communicant. These make the Lords table a Pandocheon, an Inn to entertain all,
and Christ to keep open house at the Sacrament; and yet we may observe a great
difference between the places of Christ preaching, and administering the
sacrament. He preached often sub dio, in the open air where nothing confined
his voice but his voice, as extending audible (at least intelligible) no
farther. Thus Matthew. 5. 1. He went up into a mountain and preached. Matthew. 13.
2. He went into a Ship and sat, and the whole multitude stood on the shore.
But when he administered the Sacrament to some select persons, then he made
choice Mar. 14. 15. of an upper chamber trimmed and prepared, purposely made
ready for them, of far less latitude, and receipt as capable, only of the
company intended present at that exercise. To show the extensiveness of the
Word to all that please to hear the same, the contractedness of the Communion,
confined only to such as in some measure are fitted for the receiving thereof.

The maintainers of this Opinion of promiscuous Communions, proceed upon a
double error. First, on the example of Judas, one of the worst of men, yet not
thought bad enough by Christ himself to be excluded the sacrament. Here they
take that for decided which is disputed, that for concluded which is
controverted, adhuc sub Judice lis est, it hangs as yet on the file, and the
number and worth of ancient Writers on the negative, are almost even with those
which affirm his receiving. But suppose he did receive the sacrament, (which in
my particular opinion I do believe) it makes nothing for the advantage of
those which urge it in this behalf.

For, First, Judas was completely qualified for a Communicant, first with
knowledge, whereof he had too much, except he had used it better, whose eminent
parts were like unto those torches and lanthorns abused by him to apprehend and
betray our Savior. Secondly, with such seeming holiness, that none of his
Fellow-disciples could detest, or did suspect him for unfaithfulness: Else
needless had the question been of John to Christ, John 13. 25. Lord who is it?
had he not carried it so cunningly that no common jealousy centred on him as a
Traitor in intention.

Object. Christ as God knew Judas to be an Hipocrite and a Devil, and yet he
would not deny him the sacrament, to show, that the worst and wickedest of men
may be admitted thereunto.

Answ. Indeed as God he knew it, but it is questionable whether he communicated
this knowledge to his humanity, and if so, yet might not be pleased to take
notice thereof at the instant of Instituting the sacrament. Because therein
Christ would do nothing but what should be precedential to posterity to
imitate: as intending that mere men should afterward follow him in the
Ministry.

The Second false principle that the Patrons of Promiscuous sacraments proceed
upon is this, that the Lords supper is as well a converting, as a confirming
Ordinance, from whom (till we be better informed) we must be forced to dissent.
Here, far be it from us to minorate or lessen the efficacy and operativeness
of the meanest of Gods Ordinances, and on the other side, we must be wary, lest
we extend their power too far, to the endangering of peoples souls.

The Word of God is the only ordinary means of conversion known unto us. This
pearl, though cast before swine, may turn the swine into the sheep, and by Gods
blessing, alter and better their property. Nor is any other previous
qualification required by an Auditor of Gods word, but mere hearing the same,
which may put life into those who were dead in trespasses, in sins. But Food
and Physic (for such is the sacrament) if not given to such who have life to
take and digest them, is altogether useless. The first must have faith and
repentance who expect to reap any benefit thereby.

Object. The sacrament is also a converting means, because in the
administration thereof, many excellent passages of Scripture are intermingled.
Formerly, when the Liturgy was in full practice, several Texts of most signal
comfort were interwoven by the Minister in his preparative addresses thereunto,
Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all that travel, etc. John 3. 16. So God loved the
world, etc. 1. Tim. 1. 15. This is a true saying, and worthy, etc. 1. John 2.
1, 2. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, etc. Now these
passages of Gods word (which ever has a converting vigorous virtue in it) may
on a sudden surprise the soul of a notorious sinner present at the Sacrament,
and effectually work an amendment in him. And although, since the abolishing of
the Liturgy, the reading of those numerical places be disused, yet one may
confidently presume, that no Minister of the Presbyterian persuasion, does or
can solemnly administer the Sacrament, but in his prayers before and after the
same he inserteth select Scriptures to that purpose. wherefore the receiving of
the Sacrament, if not in it self, by necessary consequence, as attended with
Scripture (in the due celebration thereof) is a converting Ordinance, and
therefore an usurpation to forbid any, the worst of men admittance thereunto.

Answ. The Word of God loses the converting power thereof, when used against
the word of God; I mean, when applied contrary to those directions, which the
Scripture commends unto us. For every Communicant is commanded to examine
himself, and to discern the Lords body, and to eat the same worthily. Duties
which mere unconverted persons, in the state of nature, are utterly unable to
perform. These things are not to be wrought there, but brought thither. Indeed
the Sacrament will multiply, but not make increase, but not create grace in
the hearts of Receivers. Such therefore, who come not qualified for
Communicants, cannot expect converting from the sacrament, because they break
the Word of God in appearing there. As for those excellent passages of
Scripture, used by Ministers officiating in the sacrament, it is to be feared
they will rather turn the savor of death unto death, and give Satan a larger
power over those unconverted persons which press to those mysteries.

Use 2. It confutes those who are too rigid in administering the Sacrament,
denying it to all those who will not submit themselves to their examination,
though formerly they have been examined and admitted, and since stand charged
with no fault proved or suspected, save only they call it stubbornness or
resolution, recusancie to be re-examined.

Here let none think, that out of the spirit of frowardness I will fully oppose
their Opinions, or that out of anger or discontent I may favor some modern
licencious extravagancies I Fox Act. and Mon. page 2079.
remember a story of the Lady Katharine Brandon, Duchess of Suffolk, which
may be applied to my occasions. When every Lady at an entertainment was to
choose whom she loved best, and so place themselves, the Duchess, because not
allowed to choose her own Husband (as against the laws of the feast) took
Steven Gardener by the hand, whom she perfectly hated; with these words, If I
may not sit down with him whom I love best, I have chosen him whom I love worst.

Not to dissemble in the sight of God and man. I do ingenuously protest, that I
affect the Episcopal Government (as it was constituted in its self, abating
some corruptions which time has contracted) best of any other, as conceiving
it most consonant to the word of God, and practice of the Primitive Church. But
seeing it has pleased God to set by Episcopacie for the present, (whether or
no animo resumendi to him alone is known) Far be it from me to close with such,
whom I confess I love the worse; those Practicers of so much liberty in the
Church, that it tends directly to confusion, and whose disorderly Order
deserves not the name of any Discipline.

But I know that Religion and learning has flourished under the Presbyterian
Government in France, Germany, the Lowcountreys. I know many worthy Champions
of the Truth, bred and brought up under the same. I know the most Learned and
moderate English Divines (though Episcopal in their callings and judgments)
have allowed the Reformed Churches under the discipline for found and perfect
in all essentials necessary to salvation. If therefore denied my first desire
to live under that Church Government I best affected, I will contentedly
conform to the Presbyterian Government, and endeavor to deport my self quietly
and comfortably under the same.

This premised (to prevent personal exceptions against my judgment) I am bold
to say, That the excluding persons from the sacrament on this score alone, for
Recusancies in point of re-examination, has been the mother of much mischief
in the Church.

First, it has brought an undervaluing opinion on the sacrament it self, as if
it were not so necessary for the growth of grace as heretofore was generally
preached and believed. Lay People (which phrase I use not for any fondness I
have thereunto, but because generally used and understood) seeing Conscientious
Ministers debar their people those holy Mysteries, merely for a ceremonious
matter, begin to thin, that receiving is but a matter of indifferency, which
may or may not be used without great gain or loss to the soul.

Secondly, it has made sacraments to be long disused in some places, to the
great grief of many godly perons. I could never read that passage Acts 27. 33.
but with admiration. This day, says Paul, is the fourteenth day which ye have
tarried and continued fasting, having taken nothing. Strange that life could
consist with so long abstinencie. I confess, men in the Southern parts have not
so active stomachs, as extended and extenuated with heat. I confess also, that
having, as one may say, a surfeit of sorrow, they had no mind to meat; as little
joying to feed themselves as to feed fishes; expecting daily to be drowned. Yet
all things put together, we cannot understand their fourteen days fasting
otherwise, but that in such a term they made no set and standing meals. They
did not comfortably enjoy themselves at any just refection; but fed privately
and cursorily as their occasions would give them leave, without any delight,
merely for the maintenance of nature.

But behold a greater wonder, for ten years, I dare bodly say, some Parishes in
this City have fasted from the Sacrament. I will not excuse the peevishness of
such people, who on the punctilio of reexamination deprive themselves of so
great a benefit. But that the guilt may fall the lighter on either, let it even
be parted betwixt both Pastor and People as faulty herein. I know not what
hard shift such people have made (perchance privately in their houses, to else
in other Parishes) to be clandestine comunicants, as I may term them, what
runing-meals they have made I know not, sure I am they have not sat down at
Gods board in their own Parish for many years, a wonder indeed if well
considered. However, this is most injurious, if the Drones will not feed, that
the Bees should be famished. That be far from you my Brethren to do after this
manner, to starve the righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should
be as the wicked, that be far from you. What if such the fault worthy
stubbornness of some as not to submit themselves to reexamination, must
Communions be wholly neglected? and humble people, who on any terms are willing
to receive the Sacrament, be debarred the benefit thereof?

Object. Should sacraments be administered, and any profane person press in
thereunto, there presence would infect all the rest how good soever,
contracting guilt to themselves from the company of those unworthy persons
with whom they communicate? Better therefore is a total absence in such a case,
than a sinful receiving.

Answ. The Position is most false, that mixed Communions do infect. For when
first our aforesaid cautions have been observed, if in defiance of the
Ministers care and other Officers of the Church, an unworthy person shall
chance, either cunningly to insinuate, or violently to intrude himself, his
guilt is on his own head, and he alone answerable for the same.

Surely the man at the Marriage Feast, Matthew. 22. 12. wanting the
Wedding Garment, had many in the same mess (for (...), the Table was furnished
with guests) some sitting above him, beneath him, before him, besides him,
against him, probably putting their hand into the same dish, drinking out of
the same cup with him; yet none of these were taken to task, or called to
account, but he alone who came thither unqualified, as wanting a habit
necessary at such entertainments.

And here let me be your Remembrancer of an humble meditation, seasonable for
such who maitain that mixed communions convey contagion to all receivers. It
were no less pious than profitable for the best of them to be jealous over
themselves with a godly jealousy, and to fear lest their own badness should
derive infection to their Fellow-communicants. Surely S. Paul in holy
humbleness, said of himself, 1. Tim. 1. 15. Christ came to save sinners, of
whom I am chief. Contrary to which, there thoughts are wholly taken up with
suspicions of being infected from others.

The third mischief which the disusing of sacraments has done, is that thereby
our Adversaries of the Romish Church have gotten a great advantage. This is a
true Maxim, A lean Communion makes a fat Mass; and many are fallen off to
Papistrie on this occasion. Let none say, we will easily convert them with
penal statutes, or else the more Papists the more payments to the present
necessities of the Commonwealth. Surely such a thought never entered into the
breast of any Godly Governor: and the Gospel teaches us other Divinity, to
prevent all occasions of Christians falling from the True Faith, and running
into erroneous opinions.

To draw to a conclusion, My humble motion to the Ministers, is, that for a
time they would be pleased to forbear the urging any so far to re-examination,
as upon refusal thereof, to prohibit them the receiving of the Sacrament.

Object. It is hard to say whether your counsel savoureth more of carnallitie,
or cowardice. Surely St. Paul was of a more zealous temper, who Gal. 2. 5. gave
place by subjection, no not an hour to such who would have brought their
Christian liberty into bondage. Such time-serving as you commend unto us, what
is it but the prostrating of the scepter of Christ to the pleasure of man?

Answ. No evil may be done that the greatest good may come from it. But some
good may be forborne to be done when, in all Christian prudence, thereby a
greater good is probable to be promoted. It had been absolutely evil in St.
Paul to tolerate such betrayers of the Christian privileges a minute or
moment, so far forth as in convenient time and place, not to oppose their
machinations. But it is Christian wisdom for a time to suspend the prosecution
of such practices, which may be lawful and laudable in themselves, when
foreseeing they will necessarily attract a greater danger. This was done even
by our Savior himself, who perceiving the partial carnallitie in his
Disciples, respited the delivering of some difficult Doctrines, and the
pressing of some hard precepts until they were arrived at more perfection;
John 16. 12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them
now. Where the people cannot bear, there the Ministers must forbear, and
patiently wait a fitter opportunity.

Object. Let us of the Presbytery begin as we will hold. It is given to all
authority to lessen by the continuance of time: If we abate ought of our power
at first, the encroaching of people upon us will quickly reduce it to nothing.

Answ. This Objection savoureth of the spirit of the Young men who were
Rehoboham his Counselors, 1. Kings 12. 10. and surely if followed will meet
with the same success. It will be more honor for the Presbyte^ian Government
hereafter, to be called to by our State, Come up hither, Prove. 25. 7. and to be
improved in Power, and advanced in Honor, than to be degraded afterward in
general esteem, for over-activitie in the beginning.

I resume therefore my former motion, and reinforce it to the consideration of
such concerned therein, with the following motives. First, Men ought not to be
busy to enjoin these things as necessary duties, though fitting and
convenient, for which they have no express commission in Scripture. What
Protestant will deny the expediencie of confession, in some cases, to a
Minister? But when the same was imposed by the Church of Rome, as absolutely
necessary to salvation, so sovereigne a practice became carnificina, the rack
and torture of men's consciences. Will any ingenious person gainsay, but that
some Ceremonies used under the Bishops were decent and comely? but when the
same was urged with much violence, what clamours were raised against such
practices, under the norion of persecution? Take heed that the reproof of the
Apostle fall not heavy upon you; Romans 2. 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O
man, whosoever thou art that judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self; for thou that judge do the same things.

Object. As much may be alleged for re-examination of communicants, as for
baptizing of Infants, which by your own confession. You will not deny your own
words; Infants Advocate Ca. 8. page 71.
We do freely confess, that there is neither express precept nor precedent in
the New Testament for the baptizing of Infants, and yet are confident by
necessary and undeniable consequence from Scripture, it will be made appear to
be founded thereon.

Answ. First Analogy from Circumcision. Secondly, the Birth-holiness of
Christian Infants. Thirdly the Holy Spirit given unto them. Fourthly, some
degrees of faith conferred on them. Fifthly, the necessary removing of the
malady of Original corruption, with the constant practice of the Church in
allayes are alleged for baptizing of Infants, whereas little or nothing in
comparison is produced for re-examination.

Besides, Baptism has the primitive practice, and the constant use of the
ages. Whereas the enjoining of such, who once have received, to be re-examined,
is a stranger of yesterday in most Protestant Churches. Herein I appeal to the
French and Dutch Congregations in London (branches conformable to their
respective roots in foreign parts) whether strangers coming unto them with a
Testimonial, that once they have been admitted, are not received for Receivers,
without any further inquiry or examination.

Indeed, if every particular Member, and so by consequence every Parish of
England should be subject to a new examination on every removeal of an old, and
election of a new Minister, some Parishes would never be out of examination.
What says Solomon, Prove. 28. 2. For the transgressions of a land, many are the
Princes thereof. Not meaning all abreast at once (which notwithstanding, is
both true in it self, and a trouble to the people) but many successively,
sinful people make short-lived Princes. Many, not in rank but in file, one
after another. I will not say the bad Parishioners make many Pastors in the
place, but be the reproof parted betwixt both (that so it may fall the lighter
and be the better born.) What betwixt the faults of the one and the other, many
have been the Avoidances of Incumbents, and substituting of new ones in their
room in a short time, so that if communicants were of necessity reexaminable
on every alteration, some Parishes would be in a perpetual Probashionership,
and constant Candidate-ship for receiving.

Not to say but that in some Parishes (large in extent and numerous in people)
were monthly communions observed (which formerly was the commendable practice,
and still is the just desire of many Ministers) it would be the constant work
of the Minister, to do nothing else but examine his people, the which would
engross and take up his whole time. And then, if all his care be examining,
where is his praying, his preaching, his studying, his visiting the sick, and
his other performances?

Secondly, Excluding the Communion for refusing re-examination, is a severitie
unreasonable at this time. We read of King Amaziah, 2. Chron. 25. 3. Now it
came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he slew his
servants that had killed the King his Father. Why did Amaziah so long connive
at murder the worst of sins? Treason the worst of Murders, and Treason against
his own Father, the worst of Treasons, as to suffer the Actors thereof so long
to enjoy their lives? A satisfactorie reason is rendered; he was not as yet
fastened on his Throne. To strike fiercely with ones hands before he stands
firmly on his feet, is the ready way for one to overturn himself. People must,
till they are well settled themselves, and well rooted and riveted in their
power, be cautious of provoking any, and may justly suspend the punishing of
what is faulty till a fitter opportunity.

And now to commend unto you a double expedient, which may in some sort
mitigate the rigor of proceedings. First know it is one thing Magisterially and
Imperiously to thrust people from the sacrament, and another thing to request
and entreat them as they tender their own good, to abstain from the receiving
thereof. Both meet together in the same end, effect the same thing, though
embracing several ways in order thereunto. The first way being rough, rugged,
full of displeasure and distaste; the second soft, smooth, more easy both for
Pastor and People, and most proportionable to the meekness of the Ministers in
the Gospel. Let this later way therefore be used by you, when you see just
cause to seclude a Parishioner from receiving of the sacrament for suspected or
detected insufficiency, when ingenuitie and hope of amendment is legible in
him. As

It is said of Titus Vespasian (for the sweetness of his nature, styled the
delight of mankind) the neminem demisit tristem, he never sent any suitors sad
away from him. Yet it must certainly be presumed, that he denied many their
desires, it being usual at Court, that there be several Petitioners for the
same Office, which only one can receive, but then that Emperor had the
happiness so to qualify his denials with good language, that he made them but
one degree from a grant. Sometimes he would convince such Suitors in their
judgments, that they requested that which was not in his present power to
grant. Sometimes he showed them, that their desires were destructive unto
themselves, at leastwise, that they were unfit and improper to receive them.
Sometimes he would promise them the next preferment far better and fitter for
them. In a word, without any falsehood or flattery (as beneath the Majesty of
a Prince) his soft, supple, and complying nature so applied it self to all
dispositions, that people contentedly, yea, thankfully and cheerfully departed
from him with denials.

God has given you such sinews of Logic, and such colors of Rhetoric, and
such persuasive tongues, if pleased to improve them, that except you meet with
unreasonable men, 2 Thessalonians 3. 20. ( from whom God delivere you ((...)) from
those that have no Topics, no sense of reason or arguments; you may convince
such whom you account unfitting to receive, for their own good, to abstain from
the same.

Neighbor, with Joseph, I would be a just man, that is in Gospel acception, an
equal man, Matthew. 1. 19. I am not willing to make you a public example that
others should take any occasion to slight any neglect you. I am tender of your
credit, conceiving it to be wrapped up in my own; such the near relation
betwixt the Shepherd and his Sheep. I will not in a disgraceful way forbid you
the Lords table, but with Joseph, I am minded to put you away privily, or
rather do entreat you willingly to put away your self. I am jealous over you
with a godly jealousy, that you have not as yet such a measure of knowledge
as may fit you for these mysteries. I say, as yet; for I doubt not but on your
prayers to God for your self, and mine for you hereafter, you may seasonably be
admitted to the Sacrament: but it is better to stay a year too long, than come
a day too soon. Know, I could interpose my power, if so disposed, and command
you forbearance, but what says St. Paul, Philemon 8. Wherefore though I might
be so much bold in Christ to enjoin thee, the which is convenient, yet for
loves sake I rather beseech thee, and know the strength of my affection to thee
inditeth this counsel, and no other by-respect.

A soft tongue, says Solomon, Prove. 25. 15. breaks the bones. It is
impossible but that an ingenious nature will be affected therewith, and cannot
take just exception thereat.

The second expedient I recommend is this, even to practice our Savior his
precept, Matthew. 9. 17. Neither do men put new wine into old bottles, else the
bottles break and the wine runs out, and the bottles perish: but they put
new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.

I apply it thus, put old wine into old bottles, your ancient Communicants
which formerly have frequently received of your selves, or your Predecessors,
and are habited to the ancient custom of receiving, admit them without any
scruple (except excludible according to the premises, for some notorious sin)
charitably presuming (nothing appearing to the contrary) that they are improved
in sufficiency for the same.

Now put new wine into new bottles. Such novices, which never before received,
and remember not the old Temple. I mean the former discipline of the Church
under Episcopacie, whose maturitie to receive bears date only from the
beginning of our differences. Let them on Gods blessing be solemnly tried and
examined before they be admitted unto the receiving of the sacrament.

And here by your leave and favor, I humbly conceive, that the Anno Dom 1645.
die lunae Oct. 20.
Ordinance of Lords and Commons, (if seriously perused according to the genuine
and natural sense of the words, speaks only de admittendis, and not de
admissis, and impowereth Ministers only to the Examination of such who
received it not before, who ought now more strictly to be examined in England
than ever before: for the Church of Rome erroneously advanced Confirmation to
such a height, as to make it a sacrament. The Church of England under
Episcopacie retained it so far as an ancient and useful custom, appropriating
the exercise thereof to Bishops alone. The present discipline has utterly
abolished both Bishop and the use of Confirmation. However, something
analogical thereunto may and must be continued. The Primitive Christians being
wise in the appointing, though after-ages were superstitious in the abusing
thereof, and the more confirmation is neglected, the more ought a serious
examination of youth in this kind be continued and practiced.

In a word, there is a way to examine people, committed to the care of the
Ministers, which may be done without any dangerous noise, and without the least
suspicion of pragmaticalness, and yet to the great glory of God, quiet of the
Minister, and edification of the Church. This examining consists not in
summoning people before them, and sounding them with Question and Answer, but
in the solid and faithful preaching the sincere Word of God, which carries a
secret searching power along therein, Heb. 4. 12. For the word of God is quick,
and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart. Thus by prophesying (that
is by preaching of Gods Word) 1. Cor. 14. 23. If there come in one that
believes not, or one unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is judged of all:
and thus are the secrets of his heart made manifest, and so falling down on his
face, he will worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. I say, let
us take off for a time from the other, and more practice this examination as
least subject to exception. Try it but for a time, and you shall see what
success it will find, and fright unworthy persons from the Sacrament, with a
more awful reverence than your actual secluding them for not submitting
themselves to re-examination.

To conclude, I may compare the first high acting of Presbyterians to men
running in a race. It is impossible for a Racer to stop just at the mark: he
must either overrun it, or else can never come at it. But when past the mark,
(necessarily transported with his own fierceness beyond the same) he will
return to it again, to show that that place and no further was the intended end
of his endeavors.

Whilst you contested with Episcopacie, your Corrival, and were seven years
since in the height and heat of your contention, therewith much may be pleaded
for your passion, if it transported you in some actions beyond the just
standard and proportion of your judgments.

But seeing now it has pleased God that you have run your Adversary quite out
of distance, and have attained that you strove for, it will be no shame, nay it
will be your honor to abate and remit of your former eagerness, and coolly and
calmly to return to the place which you over-shot in the Paroxcism of that
contest. This is the humble advise and desire of him who has no private ends
therein; but the advancement of Gods glory, and the good of his Church. Amen.

Dum Spiro Spero


THE SECOND RECONCILER.
ACTS 13. 15. And after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of
the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men and Brethren, if ye have any word
of exhortation for the people, say on.
THis Chapter presents us with four principal remarkables.

The solemn separation of Paul and Barnabas for the Ministry, five pious
persons are mentioned, verse. 2. all in humane likelihood, equally probable for
the employment. Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Mahanaem, and Saul; of these God
leaves the three middlemost, takes the first and the last; even so Father
because it pleases thee.

Then have we the three first adventures of Barnabas and Saul in there
Ministry, whereof the first proved prosperous, the second with the Jews at
Antioch had sad success, the third with the Gentiles in the same place came off
with comfort. We Ministers must not be elated with good success, but fear the
worst, nor dejected with bad, but hope the better.

In their first adventure they confounded Elimas the Sorcerer, and Saul
converted Sergius Paulus the wise Deputy of Cyprus. By the Laws of Herauldry,
whosoever fairly in the Field conquered his Adversary, may justify the wearing
and bearing of his Arms whom he overcame. Here Saul had conquered Sergius
Paulus, overcome his ignorance, vanquished his infidelity; no wonder then if
he assumeth his name, and henceforward is called Paul in all the history, his
next voyage ends sadly, and sorrowfully with Blasphemy and Persecution from
the Jews at Antioch, though it began Comically and courteously with this fair
invitation in my Text; and after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, etc.

The words contain a principal part of the Jewish Liturgy, or if that
displease, their Directorie, wherein their solemn Sabbath-service is plainly
presented unto us. I confess, there is no mention of prayer an essential part
of Gods worship among them, (my house shall be called the house of prayer)
which is omitted in the Text, not as if it were omitted by the Jews, but
because St. Luke hasteneth with all convenient speed to the Doctrinal part, as
leading the nearest way to the matter in hand. Some persons account this verse
their Masterpiece, hoping hence by their cunning Chymistrie, to extract a
License general for all men to preach; though the words well understood, are so
far from their building any advantage thereon, that they batter down both their
opinions and practice.

We will first clear the same from the encumbrances of all difficulties, and
then extract natural and profitable observations from them.

Law and the Prophets] Law taken largely, contains all the Prophets, and
Prophets taken largely, comprise all the Law, 2. Pet. 1. 20. No Prophecy of
Scripture is of private interpretation.

Yea Moses, the Prophet Paramount was the penner of the Law, Deuteronomy. 34. 10. And
there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses whom the Lord knew
face to face. But when the Law and the Prophets are distinguished, so as to
devide the old Testament betwixt them, as Luke 16. 20. they have Moses and the
Prophets: then by Law is meant the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses, by
Prophets all the rest of the old Testament, not only such parts as foretell
what was to come, but also which historically relate what was past.

The Rabbis tell us, that the five books of Moses were divided into fifty
three Perasoth or Divisions (each whereof contained one hundred thirty six
verses) and one of them was read every Sabbath Day, beginning at the first
Sabbath after the feast of Tabernacles, if any say, there being but fifty two
Sabbaths in the year, what did they with the odd Perasoth, or Division? I can
give no certain account, save that it is probable they doubled their office the
last Sabbath, hemming it, as I may say, at the close and conclusion thereof.

The Masters of the Synagogue.] why plural? what says St. James, be not many
Masters. Answ. By Masters are meant the several Rulers thereof, which as the
Rabbis do teach, were subordinate one to another.

Here it will be worth our pains to make inquiry into the name, first
founding, and use of the Synagogues.

Synagogue, signifies a Meeting Place where many are assembled together. The
first and last mention of them in the old Testament, is Psalm. 74. 8. they have
burnt up all the synagogues of God in the land. Now if this Psalm had had any
large Title, we might have conjectured at the time when synagogues were first
founded. But nothing appears in the front thereof more than, Maschil to Asaph.

Again, if this Asaph was the same with him who was contemporarie with David,
1. Chron. 25. 2. whose sons were designed for solemn singers, this would
advance the senioritie of synagogues as extant in David's time: But much weight
must not be laid on so slender a proof for fear of failing. Seeing Asaph there
may be taken, not for his person, but for his posterity, some hundred years
after; the result of all is this, uncertain but ancient is the Original of
synagogues, as before the Captivity of Babylon. No positive place of Scripture
directly enjoyneth their foundation, only for the necessary ease of People
who could not repair to the Temple and return back to their own homes on a
Sabbath Day. These may be said to be jure Divino secundario, by Divine right
once removed, namely collected from the Scriptures by necessary consequence,
and were constantly graced with our Saviors company therein. These synagogues
served for a double intent, as our Churches for Devotion, and as Schools or
Academies for Disputation. Act. 17. 17. Therefore disputed he in the synagogues
with the Jews. So that the synagogue may be presented in its lively
Pourtracture, like to the Builders of the walls of Jerusalem, Nehem. 4. 17.
holding a Trowel, to build it, in one hand, and a Weapon, to defend it, in the
other. Semblably the synagogues were both for edification of people in
knowledge, and for controversial defending of the Truth therein by Polemical
Learning.

Sent unto them, saying,]

Object. It seems it was fashionable in that age, that any who would might
preach in the synagogues, only with a courteous call of the Masters thereof;
so that the Pulpit lay open to all comers and goers, and not (as some now
endeavor) enclosed by, yea engrosed a particular profession.

In answer hereunto we will first clear the Title which both Paul and Barnabas
had to preach the Word.

First for Barnabas, his first title was, by his extraction, being a Levite,
Act. 14. 36. to whom it belonged by their Profession to teach the people.

Secondly, he had an extraordinary call from God in the second verse of this
Chapter: besides, at this time a civil invitation from the Masters of the
synagogue. Thus his threefold cable cannot be broken, nor any unlawful
invading of the Ministerial office be charged upon him.

Thirdly, St. Paul's Commission to preach, does appear both by his ability and
authority for the same. His ability, Act. 22. 3. Brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel.

Object. We confess his ability, but deny his authority; for first he was no
Levite, but of the Tribe of Benjamin, to whom the expounding of the Law was
never committed. Secondly, he was one of a manual and Mechanical trade, Act.
18. 3. A Tentmaker.

Answ. All is confessed, but let the unpartial Reader consider first, that Paul
was a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee, Act. 23. 6. Seasonably let him also
weigh the words of our Savior, Matthew. 23. 2, 3. The scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses chair: all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and
do: but do not after their works, for they say and do not.

Indeed, the Lay-pharisees, as I may term them, sit not in Moses chair in one
capacity, because being of other Tribes, they might not offer sacrifice,
officiate at the Altar, and attend at the Temple, but only as Professors of
the Law and Doctors, they might read public Lectures to their Auditors.
Thirdly, let them consider that Synagogues, as aforesaid, were of double use,
and served for an Academie as well as a Congregation. All which laid together,
it will plainly appear, that Paul in his Pharisaical capacity, had sufficient
authority to teach in the synagogue. Not to speak of his calling of Callings,
his extraordinary and immediate Commission from God, authorizing him to the
same.

Object. Grant the ability and authority of Paul and Barnabas to preach, yet
both were utterly unknown to the Masters of the Jewish synagogue in Antioch,
who beheld them as neither more nor less than mere strangers, casually coming
thither.

Answ. First we will premise the answer of Carthusianus a learned Papist, and
justly dissent from the former part thereof. Ex habitu censuerunt esse pios and
Religiosos. They esteemed them, says he, to be pious and religious men by
their habit.

To this I agree negatively thus far, that nothing of vanity or lightness
appeared in there clothes to speak them idle or foolish persons, but otherwise
I dissent, that the form or fashion of their clothes differed from other
people. Surely what would hide and heat, cover and keep warm, served their
turns. The Cloak, no doubt, which Paul left at Troas, 2. Tim. 4. 13. differed
not in shape from other men's. For then in the time of persecution to be
distinguished by their habit from others, what was it but to give a mark of
discovery to their enemies malice, yea, to give them aim to level the more
steadily at them. And yet I deny not, but that it is fitting, that in times of
Peace Ministers should be distinguished from ordinary men by the gravitie of
their garments. And the Ancient Church-Canons on that kind, were grounded on
just considerations.

We answer, It is more than probable, that the fame of Paul and Barnabas came
to Antioch before their persons came thither. There being daily intercourse by
Sea betwixt Paphos, a famous Port in Cyprus, and this Antioch. The smiting
Elimas the Sorcerer blind, and converting of Sergius Paulus, could not but make
a strange and sudden impression on the neighboring places.

Secondly, their grave demeanor and reverend behavior in the Synagogues
attached the eyes of all people to behold them and beholding, to read in them
more than common and ordinary persons. They behaved not themselves in Gods
house during the exercise of Gods ordinance, like some spiritual Clowns now
adays, whose unreverent deportment bewrays their ignorance; but so decently
they demeaned themselves, that they struck the beholders into a reverent
opinion of their persons, and conjecture at their professions to be Preachers
of Gods Word.

Thirdly, had the Masters of the Synagogue been mistaken herein, had Paul and
Barnabas been otherwise than they appeared and were apprehended to be [ viz. no
more than common men unimpowered with a Commission] to preach. Surely the
Rulers presumed on their modesty and humility, that they would decline the
proffer, seeing in that Age, none adventured to teach without lawful
authority, as largely, God willing, shall be proved hereafter. Mean time let
us proceed to the Collection of some natural observations from the words, After
the reading of the Law and the Prophets.

Doct. 1. It is good reason, that Gods word in the Church should have
precedence of men's meditations. For Gods word is all gold, (and prized above it
by David, Psalm. 19. 10.) the best men's meditations but silver and guilt, and
that silver having much allay therein, which debaseth the metal, though it
makes it to work the better to men's understandings, rendering the sublime
purity of Gods word more easy and intelligible when expounded, explained, and
applied by the pains and endeavors of Ministers. Wherefore as the Master of
the Feast, John 2. would have the best wine brought first, and then what was
worse. So fit it is that the virgin attentions of the people in the Church,
should first be fed with the pure and sincere word of God, as it is in the
Text, and afterward their appetites may be entertained with less dainty diet,
the sermons and studies of their Ministers.

Doct. 2. It was an ancient custom in the Church, that Gods word was publicly
read therein. And here let us endeavor to raise the just reputation of the
word publicly read; some conceive, that the Word preached, is as much holyer
than the Word read, as the Pulpit is higher than the Desk. Yea such will say,
my self, or son, or servant can read a Chapter as well at home, as any the most
accomplished Minister in England. But let such know, that he which does not
honor all, does not honor any of Gods ordinances, and it is just with God, that
preaching of the Word should prove uneffectual to such as slight and neglect
the reading thereof.

Doct. 3. Blessed be the goodness of God, who has bettered the Bill of fare of
Christians, by allowing our souls a second Course of the New Testament. And
properly may the New Testament be termed a second course, which commonly has
dishes fewer than the first, for there quantity, finer for the quality of the
meat; and here far be it from me to make comparisons (which are odious in
themselves, and so much the more odious, the more eminent the persons or things
are that be compared) betwixt the Old and New Testament. As Moses in holy zeal,
by clashing the first Table against the second, brake both: so some profanely
and despightfully abuse Old and New Testament, about preeminence betwixt them.
But acknowledging them both best in this respect, as to us, the New Testament
excels as far as a blessing performed is better than a blessing promised, and a
Savior tendered in possession, more comfort than in reversion.

The Rulers of the Synagogue.]

Doct. 4. No considerable society can long comfortably subsist without some
government to order the same. Ten are but a few men, yet Moses, by the Counsel
of wise Jethro his Father in Law, Exodus 18. 25. made Rulers of tens. Better is
a Tyranny than an Anarchie: for where every man does what is good in his own
eyes, where there is equality amongst all, there will be equity but amongst
few men.

Doct. 5. It is lawful for Ministers to make use of the help of others, not
only in their sickness and necessary absence, but also when their own persons
are present. First, because we must as well mend our nets, as always catch
fishes; as well study for new supply, as always preach. And seeing nature has
given us as well two ears as a tongue, we must as attentively listen to the
parts and pains of others, as contentedly utter our own meditations.

Secondly, such variety will not only be pleasant but profitable to our
people In the mouth of two or three witnesses let every truth be established.
When the People shall hear the same matter in a different manner, one truth [
Salvation by Gods mercies alone and Christ's merits] dressed in several motives
and methods, and expressions. The nails will be driven the faster by many
Masters of the Assembly; and though it be faulty for itching ears to heap up
Teachers to themselves, yet sometimes such exchange of Preachers, increase the
edification of an Auditorie.

Doct. 6. They may have courtesy and civilitie in them, who notwithstanding
may be devoid of grace and true sincerity. These Masters of the Synagogue
began very mannerly, proffer Paul and Barnabas the courtesy of the place, but
all ended at last in blasphemy and persecution.

Doct. 7. None are to preach but such who are lawfully called thereunto. The
Rulers of the Synagogue gave a license to Paul and Barnabas, who intrude not
without their leave and desire. How many now a days in despite of the Rulers
of the Synagogues, the undoubted Patron, the lawful Incumbent, the Guardians
of the Church publicly chosen, storm the Pulpit by their mere violence,
without any other Call or Commission thereunto.

Be it first premised, that we protest our Integrity not to invade the due
Right of any Christian, with Abraham, Genesis 14. 23. We will not take a
shoo-latchet which is none of our own. To which purpose we lay down the
following Rules, allowing as much liberty as may be to all Gods servants.

First, Parents and Masters of Families, may and must privately teach their own
Children and Servants. Teach them, and thou shall be taught; Instruct them, and
God will instruct thee; never had Abram, in all probability, so soon known
Gods intentions to destroy Sodom; but because Genesis 18. 19. he would command his
children to keep the Law of God. Even Mothers ought to do this, who have a
legislative power over their Sons, Prove. 1. 8. Forsake not the law of thy
Mother. It is remarkable, that great grace which God did to a Mother, that her
private precepts, (namely Bathsheba to her Son Lemuel) Prove. 31. were afterward
made Canonical Scripture for Gods whole Church.

Yet let me advise Parents, when modestly undertaking in their own houses to
explain Scripture, not to make fountain, but Cistern expositions thereof. viz.
not to be the inventers, but the declarers; not the devisers, but the
remembrancers of inter pretations. Children and servants, I have heard such a
godly Preacher, or have read in such a learned comment thus to expound this
passage of Scripture. But if he should adventure of himself to tender unto them
an explication, let it be done with an humble reservation and submission to the
better judgments of those, whose proper profession it is to expound the same.
Hoever, he may more safely deal in Application than in Explication of Gods
word, the general precepts, promises, and threatenings, whereof, he may
effectually applly to himself and those of his family under his inspection.

Secondly, Judges on the Bench may and must in their charges teach the County
there assembled, inserting Scripture in their discourses, such the
correspondencie, and mutual good intelligence between the Laws of God and Man,
that they return and receive strength and luster each to other. This made
Jehoshaphat to couple Judges and Priests together in the visitation of his
people, 2. Chron. 17. verse. 7. also in the third of his reign he sent to his
Princes, even to Benhail, and to Obadiah. verse. 8. And with them he sent
Levites, even Shemaiah, etc. verse. 9. And they taught in Juda, etc. The one the
Law of the Land, the other the Law of the Lord; which excellent Medley made a
cordial composition thus put together.

Thirdly, Professors in the Universitie, as the Doctors of the Chair, may, in a
controversial way, preach to young Students under them. Such Doctors in
Divinity are generally in Holy Orders, but if (which is rare) one unordained
be preferred to the place, he may use Polemical preaching, confining himself to
the Schools, the proper center thereof.

Fourthly, Generals in the Field, before and after the fight, may make Orations
or Sermons if you please, to encourage the soldiers. I confess, as custom has
confined the word Bible, (signifying in it self any Book) to the Word of God,
so has it appropriated sermons (which imports any speech) to those made by a
Preacher in the Pulpit: Otherwise those may pass for sermons which Generals
utter in the field as Joab, Abiah, Jehosaphat. And because all true valor is
founded in the knowledge of God in Christ, such Generals may and must, to raise
the resolution of their soldiers: by inserting and interposing passages of
Scripture, animating them to depend on God the just maintainer of a right
cause. Thus Queen Elisabeth in 88. at Tilbury Camp, inspirited her soldiers
with her Christian exhortation.

Lastly, all Christians ought mutually to teach and instruct one another. In
this case every place is a Church, day a Sabbath, occasion a Text, person a
Preacher. Romans 15. 14. Admonish one another, Col. 3. 16. Teaching one another
in Psalms and Hymns, These. 4. 18. Comfort one another with these words, Jude
11. Edify one another even as also ye do, Heb. 3. 13. Exhorting one another.
To this end are talents bestowed on men that they should stir up the gifts of
grace which are in them. Thus Priscilla, though a woman, instructed Apollos.
But here we must distinguish betwixt mutual and Ministerial teaching. In the
former the Romans may be said to teach St. Paul, as well as St. Paul the
Romans. I am comforted with you by the mutual faith both of you and me, Romans 1.
12. whilst Ministerial teaching belongs only to such, who are solemnly
called thereunto.

Take two Criteria or distinguishing marks, betwixt mutual and Ministerial
teaching. The former is compatible with another vocation, either liberal or
mechanical according to the condition of the Person. Yea which is more, not
only it is lawful to have another calling, but in some cases for some men,
sinful to be without it; S. Paul says, 2 These. 3. 10. If any would not work,
neither should he eat. This mutual teaching of others will not excuse peoples
idleness, nor can they plead for themselves, this mutual labor in love shall
exempt them from other manual work; because by it self it amounts not to a
distinct profession, as being the entire body of a calling, which is only a
part and necessary member of all men's duty, as they are Christians. But public
preaching is to possess the whole man as the highest of employments, wherein he
may use all his pains and endeavors.

Secondly, no Salary or reward is due to mutual teaching (save the inward
blessing which God bountifully will bestow on such as labor therein) so that
the Teacher may demand it of due, it being an injury in the party taught to
detain the same. Such Teachers must know themselves sufficiently satisfied by
the good, which is returned unto them by reflection, having their graces
heightened and intended by their instruction: Besides the party taught restores
often times instruction unto him; and so there is nothing due in the
reciprocation of courtesies, but the obligation cancelled on both side. But to
ministerial preaching wages is due by Gods appointment, The labourer is worthy
of his hire, because sequestring his soul from other works to attend that
business alone, God has ordered it, 1 Cor. ^. 14. that those that preach the
Gospel shall live of the Gospel.

Thus have we given, or rather God has given, and we have declared, how
Christians un-ordained may teach Gods word in a Domestical, in a mutual, in a
military, in a Judicial, in an Academical capacity, shame light on that steward
who is niggardly where his master commands him to be bountiful, had we denied
Christians this liberty, we had wronged them much, our selves more, God most.
But now let me say unto them in the words of the master of the Household,
Matthew. 20 the 14. Toll quod tuum est, and abi, Take what is thine and go thy
way. Be contented with what has been allotted unto you, which has been fairly
measured out and with all possible advantage. Gripe and graspe not after more,
least you loose the blessing and benefit of what you have, which has now
brought us to the following Doctrine as chiefly intended in this discourse.

Come we now to the main Doctrine which is this, none may ordinarily execute
the office of Preacher, except lawfully called thereunto, I say ordinarily.

For much may and must be indulged to Laymen in absolute necessity, if they
adventure to exercise the ministerial function. I say absolute necessity; Here
first I exclude all conditional necessity which is but necessity of
convenience. Such Saul might have pleaded for himself, 1 Samuel 13. 9. When
presuming to sacrifice to prevent the peoples scattering. But when the
necessity is invincible and unavoydable, God may seem to dispense as in David's
eating the shewbread properly belonging to Priests alone. Otherwise men must
not first make necessities, and then make use of those necessities to excuse
their extraordinary practices. For instance, suppose some out of fullenness and
pride, conceiving themselves too good to converse with conmmon Christians,
should separate themselves (being none of them ministers) into a solitary place
from all society. It were presumption for one of them to adventure on the
Office of the ministry. But put case some number of people (none of them ever
ordained banished by Tyrants, carried captive by violence, or casually cast by
shipwreck, or Tempest into a Wilderness, or amongst Pagans, where no
possibility of recovering a minister, if the gravest and ablest amongst them
should by general consent be chosen to officiate in their Congregation, God no
doubt would hold him guiltless in such a case of extremity.

Except they be lawfully called thereunto.

A lawful calling is partly internal, partly external, the Internal part
thereof consists in two things.

First, in having a desire and delight to undertake the ministry.

By desire I understand, not every fond fancy, light or slight affection, but a
serious and reduced tendency of the soul to that calling. Especially, when such
persons, if consulting sinister respects, might have provided more plentifully
both for themselves, and their posterity; yet passing by more gainful
professions, whereof they were equally capable with others, their restless
souls cannot be centred with satisfaction on any profession, save that of the
ministry, Thus Tim. 3. 1. If a man desire the Office of a Bishop he desires a
good thing, not the honor, but the Office, not the profit, but the pain:
whence (...) man's natural appetite, if he have as great a desire thereunto as
to his natural food.

Secondly, in having some competent ability to discharge that Office, I say
competent: For for these things who are sufficient? It is a Burden too heavy
for the back of an Angel; Some skill in Greek, and Hebrew that he may
competently recover the Scripture in the Original. Some skill in Logic to
analize the Scripture aright. For although the words of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.
15. Rightly dividing the word of truth, be principally intended, Theological
divisions (giving comfort to whom comfort terror to whom terror belongs) yet
even Logical dividing is necessary for the clear parcelling and expounding the
word. Some skill not in vain but full Philosophy to understand the Metaphors of
Scripture.

Know here, great the difference of abilities in several ages. In time of
general ignorance a lesser degree of knowledge must be admitted: Sad the times
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, when by her Majesty's injunctions, the
Clergy were commanded to read the Chapters over once or twice by themselves;
that so they might be the better enabled to read them distinctly in the
Congregation. Blessed be God, we have an alteration to the better, and lately
there has been plenty of able men, were their parts but sufficiently
sanctified; which has brought me to the third part of the Internal Call viz.
Inward Holiness

This is mainly material as rendered for a reason of the extraordinary success
of the ministry of Barnabas, Acts 11. Why much people were added to the Lord,
by his preaching. For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Christ and of
faith, etc.

I deny not but it may be possible even for a wicked minister, virtute officij
by virtue of his office to convert others to God. But far betterit is when done
officio virtutis, by the office and efficacy of his virtues, as the
Instrumental cause thereof. True it is Daniel 12. 3. They that turn many to
righteousness shall be as the stars for ever and ever, but what went before in
the same verse; and they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament. And what says Solomon Prove. 9. 22. If thou be wise thou shall be
wise for thy self, chiefly laboring to make his own calling and election sure.

The External call consists, first, in the approbation of such in the Church,
which have power and place to examine them. For know, all men by nature have
Laodicean humor in their souls, ready to say, I am rich, and have need of
nothing, when indeed they are poor and have need of all things. I have gifts, I
have graces fit to make a minister, will swelling emptiness say, when modest
abilility is often silent.

Now let another praise thee, and not thy own mouth. Let guilty dross decline
the Touchstone; good gold rejoices when brought thereunto, But let these also
first be proved. A great Emphasis is couched in also, how good soever they may
be reported: let their honesty and ability both of them be first examined,
wherein eminent holiness may make the less knowledge to pass current, but no
knowledge how great soever can qualify profaness for the Office.

But all these will not do the deed to make a Lawful minister, still one
thing, and but one thing is wanting, and that is ordination, Acts 14. B. Titus
1. 5. the solemnity whereof with the Ceremony used thereat are set forth in
scripture. This done after the Internal, and External call completed by
Approbation and, Ordination, let one so qualified preach the word, be instant
in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and
Doctrine, The Lord prosper the work of his hands, yea, the Lord prosper his
handy work, we have wished him good success in the name of the Lord.

Come we now to resume our main Doctrine, which is this. None may ordinarily
execute the Office of a Preacher, except lawfully called thereunto. This first,
appears by the Legal Priesthood appropriated to the Sons of Levi, and two
eminent judgments one to Forraigners usurping the same, Vzzah a private man,
Vzziah a King, to show, that neither high nor low may be excused therein. Uzzah
to the Tabernacle, Uzziah to the Temple. To show that whether the Church be in
motion, in afluctuating and tottering condition, or Temple-like in a standing
and settled estate, none can be defended: Uzzah out of charity mistaking meaning
well: Uzziah out of mere pride of heart lifting up himself, to show, that God
will not hold them guiltless, be their intentions good or bad, Uzzah favored,
(at leastwise not opposed) by the beholders, and pitied by David himself.
Uzziah resisted by the Priests, to show, that whether men do or do not mislike
such intrusion, it is unlawful in it self. Uzzah instanly smitten with death,
Uzziah with a long and lingering sickness parted from public society, to show
that divine justice goes not always the same path; and the same place in
punishing offenders.

And here it is not unworthy our notice, that though Jeroboam made Priests of
the meanest of the people (without any respect to the Tribe of Levi 1 Kings 12.
31. never giving his negative voice for any man's worthiness, but whosoever
would might be a Priest. Yet even those Priests, did not officiate till the
Ceremony of a mock-consecration was passed upon them, 2 Chronicles. 23. 9. With the
sacrifice of a Bullock and seven Rams: Well did that wicked Politician know,
that except some solemnity was used to separate his Priests, as mean as they
were, from common people, his profane Religion would quickly be contemned and
confounded.

Secondly, This may be proved by the solemn calling and Commission of Christ's
Apostles.

Their Calling consisted in, Come hither.

Their Commission consisted in, Go therefore.

Their Calling, Mark 3. 13. And he goes up into a mountain and calls unto
him whom he would, and they came unto him. (...) (whence our English Call) it
was not who would come, but whom he called, Christ invites all to salvation.
Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, only some to the ministerial
Function.

Object. It was Moses his wish Number. 11. 27. Would God that all the Lords people
were Prophets; what he desired is now done, what then wished is now wrought:
then prayed for, now performed. The Pulpit (or Prophesying) according to Moses
his wish is now open to all, and such discover the envious spirit of Joshua who
repine thereat.

Ans. It follows not that those things either should be, or which every good
man in holy zeal does desire. I will not instance in the wish of Daniel, O King
live for ever, least any say, that was but a Court-complement, St. Paul says
Romans 10. Brethren my hearts desire for Israel is, that they may be saved.
Israel indefinitely, that is Israel universally, though it neither could nor
would be so, as contrary to the will and pleasure of God in that particular:
Thus The Expressions of Moses was the commendable extravagancie of his pious
affection; but not the exact Standard by adaequation, whereunto the lawfullness
of all men's Prophesying should be proportioned.

The second part of their Commission consists in Go therefore. I confess the
Apostles, when first sent to preach, Matthew. 10. 5. Had but a limited or
confined Go, ago, which began with, go not, go not in the way of the Gentiles,
but go rather to the lost sheep of Israel. But after Christ his resurrection,
their Commission was general, go ye therefore and teach all nations -- and lo I
am with you always even to the end of the world.

Men and Brethren let me freely speak unto you af the Apostles, that they are
both dead and buried, and their sepulchers (though uuknown, are amongst us unto
this day, Christ therefore promising to be with them to the end of the world,
therein also intends their posterity and lawful successors. And this is the
Chartar from whence we ministers, lawfully ordained, justly derive our
Commission.

A Third argument might be fetched from the practice of the primitive Church,
wherein preaching was only practiced by such as were lawfully ordained
thereunto, which may be cleared by authority out of the Fathers. But I
purposely decline this reason remembering how Samson served the Philistines,
when fastened Judges 16. 14. by his locks with a pin: For he went away with the
pin of the beam; Thus when we think to have our Adversaries in this point safe
and fast, when by an argument fetched from Church-practise we stake them down to
the Primitive times, away they carry pin and all by slighting and contemning
such ancient practices, as no ways concluding them to conform thereunto.

Fourthly, this appears by several places of Scripture, as Romans 10. 15. How
shall they preach except they be sent. Now shall they preach. That is
profitably to others, comfortably to themselves, with an assurance of Divine
Direction, Protection, Benediction. It is said in the foregoing words, how
shall they hear without a preacher, to show that it is equally impossible for
men to hear without a preacher, as to preach lawfully without sending. Let
such, who pretend to preach without a call, try if they can hear without a
preacher. This they will never presume to do, as knowing that they shall
quickly be confuted by the rest in the room, which can hear nothing where
nothing is spoken, though they have as quick ears as any others.

Secondly, 2 Cor. 12. 17. If the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? Prophets we know are termed Seers, 2 Samuel 9. 9. Now where all the body
is sight, that may be truly termed not a body mistical but monstrous.

And here I lay this down for a position of undoubted truth, that although some
not called to be ministers are often said in Scripture to teach and instruct;
yet none are said to preach, but such who have a public calling thereunto,
take it in the verb (...), to preach, or in the participle (...), preaching,
or in the verb denoting the Act (...), preaching, or in the noune (...),
expressing the Agent a preacher, in all these the word is only predicated of
such, who had a solemn vocation, and were entered into the ministry; I say
again the aforesaid word preaching with its derivatives, being used more than
seventie times in the new Testament is constantly confined either to Christ, or
to his Apostles, or to his Disciples, or to the Deacons, or to some public
persons, making the same their proper functions.

Abate me only two places, one Mark 1. 45. Whereof the man cleansed of the
Leprosy it is said, (...).

The other Mark 7. 36. of the dumb and deaf man who (...). But here the
distinction of our Translatours is commendable; who no doubt observing the
constant tenor of Scripture (the best way to expound words therein) and
finding the word (...), restrained generally to men of the ministerial
profession have rendered the word here not to preach but to publish, Mark 1.
45. But he went out and began to publish it much; Mark 7. 36. So much the more
a great deal they publish it. So that without any exception at all the rule
notes universally true in our translation through the New Testament, that
preaching is only attributed to public persons appointed for the same.

Use. To confute such who maintain, that men gifted, though not called, may
preach. But let us examine what manner of gifts they pretend.

First, some gifts are such as may be said eminently to contain a calling in
them namely such, which -- presently and perfectly are bestowed upon men, If a
mean man utterly unlettered shall in an instant be furnished with Arts and
Languages, as the Apostles were (not gaining them by degrees with study and
industry) such a one would startle, us if challenging ipso facto to be a
minister, because miraculously enabled for the same. And yet we may observe,
that God to keep order and regulariry in his Church solemnly sent such, who
were thus immediately qualified to the Churches approbation. Witness Paul and
Barnabas; who notwithstanding their rich endowments were in this Chapter
solemnly separated verse 3 with the fasting and prayer of the Church, with
their hands laid on them.

Wherefore I say again should such a person appear, commencing per saltum,
complete in all sciences, and languages, so that all the tongues, which
departed from Babel in a confusion, should meet in his mouth in a method, it
would give assurance to others, that these his gifts came down from the Father
of lights, if willingly submitting himself to the examination, and ordination
of such to whom it properly does belong. Otherwise if amongst all other gifts;
the essential grace of humility be wanting, it will render the rest suspected
from what fountain they do proceed.

But let us survey what gifts those are, which generally are most boasted of by
opposers in this point. God is my witness, I speak it without bitterness or any
Satyricall reflection. Are they not for the most part such as may be reduced to
boldness, confidence, memory, and volubility of tongue. Might they not truly
say of many of their Sermons what the Son of the Prophets said of their Axe 2
Kings 6. 5. Alas its borrowed, venting chiefly the notes and endeavors of
others.

But grant their gifts never so great, graces so good, parts so perfect,
endowments so excellent, yet mere gifting without calling makes not a lawful
Preacher. This appears by Christ's practice, Luke 4. 26. where we read it was
his custom to go into the Synagogues every Sabbath day. All this time Christ
was admirably gifted, and endowed with Gods spirit. The minister of Nazareth
might say to our Savior more truly than John the Baptist: I have need to come
to thee, and come thou to me. He was able to teach his Teachers, yet all this
while he was silent, took not on him the Office of a Preacher, and why,
because as yet he had not received his Commission from God for that Office, and
therefore till he was past thirty years of age, he was contented probably to
follow his Fathers calling of a Carpenter, Mark 6. 3. Certainly) to conceal
himself in a private condition, For it is said, Matthew. 4. 27. From that time
Jesus began to preach, and to say, repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand, that is, from the time that John the Baptist was shut up in Prison. For
fit it was that the day star should set before the Sun did arise; Abating
therefore only that Essay which he made Luke 2. When he Disputed with the Dr^.
in the Temple, he adventured not on any public performance of preaching, as
well knowing, that his exquisite accomplishments would not bear him out
therein, except solemnly called thereunto.

Remarkable also is his answer to the Pharisees question, demanding of him,
Matthew. 21. 23. as he was teaching, by what authority do thou these things,
and who gave thee this authority; which plainly shows, that the Pulpit in
that age did not lie open in common, to any who would stock the same, but was
sequestered to select persons approved for the place* Yea, our Savior, does not
deny he had authority, but denies to tell them what authority he had tacitly;
confessing himself obnoxious to just censure, if being a mere private man
without Commission either ordinary, or extraordinary (such his license ad
praedicandum) he had wounded that profession.

Object. If a master may teach his Family, he may preach in the Church. For
what is a Family but a small Church, or a Church but a great Family. The place
makes no, difference in the Duty, nor does the number of people alter the
nature of the exercise. Besides it is possible that some numerous Family, may
have more people in it than some narrow Parish.

Answer. The latter is confessed, but the main is this; His calling extends only
to his Family, exceeding which compass his voice (how stentorious soever) is
affectually dumb, as to any converting operation, be cause deserting his
vocation.

Yet of such gifted men, who without ordination presume to preach, we may
obobserve two ranks or kinds, first those who hold another calling (as I may
say) in commendum with preaching, and discharge both employments. Secondly,
such who quit and forsake their former calling, and betake themselves wholly to
preach the Word:

To the former of these, I commend the words of the Disciples, Acts 6. 2. It is
not reason that we should leave the word of God and serve Tables. which
tendereth two remarkeables to our considerations.

First, that the Apostles would not be Plurallists in professions, nor retain
two callings at the same time, and yet serving of Tables in that sense [that
is, overseeing the poor] was more compatible with preaching than any other
employment, as being in its own nature of a charitable constitution, and an
office afterward used in the Church as an entrance of Probationers into the
ministry.

Secondly, the Apostles refusal to be double-called at once proceeded from one
or both of these reasons. Either because they accounted it too heavy a task
for one person, though they were most miraculously accomplished, in which
respect the ability, and activity of their parts might have as much
ubiquitariness, as mortal man can pretend to, to be present at once in distant
employments. Or else their recusancy was caused from an apprehension, that it
was disgraceful unequally to yoke the preaching of Gods word with any other
vocation, and beneath the dignity thereof to couple it with a serving of Tables.

Thirdly we see they were resolved, as to let go the meaner, so to retain the
most noble and necessary function of preaching, whence most glory redoundeth to
God, and profit to his people.

How then can men now adays of meaner parts and endowments discharge that,
which the Apostles did decline Preach; the Word, and serve a Ship, Preach the
Word, and serve a Shop, Preach the Word, and serve the Loomes, Preach the Word,
and serve the Last, retaining either manual or military employment with the
same?

Object. It is lawful for men to practice a mechanic calling in conjunction
with their preaching, warranted by the example of St. Paul himself, building at
the same time the Tents of men, and the Temple of God. Yea, he says himself,
Acts 20. 34. yea, you your selves know; that these hands have ministered unto my
necessities, and again 1 Corinthians. 4. 12. and labor working with our own hands.

Answ. Extraordinary accidents are not to be drawn into ordinary practice. The
Apostle did not this commonly and constantly, but for a short time, at a very
pinch, out of a holy design, namely to starve the false Prophets amongst the
Corinthians, and therefore this his act ought not to be precedential to others,
who are to apply themselves totally to the ministry.

Others there are which wholly desert their former vocation, and betake
themselves totally to the preaching of the word. To the serious thoughts of
such I offer the words of St. Peter 14. 15. But let none of you suffer as a
Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an evil Doer, or as a busy body in other men's
matters. See what a crew the Apostle has chosen out, as only fit to keep
company with busy bodies; Surely busie-bodyness is an heinous offense of
greater guilt than men generally do know, or will acknowledge. Noscitur e
socio, dark men are expounded by their companions. The great offense therein
appears by such with whom the Apostle does associate them; And what greater
busie-body, than he who invadeth the Hardest, and Highest, and Holiest of
professions, never ordained thereunto contrary to the Council of the Apostle of
Chorinth. 7. 24. Brethren let every one wherein he is called, therein abide
with God.

And here with all reservation of due respect, and deserved honor to men of
military profession; I humbly conceive that it may be plainly proved out of
Scripture, that Soldiery and Ministry were such distinct callings, that they
met not in one and the same profession. For the Apostle being to prove the
equity and right of Ministers maintenance, fetches an argument, of Cor. 9. 7.
From the wages justly due unto Soldiers. Who goes to Warfare at any time on
his own charges, and thence concludes verse 14. Even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Which
words, if perused with unpartial eyes, they set up a partition betwixt the two
callings as not then concurring in the same persons.

And here take notice of a strange and incredible alteration within this last
ten years in England, that either men are suddenly grown more able than before
or else the Ministry is become more easy than in former ages. Some ten years
since when those of the Clergy were excluded the Commission of the peace, this
principal reason is rendered in the Act, why ministers should not be admitted
Justices of the Peace, because preaching of the word is enough to take up the
whole man, so that they must be wanting to the calling of their ministerial
function, if attending at the same time another employment.

And yet see now on a sudden, some conceive themselves able sufficiently to
follow a manual trade all the week, and also qualified for preaching on the
Lords day after. I say again, either men in our age are mounted on a sudden to
be more dextrous and knowing, or the ministry is stooped to be more facile and
obvious, or (which I fear is the truest) men are grown more daring impudent and
profane than in the days of our Fathers.

Oh let such remember what is written in the Prophetical Epistle of St. Jude
placed last and next to the Revelation, as containing the prediction of such
things as should happen in the Church toward the end of the world verse. 11.
and perished in the gainsaying of Korah. What gainsaying this was we all
know, Number. 16. 4. partly consisting in challenging Moses and Aaron to take too
much upon them, partly in presuming to perform the High Priests office. Their
perishing also is notoriously known, the earth swallowing them up, and this
excellent note deserves our best heed in it (because straggling out of the body
of that History) Number. 26. 11. notwithstanding the Children of Korah dyed not.

God in like manner, no doubt, may and will out of pity preserve the Children
of Korah, such seduced persons, whose simplicity is practiced on by the
subtility of others; but oh let those look to it who are Ringleaders herein,
that Gods justice may be no looser in the main, he will take off from the
children and lay load on the Fathers. Pardon well meaning persons imposed on by
others, and severely censure their Conductours, if not seasonably compounded
with him by serious repentance.

And here I request the unpartial Reader seriously to peruse the following
passage, Fox 2 Tom page 278
being the words of Mr. Bilney at the stake, as he stood ready to seal the
truth with his blood. Having made a brief repetition of the Articles of his
faith, coming to these words; I believe the Catholic Church, paused awhile and
then proceeded.

Good people, I must here confess to have offended the Church, in preaching
once against the prohibition of the same, at a poor Cure belonging to Trinity
Hall in Cambridge, where I was Fellow, earnestly entreated thereunto by the
Curate, and other good people of the Parish; showing, that they had no sermon
there of long time before, and so in my conscience moved, I did make a poor
collation to them, and thereby ran into the disobedience of certain authority
in the Church, by whom I was prohibited: Howbeit I trust at the general day,
charity that moved me to this Act, shall bear me out at the Judgment Seat of
God.

Many things herein are considerable. First, Bilney at this time was a Master
of Arts at least, and able to discharge the place. Secondly, being Fellow of
that College which was Patron to the Church; he had some obligation in
conscience to see the place provided for: Thirdly, invited by the Curate and
the Parish, it seems to amount to a sufficient calling; Lastly, the long want
of the Word in that place, might make him compassionate their condition.

Notwithstanding this four-fold-cable to draw on Bilney to this performance, he
says, he did it but once, he made not a common and constant practice thereof,
Secondly, he did not please or delight himself in the memory of what he had
done, nor makes he mention thereof in a rejoicing, much less in a bragging
manner; but only by way of necessary excuse, as somewhat troubled at the deed
done, but hoping (as well he might) that God beholding the act, as qualified
with the aforesaid circumstances, and proceeding from a pious intention, would
acquit him from any guilt therein.

Let such lay this to their hearts, who wanting the tithe of Bilney his
ability, undesired by the Minister of the place, (yea sometimes against his
will) do not with Bilney but once, but make an usual practice and common custom
to preach against the prohibition of the Church, whose ancient Canons have
ordered it, that none except Probationers by way of Trial, may preach the word.
It is to be feared that many who run before Bilney into the Pulpit, will scarce
halt after him to follow him to the stake.

However let us Ministers, make a scrutiny in our own souls, what may be the
reason that we are fallen into such disgrace. So that God in his justice has
permitted our function (formerly fenced about from common feet with an awful
reverence) now for any to enter upon it, Psalm. 80. 12. Why have thou broken
down our hedges: have broken them, that is, have permitted others to break
them. Sure something is in it more than we ministers generally take notice of,
that God has exposed us and our calling to contempt.

Tully in his first Oration against Catilin, being himself then Consul of Rome,
inquiring into the causes of the many distempers and distractions of the state,
and the presumption of bold persons to disturb the same, ingenuously
confesses, nos, nos, dico aperte, consules desumus. We, we, (speaking of Mark
Anthony and himself) we Generals are wanting in our places.

In like manner we may say, nos sacerdotes, Presbiteri, Ministri (how would we
be termed) nos, dico aperte, desumus. We Priests and Ministers are wanting to
God, or to our selves, or to our Congregation, or to all, that God in his just
judgment deals with us as with Israel, 2 Kings 10. 32. begins to cut us short,
pareth us in our Profession, abateth us in our honor, diminishes us in our
dignity. Let us search out the cause diligently, and having found it, zealously
endeavor to remove it, otherwise if we honor God, he will honor us, but if
we proceed in our sins, he will proceed to pour more shame and disgrace upon
us, till our calling, whose reputation begins daily to lessen, become at last
(though to the confusion of such as contemn it) a very shame and reproach.

And now I trust that none can take just exception at what I have freely, but
without spleen or malice spoken of the blame worthy practices of such, who
intrude themselves into our Profession, having unpartially reproved even my
self and those of my own function: and thus my sword having equally cut on both
sides; I now put it up into the sheath, never to be drawn in this place or
quarrel again.

FINIS.
THE THIRD RECONCILER.
LUKE 11. 2. When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc.
IN the foregoing verse the Disciples present our Savior with a Petition,
qualified with, Equity, Brevity, and Perspecuity; Such a Petition need never
doubt of success when brought to a just Judge. It consists of two parts.

1. The body of the Petition, Master teach us to pray.

2. A reason to edge and enforce the same, drawn from the precedent of John the
Baptist, as John also taught his Disciples.

As if they had, said Master, we have taken special notice of that high
opinion, you ever had of John the Baptist, whom you always esteemed a Person of
signal sanctity and exemplary devotion. We have heard you say of him, that he
was more than a Prophet; that he was the second Elias, and none greater amongst
them, who were born of Women. Now he had Disciples as you have, and it was his
constant custom to teach them how to pray, as it is now our humble suit and
request, that in Imitation of his practice, you would be pleased to instruct us
likewise how to pray.

Take notice in the mean time of the admirable humility and condiscention in
our Savior, no whit angry and offended with his Disciples, although they in a
manner prescribed John the Baptist as a pattern for him to imitate. Had we been
in Christ's place, I mean had we had his parts and power with our own pride; how
should we have took this in disdain and distaste, that one so far our inferior
was propounded to us to follow his example. We should have returned, Matthew. 3.
9.
John the Baptist is not worthy by his own confession, to ber my shoes, or as
he says elsewhere, to unloose the latchet of my shoes, and again he plainly
confesses, He who comes after me is preferred before me; Luke 3. 16. John 1.
27.
let John order his Disciples as he please, and I will Discipline mine
according to mine own will. I will not be concluded by his practice, I am to
give not to receive directions.

Not so our Savior he, manifests not the least degree of disgust, but
willingly and cheerfully grants their request, when ye pray, say, our Father.

Learn we from hence, when we behold a commendable precedent set before us in
such, who either are, or else in our proud self admiring opinion are esteemed
our Inferiors, not to disdain to follow and imitate the same, let not the
master think much to write after a good copy of his servants seting.

Observe in the words, the time, When; the persons, Ye; the practice or duty,
Pray, the direction of the duty, say our Father, etc. We begin with the time
When.

From which we collect this Doctrine. Men ought to find out a When, wherein
they are to pour forth their hearts in prayer unto God.

Quest. How often is this When to return, and what rules can you give us by
what number we should regulate our quotidian Devotions.

Ans. First, I will tell you how often I find a Saint and servant of God in
Scripture to pray; but on this condition, that you will promise not to be
frighted with the prodigious number of his daily devotions. The party is David,
who says thus of himself, Psalm. 119. 164. Seven times a day do I praise thee.
Admirable, how could David spare so much time from his private and public
employments; not to speak of his Family affairs, having six Wives, 2 Samuel 3. 5.
ten Concubines 2 Samuel 15. 26. and more Children by them, which must needs
perplex him with much Domestical business. David was a mortal King, and needs
must be employed in multiplicity of matters. Now to send dispatches to that
Foreign Agent, read the received Intelligence from him, give audience to this
Ambassador, send Orders to that General, Instructions to that Commander, be
present at the Council, hear Petitions, judge causes, etc. must needs engross
much time, yet David in all this term of business found a constant vacation,
wherein he might perform seven times his daily Devotions. And though seven may
here seem a certain for an uncertain number, yet probable it is, David rather
exceeded, than fell short of the same.

One asked a Philosopher, what was the best time for a man to eat in, to whom
he ingeniously replied, A rich man may eat when he please, a poor man when he
can, his witty answer may afford us this grave application; Be thou poor, or be
thou rich, pray thou both when thou will and when thou can, as often as thou
have either necessity, or convenience; I will not stint thee to Canonical
hours, but embrace all opportunities that are rendered unto thee, to express
thy service to God in thy prayers.

Object. But it seems we are obliged to constant praying, as the Euchites did
in the Primitive Church, seeing the Apostle says, 1 These. 5. 17. pray
continually, or pray without ceasing, and if so, if all our performance be
praying, how shall we attend our callings and concionably discharge our other
relations.

Answ. First in Scripture Language, that is said to be done continually which
is done every morning, and every night, Exodus 29. 38. Now this is that which
thou shall offer upon the Altar, two Lambs of the first year day by day
continually; and this was constantly called Juge-sarificium or the continual
sacrifice, Numbers 28. 3. and the 6. 10. Ezra 3. 5. In proportion whereunto
whosoever constantly prays morning, and evening, though following his
calling, and attending his own occasions all the intermediate time, may be said
according to the Apostles precept, to pray continually or without ceasing.

Secondly, by praying continually or without ceasing, is meant, Endeavors so
to temper thy soul, as always to be in a praying capacity, though not actually
praying, yet be not put past an ability to discharge that Duty. Such therefore
who are so discomposed with sin or sinful passion, that they are rendered
thereby utterly impotent to pray, sin against the command of the Apostle.
Otherwise it is no breach thereof to intermit their prayers and cease sometimes
from the same, it being said of our Savior himself in the verse before our
Text, As he was praying in a certain place when he ceased.

Use. Must we find a set time to pray? serves this to confute such who can
afford a When to Eat, and a When to Drink, a When to Sleep, a When to Talk, and
a When to Walk; and a When to Work, and a When to Play: but cannot find out a
When to Pray according to our Savior his command, When ye pray. Yet God,
Eccles. 3. 1. has made a time for all things, save that which man does at all
times, I mean sin. How many are there that pinch on Gods side, and as the crowd
of People, Luke 8. 45. (...), the multitude throng thee, and press thee; so
worldly men, to make room for their temporal affairs, thrust, throng, contract,
yea sometimes, do wholly justle out and omit their daily Devotions.

Come we now to the person, ye.

Quest. Were not Christ's Disciples able to pray before this time? Sure I am,
they were able to cast out Devils. For it is said in the foregoing Chapter
verse 17. And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the
Devils are subject unto us through thy name. Now to cast out Devils is a harder
thing than to pray, because some Devils are of so sullen and surly a nature,
Matthew. 17. 21. That they go not out but by prayer and fasting; Being thus
therefore empowered with ability to cast out Devils, surely the greater did
include the lesser, and it is wonder they should now desire a Direction to
pray. Say not that Christ made a resumption of that power which once he
bestowed upon them, and after their return from preaching deprived them of
them; seeing, Romans 11. 29. the gifts of God are without repentance.

Answ. Some answer this by pleading a Metathesis or transposition in the
History of St. Luke, setting down that first which was last done, a figure very
frequent in the Old Testament. But this is, though the best of shifts yet the
worst of answers, last to be tried, and least to be trusted, saving in such
cases as seem to be capable of no other solution. No need of this refuge at
this time, and therefore we decline the same.

Secondly, it is answered, that it is a greater argument of Gods favor to us,
and our sincerity to him, if we can power forth unto him an acceptable prayer,
then if enabled to dispossess Devils. This appears by the Plea of the
Reprobate to Christ at the last judgment, Matthew. 7. 22. Many will say unto me
in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name
have cast out Devils, and in thy Name have done many wonderful works? Nor does
Christ confute what they allege as false, but reject it as in sufficient;
Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Thus such miraculous endowments are
compatible with damnation: whilst the Spirit of supplication (enabling us to
pray acceptably to God) is none of those gifts bestowed upon the Sons of
Ketura, but such as are conferred on Isaacs alone, given only to us Sons,
Saints, and servants of God.

Thirdly, and chiefly I answer, certainly the several Apostles and Disciples
had formerly their particular prayers; and as I may term them, personal
Devotions. Peter no doubt had his, and Andrew his, James and John their
particular forms of Invocations. But now they desired that Christ, would
gratify them with such a general prayer, unto which they might all jointly
concur with their Amen thereunto, and all their several Devotions unite, and
center themselves therein.

They also desired such a prayer, as they might transmit as an Heir-Loom to all
posterity, and intail it on the Church to be used successively by all
generations. Herein I hearken to the Disciples requesting our Savior, as to
the mouth of all Christians: For they speak as the Speakers or Prolocutours,
for the Church in all ages desiring this boon to be bestowed upon them.

Here is worthy our observation, that our Savior had once formerly delivered
the same prayer both for the manner and matter thereof, and yet how again at
his Disciples request, recommendeth the same (some inconsiderable differences
abated) unto the practice of his Disciples.

For whosoever shall compare this prayer delivered by our Savior, Matthew. 6. 9.
with this made by him, Luke 11. 2. Will find them not to be parallel places
(as many in the Gospels) presenting one and the self same matter, but two
different stories as will appear by the following circumstances.

1. That was made on a mountain when multitudes of people were gathered
together to hear it; This composed in a private place when Christ was solitary
with his Disciples.

2. That was freely tendered by our Savior unsought, unsued to, to all his
Auditory; This granted at the instance and request of his Disciples to them
alone.

3. That was inserted, and incorporated in the very body and bowels of a most
heavenly sermon. This not in preaching, but after praying when Christ ceased
from the same.

Now might not the Disciples have murmured hereat, might they not have said,
Master, we expected you would have favored us so far (as being your servants
in Ordinary) as for your sakes to have composed and compiled a spick and span
new prayer, which we your Disciples might have used as a memorial of our
Master. Whereas this prayer is an old one, we heard the same for all the
essentials thereof, a twelve month since in that sermon you made on the
exposition of the law, hence we observe;

One good prayer well composed, the more used the more acceptable to heaven;
think not, like lavish Courtiers, our prayers shall be more welcome, if always
appearing in a new suite, a new dress of language and expression.

But as the good House-holder, brought out of his Treasury things new and old
(only new, had been too prodigal, only old had been too penurious) so present
thou to God, new affections with thy old expressions, a new degree of faith,
repentance, charity, and never fear the entertainment of thy prayer in heaven,
though it be an old one, and the self-same which formerly and frequently has
been offered up.

Say, Doctrine; It is not enough for men to make mental prayers but sometimes
they ought orally to express the same. First, because the very speaking of the
words does raise and rouse people from drousiness, which otherwise may assault
them. I confess no Christian ought Hypocritically to delight in hearing the
Echo or reverberation of his own voice, yet sometimes the same may serve to
give him the watchword, and to shake off that laziness which too often
attends our Devotions. Secondly, prayers spoken are good for example to
others, to show that we are not ashamed of Gods service, but that our tongue
dare openly avouch what our heart does inwardly onceive. Thirdly, it is good
for the edification of others, who may so far be partakers of our prayers, as
to join with us in them, and to be comforted by them. A prayer concealed may
have as much heat, but a prayer expressed has more light therein, it does
shine before men, and make them glorify our Father which is in heaven.

Obj. But Hannah, 1 Samuel. 1. 13. Only moved her lips, and her voice was not
heard; embracing a middle way betwixt Mental and Oral prayer, which can seem
best of all as participating of the perfections of both.

Ans. Hannah herein stands sole and single by her self. It is sufficient that
she confesses her self to be of a troubled and sorrowful spirit, an excuse
for all her actions if one serious scrutiny appearing not so composed, and
therefore not to be drawn into Precedent for others imitation.

Come we now to answer those Cavils, which this age has devised against the
Lords prayer; a subject not unnecessary in our days. Indeed when one had made a
large discourse in the praise of Hercules, and expected great commendation for
the same, his Audience only answered his expectation: with this question, quis
unquam vituperavit Herculem, whosoever spoke in the disparagement of Hercules.
Intimating thus much, that his pains might very well be spared in a needless
subject, all the world acknowledging the worth and valor of Hercules. The same
will be said of the ensuing part of my sermon, ut quid haec perditios, what
needs this wast of words and time, were ever any so impious, so profane as
to doubt, much less deny the divine inspiration and daily necessary and
profitable use of the Lords prayer?

Ans. Thirdly, I believe it is almost unprecedented in former ages, which
maintained a constant reverence and esteem thereof, as the Lords prayer, and
Lord of prayers; But alas! we are fallen into such an impudent age, wherein
many begin to slight it, of whom I will say no more than this, If they begin to
think meanly of Gods prayer, what cause has God to think basely of theirs?

And now I remember what John the Baptist said to our Savior, Matthew. 3. 14. I
have need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me. In humble allusion
whereunto I may say, my prayers have need to come to Christ, to mediate and
intercede to God for them, and to present them with his merits to the Throne of
grace: And now his prayer comes to me, so the all disposing providence of God
has ordered the matter, that in the prosecution of my Text, I must be a weak
Advocate in the defense thereof. The best is, it mattereth not who is the
Pleader when God is the Clyent, and what is wanting in my weakness and
worthlesness, will be abundantly supplied in the might and merit of the subject
which I undertake.

First, it is objected that it is a set form of prayer, and therefore does
pinnion and confine the wings of the Dove, which ought to be at liberty and
freedom, to make choice of his own expression of it self. It is said, Romans 8.
26. The spirit it self makes intercession for us with groans which cannot be
uttered. It is therefore presumption in man to make himself Gods Interpreter,
and to dictate those words whereby his Spirit is to impart and communicate it
self to the Throne of grace; It was charged on the Rebellious Israelites, Psalm.
8. 41. That they limited the holy one of Israel; no better is their practice,
who offer to score out both the path and pace to Gods Spirit in prayer by
pre-designing the Numericall words, which are to be used thereby. Gods servants
are said to be led by the spirit, To. 8. 14. And so also if ye be led by the
spirit, Galatians 5. 18. But this is leading the spirit, when men will guide
their Conduct-our and draw up a set form whereby the same shall be directed.

Ans. That set forms are no restrainings of the holy Ghost in us, appears by
the practice of our Savior himself, Matthew. 26. 44. And went away again, and
prayed the third time saying the same words, namely the same words which he
uttered the second time, viz. O my Father, if this cup may not pass away from
me except I drink it, thy will be done. See we here, he who made the tongue to
speak, who was the frauder, and confounder of all languages, who needed not by
premeditation to press words for his service seeing millions of volunteeres
proffered themselves to be used by him. See I say, him pleased notwithstanding
to resume the same individual terms which he had uttered before.

Secondly, next to our Savior, who may be presumed most able to pray then, the
High Priest Aaron, and his two inspired Sons Eleazer and Phineas? Yet God in
their public blessings, left them not to the liberty of their own expressions,
Number. 6. 23. Speak unto Aaron and unto his Sons, saying, on this wise ye shall
bless the children of Israel, saying unto them, the Lord bless thee, and keep
thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee, the
Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.

I confess they were not confined to these words on all ennergencies and
occasions, having the latitude allowed them, that in the Temple they might
vary from this form according to their own discretions. Witness the blessing
of Eli to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 17. Go in peace, and the God of Israel grant thee
thy Petition, which thou have asked of him; But otherwise God had ordered them
not to decede from this form: and as Moses was to make all things according to
the pattern in the Mount, Heb. 8. 5. So no doubt the Priests conformed
themselves in their prayer to every word, syllable, and etter, of Gods
prescription, neither detracting thence, nor adding thereunto.

Thirdly, the Ministers conceived prayer under the Gospel, is a stinted and
premeditated one, to such people, his Auditors, who ay Amen thereunto: Their
fancies, and which is more, their hearts do or should go along with the
Ministers words, so that he boundeth their meditations, Hither shall they come,
and no further. If any say, that notwithstanding this Obligation to the words
of the Minister, they may make their own Salleys and excursions by Gods spirit
in their hearts, to enlarge themselves, and as it were to comment in their
sighs and groans on the Text of the prayers of their Ministers, it is said,
that no less liberty is allowed them in all premeditate forms of prayer, where
on the plain song of the set words, the devotion of their hearts may descant to
their own spiritual contentment.

Fourthly, none will deny, but Songs and Hymns are prayers of thanksgiving,
both those which David made in the Old Testament, and those that were used by
Christians in the Primitive times, Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in
Hymns and spiritual songs, Colos. 3. 26. Admonishing one another in Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual songs; Now surely such Ditties would be bad, and Notes
worse, and the Harmony rather ridiculous to move laughter than melodious to
raise Devotions, if the singers thereof were not predirected to the very words
and syllables of what they sung and chanted in the Church.

Excellent was the expression of Doctor Preston in point of preaching, and is
applyable equally to prayer. He would have a Minister take such pains in
studying his sermon, as if he relied not only on Gods assistance; but when he
comes to preach the same, so wholly to cast himself on divine asisstance, as
if he relied not at all on his own studies. Proportionable whereto, a Christian
soul may compile and compose his prayer, as trusting nothing to the Spirit, and
yet in the minute of the utterance thereof to God, so quit and renounce all
efficacy of premeditation, as consisting only in the concurrence of Gods
Spirit helping his infirmities.

Yea, allow the Minister able strongly to go alone by himself without leaning
on the Leage of any premeditate prayer to support him, yet surely he may not
only lawfully, but laudably degrade himself for the edification of others to
use a set form of prayer. We know how Jacob, able to walk fast himself,
confined his feet to the pace of the Children and Ewes big with young, Genesis 33.
13. he would not over-drive them. Semblably, a Minister, endowed by God with
the gift of extempore prayer, may without any shame to himself, and great
profit to others, go on pedetentim in a set form, so to bring up the rear of
his most lagging Auditors to go along with him, the more knowingly from the
beginning, and close their Amen with him the more cheerfully in the end of his
prayer.

2. Cavil. It is not a prayer of it self, but only a pattern, or draught by
which other prayers are to be made, and therefore S. Mat. says; After this
manner therefore pray ye.

It is both a pattern for prayer, and a prayer in it self to all purposes and
intents. The Standard-Bushel, which commonly is chained up in the Market place,
is not only a Bushel to measure Bushels by, (all which ought to be adequate to
the content thereof) but also a Bushel to measure grain by, it may chance of
Wheat, or of some other grain: so this of our Savior his prescribing, is
nevertheless a complete and perfect prayer in it self, although also it be a
Model, Type, or Copy, according to which for the essentials we ought to conform
all our supplications.

Third Cavil. I should be ashamed to set down as so weak and simple, save that
some in our days, who pretend to judgment, put it in not only to swell a
number; but lay much stress on the strength thereof; namely, that Christ made
it in his minority, before he was arrived at his full perfection.

I answer, as the folly of God is observed by the Apostle wiser than the wisdom
of man, and the weakness of God stronger then the strength of man: so may I
say, that the minority of Christ was more than the majority, his nonage than
the full age, his youth than the maturity of mankind. Besides, Christ was, Luke
3. 21. about thirty years of age when he was baptized, the prime conceived of
man's life, after which generally they impair rather than improve. Yea, besides
the Original stock of perfection brought into the World at his birth, he had
already received a grand accession of the holy Spirit at his baptism.

Fourth Cavil. There is nothing of a Savior in this prayer. It is but a legal
Old Testament prayer, whereas we are to ask all things in the name of Jesus, no
mention thereof herein. As therefore some Jews have a diminitive opinion of the
book of Esther, because the word Jehova is not to be found in all the extent
thereof, on the same account we may justly ground an undervaluation of this
prayer, wherein the name of Jesus does not appear, which alone is so of the
Quorum in all supplications, that without it they cannot be presumed acceptable
in the Court of Heaven.

Ans. The name of Jesus, though not literally, yet virtually and effectually is
to be found in this prayer. One cannot stir a step therein, but in the very
Porch of this prayer, and at the very Threshold of this Porch he meets with
Jesus a Savior, in those words our Father. For fain would I know who wrought,
and brought this great and good alteration that God is beheld by us under so
comfortable a notion. How came in the Kindred, whence sprang this our filial
relation. Man at his last parting with God, when expulsed Paradise, left him
his adversary, his enemy, his enraged Judge, whilst he himself was looked on
as an Offender and Malefactor. Whereas now all things are become new. Such who
parted in anger, meet in love, of Foes are become Friends; Yea, Father and
Sons. Our Father.

Now none effected this change save Jesus Christ by his merciful Mediation. Is
not the hand of our Savor clean through this prayer? Wherefore as some
Physicians give not in their receipts the bulk and mass of Herbs and Drugs, but
only their Spirits, or their infusions, which, though not so great in
quantity, are easier in the taking, and stronger in the working: so in this
prayer, though neither the name of Jesus, Messiah, or Christ, is therein used,
yet the powerful influence of both, and sovereign effect is obvious to every
judicious eye, causing our confident and familiar addresses to God, under the
relation of a Father.

Fifth Cavil. The prayer is too short, it is not comprehensive enough of all
men's necessities, which ought to be represented therein. It is too narrow as
not adequate to the emergencies of all occasions. The Merchant wants a clause
therein for prosperous Gales to drive his Ship to a safe Haven and gainful
market. The Soldier wants a clause to cover his head from danger, and crown it
with victory in the day of battle. The Husband man discovers a defect,
because no express therein for seasonable weather. The unmarried want a
Petition for loving Husbands and dutiful Wives, and the married for the
continuance of the goodness, or amendment of the badness of those to whom they
are coupled.

Ans. First in general. Whereas some find fault with the shortness of the
prayer, know, length of prayer is made a crime in Scripture, but never the
brevity thereof charged on any as a guilt, Matthew. 23. 14. Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees Hypocrites, for you devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make
long prayers. Neither length nor shortness is any whit considerable to the
acceptableness thereof, but the thickness of a prayer, when it is not empty and
hollow within, but well filled with Faith in the heart and middle thereof.

One bought a Map of the whole world, and being himself an Athenian, Cavilled
at the Map as imperfect and defective, merely because his own house in Athens
was not presented therein. Whereas the whole draught being not above a yard
square, it fell to the proportion of all Europe not to be a full foot. All
Greece not to be a full span, Attica to be but a little spot, and Athens to be
a very speck therein, so impossible was it that his invisible house should
appear. As his causeless Cavil betrayed him ignorant in Geography, so their
exception discovers their weakness in Divinity, who expect a prayer to
particularize every man's necessities. What was said by the way of Hyperbole of
our Savior, that if all things which he did and spoke were written, the World
were not able to contain them, may it not be literally spoken here, the World,
that is, none of the men therein could contain so voluminous a prayer,
descending to the minutes of all men's wishes and wants. No memory so tenacious
as to retain it, no voice so strong as to pronounce it.

Now although the particulars of every man's wants, neither are nor can be
expressed in this, or any other prayer; Yet here we find their total sum cast
up and couched under general terms. For when it is said, give us this day our
daily bread.

Herein the Soldier is remembered, who prays for all things necessary for his
condition, when, saying, give us this day our daily bread. Except it be so,
that being guilty to himself that he is rather a plunderer than a fighter, more
maintaining his livelihood by violence than valor, rapine than conquest, he
conceives himself excluded, who cannot truly call it our daily bread, as
conscious it is none of his, but snatched from the true owners thereof.

The Husbandman in this Petition prays for all things, which may tend and
conduce to the seasonable fruits of the earth:

A snowy January, frosty February, dry March, showry April, cold and windy May,
moist and fair June, hot and dry July, fair and sunny August, etc. For how
easily can God destroy in one unseasonable Month in Harvest, what the
concurrence of many foregoing Months has hopefully advanced.

In a word, let not the shortness of this prayer (which being consistent with
so much clearness is a principal honor thereof) be charged upon it for a
defect. Consider how it was intended for old folk who were past their memories,
for young Children who as yet are not come to their memories, for simple folk
who never had, nor will have memories.

Last Cavil. This Prayer has notoriously been abused by the Papists to
Superstition, and therefore the more surely to avoid offense, the use thereof
may safely be waved and declined.

Answ. It is confessed, that this most excellent Prayer has been unworthily
abused by the Romish Church.

First, by locking it up in the Latin tongue, whereof the generality of their
Layetie is ignorant, praying, as S. Peter spoke at Christ his transfiguration,
Luke 9. 33. Not knowing what they said.

Secondly, Because it has been abused in Spells and Exorcisms, to the great
dishonor of God, and advantage of Satan.

Thirdly, Because wronged with needless and impertinent repetitions of their
Beads, till their tenth bead become a Decurion, and the same ten times told
over, a Centurion in their mumbled and multiplied Devotions.

Here is it worth our observation, that the Lords prayer is abused by that very
sin, for the rectifying and reforming whereof, it was originally by our Savior
instituted and intended. Matthew. 6. 7. But when you pray, use not vain
repetitions as the Heathen do, for they think they shall be heard for their
much speaking. Now to repress former, and prevent future tautologies, was one
principal end for which this prayer was appointed. Matthew. 6. 9. After this
manner therefore pray. Therefore, that is that you may not run on the rock of
frivolous repetitions, use this prayer so free from Battologies, that excepting
some necessary Pronouns of Our and Us, the same word recurreth not twice in
the whole extent thereof.

Yet see, I say, how the Papists abuse the same by repetitions. Does it not
argue a very foul stomach, when the Physic intended to correct and remove the
vicious humors, is turned against the true nature thereof to increase the
disease of the Patient, and how does it speak the malignitie of the Popish
practice, abusing this prayer to end with repetitions, designed originally to
prevent that ill custom.

However, though it cannot be denied, that the Papists have shamefully abused
this prayer, it follows not, but that Christians may retain the true use
thereof. They must (...) purge away Popish superstitions from the same, but may
not on that pretense (...) utterly take it away and expel it out of their
public or private devotions.

First Use. It serves to confute those, who over-esteem the Lords prayer.

Quest. Is this possible, are men capable of excess in this kind of giving too
much reverence or respect to this prayer, or any other part and portion of Gods
word. Surely if it be an errrour, it is one on the right hand, rather to be
pitied and pardoned, than publicly reproved.

I confess an utter impossibility of overprising any part if Gods word, but men
may be immoderate and unadvised in their undiscreet manifesting and declaring
of their esteem of the Lords prayer, who in some sense may be said to
overvalue it, though in fine, and effect it does prove an undervaluation
thereof.

Such therefore are faulty in undiscreet expression of their respect to the
Lords Prayer, who confine all persons, at all times to that alone, not allowing
them liberty to make use of other forms, as occasion shall require. Where we
may observe, That the Apostles of Christ in the Acts, and elsewhere, on the
emergencies of sundry matters which called for their prayers, expressed
themselves in other language, accommodated to the occasion, and waved these
very words of our Saviors prescription, as too general, and not coming up
close enough to their urgent necessities. Wherefore, though we will not say of
the Lords Prayer, none but it, I may say as David did of Goliah's sword, None
is like unto it. Though it be not to be used Exclusively to shut out all other,
yet is it Eminently to be preferred before the rest.

I will add one thing more, What metals soever the ring of thy devotions be
made of, the Lords Prayer is a good Diamond to close and conclude with, of what
wood soever the shaft of the darts of thy prayers does consist, the Lords
Prayer is the best sharp Pile to pierce heaven, and to be put on at the end of
thy own devotions.

Greater is the folly of such people, who in a manner Idolatrize to the very
words and syllables of the Lords Prayer, as if men were so strictly tied up
thereunto, as not to recede one tittle from the same. Whereas we may perceive
some small difference in the two forms presented in S. Matthew and S. Luke's
Gospel. The variation of one, and transposition of two or three words, not to
add, that the Doxologie inserted in the one is omitted in the other, as if
purposely done to confute and discompose the superstition of such who stick in
such syllabical curiosities.

Truly I am afraid, if some might have had their wills, Christian liberty
might have been much prejudiced by the obtrusion of this prayer alone upon
their practice, and dare boldly say, that some men's too much crying up of the
necessity of this prayer at all times has occasioned others out of their
spirit of opposition, a mischief which mortal frailty is much subject
(especially in controvertial days, and in the frowardness of the aged world)
too much to slight, neglect, and under-value the same.

For where the former humor of overprising this prayer has infected their
hundreds, the latter of under-esteeming the same has infected their thousands;
who in their uncivil, not to say profane expressions, have vented much contempt
of this holy and heavenly prayer and pattern thereof.

And here let me safely express what I fear may be the true cause thereof, and
let such, who are faulty therein make a scrutiny in their own consciences,
whether I speak not too much truth in this point. Are they not out of charity
with the Lords Prayer, because there is so much charity in the Lords Prayer?
There is one Petition therein, which if they leave out they make the Prayer
lame, and if they put it in they make themselves liars. Namely, and forgive us
our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; does not their
revengefull and vindicative hearts harbor so much malice against their
adversaries, that they are loath to forgive them, and desire forgiveness from
God, on the condition that they forgive others? now, though I will not
positively affirm the same, yet because it carries with it a great
probability, Ministers may be jealous of their people with a godly jealousy,
as they may be jealous over their own hearts; and if their conscience acquit
them on this enquiry, happy are they, and no hurt is done by this causeless
suspicion.

To conclude, Parents of Children, and especially Mothers, may take notice,
that their little ones in saying the Lords Prayer are generally out at this
Petition. And forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that Trespass
against us. Not one little Child of ten says it a right, and in the right
place; some pass over and wholly omit it, some transpose it, very few truly
pronounce it, whereof this the reason, Trespasses once and again in this
Petition, is as bad as a Shiboleth to try the lisping tongue of a Child, there
being a conflux of several Consonants, and some hard sounded therein, so that
it poseth all the offices of speech in a Child's mouth distinctly to utter the
same.

Let not Parents be angry with their Children for not speaking it, but with
themselves for not practicing it, they beat their Children for not saying it,
God may justly beat them for not doing it. I confess such forgiveness goes
against flesh and blood, but flesh and blood shall never enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, we must be acted with higher principles, if we hope to come thither,
whither the mercy of God bring us through the merits of Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

