TWO DECLARATIONS From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND The General
Council of His Army; THE FIRST, To the Right Honorable, the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London, in behalf of the whole
Army; together with the Generals Desires therein.

And an Answer of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council thereunto.

THE SECOND, To the whole Kingdom in general; Concerning the Resolution of His
Excellency, and the Officers and Soldiery under His Command, touching the
Power of the Sword, etc.

BY the appointment of His Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax, and the General
Council of His Army.

Signed, Jo. Rushworth, Secr.



7ber. 14 LONDON: Printed for R.G. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, MDCXLVII.

THE HEADS OF THE NEW PROPOSALS Debated upon Thursday last, the 9. of this
instant, by His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lieutenant General Cromwell,
and the rest of the Officers, and Council of the Army.
To be presented to the Kings most Excellent Majesty at Hampton Court.
UPon Thursday last (being the Ninth of this instant, 1647.) His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, Lieutenant General Cromwell, and diverse other Colonels,
Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, and Captains, together with the Agitators of each
respective Regiment throughout the Army, met at the Headquarters at Putney,
and about ten of the clock in the morning assembled together in Putney Church,
where they continued till six in the Evening, and had a long debate at the
Council Table, touching the enlarging of diverse Proposals to be sent to the
King; they are very large, and of great concernment, therefore to large to
contract in this small Volume: Nevertheless, I shall here briefly intimate
unto you, the effect and substance of some of the chief of them, by giving you
the Heads, as follows:

The first is, concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty, and His Royal
Posterity, touching their Rights and Interests.

The second, Concerning the Sequestration of the Estates of diverse of the Kings
friends, for assisting his Majesty in the late War against the Parliament, etc.
With diverse other Proposals, for settling of this tottering Kingdom in a firm
Peace and Union.

The Right Honorable, the Lieutenant General declared himself most worthily
at the Council Table, and expressed himself to this effect:

That whereas it has been suggested to the Kingdom, that he has a disire to
cast down the Foundation of Presbytery, and to advance and set up Indepency,
He declares, that he desires nothing more, then to see this poor tottered
Nation established in Truth and Peace, and this languishing Commonwealth
restored to their just Rights and Liberties, etc.

Diverse other matters (worthy of observation were treated upon at the same
time, a Copy of which I have sent you here enclosed, together with the Generals
Message to the Lord Mayor of London, and His Declaration to the Kingdom of
England, all which I shall here insert verbatim, according to the original
Copies, agreed upon by his Excellency and the Council of the Army.

A Declaration from the Adjutators in the Army, prefented to his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax at Putney.
May it please your Excellency,
HAving received informations from some persons of good affections and fidelity
to the Army, and Kingdom, that several persons, are now under unmertiful
sufferings, by consiscating their goods and imprisonment of their persons, for
words spoken against the King (acting in his tyrannical practices in the late
war they having been Soldiers.) And whereas we being made sensible of their
misery, not knowing how soon it may be our condition, their as yet being no
provision for their, or our own indemnity. For want of which our Enemies have
so great advantage of all the well-affected in the Kingdom, That if not timely
remedied, they will recover more upon our words, then we of them by our swords.
We are engaged to supplicate your Excellency in behalf of these prisoners,
That you would be pleased to use some means for the restoring them to their
freedom, and to deliver them from their Tyrannical sufferings, according as
your Excellency shall find agreeable to justice and reason.

This Declaration was presented to His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax at Putney,
and signed by above 24. Adjutators in behalf of the whole Army.

A Declaration from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of his Army, to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London, etc.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
WHereas I am informed, that the City of London is in arreare to the Army, a
very great sum, and understanding that care is taken by the Committee of
Parliament for the Army to provide money seasonably for the payment thereof, by
sending to you to advance fifty thousand pounds upon the security of what is
due from you, which is a far greater sum then is desired to be presently
advanced by you, although we cannot conceive that there well be any
backewardnesse in you to answer this desire which is so reasonable, and of such
necessity to the satisfaction and well ordering of the Army; yet we thought
good to declare unto you about it, that so you may understand so much from us,
with this, That delay will be equal to a denial, and cause us to think that
little regard is had of us, or the endeavors now in hand, tending to the
settlement of the peace of the Kingdom, which is so much desired, and hoped
for by us, and all honest men; And to the obtaining of which timely supplies of
Money, and especially the present payment of the sum above named will very much
induce.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the general
Council of his Army, Signed. John Rushworth,Secr.
Postscript.
We desire there may be a present performance the cendition of the Army not
admitting any longer delay.

Putney Septem. 7.


Whereupon, the Common Council met at Guild Hall upon Saturday last, and
resolved to send an answer to the General to this effect, That they will do
their endeavors to raise the said sum so soon as possible they can, and
satisfy his Excellencies desires therein.

Whereas a Member of the General Council of this Army has publicly declared
and expressed himself, That there is now no visible authority in this Kingdom,
but the power and force of the Sword; We therefore the said General Council,
to testify how far our hearts and minds are from setting up the power of the
Sword above, or against the Fundamental authority and Government of the
Kingdom, and our readiness to maintain and uphold the same Authority, have by
a free Vote in the said Council, no way contradicting, adjudged the same
Member to be expelled the Council, which we hereby thought fit to publish, as
a clear manifestation of our dislike, and disavowing such principles or
purposes.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Genenerall
Council of the Army. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secretary.


