A FVLLER NARRATIVE of the late VICTORY Obtained by Col: General Poyntz
against His Majesty's Forces near CHESTER.

As it was presented by Col: Laurence Parsons, Quartermaster General, who was
a principal Actor in the business, to the Honorable House of Commons, on
Monday, Sept. 29. 1645. and Read in the said House.

With a more perfect List of the Prisoners taken, and amongst the rest, Sir
Tho: Glemham, and others of note.

I Appoint Mr. William Liptrat my Servant, being Agent to the Colonel General,
to print this Relation:

W: LENTHALL, Speaker.

London: Printed for John Field. Sept. 30. 1645.

A fuller NARRATIVE of the late VICTORY, Obtained by Coll: General Poyntz,
against his MAJESTY'S Forces near CHESTER.
ABout the 18. of August last, The King with about Four thousand Horse and
Dragoons advanced into Yorkshire: The 19. Col. Rossiters horse came up to Genesis
Poyntz: The 21. they joined with the Scots and Cheshire horse; a days rest the
Scots would have: The next day all marched, but the King got by that means a
days Retreat before, whom General Poyntz, according to his Order from the
Committee of both Kingdoms, through many difficulties, pursued above Three
hundred miles, not resting above a day in any place: The knowledge of the Kings
advance for relief of Chester, was the first certain Intelligence received of
the Kings motion: The General marched day and night to be there before him,
and took in a strong house, with a drawbridge and moted, which stood in the
way of his march, and opposed him (in less then an hours space) and after a
very hard march all night on the 25. of this instant, in the morning his Van
Carriers discovered the Enemy on a Moore, within a mile and a half of Chester,
called Routon Moor, whereupon, immediately he drew into order, and advanced upon
them, though all his forces were not then come up, for he supposed to take the
Enemy at unawares; it being probable they could have no Intelligence of his
being so near, though it proved otherwise; for his Letters written that night
to the Commander within the out-Lines of Chester, giving notice of his advance,
were intercepted, and the Enemy being possessed of the advantage of ground and
in order, confronted our Van, led by Colonel Hugh Bethel, in the midst of a
Lane, betwixt two Moors, covered with the Armed men of both Batalia's, where
was given a very sharp and gallant charge by both parties, for after Pistols
were discharged at half Pikes distance, they disputed the matter with their
swords, a full quarter of an hour, neither side yielding ground to other, till
at length the Enemy were forced to retreat, whom: our men pursuing, were
reincountred by a fresh reserve at the Lanes mouth, and they were likewise
discomfitted, and a third; but being over powered, were in the end forced to
Retreat through the Lane, incapable of receiving any reserve to second them;
here we had some loss, the Enemy pursuing to the Lanes end, but were beaten
back, for there was space for our reserves to advance, Colonel Bethell and
Colonel Graves were there fore wounded: After this, the General perceiving
the Enemy lay upon his advantages, only skirmisht him, with some flying
parties, while he held correspondency with his friends in Chester Suburbs,
whose sign was the discharge of two piece of Ordnance when they would issue
out with Horse and Foot to join with him, upon whose appearing, the Enemy
quitted their station, and the General with a party advanced to take the most
convenient Ground, giving command to Colonel Parsons, Quarter Master General
of the Army in the absence of Colonel Sandys (who performed the duty of
Commissarie General of the Horse, during the aforesaid march, being then
employed to the Committee of both Kingdoms) to order up the rest, which was
opportunely done; for they joined with the Auxiliary forces of horse and foot
in the Enemies ground, and were drawn into many small Divisions and Reserves,
being much over numbered by the Enemy, who accounted themselves 5000. horse, and
General Poyntz not above 2500. horse, besides two small bodies of Foot, who
were disposed in the two outmost intervalls of horse; upon the very instant of
this juncture, the enemy advanced with their whole body, and the General
leaving the charge of the reserves to Col. Parsons, took care of, and led up
the Van divisions; with which, after a round volley of shot from the Foot, he
joined Battle, charging the enemy in Front and Flank, (where his horse was
deeply wounded on the head) being continually seconded with Reserves, as often
as there was occasion; the rest (being kep entire) followed at a due distance,
the prevailing General who put the enemy to a total Rout; and although the
pursuit was as hot as could be expected from such wearied horse, through narrow
dirty Lanes, and over ditches; the Enemy Rallied in a great Moor wide of
Chester, in two vast bodies, a great distance asunder: The first, not without
some dispute, were again Routed, and the other likewise, who Retreated upon the
Warwick Regiment with such violence, as bore them away confusedly, intermixed
with the flying Enemy, up to the outworks of the Suburbs; the Musketeers
within, were nevertheless liberal of their Gunshot; but the Divine
Providence appeared much in the distribution of the impartial bullets, few or
none lighting upon our men, though many of the Enemy were there found expiring:
A body of horse all the while of these last disputes appeared, fixed on the top
of a hill a little distant on that side Chester, wherein the King was very
confidently reported to be; for confronting whereof, a party of foot winged
with Col. Bethells and Col. Lidcots Regiments, were drawn into a convenient
close in the bottom as a grand Reserve; but the night by this time falling, the
body on the hill appeared not, and those in the bottom returned to their
Comrades, satiate with the slaughter, Prisoners and booty of the vanquished
Enemy: While these things were thus agitated in the field, the remainder of
Foot left with Col. Louthian in the Suburbs were not idle, for the Enemy made a
strong falley upon them out of the City, and were more strenuously repulsed.
The number of the slain, of the Prisoners, and horse taken, is not yet known,
but it is generally conjectured Eight hundred slain, One thousand five hundred
men, and Two thousand horse taken: There was brought in that night, the
underwritten list of the considerable men taken and slain in the Fight; the
King was seen with a party of about five or six hundred horse to march into
Wales.

Prisoners taken at, and after the Routing of the Kings Forces near Chester,
the 24. of September, 1645.
Knights and Colonels.
SIr Thomas Glemham.

Sir Philip Musgrave, Major General. Col. Sir Thomas Dawbrichcoate. Col. Sir
Thomas Dacres. Col. Sir Michael Constable. Col. Sir Thomas Goare. Col. Sir
Henry Stradling, Col. Jo. han Philiem Heitter. Col. Thomas Weston, Son to the
late Lord Treasurer. Col. John Gifford. Col. Cromwell. Col. Fletcher.

Lieutenant Colonels.
Matham, Millington, Edward, Hatton, Salkeld, Ruly, Broughton, Rutherford,
Constable, Lawson, Wigmore.

Majors.
Williams, Morris, Magduggell, Magdoole, Lacymouth, Smith.

Captains.
Wyvill, Cottrell Martin, Swinlue, Henshaw, White, Gibbon, Starling, Morgan,
Mountain, le Strange, Swinho^, Constable, Shel^y, Connyers, Johnson, Dixon,
Press, Lo^^^er, Willey, Moreton, Simpson, Bell, Boulton, Vaughan, St.
Michaels, Capt. of the Queens Troop, with him a Scarf taken, which the Queen
took from about her neck, and gave him to wear as Colors for her.

Lieutenants.
Cottrell, Morgan, Bartrom, Astelby, Story, Colborn, Constable, Mansfield,
Skipwith, Iefferson, Power, Brook, Whitney, Ellyot.

Cornets.
Elsyng, Iulyan, Rainsford, Morley, Peirson, Fitz-Williams, Smith.

Quartermasters.
James Martin, Quartermaster General. Thomas Shelden, the Kings Quartermaster.
Quarter. Collizer, Quarter. Low, Quarter. Brere.

Trumpets five.

Corporalls two.

Gentlemen of the Kings Lifeguard, seventeen.

Twenty more Gentlemen.

Troopers between Eight hundred and a Thousand.

Master Sherburne of Stannyhurst.

Master William Leighton.

Master Lewis Darcy.

Master Henry Boucher.

Master James Mountague.

Master Gilbert Markham.

These very considerable Gentlemen.

Slain.
Two Lords, 2. Knights, 1. Colonel, 1. Lieutenant-Colonell, and three hundred
and more Officers and Common Soldiers,

Sir Marmaduke Langdale and Gerrard, reported to be killed.

Sir Brian Stapleton, a notorious Papist slain, the Kings Agent for Ireland, in
whose pocket was found a Commission for bringing over ten thousand men.

FINIS.

