OBSEQUIES OFFERED UP To the Dear and never-dying Memory of the Honorable SR
PAUL PINDAR KNIGHT.
HEnce all unhallowed Orgies; let no tongue
Presume to chant the Epicedium
Of our renowned PINDAR, less he be
The Grecian PINDAR, or as great as He.
Naught but the Sock or Buskin can become
Such Tragic Rites; or Personate thy Tomb
Admired PINDAR! whose Heroic Hers
Admit's no Parallel with a slow-pac't verse.
The Quire is too too narrow, and the whole Nine
Too few, to warble Anthems at this Shrine,
Though they could out-weep NIOBE, and sing
Sorrows as fluent as their Thespian Spring.
But why do I thus, to inhance Thy prais,
Mingle my Cypress with thy spreading Baies?
Since Thy Encomium needs here no more
Then Gold in Peru, or a Map on Shore.
Let those that track the Mysteries, and the Truth
Of PRINCEly- Embassies, define His Youth,
Spurred on with heat of Honor through the whole
Circle, from the Artick to the Antartick Pole;
Whose Travel this advantage had to bring
Riches to's Country, Honor to his KING.
Nor could the Heresy of that CLIME Impair
His Pious Soul; the influence of that Aer,
Whose venom has killed thousands, hurt him not,
In The midst of Sodom who remained a LOT.
Let those who 're grounded in the Grand debates
Of Kingdom's Rights, and Interests of States
Revolv his Counsels; so maturely wise,
They always Conquered where They did Advize.
Solid, but not Severe; who could unite
Candor with Prudence, Prudence with delight-
Most Rich, yet Humble in the richest sens;
His Mind was moderate, though his Means Immens.
Liberal, but not Profuse; He could express
The difference 'twixt true Bounty and Excess.
Courteous, without exception, or self ends:
Kind to the Stranger, Ample to his Friends:
Pious to admiration, and Free
Beyond all President, to each degree
That Craved his Alms; who was the Poor's Supply,
Crutch to the Cripple, and the Blinde-man's Eye.
But who can write his Story? 'twas so Ample,
It might serve both our mirror and example.
So Heavenly was each Action, and so Just
Poised in the Scale of TRUTH, that scarce one dust
Or atome did fall scantie, or surmount
In the Examen of his life's account.
No wordly cares could discompose, or cross
His thoughts with sens of lucre or of loss.
No shocks of Fate or Fortune could control
Or storm the Bulwark of his fase-built Soul.
No threats could fright his Loial Temper; He
when half the Land Apostatized, stood free
In his Resolvs; abhorring to divide
Himself, or shift his Tenets with the Tide.
He sought not in those troubled streams to swim
Nor courted Honor, which so courted Him.
PEACE was his Aim, and End; who lived, and di'd
Lulled in a Calm, when all the Earth beside
Reeled with those storms of WAR, whose Shocks have hurled
Realms from their Center, and unhinged the world.
But why do I Epitomize a Theme
In this small Schedule, which deserv's a Ream?
'Way then with Elegies; which cannot add more
Life to His Honors, then they had before.
Nor need we ransack the Corinthian Mine,
Or rob the Parian Quarries, to enshrine
His Memory, since thy Structure great St PAUL
(Indebted to great PINDAR'S Bounty) shall
Perpetuate His Name, and in her Womb
And sacred Entrails Rear Him such a Tomb
As shall out vie proud Memphis, and surpass
Those Mausolean Obelisks of Brass.
Great TIME shall tell the rest; and quote His glory
From her own Register; the wel-pen'd Story
And Legend of whose Actions shall strike Dumb
The Present, and amuse the Age to Com.
P. F.


