A Divine Antidote against the Plague: OR Mourning Tears, IN Solioquies and
Prayers.

AS, 1. For this general Visitation. 2. For those whose Houses are Shut up of
the Plague. 3. For those who have Risings or Swellings. 4. For those Marked
with the Tokens.


Necessary for all Families as well in the Country as in the City, in this Time
of Pestilence.

By John Featley, Chaplain to His late Majesty.

London, Printed by Thomas Mabb and are to be sold by Margaret Shears at the
Blew-Bible in Bedford-street, 1665.

The Table.
Tears of mourning, fitted for this General Pestilence.
The Soliloquie, consisting of fix several parts, and treating of, 1 Mourning
by Example, in a public Calamity. Page 1. 2 Several causes of God's
Visitations. p. 18. 3 Sin especially the cause of the Pestilence. p. 33. 4
Several Examples of dreadful Pestilences. p. 42. 5 God's threatening before his
Visitation. p. 51. 6 The duty of a Christian, decreeing both to whom, and for
whom we ought to pray in the time of Pelence. p. 60.
The Prayer. p. 72. Tears of those whose Ho^ses are shut up of the Plague. p.
81. The Prayer p. 94. Tears for them who are visited with the Pestilence, being
1. either wounded with a Swelling or Sore. 101. Or, 2. Marked with Tokens. p.
111 The Prayer. p. 123.


Tears of mourning, fitted for this General Pestilence.
The Soliloquie, consisting of six several parts, and treating of, 1 Mourning
by Example, in a public Calamity. 2 Several causes of God's Visitations. 3
Sin especially the cause of the Pestilence. 4 Several Examples of dreadful
Pestilences. 5 God's threatening before his Visitation. 6 The duty of a
Christian, decreeing both to whom, and for whom we ought to pray in the time of
Pelence.



The Ejaculation.
Psalm. 5. v. 1, 2. Give ear to my words, O Lord; consider my Meditation.

Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for unto thee will I
Pray.


THe heart of the Wise is in the house of mourning: Ecles. ^.^.
(says Solomon) but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. Is the heart
then, sometimes in a Pilgrimage from the body? Or is the body required to visit
the sick, yea, though the Disease be Infectious? Or are we always, by command,
to intimate the Prophet, Psalm. 42.3.
whose Tears were his Meat day and night? The heart indeed is often from home;
and is least where it lives, most where it loves. The Sick must be visited,
or else my Savior will complain as he does in the Gospel, saying, I was sick,
Mat. 25.43. Job 2.11.
and ye visited me not. When Job 's three friends heard of the evil that was
come upon him, they came every one from his own place; for they had made an
appointment together to come to mourn with him, and to comfort him. Verse. 13.
So they sat down with him upon the ground, and mourned seven days and seven
nights. When Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness wherewith he dyed, 2 Kin
13.14.
Joash the King of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face, and said,
O my Father, my Father, the Charet of Isra^, and the Horsemen thereof. When
wicked King Jo^am went to be Irealed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians
had given him at R^mah, chapter 8.^.
Ahaziah the Son of Hehoram King of Judah went down to see him in Jezreel,
because he was sick. Thus do I read of a Holy Patient visited by friendly
Mourners: a Holy Prophet visited by a weeping King: a Wicked King visited by
another as wicked as himself. All these were visiters, or visited: But I do not
find that the Diseases were Infectious. No: I must therefore imitate the best
of them in my charity to others: but I may not forget charity to my self.
Wilfully to run into apparent danger, is desperately to tempt the Keeper of
Israel. What shall I then do? The passing-bells inform mine ears of the
mortality of my Neighbors; and yet I cannot, I must not visit them. What (I
say) shall I do? What course shall I take? Charity commands me, compassion
hastenth me to the dying Christians, that by my advice, or at least by my
prayers I might express my commiseration. And yet, when I am just at my door
provided, resolved, intended to go, even then mine own health, the health of my
Family, and (which is greater then all these) the fear of displeasing my
Gracious Protector brings me back again, and keeps me at home. I would not be
uncharitable; but I must not be desperate. Well then: I am resolved what I will
do. I will (with Solomon) go to the houses of mourning, the houses of the
Visited; yet not in body, but in mind, and in purse; I will pity them, and I
will send relief unto them. I dare not go in Person, but I will go in
Affection; and for my Neighbors groaning under the evil of punishment, and for
my self burdened with the evil of sin; I will feed upon my tears day and
night. I must grieve for my self in particular; and yet I must not be so
unkindly Covetous, as to keep my tears only for my self. In public
Calamities those who shed no tears may be justly suspected to have no bowell^.
I find my self not un-apt to weep; for I am prompted to that by the weakness of
my disposition. And yet I suspect my self; I am jealous of my self, that my
tears do rather flow from my fear of Infection, then from a fellow-feeling of
the miseries which the infected suffer. To heighten therefore my mourning, and
to justify it by my compassion, I will propose to my self the Examples of
others such as I find Recorded in the word of my God.

When the Destruction of the Jews was near at hand, Consider ye, Jer. 9.17.
and call for the mourning women that they may come; and send for cunning women
that they may come: Zion, How are we spoiled, etc. Women were commanded to hear
the Word of the Lord; and their ears to receive the word of his mouth: they
were to teach their daughters wailing; and every one her Neighbor Lamentation:
come up into their windows, and entered into their Palaces; to cut off the
Children from without, and the young men from their streets. did fall as dung
upon the field, and as the handful after the harvest-man; and none did gather
them. The case is now with us, as it was then with the Jews. Alas, how are we
spoiled too! How is death come up into our windows by the Infectious Air! How
do our Children dye, and our Young Men fall! Our Children which know not the
cause; and our Young Men that trusted in the strength of their Youth! O how do
the Carcasses of men fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handful
after the Harvest man; and yet there are none to gather them up! They perish
without, because either there is not room enough left within doors for them; or
not people alive to attend them in their sickness; or not people of strength
enough to unlock the doors or not means for their sustenance if they enter in.
Thus necessity drives them into the fields; and there mortality seizes upon
them, where no person is found to bury their bodies; no bearers to carry them
to the surfeited Earth; no friends to bewail the loss of their lives; and no
Christians to cover them from their gazing spectators; the very Fowls of the
Air, and the Beasts of the field. What heart would not break; what eye would
not weep; what soul would not lament for this sad Visitation? Lam. 1.16.
For these things (with Jeremiah) will I weep: mine eye, mine eye shall run
down with water; because the comforter which should relieve our souls, is far
from us.

The Lord has thrown down Jerusalem (says the Prophet) and has not pitied;
Lam. 2.17.
and he has caused their Enemy to rejoice over them; he has set up the born
of their Adversary. Zion, let tears run down like a River day and night: give
thy self no rest; the Lord covered us also with a cloud in his anger, as then
he did the Daughter of Zion; and cast down from Heaven unto the Earth the
beauty of our Israel; and remembered not his footstool in the day of his
anger. An Enemy destroys, and rejoices over us: but such an Enemy it is, as
neither can hear, nor will spare. The very Air which was created to cool the
flames of our scorching hearts, is so poisoned with the Infection, that the
more we make of it, the less we our selves are made by it: the closer we seat
it even to and in our hearts, the nearer does the Infection approach our
spirits. The corrupted Air shall be therefore cleansed by the thick groans
that shall fly from my heavy heart; and be purified with the thunder of my
loudest cries. With Moab in the Prophecy, Isa. 15.2.
I will howl over N^bo, let every one gird himself with sackcloth: on all
their heads let there be baldness: on the tops of our houses, and in our
streets let every one howl, Jer. 48.4.
weeping abundantly; for we are destroyed; for our little ones have caused a
cry to be heared. Oh our sucklings that cry for milk from the breast, suck in
destruction when they expect their nourishment. For these things (with
Jerusalem) I will weep sore in the night (in this night of a General
Affliction: Lam. 1.2.
) my tears shall be on my cheeks, because among all our Lovers there is none
to comfort us.

At the final desolation of the house of Israel, Eze. 7.16.
the Prophet told them that, They that fled away of them should escape, and
should be on the Mountains like Doves of the Valleys, all of them mourning,
every one for his Iniquity: should be feeble, should be weak as water: They
should also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror should cover them;
and shame should be upon all their faces, and baldness upon their heads. Lord
what a time of mourning should here be! What a time of horror! Destruction is
threatened; and whom Destruction missed, mourning should over-take; feebleness
should follow, weakness should pursue, and horror should cover. Oh, that very
time is come now upon us: that Prophecy is fulfilled in our Israel. Here is no
sword to slay us; no Fiery Engines of a hellish invention to murder us; no men
to take us Captives: but here is worse, far worse; Psalm. 91.6.
here is the Pestilence that walks in darkness, and the destruction that
wastes at noonday. Here are houses not inhabited; Streets not trampled;
Churches not frequented, Sick not visited, Hungry not fed, Doors not opened,
Bells not ceased, and Graves not satisfied. Isa. 24.10 Pro. 30.15
Every house is shut up, that no man may come in. The Horse-leech has here her
two Daughters crying give, give. Here are three things not satisfied; yea, four
things that say not, It is enough. The Hungry cry give, and the Thirsty cry
give, and the Sick cry give, and the Grave cries give. The Hungry pine, and
therefore cry; the Thirsty scorch, and therefore cry; the Sick want help, and
therefore cry; but, O, the Grave is daily fed, and yet it is daily hungry. The
mouth thereof is opened, and it devoureth men; and yet for all that, it still
cries for our return to the dust as we were. Eccl. 12.7
The Mountains the great persons escape not: the habitations of men are like
the Wildernesses for Beasts, because the Inhabitants are burnt up with the
fiery Pestilence. Therefore (with the Prophet) For the Mountains will I take
up a weeping, Jer 9.10.
and wayling; and for the Habitations of the Wilderness a Lamentation; because
they are burnt up that none can pass through them; neither can men hear the
voice of the Cattle.

The House of Israel was commanded to seek the Lord; Amos 5.4.
but they on the contrary are said to have sought Bethel, entered into Gilgal,
and to have passed to Beersheba: and in all Vine-yards shall be wayling, for I
will pass through thee, says the Lord. Here is again a cloud of sorrows; a
thick mist of groans, the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. This
cloud overcasteth us too; this mist choaketh us; this darkness blinds us.
Here is wayling in our streets, to dim our eyes; here is the Husbandman
mourning to stifle us with sorrow; and here is the mourning of the Vine-yards,
to cloud our souls. Our hearts, Psalm. 104.15.
which should have been gladded with the fruit of the Vine, are squeezed and
pressed like the bunches of Grapes. Our Bellies, which should have been filled
with the Fruits of the Earth, do cry in their emptiness, and wayle with the
Husbandman. One woe courteth another: one curse saluteth another. Our Sickness
is great, and yet our Famine too is great; not that the Earth has forgotten to
be fertile, but by reason that men are afraid to furnish us. Pestilence
consumes, and Hunger cries: thus the Visited dye they know not of what; for
Sickness calls, and Hunger calls, and Want calls, and Sorrow calls: all
of them join in their hideous concord, in their horrid discord, and call for
our Ruin, and yell for our Destruction. That heart which bleedeth not for such
unutterable sorrow, must needs be stone, or steel: nay worse; for stones will
weep, to complain with the clouds: and steel will droop in a time of storms.
Heart, if thou are a woman's, break; if thou art a Christians, lament; if thou
art mine, bemoan the afflictions which dwell among my friends, Joel 2.6.
and the blackness which the faces of my Neighbors have gathered. Ps. 35.13.
I will (with David) put on sackcloth now, though for my very Enemies which
are Sick; and humble my soul with Fasting: and I will go heavily, With the
Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 16.9.
I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the Vine of Shibmah: I will water thee
with my toares, O Heshbon, and Elealeh. Or with Jeremiah, Jer. 14.17
Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease; for
the Virgin-Daughter of this People is broken with a great breach, with a very
grievous blow.

The Prophet Ezekiel tells the Israelites, Eze. 7.12.
that The time is come; the d^y draws near: let not the buyer rejoice, nor
the seller mourn; for wrath is come upon all the Multitude thereof. The King
shall mourn, O Israel, how great were thy pangs, when thus thou were Visited! O
how deep are our groans too in this day of our Visitation! The Israelites are
dead; their Torments are forgotten: but we live; we live dying; we live to
suffer; we live to dye. To dye, said I? O that Death were sweet indeed, if it
would come with a wish; if it would hasten it is approach: it were sweeter then
the honey, Psa. 19.10
and the honey comb. What was formerly our dread, is now our desire. What we
posted from, we would now hasten unto, could but Death yet grow so pitiful,
so merciful as to hear our desires. But we cannot either dye when we would, or
how we would. We may not choose either the time, on the manner of our death.
See, See, how it stare's us in the face; and look's upon us in every Passenger
that crawleth by our doors; in every Cossin that is carried by our windows. Dye
we must; but of what Diseas^? By what means? If of Ago, it is welcome: if of a
Consumption, it is kind. But what if of the Plague? What if of the Pestilence?
Woe unus, there is our fear; thence is our trembling. If that arrow be short at
us, we shall have no Preacher to pray by us, or to administer ghostly
consolation unto us: no Friend to Visit us; yea, and it may be, neither Physic
to help us, nor Meat to strengthen us, no nor Servant to attend us. We may
call, but none will dare approach to answer us: we may weep, but none will dare
come to comfort us. This, this day is come upon us. The Buyer rejoices not,
fearing least with his bargain he purchase a Disease. The Seller mourns not,
hoping that though he loose by his bargain, yet his money will furnish him with
things for necessity. Thus the wrath of God is come upon us: we are clothed
with desolation. This I feel; and and yet I feel it not: I hear of it; but it
comes not yet upon me: it walks by my doors; it beckneth to me in the
streets; it knocks at my habitation; and yet, for all this, (blessed be my
God) it is not yet entered. But who knows how soon that affrighting Disease
may force open my door; or creep in at my window; or peep in at a keyhole; or
slink in at a crevise? The Disease is general; but my sorrows shall be
therefore as general. All others shall not weep, and my self alone rejoice.
The meat offering, Joel 1.9.
and the drink offering (the participation of the Holy Communion) through fear
is cut off from the House of the Lord: the Priests, Hos. 4.3.
the Lord's Minister. do mourn. The Land mourns, and every one that dwells
therein languisheth; with the Beasts of the Field, and with the Fowls of the
Heavens. Ezr. 10.6.
Therefore (with Ezra) I will go into the Chamber; and when I am come thither,
I will eat no bread, nor drink water; for I will mourn, because of the
transgressions of us all. Or (with Nehemiah) I will sit down and weep, Neh. 1.4.
and mourn certain days; and fast, and pray before the God of Heaven.

The Lord God of hosts did threaten to touch the Land of israel, Amos 9.5.
and it should melt, and all that dwelled therein should mourn; and it should
rise up wholly like a flood, and be drowned as by the flood of Egypt. Thus
has he threatened us also; and has he not brought it to pass? See, See how the
Land melts; Psalm. 97.5
yea melts like wax at the presence of the Lord; at the presence of the God
o^ the whole Earth. Needs must the Land, (the hearts of the inhabitants of the
Land) melt at his presence seeing, the Apostle styleth him a consuming fire.
Heb. 12.29.
Oh how all do mourn that dwell in the Land! The Parents lament the sickness of
the Child; the the Wife of the Husband; the Servant of the Mistress all mourn,
all lament. It may now be truly said that the whole Land is drowned: for, what
eye is not dimmed with tears? What house is not filled with tears? What
street is not washed with tears? if the saltness of water will cause a
barrenness of the Earth, what fruit can possible our Land produce, which is
thus moystened, thus watered with the brine of our tears? And yet, me thinks,
the Earth appears as greedy as ever; for it speedily devoureth whatsoever is
sprinkled on it by the sorrows of the inhabitants. The insected cry, and the
languishing cry: and shall not my tears much rather trickle down my cheeks,
although my door is nor yet converted into pasture; nor my walks over-gro^n
with the springing grass? O yes, much, much rather: yea, and with ^he more
courage will I weep, by how much the more I retain my ^rength to weep. I hear,
Jer. 4.31.
me thinks be Voices of the Visited, as of a wo^an in travel; and their anguish
as (...) her that brings forth her first ^hild, bewayling themselves, and
breading their hands, and each of them saying, Woe is me now, for my ^ul is
wearied because of this mur^ering Sickness. Isa. 22.5.
Therefore will. I ^ake up the resolution of the Prophet ^saiah; and whosoever
shall come to ^ivert my tears; to them I will say, Look away from me; I will
weep bit^erly; labor not to comfort me. Or (with Jeremiah) my soul shall weep
^n secret places, for their pains; Jer. 13.17
and ^ine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears; because the Lord's
flock is thus destroyed.

The second part of the S^liloquie, treating of several cause of God's
Visitations.
I Mourn, and I mourn and all o^ of a sense of the general suff^ance; I mourn
and I mourn by pre^dent: But do I find the cause of o^ Distresses? The ground
of our Sic^nesses? Pestilence is not the on^ arrow that is shot from the
Almig^ty, when his revenge is stirred u^ and yet every punishment is term a
Stroke, a Stripe, a Plague. Wh^ the Lord intended the spoil of t^ Egyptians
by the Children of Isra^^ that which in others would ha^ been deemed theft, or
at the least cozenage, was in the Israelites b^ Justice, and done in Obedience^
him who is Lord of all, Ex. 12.36.
when the spoiled the Egyptians of their Jewels, borrowe^* And yet this to
the lenders is termed a Plague; for the Lord said un^^ Moses, Chapter 11.1.
Yet will I bring one Plagu^ more upon Pharaoh, and upon Aegyp^ afterward he
will let you go hence* When the firstborn of Egypt were decreed to be slain
for the stubbornness of the King, the Execution o^ at decree was styled a
Plague: for ^od told the Israelites by his Servant ^oses, saying; Chapter 12.13
The blood shall be to (...) for a token upon the houses where are; and when I
see the blood, I ^ll pass over you; and the Plague ^all not be upon you to
destroy you, ^^en I smite the Land of Egypt. ^hen the Children of Israel had
^^ged after the fleshpots of Egypt, ^^d cried, and murmured against Moses and
Aaron, saying, Chapter 16.3.
Would to ^od we had dyed by the hand of the lord in the Land of Egypt, when
we ^^te by the fleshpots, and when we did ^t bread to the full; for ye have
rought us forth into this Wilderness to ^ill this whole assembly with hunger:
^hen (I find) the Lord was intreat^d for flesh; but that flesh proved ^he
Destruction of the People, and that Destruction is called a Plague. For, Number.
11.33.
while the Quails were yet between their teeth (says the Text) ^re the flesh
was chewed, the wrath ^f the Lord was kindled against the people; and the Lord
smote the people with a very great Plague. Consumption is also said to be a
Plague; for so says the Prophet. Zech. 14.12.
This shall be the Plague wherewith the Lord will smite all the People that
have fought against Jerusalem: Their flesh (...) consume away while they stand
(...) their feet; and their eyes shall (...) sum away in their holes; and
(...) tongue shall consume away in (...) mouth. Thus every Judgment truly a
Plague; and from Go^ comes; and upon men, weak (...) mortal men and women it
come but it is for their sins; it is for t^ Transgressions. Every one gro^^
under the Affliction, but few for Cause. We are angry with the R^^ and we are
angry with the Correct and yet we quarrel not with (...) selves for meriting
such, yea mo^^ yea greater, yea more tormenti^^ more continuing Punishments.
(...) will therefore look into the sacr^^ page yet once again: I will look i^
to the roll of that Book, and (wi^^ Ezekiel) I will spread it before no and
find written therein the Lametations, Ezekiel 2.9.
(...) will find the Punishments, and I w^^ find out the Offenses too. I wi^^
mourn with them, with us, with ev^ry one that is visited: and with the^ and for
our selves I will pry into the causes of our maladies, seeing I kno^ that God
will not be angry without a cause. Psalm. 89.30.
We do first forsake his Laws and walk not in His Judgments; profane His
Statutes, and break ^s Commandments; Visi^h our Transgression with the Rod, ^^d
our Iniquity with Stripes.

Wherefore did the Prophet Jere^ah cry out, and say, Jer. 23.9.
Mine heart ^ithin me is broken; all my bones ^ake: I am like a drunken man,
and ^^ke a man whom Wine has overcome, cause of the Lord, because of the lord
of his Holiness? Here I find ^^e Prophet in a strange and fervent ^assion, in
a trembling Ecstasy: yet ^ot too great if I consider the cause, I weigh the
verse that imediately ^^sueth: For the Land (says he) is ^^ll of Adulterers:
for because of wearing (or cursing) the Land ^ourneth; the pleasant places of
the wilderness are dried up; and their nourse is evil, and their force is not
^^ght. Was Jerusalem thus Visited or Swearing and Cursing? Was Sa^aria thus
burnt up with drought or Adultery? Lord what then has ^ot This Land deserved?
An Oath in very tongue causes a Cross upon every Door. Uncle^nnesse in every
Person causes the sowlest sores in every Patient. The Sins are Universal, the
Panishment must needs therefore be as Universal. The Pu^ment is become
general; O our sorrow would grow as gen^ This disease may be cured by (...)
For my part therefore I will b^ first that shall step into Bethesd^ I have
layne the longest in my (...) Jo. 5.2.
long have I also waited for the vation of my God. I will im^ the Prophet
Jeremiah, and cr^ with him, and as truly as he, (...) heart is broken.

Why did the Prophet Mic^^ solve to wayle, Mich 1.8.
and to howl; stripped, and naked; to make a w^ like the Dragons, and mourning
(...) Owls? the was coming forth out of his placeing down to tread upon the
high p^ of the Earth? Mountains should be molten (...) him, and the Valleys be
cleft, as before the fire, and as the waters are powered down a steep place?
(...) was Destruction for Samaria, Ruin for Jerusalem; for the Transgression
of Ja^ and for the sins of the House of Isr^ The Graven Images were the si^ the
People: Idolatry incensed Wrath of the Almighty. (...) might he punish, when
the wor^ ^ens hands robbed him of his ho^our, whose work-man-ship we are. ^ell
might he resolve to be known ^e Mighty God in his Revenge, whom they would not
acknowledge (...) be God when he forbore them. ^ut is it not just so with us as
it was ^ith them; Samaria the sin of ^ur Jacob? Are not the high places (...)
Judah our Jerusalem? Here is ^rath, and Wrath, and Plague, and Plague; but is
not Idolatry still in ^ur Gates? The God of the Patri^rch says unto us, as
Jacob did un^^ his Household, Genesis 35.2
and to all that were with him, Put away the strange Gods that are among you.
If therefore we ^ave still a noise of the Beads; of ^he Chapters pretended to
be consetrated at Rome: if we have Pictures Worshipped; Crucifixes Adored;
Prayers not understood; and other footsteps of the Heathen remaining amongst
us; I cannot choose but remember what our incensed Creator says by his Prophet
concerning the sins of the Jews; Jer. 9.9.
Shall I not Visit them for these things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be
avenged o^ such a Nation as this? Lord where thou art not truly Worshipped,
thou will be dreadfully Feared. Though this sin be not General, thought
Universal amongst us; is it no^ be found in Private? Does it (...) lurk in
private Closets? Is it (...) harbored in some secret hearts? hates the light
because it is not truth: but yet our sins may multi^ in the dark, until they
have brou^ us to the Land of Darkness. O (...) (with Jacob) we would all arise,
Genesis 35.3
go up to Bethel, and make there Altar unto our God; then we kn^^ he would
answer us in our distr^ This is our Plague, this is our Puniment which now does
rage amon^ us: and is not that our sin? Is (...) that our iniquity? What remain
but that (so far as lies in me) should strive to appease the wrath my God? I
will therefore endeavo^ to blunt his arrow, that it may sti^ no more when he
shoots it at (...) I will pray unto him to remove once both the Sin, and the
Punishment. I will do as did Micah: will wayle, and howl: I will way like the
Dragons, and mourn like (...) Owls.

When Ezra had Confessed the sin the People, Ezr. 10.1
weeping, and casling him self down before the House of Go^ there assembled
unto him out of Isra a very great Congregation of Men, and Women, and Children;
and the People wept very sore. What ayled the Priest to cast himself down; and
the People so sorely to weep? Were they not come out of Captivity? Were they
not busied in re-edifying the House of the Lord? Were not their burnt
Offerings, and their Sacrifices made unto the God of Israel? What now should
deject them? What should dismay them? The Lord questioneth Cain the Murderer,
the Fratricide, saying, Genesis 4.6
Why is thy countenance sallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
And if thou do not well, Thus might Judah and Benjamin be likewise examined.
They had a sin that lay at the door: yea nearer, closer to them if possible
might be; even in their beds, in their bosoms. Ezra 9.1.
They had not separated themselves from the People of the Lands, and from doing
according to their abominations: but they had taken of their Daughters for
themselves, yea the hand of the Princes, and Rulers had been Chief in this
Trespass. Yet for all this, their Punishment was not hither to come upon them
to the full. They had yet but a sprinkling of it only some drops: or at most
but a gust, a small storm, a shower or tw^ of rain. When the Lord was angry the
clouds frowned; they knit their brows; and it were in the abundance of their
compassion, cha. 10.9.
they dissolved into tears for the sins of the People. But more vengeance w^
expected; therefore the Children of the Captivity turned away the Wives, the
fierce wrath of G^ for this matter might be turned fre^ them. If such a sin as
this he the cause of this our dreadful Visitati^ we ought also (with them) to
fit the street of the house of God, Whither this, or whatsoever else is the
cause of this Contagion, the sin this Land; Cha. 9.4.
for my part I will (...) solve (with the same Ezra) to (...) astonished at the
sins of the Lan^ and (with the people) I will tremble at the words of the God
of Israe^ because of the Transgressions of (...) People of this Land. I will
not rise from my heaviness; Joel 2.13
or rather my Hea^ and not my Garment, and turn un^ the Lord my God: for he is
Gracio^ and Merciful; slow to Anger, and great kindness, and repents him of
the evil. I will fall uponmy knees, Ezra 9.5.
and spread out my hands unto the Lord my God.

Zion was threatened that her Gates should lament, and mourn; Isa. 3.26.
and that she being desolate, should sit on the ground. Here was the
Punishment; a grievous Punishment: Desolation by War; Destruction by the Sword.
Her Men should fall by the sword, But what was the cause? What stirred up the
Almighty to shower down his vengeance? Alas, it is too easily found. The Pride
of the Woman was the Destruction of the Men. because the Daughters of Zion were
haughty, and walked with stretched-out necks, and wanton eyes; walking, and
mincing as they went, and making a tinkling with their feet. We are punished;
we are afflicted; not by the Sword, but (which is more dreadful) by the
Pestilence. Our sufferances are not in the same manner indeed as were theirs;
and yet we deserve both the manner, and the measure. Our Sins are alike; our
Punishments must therefore be expected alike; alike in the greatness, though
they are not in the kind. They seem (me thinks) already t^ agree in part; for,
besides our sicknesses, Mat. 24.6.
we hear of Wars, and rumou^ of Wars. Yea, they come yet nearer alike; for they
were threatner that the Lord should smite them wi^^ a scab on the crown of the
head of the Daughters of Zion: Isa. 3.17
and this ver^ Judgment appears among us i^ every blane, in every botch, in
ever carbuncle. Surely our sins are great, or greater then theirs. T^ pride of
our Sex in their Dresses, (...) their Laces, in their Jewels, (...) their
Fashions, in their Gaites, (...) their Behaviors, in their Attendant in every
thing is greater then Zion The Effects of Pride, their Lascivious Embracings,
their Amoro^ Conrtings are commoner, are fre^ quenter then Zion's. Lord is it
n^ just with thee then, take aw^ from us (as thou did from Zion the bravery
of our tinkling Ornaments and our Tyres, a stink, instead of a swee^ smell; and
instead of a girdle a re^^ and instead of a well-set hair, bladness; and
instead of a stomacher, a girdle of sackcloth; and burning, instead of
beauty. For us the Land mourns; for our Pride the People are humbled; for our
Sins the Pestilence Reigns. Lord make us all with Zion, Lament and Mourn:
make us sit on the ground, acknowledging Thy Justice, and Our Sinfulness. Eze.
35.15.
God has come down to the Grave among us, as he did at the Destruction of
Assyria for the Pride thereof; and caused Lybanon to mourn for us; and the
Trees of the field to faint for us: therefore with Zion, I will lament, I will
mourn, I will sit on the ground.

A Voice was once heard from the high places of Israel, Jer. 3.21
weeping and supplications of the People; because they had perverted their way,
they had forgotten the Lord their God. Here was sorrow at the heart for the sin
of the soul; and yet no Destruction of the body threatened for Disobedience. Had
they continued in this their repentance, they might have prevented the ensuing
Judgments: but intermission of sorrow proved to be the ground of their sorrow.
Hence came their Land to be cursed with Barrenness, and the Proph^^ to cry out,
Cha. 12 4
How long shall the L^^ mourn, and the Herbs of every (...) wither, for the
wickedness of them th^^ dwell therein? Here Wickedness w^^ the Cause, and
Barrenn^ss the Effect. But why should the Herbs and Flowers of the field suffer
for the sins^ the People? Alas, they grew up t^^ wards Heaven in their
grateful a^^ knowledgement, that from the^ they received their nourishment
(...) the Earth. Yea so innocent th^^ were, that when they looked abo^^ them,
and saw (as it were) the wi^^ kedness of them for whose servi^ they were made,
every morni^^ hung pearly-tears upon their droo^ing eyes: and when they saw
th^^ men had not half so much remo^^ as they themselves, they sad^^ shrunk to
bed again in the Earth. It was a curse to them to be ens^^ ved in the service
of cursed sins: (...) poisonous is transgression; so m^ chievous is iniquity.
Thus th^^ Herbs were cursed for the sins of th^^ Jews: but what had the Jews
do^^ amiss, which we have not exceeded What wickedness had they committed which
we have not surpassed Therefore our Herbs and our Flowers, the beauty of our
Gardens, and the pride of our Knots is nipped, is withered with the poisonous
breath that arises from our infected bodies: and yet we fear that what we
dispatched the air to kill in our Gardens, will bring poison to us, and slay us
in our Houses. Thus we suffer; for thus have we sinned: I will therefore
resolve with the Prophet David, Psalm. 119.136.
That Rivers of Waters shall run down mine eyes, because we have not kept the
Law of our God.

Shall not the Land tremble for this, Amos 8.8
Says the Prophet Amos. Tremble! for what? Israel knew well enough; the poor
were sensible enough; the Poor that were bought for silver, and the needy that
were sold for a pair of shoes. Here was Oppression in the streets, Crying in
the gates; for the Ephah was made small, and the Shekel great; and the
balances were falsified by deceit. No marvel that the Psalmist concludes,
Psa. 61.9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be
laid in the balance they are altogether lighter then vanity. It was thus among
the Israelites; and thus it is among (...) also. Men of low degree are vanity,
vanity in the account, and contemp^^ of Superiors? Vanity in the cruelty of
Superiors. Men of high degree, the Richest Traders, the Merchants of Corn, and
the other fruit^ of the Earth, are a lie: their measures are false, their
weights are false: yea they buy by one, an^ they sell by another. They devou^
their brethren, and yet they do it by a show of Justice; for the ballance^ they
have corrupted, and the weight^ they have pared; insomuch as men err most,
they are most deceived when they think themselves most righted, best dealt
with. This I^justice commands us justly to mourn: so the belly cries, and
the back cries. The hungry cry when they buy of the rich, and are cozened by
the rich: when they suffer in the cozenage, and suffer likewise in the public,
in the general punishment for the cozenage. For this our Land Mourns, for
this our People are Visited, our Houses are shut up, our Streets are not
frequented, our Markets are not filled; and yet the hungry lament, and the
thirsty do mourn. The poor can neither buy for their money; nor be employed in
their willing labors to earn them money; nor live without money. We roar all
like Bears, Isa. 59.11
and mourn sore like Doves. We look for judgment, but there is none: for
salvation, but it is far from us. Therefore with the Oppressed I will cry, and
with the Visited also I will cry. I will cry with the Oppressed for Right; and
I will cry with the Visited for health. How long, Lord, how long will thou
punish us? Chapter 44 22.
O remove our sins like a cloud: blot out, as a thick cloud, our
transgressions, and as a cloud our sins: return unto us, for thou have redeemed
us.

The third part of the Soliloquie; showing that Sin especially is the cause of
the Pestilence.
THe Diseased (ignorant of the kind of their Maladies) cause the Physician to
consult with their Paulses; to examine their Urine; and by sympromes to find
out the Cause of their disturbance. So should the sick Soul also; or else the
ignorance of the sin may hinder the cure. General complaints have been mad^ by
men groaning under the burden of several Visitations: but does the Pestilence
come by the same Rule^ and arise from the same causes Surfeits, and
Consumptions, an^ Fevers, and Palsies, and Plurisie and other such sicknesses
may ha^ their Causes in Nature, and the Remedies oft-times by Physic: bu^
neither is the cause of the Pestilen^ so clear in nature; nor is the cu^
thereof so easy by Physic. Or if (...) be; yet is this Disease more
Infec^ous, more Mortal, and therefore mo^^ Dreadful then any of the rest. I^
shall therefore be my first care (...) find out the cause in my Soul, b^fo^ I
look upon the effects thereof (...) the bodie^ of sinful mortals. I wi^^
examine our times by those of o^ Ancestors; and see whether this general
Contagiou does not rather pro^ ceed from the malice of the soul^ then from the
Air-dyet, or whats^ever else the Physicians conjectu^^ at.

The men which Moses had sent (...) spic out the Land of Canaan returied, Number.
14.36.
and made all the Congregation (...) murmur against Moses, by bringing up a
slander upon that Land of Promise: and those very men that did bring up that
evil report upon the Land, What? Of the Plague? Of the Pestilence? There were
but Ten of those spies, and those Ten only dyed. We have the Pestilence too;
but it contenteth not it self with Ten, and Ten, and Ten, and Ten, but Hundreds
dye; Hundreds are Visited; Thousands complain; every one fears. But was their
Disease the same as Ours? Was not theirs an inflammation of their tongues, and
worms issuing out of them, as a just recompense, because with their tongues
they had lied? Or was it not some other extraordinary Plague from the hand of
God? Or was it not that Pestilence which was threatened when the Lord said unto
Moses, How long will this People provoke me; Whatsoever their Disease was,
though I cannot determine it; yet will I consider the cause thereof. The cause
was a sin, a grieveas sin; a lie: and the effect of this was (...) sin, a
grievous sin; it was murmuring. O thus have we also added sins unto sins. We
also lie; we lie grievously, desperately, impudently. Like unto Job's Friends,
Job. 13.4. Psalm. 40.4. Psalm. 58.3. Psalm. 62.4 Ez. 24.12 Hos. 10.13.
we are forgers of lies; we turn aside to lies; we go astray so soon as we be
born, and speak lies: we delight in lies; and we have wearied our selves with
lies: justly therefore now do we eat the fruit of lies. And yet, not contented
with this, we murmur too. Against our Superiors we murmur, for not governing
us according to our Licentious, and sinful desires: against the Rich we
murmur, because we float not in their plenty: yea even against God himself we
murmur, because he grants not our sinful desires. Thus in every thought, and
in every word we either find a sin, or make a sin. For this our lying, for this
our murmuring we are now Visited; we are now Stricken; 1 Cor. 10 10.
we are (as those spies were) destroyed of the Destroyer.

The Rebellious Israelites were threatened by Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.61.
that Every Sickness, every Plague which was not written in the Book of the
Law, them should the Lord bring upon them, until they were destroyed: should
be left few in number, whereas they were as the stars of Heaven for Multitude.
These were the menaces, these were the threats to the Children of Israel: but
among all these Sicknesses, where is that which reigns among us? Has God
prepared a new punishment for us, such as the Israelites never suffered, nor
the Law ever mentioned, nor skill ever cured? Doubtless thus God could afflict
us; but he chooses rather to punish us as he did others, that so we might find
out the cause as others have done. He was pleased to tell the Israelites the
cause of their Plague which he would send upon them; Because they would not
obey the Voice of the Lord their God. Just thus he punishes us as he punished
them; even until we are almost quite destroyed: and he tells us our sin, our
offense too, by his Word, by his Ministers, by our own Consciences, even, that
we refuse to obey the Voice of the Lord. Just therefore, most just it is, that
seeing we have, we do, we will thus sin; even thus, yea thus severely likewise
we should be punished. Yea, we deserve it in a far greater manner; in a far
greater measu^^ He who threatened those that would walk contrary unto him,
Levit. 26.21.
and wo^^ not hearken unto him, that he wo^^ bring seven times more Plagues
upon them, according to their sins: (...) who by Moses threatened them, the If
they would not observe to de all (...) words of that Law which are writ^ in
that Book, Deuteronomy. 28.58.
that they might fear t^^ Glorious Name, should make the^^ Plagues wonderful,
and the Plagu^ of their Seed; even great Plague and of long continuance: and s^
Sicknesses, and of long continua^^ The self-same God has found walking
contrary unto him; a^ therefore has brought on us sev^^ times more Plagues
then former^^ He sees that we fear not this G^rious Name, The Lord our God
therefore has he sent us gr^^ Plagues, and of long continuance.

Thus I sit, and muse, and cons^der of the Sickness: I hear the Be^ Tolling;
even those Bells which we wont to invite us to the Temple that we might know
our sins at th^^ mouth of the Preacher, and pra^^ for remission of our sins by
the hel^ of the Preacher; the very self-sam^ Bells serve now to tell me that
one man lies languishing, and desires my Prayers; another man is departed,
and wants nothing but a Funeral; a third man is to be buried, but a
Neighbourly, and Friendly Company is wanting. Every stroke of a Bell (me
thinks) hitteth me at the heart, and bids me to prepare for my last farewell
Every toll awakeneth my conscience; and bids me remember what my sins have
merited. Thus mine ears receive a sound; and thus my trembling heart feele^h a
throb, a beating, a panting for my particular sins which have been some cause
of this general Sickness.

Moses went unto the Lord, Ex. 32.31.
Oh this People have sianed a great sin, and have mad them Gods of Gold! But
what followed? The Lord Plagued the People, Aaron had made. There was the Sin,
and there was the Punishment. But was that Plague the same as this which now
does rave, and rage amongst us? Surely our sins are the same as were theirs;
for we dig the entrels of our mother Earth, and (like the Augures, the
South-sayers, though they said no sooth, no truth at all) conjecture, we divine
by those (...) trailes; yea, and we decree h^^ who is rich, to be a good man, a
(...) ficient man, an honest man, and wh^^ not? We value the man for (...)
Gold; we worship him for it; honor him for it. And is not to sin with the
Israelites? We very little differ from those Id^ters, even nothing at all. Th^^
made them Gods of Gold, and make Gold our God. Justly the fore are we thus
punished by (...) True God, because we honor (...) which is no God. The
Israelites (...) this very kind, and sort of Plage such a very Pestilence as
ou^ and for just such a sin as this of ou^ Though Moses prayed for them, y^
though he desired to be blotted ou^ the Book of God, Whosoever has si^ned
again (...) me, him will I blot out my Book. ^hosoever has sinned a against
him? If he should deal (...) with us who should people the lan^ Who should
^nhabit our dwellings Who should enjoy our Treasures He has begu^^ blotting
indeed already: His Ink is found in the blackness of every blane; in the blew^^
of every Token; in the redness of ^^ery Crossed Door. But will this sotting
always continue? Will he ^^t stay his hand? Will his wrath ^^rn like fire for
ever? Our bones (...) scattered at the graves mouth, as ^hen one cutteth, and
cleaves wood ^on the Earth. But mine eyes are ^^to thee, O God, the Lord; in
thee is (...) Trust. Either blot not at all, Psa. 141.7
or ^^ly blot out our Offenses. Say unto every one of (...) as thou did
unto Jacob by the ^outh of thy Prophet; I, even I am (...) that blotteth out
thy Transgressions, Is. 43.25.
^^r mine own Names sake, and will ^^t remember thy sins.

The Fourth Part of the (...) liloquie, consisting, of several Examples of
Dreadful Pestilences.
LOrd what a hideous din (...) in mine ears! There ^^groan able to have shaken
eve^ Earth it self, had it been impr^ed in the deepest bowels the What
another? Hark! The weeping too. Oh this is the sadwearisome life of us poor
si^^ who are caged, and miewed up (...) Infected Cities, and Towns, and lages.
The Diseased groan th^^ the extremity of their pains; an^ want of comforts both
of body, soul. The sound are weeping so^ miseries of the sick; and long the
deliverance even of their w^ Families from the burden of flesh. Some
Habitations are m^ both Hospital, and Charnel-ho^^^ where many a one lies
sick; (...) for want of help, they sicken w^^ out Hope, they dye without Com^^
and they consume without Interm^ Sometimes again the Mother, (...) dandled her
Infant in her clasping ^^mes, is enforced in those arms to ^^ry it to the
Grave. Sometimes ^^e Husband, who dearly affected be Wise of his bosom, is
enforced to ^ake her the burden of his shoul^ers; and to bear her dead Corpse
(...) the devouring Earth, for want of ^^riends, and Neighbors to ease ^im of
the burden. Yea, sometimes ^he Children are enforced to assist their Father, in
the carriage of their Mother to her longest home. O horour, horror, horror!
Can pity and no entrance at the hearts of strangers? Can compassion find no
^arbour in the bowels of Neighbors? Will none perform this act ^f piety to
key-cold woman to the carcass of a woman, but only her Husband, the Husband of
her Affection; and her Children, the labor and the fruit of her Womb? O how
diverse in the world would stand amazed at the sight, and hardly determine
whether the drops which fall from the faces of the bearers be the sweat of
their brows, or the tears of their eyes. Oh what a dreadful time is this! Did
ever age produce a parallel to this severe Contagion? Was it ever known that a
Pestilence was so general, and so malign^ Did ever any people drink so of the
Cup of Sorrow, Astonish and Desolation as we do? Ez. 23.33
Was Samaria, Aholah, or Aholib^ Babylon, Jer. 25.20
or Jerusalem; was ev^^ King of the Land of the Philistin^ Askelon, Uzzah, or
Ekro^^ Ashdod; Edom, or (...) or Ammon, Hos. 4.18.
or Tyrus, or Zidon; ever Dedan, or Tema, or any place so drunk with the Cup
(...) from the Lords hands, as we Our drink was formerly sour our Whoredoms,
with our Abo^tions: Jer. 8.14. Chapter 23.15 Chapter 25.15 Ez. 39.17 Verse. 18. Verse.
19. Lam. 1.12
Now therefore we have ters of Gall to drink; we are with Wormwood; and our
Cu^ Cup of fury, of trembling, and of nishment. O the Plague, the P^^ it is
that eats our flesh, and d^^eth our blood: It eats the fle^^ the Mighty,
and drinks the blo^ Princes; it drinks even until drunken with our blood.
Was t^^ ever any sorrow like unto our sor wherewith the Lord does afflict (...)
this day of his fierce wrath?

But why do I thus cry out? W^^ complain I so mournfully, as if Afflictions
exceeded all that e^ were sent upon the Children. M^n? If I consider our estate
by it ^^f, I cannot choose indeed but ^^clude it miserable: but if I weigh
(...) with the Pestilences of former ^^es, it will not perhaps appear a ^rden
so un-supportable. Com^risons may peradventure ease my ^rief, and lessen my
Torments: ^erefore (with David) I will re^mber the days of Old; Ps. 143.5.
I will me^ate on all the works of God. It ^^y be that Solomon may advise ^^e,
and comfort me too, where he ^us counsels; Eccl 7.10
Say not in thine ^art, What is the cause that the for^r days were better then
these? For ^ou do not enquire wisely concern^^g this. Ps. 77.5.
I will therefore consider the yes of Old, and the years of ancient ^nes.

The Children of Israel murmured ^ainst Moses and Aaron about the estruction of
Korah, Dathan, Number. 16.41.
Abi^^m, and their Accomplices, saying, ^^e have Killed the People of the Lord:
^^d presently there was wrath gone (...) from the Lord, was be^^n. they that
dyed of the Plague ^ere Fourt en Thousand and Seven ^undred, and all in a day;
beside ^^m that dyed about the matter of ^orah.

When Israel abode at Shi^^ the People committed (...) horedome the Daughters
of Moah: Number. 25.1.
and not tented with this high offense, joined themselves unto (...) Peor,
Psalm. 106.28.
and did eat the Sacri^^ the dead. and those that dyed in the Plagu^^ Twenty
and Four Thousand. Number. 25.9.
(...) sin was do^ble; it was Whore both Carnal and Spiritual: the^ nishm^nt
was therefore almost (...) to that which was sent for mu^^ ring.

When David sent for the ^^tain of the Host to number the ^^ple; Joab answered
him fairly, ^^ing, 2 Samuel 24 3.
Now the Lord thy God add^th People (how many soever th^^ an hundred fold; and
that the ey^^ my Lord the King may see it: but^ does my Lord the King delight
in thing? ^oab, an^ against the Captains of the Host: Joab, and the Captains of
the went out from the presence of the (...) to Number the People of Israel.
(...) what was the event thereof? Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel (...)
(...) morning even to the time appointed: (...) there dyed of the People from
Dan (...) to Beersheba Seventy Thousand ^^en; and all of them in the space but
three days. one ^ly man: but this one man was a ^^g; and for his Eminent
offense (...) times as many were slain, as ^^en the multitude of people joined
a murmuring. He who by the people was acknowledged worth ten thou^^d of them,
Chapter 18.3.
now for his sin became ^^e destroyer of seven times as many them as he was
vallued at by ^em: so great was the anger of the lord, for a sin so great, and
commit^^d by a person so great, so eminent.

The Almighty threatened Jeruslem by the mouth of his Prophet, make that City
desolate, ^^d an hissing: Jer. 19.8.
every one that passed ^^ere by should be astonished, and hiss, because of the
Plagues thereof. The ^^me God threatened Edom also by ^^e same Prophet, saying,
Chapter 49.17
Edom shall be a delolation: every one that ^^th by shall be astonished, and
shall ^^ss at the Plagues thereof. The same God again threatened Babylon by the
same Frophet, saying, Chapter 50 13
Because of the Word of the Lord, it shall not be ^^ted, but it shall be wholly
deso^^ Every one that goes by Babylon be astonished, and hiss at her Pla^

Thus I remember thy Judge^ of Old, Psalm. 119.52.
O Lord, and receive c^^ Confess I must indeed that W^ sinned with our
Fathers, 2 Chro. 6.37.
we have amiss, and dealt wickedly: b^ our Punishments as great as ou^ there is
were? Fourteen Thousand Seven Hundred of them fell a^ time: Twenty and Four
Tho^ at another time: Threescore^ Ten Thousand at a third (...) Lord, what
mighty Numbers, here! and yet we fear when O^^eth; we tremble when Ten; w^ when
Twenty; we are dism^^ when an Hundred; we are hop^ heartless, even almost quite
dea^ ready when a Thousand depart. (...) why should not we expect as (...)
Plagues as were sent upon a^^ our Ancestors, seeing, that our are not less
either in Namber^ Weight? Wherein are we be then Jerusalem, or Edom, or B^lon,
that we are not yet as deso^ as were they? That every one (...) passes by is
not astonished, nor his^ at us, as they did at them? He (...) Visited them does
Visit us: Ps. 89.32.
he Visi^th our Offenses with his Rod, and ^^r Sins with his Scourges. Yet he
Visits us not so sorely as he did he Israelites, when Fourteen Thou^and and
Seven Hundred of them lied; or not so severely as when ^wenty and Four Thousand
of them vere swept away: or not so grie^ously as when Threescore and Ten
^housand of them were destroyed; (...) not so terribly as Jerusalem, Edom, ^^d
Babylon; for we are not quite ^esolate: or not so furiously as Nini^th, to whom
God spoke by his Pro^het saying, Nah. 3, 19
There is no healing of thy ruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the
bruit of thee shall clap ^he hands over thee: Or howsoever ^ot so remedilesly
as the Army of ^haraoh at Euphrates, whom the lord mocketh by the mouth of his
^rophet, saying, Go up unto Gilead, Je^. 46.1^
and take Balm, O Virgin, the Daugh^^r of Egypt: In vain shall thou use ^^y
Medicines, for thou shall not be ^ured. This, Ez. 12.18
O this makes me to ^^t my bread with quaking, and to ^^ink my water with
trembling and ^arefulness, for fear least our sin-re^enging God should punish
us as he ^ath done them. O what me^cies does he not yet offer unto us; W^^
kindness does he not yet afford (...) To our Physicians he gives kno^ ledge:
to our Medicines he give virtue. The Herbs of the fields, (...) and the Fruits
of the trees, and (...) flesh of the beasts do yet offer the selves for our
cure, and our su^nance. O that we had but so m^ happiness, as to know the mi^^
which is due to our Offenses (...) that we had but so much mercy s^ God, as to
know his mercy in gentle visitation! For this our m^ will I groan; for these
our sins ^^lament; for the mercy of my (...) I will Pray, and I will Cry; He^
Lord, Psa. 20 ^0 (...)
and have mercy upon us: I be thou our helper. O he thou our in trouble, for
vain is the help of (...)

The Fifth part of the Soliloquie, showing how God threatens before his
Visitation.
IT is a weakness, it is a sondness, it it a madness in people not to believe
the sure effects of certain causes, before they become obvious to their senses.
In the course of Nature we are apt to believe what we dare not try. Who will
put his finger into the fire to try if it will burn? Who will cast himself into
the water to try whether it will drown him? Yet in things divine we are too
incredulous, too full of unbelief. I find that my God has stricken diverse with
Plagues for the sins which they have committed: But I likewise find that he
has threatened diverse before the Visited them, that so by their amendment they
might prevent those Judgments which otherwise would ensue. It is my best way to
find out the crying sins of the Land, by observing the punishments which are
sent us for them: but I must not forget either the patience of our God, or the
obstinacy men? the long suffering of (...) Creator, or the impenitency of
(...) Creatures. Sure I am that the L^^ did always call to Repentance before
he punished Offenders: he ha^ ever woed Transgressors both (...) Promises, and
by Threatenings before he ever made them sick in smi^^ them for their
Transgressions. Mic. 6.13 1.


When the Israelites were to (...) freed from the Egyptian bondag^ O how often
was Pharaoh admonis^ed to let them go! Moses and Aa^ said unto him, The God of
the H^ brews has met with us: Exo. 5.3.
let us go, (...) pray thee, three days journey into (...) Desert, and
Sacrifice to the Lord (...) God, least be fall upon us with the P^stilence, or
with the Sword. Lord how meek Moses begged for the people! yea, and in the Name
of God too; and for an act of Religion too; and for fear of Judgments too: yea
and those Judgments not small or trivial; for they should be either the
Pestilence, or the Sword; yea, and he pretends that those Judgments should
sall upon the Israelites, the People of God, if they neglect their Sacrifices;
he says not, upon the Agyptia^s; he says not, upon the King: And yet for all
this, the King yielded not; the Israelites sacrificed not; and therefore the
Plagues, the Vengeance came upon the heads of their Oppressors.

Gogg was threatened for a thing which yet he was suffered to do. Israelites
were to be his purchase; the un-walled Villages his prey; Ez. 38.11
all that dwelled without Walls, and had neither Bars, nor Gates should be
made desolate by him. Thus the People of God were to suffer for the sins
committed against their God. But was the Enemy to escape, by whom the People
should be corrected? Was Gogg to be enriched, and to enjoy the spoil? Nothing
less. The very instument of revenge was not to be freed from the wrath of the
Revenger, nor the Executioner to be accounted innocent, though he punished the
guilty. I will plead against him with Pestilence says the Lord) and with
blood. brimstone. Thus the Israelites offended, and were threatened with the
Armies of Gogg. Gogg offended, in that he knew not his Maker; in that looked
only to his advantage^ spoils, whilst yet he executed vengeance of God: he is
there threatened; he shall therefore be^ sumed. When he should have venged God
upon the Rebel^ People, then God himself wou^^ revenged upon him with Judgm^
from Heaven.

The Prophet Ezekiel was ser^ threaten the Israelites for their (...)
Rebellions, Smite with thine^ and stamp with thy foot, Eze. 6.11.
and say, (...) for all the evil abominations of House of Israel; for they
shall so the Sword, by the Famine, and (...) Pestilence. He that is far off
sha^ of the Pestilence, Here is warn given before the blow be stricke there is
the Sword already halfo here is the Famine already in a (...) preparation; here
is an Angel re^ to disperse the Pestilence: but be^^ execution here is a
threatening f(...) Even thus also has our good G^ dealt with us: thus has he
war^ ^s. He who delights not in the ^eath of a sinner, Ez. 33.11
does never strike before notice given; for he had rather that our repentance
should quiver his arrows, then that by our sins he should be enforced to hit us
at the heart.

I will smite the Inhabitants of this City (says God by Jeremiah concerning
Jerusalem) both Man and Beast: Jer. 21.^.
they shall dye of a great Pestitence. Lo here is still the future tense, I
will; not I do. God delights not in the execution of his wrath; but yet his I
will is as sure as his I do. Thus he has formerly threatened us with his I
will; I confess indeed he has: and yet we would not believe what was to come,
and only because we found it not instantly present. Hence it is, that now our
people cry; now our beasts do roar: and it is but just that men and women
should be ranked in the order with beasts, seeing that our sins have discovered
us to be more stupid then them. Yet the beasts perish, though they could not
sin; and we perish because we can do nothing but sin. So the Servant suffers
for the offenses of the Master: so the Beasts are punished for the sins of the
owners. The Pesti^^ puts no distinction between t^ both, although the one
could (...) the other would not avoid the nishment.

In the Book of Exodus the L^^ says concerning Pharaoh, Exo. 9.15.
Now I will stretch^ mine hand, that I may smite thee thy people with
Pestilence, and (...) shall be cut off from the Earth. T^ heed Pharaoh, he is
true who thro^ neth; and although he says, I w^ yet he says also now I will.
H^ ready for thee, although thy he^ be not ready for him: he is (...) now
prepared to punish, if thou^ not just now prepared to obey. I w^ bring a Sword
upon you, Lev 26.25
that sh^^ avenge the quarrel of my Covenan^ and when ye are gathered together
(...) your Cities, I will send the Pestilen^ among you; and ye shall be
deliver^ into the hand of your Enemies, says the Lord to the Israelites. And
again: The Lord shall make the Pestilence (...) cleave to thee, Deuteronomy. 28.21.
until he have consumes thee from off the Land whither tho^ go to possess
it. Yea, and yet once, again; Number. 14.11.
The Lord said unto Moses, How long will this people provoke me? And how long
will it be e're they believe me, for all the signs that I have ^^ewed among
them? O the fathoruless treasure of the bounty of my God! O the riches of his
goodness, Rom 2.
and patience, and long-suffering, leading us to repentance! What were the
Israelites, that he should not Plague them? Why not presently? The wages is due
so soon as the service is done; and the punishment is as due, so soon as the
offense is committed: and yet, although God be forward in the former, he is
slow to the latter: although he delight in the former, yet is he hardly drawn
to the latter. Me thinks when I consider the Israelites, I wonder at their
Rebellions: and yet, me thinks, when I consider our selves, I wonder much more.
Isa: 5.1.
What could have been done more to this Vineyard of God, that he has not done
unto us? He has fenced us, in this his Vineyard, and yet for all this, when
he looked that we should bring forth grapes behold wild grapes. Oh how my heart
pants w^ me, and my whole self is in a t^ bling fear, when I consider his
(...) e^es, and our rebellions! O^ thinks I see a handwriting ag^ us almost
upon every door, Dan. 5.5.
ever habitant, written as it were, wit^ fingers of a man's hand (as Belshazar
saw upon the plaster (...) Wall;) ^^nance change, and my thoughts be bled, so
that the joints of my loy loosed, and my knees finite one a^ another; and I cry
for mercy have offended; and I knod compassion, for I have transgn^ God did
threaten Israel with: stilence that should dis-inherit t^ and all this to
avenge the quar^ his Covenant, because they still voked him; because they would
believe him, for all the signs he had showed among them. (...) wherein had
Israel offended? what manner? In what meas^ which this Land has not excee^ And
yet, o how unwillingly do^^ Almighty punish us! O how slo^ O how gently! Mat.
11.1.
The Kingdom Heaven suffireth Violence, says Jesus. Violence indeed, by our
(...) the Reven^ Sword for him: we bend his bow for him, and make it ready:
Psalm. 7.12. Verse 13. Psalm. 64.3
we also repare for hun the insteuments of death, because we whet our tongues
like swords, and bend our bows to shoot o^r arrows, even bitter words, that we
may shoot in secret at the perfect: And what now can we expect but judgments,
seeing that we will not offer the just, and rightful violence to the Kingdom
of heaven, even the violence of our prayers; the violence of our tears; the
violence of sobs and sighs, and groans in our spiritual combats, and conflicts?
What can we expect but vengeance? And what do we meet with, but destruction? He
has threatened, and threatened, again and again; and yet we have resisted, and
resisted, again, and again too. Isa. 5.7.
When he looked for Righteousness, behold Oppression: justly therefore, now we
look for mercy, behold a ^cry. A cry in the Beds of the languishing; a cry in
the Chambers of the Infected, and pined Prisoners; a cry of the healthful, for
fear of infection; a cry of Parents for their tender children; a cry of
Children for their dying Parents. Brother cry^^ for brother; sister (...)
sister: All cry for help; All cry for mer^ O Lord hear our Prayers, Psa. 102.1
and let (...) Cries come unto thee.

The Sixth part of the Sol^ loquie, treating of the du^ of a Christian;
decreeing both to whom, and for whom we ought to pray in time of Pestilence.
I Weep and weep, and sigh a^ sigh, and pray, and pray: (...) why do I thus
weep, and sigh a^ pray? If for my self, it is a de which is challenged even by
natu^ it self, so that I may have any her^ by these means either to prevent,
(...) to cure the sickness. If for others, is charity; it is a religious due^
Thus we are commanded by the (...) postle; Oal. 6.2.
Bear ye one another burden and so fulfill the law of Christ. An^ again, by
the same Apostle, I an^ commanded to weep with them th^^ weep. To. 12.15
But must my tears be general? Must my prayers be universal For all? For the
wicked as well as the godly? There was a time whee the Prophet Jeremiah might
no^ pray for Judah. Jer. 14.11
The Lord said unto him, Pray not for this people for their good: When they
fast, I will not bear their cry; and when they offer burnt-offerings, and
oblations, I will not accept them; but I will consume them by the sword, and by
the famine, and by the Pestilence. cap. 16.3
There was a time too when the Lord said concerning the sons, and concerning
the daughters that were born among the Jews, and concerning their mothers that
bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them: And there was (...)
when the eyes of Jehojakim the so^ of Josiah King of Judah, Ca. 22.17
and (...) heart were naught but for coveteous^ and for to shed innocent blood,
and oppression, and for violence to do^ Therefore thus said the Lord conc^^ ing
him, Thus it (...) with them; but must it there^^ be thus with those which dye
of (...) sickness; of the Pestilence? With This were a dreadful sentence (...)
deed, To dye, and not to be pitti^^ to dye of the Plague, and be^^ denth not to
be prayed for. W^^ knows indeed, but that some su^^ as those men of Judah,
may be^ among us? Who knows but the some Jehojakims may be among t^^
Visited? What then? Shall I ther^ fore pray for none? Yea, shall nor pray for
them? God forbid. Th^^ less they pray for themselves, the more will I pray for
them. The les^ they know God, the more will I pra^ that they may know him. The
sicker they are in body, the more nec^^ they have of comfort in mind. What
though they in part may be a cause of this mortality? What though their
wickednesses have helped to bring this Contagion? If they are enemies to my
particular, I will forgive them: though they are God's, I will pray for them;
even that he in his good time would be pleased to call them home both to the
knowledge, and the practice of his Truth. David I am sure did pray for, and
pity his enemies; Ps. 35.13.
for so he professes, saying, As for me, when they were sick, my clothing was
sackcloth: I humbled my soul with fasting. And thus did my Redeemer too for
Jerusalem: for, Lu. 19.41
When he was come near to the City, he beheld it: yea, be wept over it, saying,
If thou had known, even thou, Shall David weep then for his enemies? Shall my
Jesus weep for his enemies, for the enemies of his father, Joh 20.17
and my father; of his God, and my God; and shall not I weep for those who are
in misery, and distress? My Savior knew who were elected, and who were
reprobates; and yet he wept over the whole City. I dare not p^ into those
secret counsels of my Go^ nor can I know all those wh^ he has ordained for
heaven or he^ Shall not I then weep for them (...) in general in this general
Calami^ Yes, I will keep my turn: I (...) sing my part in this doleful conso^
Surely if my God should forbid (...) praying for them, even the very pr^
hibition might peradventure enco^ rage me to perform it: he know^ that we are
apt to do whatso^^ he forbids. O my God, eit^ take away my readiness, and
apt^ to contradict thee; or else for^^ me nothing but what thou would (...)
have me to perform. But w^ should. I pray for those, who (tho^ they are
visited) refuse to repent^ Shall I hope to alter the eternal d^ cree of him
with whom is no va^^ ableness, Jam. 1.17
neither shadow of change What if he has reserved them so^ vengeance? Can I,
by my praye^ snatch them out of the fire? If the are sick, peradventure I
cannot cur^ them. If they are not yet sick, (...) cannot preserve them. O these
churlish, inhumane, un-christian, uncharitable thoughts! God therefore sends
them this affliction, that they may repent: and that ^^y may rather prevent,
then he ex^rcise his revenge. Seeing therefore that I know not the hearts of
any, I ^vill pity all: and since by my ^rayers I cannot prevail for them ^o
whom is reserved the blackness of ^arknesse for ever; Jud. 13.
I will grieve, that Man is become so wicked, as to reasure up unto himself
such wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2.5.
Fain would any God have conquered the stub^ornnesse of stiff-necked Israel
with ^he pleasant allurements of his hea^enly blessings: yet they would not
^eeld, they would not relent. Then ^e threatened them: yet they would ^ot yield.
Then he punished them; and yet they would not turn: which ^ade him cry out by
his Prophet. I ^ave sent among you the Pestilence after the manner of Egypt;
Amo. 4.10
yet have ye ^ot return^d unto me, says the Lord. Surely the Lord is very
angry with ^uch as will not tremble at his judgments; which made him threaten
so by Ezekiel, saying, Ez. 14.19
If I send a Pestilence into that land, and power out my fury upon it in blood,
to cut off from it man and beast: Though Noah, and Job were in it, as I live
says the Lord God, they shall deliver neither son nor daughter: they deliver
but their own souls by righteousness. What comfort then I receive or give,
when I mou^^ the comfortless? What hope ha^ to speed, when these worthies she
be denied; If they were here to^ tercede for them by their ea^ supplications?
Sure I am that I not so good as any of those the Not as the worst. Genesis 9.21
Not as (...) though he had been drunk. N^ Job, though Eliphaz taxed him
impatience, when as he just himself, and seemed to tax (...) God himself with
in justice, Job 16.15
say^ I have sewed sack cloth upon my (...) and defiled my borne in the dust.
face is foul with weeping; No, no; far sh^^ come I of either, of any of the
Poor I; a poor, weak sinful (...) even as sinful as the worst; as (...) ked
as the worst. And (now I (...) gin better to bethink my self by th^^ king worse
of my self) what are th^^ which I question, whether I mi^^ pray for them, or
not? Are they si^ners? So am I. Are they grieve^ sinners? So am I. Surely I do
(...) know enough of my solf, If I do ^ot know my self the worst, the vilest
^^e chiefest of sinners. It is then but justice that I should pray for the
^orst, since I my self either am, or ^ight have been worse then them. My
prayers shall be general, for all; ^oping that God may be pleased to ^ave mercy
on all. But it a^y among them be certainly Re^robates, though I know it not;
yet, ^ will pray that they may be taken ^om the number of the faithful, that
so they may neither seduce by their temptations, nor offend by their examples,
nor dishonor my good God any longer by their crying, and multiplying
abominations. Yet must I howsoever be charitable in my devotions; and pray for
others, as well as for my self.

But all this while (since my thoughts have been sixed upon those that are
visited, and I am certainly resolved for whom I will pray) let me be sure that
I direct my prayers aright, or else my devotion may be but blindness, and my
Religion, Superstition. To him without doubt, and to him alone must I tender my
Petitions, from whom, yea from whom alone this sickness is sent upon this
sinful Land. And who is he (...) visits the earth, but only the (...)
Creator of heaven and earth? (...) very Philistines could acknowledge this, 1 Samuel 4.5
when the Arc of the Co^^^ of the Lord came into the Camp, (...) all Israel
showted with a great sh^^ so that the earth rang again. (...) then began to be
afraid, for said, Thus even by the testimony of uncircumcised, my God is
detemned to be the sin-revenging G^ who punishes offenders with the Plagues
and Pestilences. But shall only depend upon their testimon^ who knew not God,
for my assuran^ that this vengeance comes from God? No: I will look a little
sa^ there, and find David the good P^^phet acknowledging it in his Psalm^ and
saying, Ps. 78.50
He made a way to his a^ger; he spared not their soul (...) death; but gave
their life over to the Pestilence. This the patient Job confessed, Job. 5.17.
saying, Behold happy is (...) man whom God corrects: therefore spise not
thou the chastening of the ^mighty: For he makes sore, This the holy ^ophet
Hosea proclaimed and said, Hos. 6.1.
me and let us return unto the Lord; (...) he has torn, and he will heal us:
(...) has smitten, and he will hind us (...) This was the song of devout
^nnah: The Lord kills, 1 Samuel 2.6
and ma^h a live; he brings down to the ^eve, and brings up. Yea and ^s God
himself does publish to the ^ole world, and says, Deuteronomy. 32.39.
See now ^^t I even I am he, and there is no ^^d with me. I kill, and I make a
^^e: I wound, and I heal: neither (...) there any that can deliver out of ^ne
hand. It is clear then, it is most parent, that in this general sick^sse, I
must of necessity acknowledge (...) Finger of God. There was once ^ime when he
himself proclaimed, ^ying, Isa. 65.1
I am sought of them that ask^ not for me: I am found of them ^at sought me
not. I said, Behold ^^e, And surely, that time is ^ow come again: for we sought
him not, and yet we have sound hi^ this day of our Visitation, eve^ this
dreadful sickness. vier then our Hearts. We (...) fain to have an Aaron, Ex.
17.12
and a H^^stay them up, or else we are rea^ let them down; and if they fa^^
great Amalekites, (both our sin^ Gods revenge) will prevail aga^ us. He cries
out unto us, (...) me, behold me; and (wo^is unto we do behold him in his
severe, consuming wrath: But O tha^ might behold him in the clear most lovely
glory of his mercy that he might now be sought o^ though formerly we have not
a^ for him! He once did promise a time should be when the children Israel
should come, they and the (...) dren of Judah together, ^er. 50.4.
going, (...) weeping: they should go and seek ^^d their God. Surely that time
is (...) come to us his Israel: for now we (...) and weep as we go (as did
David (...) Absalom) We weep as we go up to (...) Chambers. With Joseph, 2 Samuel
18.33. Ge. 34.30
we seek ^ere to weep; and we enter into our ^ambers, and we weep there. With
^e Church in the Psalms, Ps. 126.6.
we go ^^^th and weep. With the Israelites, (...) weep before the door of the
Taber^cle of the Congregation. Number 25.6
With Da^d, 2 Samuel 15.30.
and the people that were with ^m, we weep as we go up to the Ci^^. Yea, with
Ishmael, we weep all (...) as we go. And as we weep, Jer. 41.6.
so ^hope we shall seek too; even seek ^^e Lord, and his strength; Psa. 105.4
yea seek ^s face evermore. This is the way for ^ardon; and this is the means
for ^alth: for so God promised King ^o^omon, saying: If I shut up heaven ^at
there is no rain: or if I command ^^e Locusts to devour the Land: 2 Chro 7.13.
or if ^ send a Pestilence among my people: if ^y people which are called by my
Name shall humble themselves, and pray, Lord, this P^^^ilence thou have sent
among us: among us Christians that are called by thy Name. Let others do (...)
they will: Jos. 24.15
As for me, and my h^ we will serve thee, O my Lord. (...) thou make me to turn
from my (...) ked ways, that thou may (...) from heaven, and forgive my s^^
and heal this land: for I will (...) thy face; I will humble my sel^ will pray
unto thee, and say.

The Prayer.
OMnipotent Lord, thou sin^ venging God, who for (...) obedience did
threaten the own people of Israel to smite them the Knees, Deu^. 28.35.
and in the legs with a so Botch that could not be healed, f^^ the sole of the
foot unto the top of (...) head: (...) of Egypt, whereof they could no^ healed:
Thou who by the mouth^ thine only son did foretell the Jews, that
Nation should rise (...) against Nation, Mat. 24.7
Kingdom against Kin^ dome, and that there should be Fr^ mines, and Pestilences
in diver^ places: Be pleased, O thou great o^ fended Lord, in the bowels of the
compassion to let thine anger cease, Psalm 85.4
and to bow down thine ear to thy ^fflicted People in the City of London and
elsewhere in this Nation. O our God thou see how this whole Kingdom does
groan under the ^urden of thy wrathful indignation, ^emoaning the general
sufferances ^or our more general sins. Our sins, our sins do far exceed the
transgressions of Israel: Yea, they are greater than those of the Jews against
^he true Messiah; for thine own Apostle ^eareth them witness, that Had they
known it, 1 Cor. 2.8
they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory: but we alas, both have known,
and do know him; Heb. 6.6
and yet we crucify to our selves the Son of thee our God afresh; and daily
put him to an open shame. For these our Offenses thou have begun thy Revenge;
yea, and most justly too; for thou art clear, though man should judge thee.
Under this thy heavy wrath, we groan O Lord, we cry, we ho^vle; for sickness
increases, death approaches: yea, such a sickness, and such a death, as
makes us fear both our selves, and our neighbors; because we have not feared
thee the Lord of hosts. Thou see, O Lord, their afflictions; even that their
Houses are made their Prisons, and their Sou^ their Companions, whom thou have
been pleased to visit. Our Stre^^ are turned into Pastures, our Tow^ into
Wildernesses; and for our badwardnesse in our Devotions, t^^ very doors we see
shut up every d^^ do instruct us to address our selve unto thee, and to
beseech thee L^^^ to have mercy upon us. Our days a^ consumed in sorrows and
languis^ing; and our nights in weeping, a^ mourning. Thou woundest us, a^ we
cry; thou smitest us, and ^^roare; thou plaguest us, and we are troubled, we
are dismayed. O^ Golgothaes are surfeited with the Dead, and our habitations
infecte^ with the living. We fly from plac^ to place, from Country to Country
and yet we fly not from thy presence, we avoid not thy judgment. What shall we
do, What shall w^doe? Is there no balm, O Lord, (...) Gilead? Jer. 8.22.
Is there no Physician there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of thy
people recovered? Thy Son, thy merciful Son, thy swe^^ Son Jesus was sent to
bind up the broken hearted, Isa. 61.1
and to open the prisons to them that were bound, and he was not baokward in
the performance of this for which he was sent; for he healed all manner of
sickness, Mat. 4.23
and all manner of Diseases among the people. At thy feet, therefore, O Jesus,
Chapter 15.^0
thou best Physician, we cast our selves down. A multitude we are that lie at
thy feet: Cure us, O Christ; heal us, O Jesus, as thou did the multitude.
Lu. 6.19.
A whole multitude once did seek to touch thee; for there went virtue out of
thee; and thou healest them all. Mat. 14.14.
Thou were moved with compassion, and did heal their sick. Many did thou
cure of their infirmities, and Plagues. Behold thy hand is not shortened that
it cannot save; Lu. 7.21
neither is thine ear heavy that thou can not hear. Is. 59.1.
The number of Petitioners cannot deter thee; the multitude of suitors cannot
molest thee; for thou have healed many: Mar 3.10
Therefore, with the multitude in the Gospel, we press upon thee, that we may
but touch thee; for thou have virtue in thee; thou have power to heal. O Lord
hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord heal us of our grievous wounds. In the depth of
thy fury when thou did resolve to be revenged of a Rebellious people, it
was yet thy promise that thou would leave a few from the Sword, Ez. 12.16
and from the Femine, and from the Pestilence, the they might declare all their
abominations among the people where the should come; that they might kno^ that
thou art the Lord. Us thou ha^ plagued, Us thou have punished, (...) sorely, so
grievously, that but f^^ of us are like to escape: yet O Lord, now at last look
in mercy upon us: O Lord let this small remnant which is left find thy
compassion. O (...) us, O heal us, O help us for thy mercie's sake. When thou
were angry with Egypt, thou did threaten to smite it: Isa. 19.22
but, even at that very instant, thou did likewise promise to heal it; and
that they should return unto thee their Lord, and that thou would be
entreated of them. Jer. 33.6
Thou did proclaim unto Judah that thou would bring it health, and cure;
and would cure them, and reveal unto them abundance of peace, and truth.
Thou did promise unto Zion that thou would restore health unto her, Ch
30.17
and heal her of her wounds, because she was called an outcast by my people,
saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeks after. These were thy promises even
in the midst of thy threatenings: and will thou be worse unto us than thou
were unto Egypt, or Judah, or Zion? True it is, that thou expectest our
conversion; thou command us to Turn unto thee with all our hearts, and with
Fasting, Joel 2.12
and with Weeping, and with Mourning. To thee therefore, O God (though formerly
we have not, yet now) do we turn. We turn unto thee both our weeping Eyes, and
our dejected countenances, and our wringing Hands, and our bended Knees, and
our mournful Voices, and our groaning Hearts. Merciful God, behold our
Tears, and view our Countenances, and look upon our Hands, and strengthen our
Knees, and hearken to our Voices, and comfort our Hearts. The Priests,
Ministers do weep between the Porch and the Altar, and they say, Spare thy
people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach. Our Ezra's pray, and
confess and weep, Eze 10.1.
and cast themselves down before thine house; and the people assemble
themselves unto them, both our men and our women, and our children; for we all
weep very sore. We weep, Number. 2.56.
as the Israelites did before the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
when twenty and four thousand of the^ dyed of the Pestilence. Thus (...) mourn,
thus we weep; our Eyes, (...) Hearts, our very Souls do weep: O let us taste of
thy love; let us feel thy compasson. Make us to (...) of thy praise, as thy
servant David did; when be cried unto thee, and thou did heal him. Psalm.
30.2
Thou ha^ been wroth with us, as thou were with the Jews for their Coveteousne^
and thou have smitten us: Isa. 57.17
thou (...) hid thy self, and have been, angry^ yet we have gone on frowardly
in t^^ ways of our hearts. But, O our God do thou make us as penitent as those
Jews; and then say unto us as tho^ did unto thy Judah, Alas, we mourn, and
yet we are punished: we grieve, and yet we are plagued; Jer. 14.7.
and all because our iniquities do testify against us: but for thy name's
sake, O Lord, be pleased to spare us. O the hope of Israel, the Savior thereof
in the time of trouble, why should thou be as a stranger in the land; and as
a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry but a night? Why should thou be
as a man astonished; still in the midest of us, and we are called by thy name;
therefore, we pray thee, leave us not. 1 King 8.37.
O here is a Pestilence in our land; and we make our Prayers and Supplications,
stretch forth our hands toward thine house. therefore in heaven thy dwelling
place, and forgive; fear thee, and walk in thy ways all the days of our
lives. Or if the sins of us thy people cause thee to stop thine ears at our
Prayers, O hear thou our Hezekiah's, praying for us who have not cleansed our
selves. 2 Ch^o. 30.18.
Stay the Plague from us thine Israel, as thou did from thy people, Ps.
106.30 Na. 16.16
when thy servant Phineas executed judgment. Cause our Aarons to take their
Censers, and to put fire in them from off the Altar, and to put on incense: O
let them come quickly to our Congregations, and make an Atonement for us.
stand between the dead and the living, and let the plague be stayed. Thine
Angel stretches forth his hand upon our Jerusalem to destroy it: 2 Samuel 24.16.
O do thou as in the time of King David: Repent thee of the evil, and say
unto the destroying Angel, It is enough stay now thine hand. Hear us, (...)
Lord, for thy distressed People; (...) hear them for us; and hear thy Ch^^^ for
us all: That to him, and the and thy Blessed Spirit we may rend^ (as is most
due) all Praise, (...) Glory, and Thanksgiving, and Obedience, from this time
forth (...) ever more Amen.

Tears of those whose Houses are shut up of the Plague.
The Soliloquie.
The Ejaculation.
Psalm. 5. ^. ^^^. Give ear to my words, O Lord; consider my Meditation.

Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for unto thee will I
Pray.


WHAT? Shut up? Why so? Must my House be a Prison; and my self both the Jailer
and the Prisoner too? This is a punishment added unto God's, to be thus shut up
from the society of men. Is this a visitation, thus to forbid our visitants?
Was I wont to be such a gadder abroad, that I must now be k^pt at home under
lock and key? Lord how suddenly am I transported with passion even beyond the
bounds of reason, and Religion (...) O here is the Messenger of death come into
mine house; and now I must be thankful to Authority for commanding me to
retire my self to (...) private, and pensive accounts, wh^ knows yet but that
both my self and my family may live, for all (...) enclosing? It may so please
my God that by my being secluded from the multitude, I may shun the infection
of the multitude; and so what (...) conceived an injury, may end (...)
Blessing. I may perhaps say, (...) say truly, when I am awaked (...) out of my
passion, as Jacob did wh^ he awoke out of his sleep: Ge. 18.16
Surely (...) Lord is in this place, and I knew (...) not. My God is, come
indeed, a though I am not worthy that he shall enter under my roof. Lu. 7.6.
O he is come but he is come in wrath, and shows me the tokens of his anger:
b^ I will submit to his pleasure, and say unto him in the language of the
blessed Virgin: Behold the Handmaid of the Lord: L^. 1.37.
be it unto me according to thy will. Who knowed but that instead of killing,
he may come to raise me a Lazarus; Joh. 11.^^, 44.
if occasion serves, as once he did for Martha and Mary? Peradventure he may
come in judgment to others, and yet to me in mercy. Howsoever. I will hope that
I am one of those who are spoken unto from the Lord by the mouth of his
Prophet: Come my people; Isa. 26.20
enter thou into thy Chamber, and shut thy doors about thee: hide thy self as
it were for a little moment, until the indignation be over past. Since then my
Lord is come to be my Guest, my House shall be empty, swept and garnished, that
nothing may offend him, nothing may displease him: and thus will I empty it,
thus will I sweep it, thus will I garnish it.

Farewell vain world; thou that have deluded me with thy follies, and cozened
me with thy false and braided wares. Come not near me; my doors are shut, and
none such as thou shall enter here. Farewell false friends, who only gaze
upon the rising Sun. Ye who were my companions in solly, and inticers to sond
and idle sports, farewell, farewell: no more shall ye enter with your
bewitching charms: Sports, passe-times, games, merry meetings, gossipings; fare
ye all well; come no more to my doors: for if ye do come, ye shall knock,
and knock, and knock again, and all in vain; for even to this purpose also are
they now made fast. And now mine eyes, the luster of my countenance, ye
windows of folly, take ye your leave of your vain objects; for I have a task to
set you, that ye never yet were acquainted with. First, I will prefer you to
attend upon my heart; and whatever sighs and sobs my poor heart shall send
forth, it shall be your duty to entertain them by the way, and enforce them to
accept of the company of your tears. Ye shall weep, till ye are weary, and
then shall ye read: and when indeed ye are weary of poring upon divine Pages,
for your recreation ye shall weep again, that by that means ye may be fitted to
read again. Next if at any time, I give you leave to consult with the sister of
mortality (as some times I shall be necessitated to afford you a time of
intermission by the persuasions of nature) be sure that ye stay not too long
from your employments; for my haste is great, my business is of consequence:
we have only a little work to do for the King of eternity, and then we shall
be at ease. And ye, mine Ear, that have so often hearkened to the Siren songs
of the vain world, now bid ye adieu to your musical harmonies, and ra^ishing
concords; for I must lock ^e up for a season: and hereafter ^e shall hear a
melody beyond the ^uning of the spheres; for the Quire of Heaven shall ravish
you with their Halelujah's. These hands that so proudly hid themselves under
the skin of the Kid, and blushed when they were beheld by any less then an
Idolater, shall now en^wine each other in a mutual concord, and then revenging
the quarrel of their sins upon my treacherous heart, they shall smite it, and
thump it, and beat it until they have mollified it; until they have beaten
that stone into flesh, and that flesh into water, and forced that water into
tears for the sins of my whole self. Next my Tongue, mine un-toward, unruly,
wanton tongue, my falls, pickthank, tel-tale tongue, that could never sinde
the way to tell the truth, or not willingly, or not with delight; thou for thy
idle, thy profane, thy wicked speeches, shall send out nothing but cries, and
yells, and hideous dins, and horrid screeches for thine offenses: and if at any
time I shall, by thine obsequious service, be contented to trust thee with
articulate Prayer; be sure that (...) first take direction from thy (...) and
then chant it out so loud ((...) forget not discretion) that it^ be heard up as
high as the th^^^ my God. Psalm. 141.3.
Be sure thou do it, I will have a watch over my (...) and at the doors of
my lips, the may be certain thou offend not. (...) for the rest of my self
(since I (...) not stay now to give every pa^^ charge in particular) I shall
(...) mand them only to attend the (...) sure of my royal Guest. Only (...)
thoughts I must commit to the (...) on of my heart, although it for^^ly has
been false unto me: and (...) sirous I am that they may be prese^ pressed down
with great and he^^ burdens. But I charge thee, O^^ Heart, if ever thou hopest
to (...) mine own deer Heart, that thou su^fer not an imagination, not a though
to come near thee, but what shall b^ commended unto thee by Religion, and what
thou shall dispatch to thy M^ker. And now I am prepared for thee. Welcome O my
God. If my room^ are not clean enough for thee, I must entreat from thee both
direction, and assistance to cleanse them. If any dust of wickedness has
flown about in the sweeping of them, I will now give my mind to wash my
chambers with the tears of mine eyes; and that, I know, thou delightest in.

O thrice well-come blessed God. Well-come, O welcome my dearest Redeemer. O
how truly did the Kingly preacher affirm that, It is better to go to the house
of mourning, Eccl. 7.2
then to go to the house of seasting: for that is the end of all, and the
living will lay it to heart! My House is shut up indeed; it is shut up for the
Infection; for fear of the infection; for fear least others should infect my
family; or for fear least my family should be infectious to others. But what of
all that? I am not the first that ever was shut up: I am not the only one that
over was shut up. Lev. 17.4
The Leaper in the law was to be shut up seven days: and at the seven days
end when the Priest looked on him, This shutting up was rather for his cure,
then intended for his hurt. Genesis 7.61
Noah was said to be shut up in the Arc; but it was for his preservation: and
so may I be likewise. Jer. 32.2
Jeremiah was shut^ too; yea, in a prison, although h^ jayle was the house of a
King: (...) yet, even at that time, he was ^^ted by the best; by one better the
the King; even by God himself For he often spoke to him in the (...) that he
was shut up. cap. 33.1
Thus am I s^^ up; even in a prison made of (...) dwelling: I hope that my God
(...) speak comfortably unto me. I (...) hope that he has shut me up (...)
Jewel in a Cabinet; in his ca^^ in his tender compassion. If so, (...) am sure
that no evil shall come i^ unto me, for he is holy, he is (...) he is
powerful who has me in keeping. Rev. 3.7.
He has the key of David: (...) opens, and no man shuts; and (...)
shuts and no man opens. True i^ is, that sometimes he shuts out; as
when he shuts out from his eac^ the prayers of his people. Thus the
faithful complain by the mouth of the Prophet: Lam. 3.8
When I cry, and sho^^, he shuts out my prayers. Sometimes he shuts up;
and that in judgment too; Isa. 44 18
as He shuts up the eyes of Idolaters, that they cannot see; and their
hearts, that they cannot understand. And sometimes man shuts too, even when
he is forsaken of God: for so says the wise King; (...) violent man shuts
his eyes, to de^ise froward things. And again, Prove. 16.30.
God (...) said sometimes in judgment to ^ut up, even heaven it self; as in a
^^me of drought. Therefore Moses ^dviseth the Israelites, saying; Deuteronomy. 11.16.
Take ^eed to your selves that your heart be ^ot deceived, and ye turn aside
and ^rve other Gods, and worship them: And then the Lord's wrath be kin^lled
against you, But sure I am that although he should shut me up in judgment; yet
he, whose compassions fail not, in the midst of judgment, Lam. 3.22. Hab. 3.2.
will remember mercy. I know that in former times he has been angry, and then
before him went a Pestilence, I know that once when the people of Israel had
offended, then the sword was without, and the Pestilence and the Famine within:
Eze. 7.15.
he that was in the Field was threatened that he should die with the Sword; and
he that was in the City, Famine and Pestilence should devour him. I know that
Elijah Prophesied against Jeb^^ saying, 2 Chronicles. 21.12.
Thus says the Lord, Bee^^ thou have not walked in the w^^^ Jehoshaphat thy
father, nor (...) ways of Asa King of Judah: B^^ with a great Plague will the
(...) smite thy people, and thy chil^^ and thy wives, Job 11.10
And I know also that (...) cut off, and shut up, or gather toge^^ none can
hinder him. But what the What though he has sh^t me (...) Shall I therefore
rage, Chapter 30.29
and rave^ one distracted? What though (...) a Brother or Sister to Dragons,
(...) a companion to Owls? my skin should be bl^^ upon me; and my ^oues be
bu^^ with heat? Chap. 3.3
Should I therefore (...) Let the day perish wherein I was (...) and the night
in which it was (...), There is a child conceived? O (...) I will rather
resolve with afflic^^^ Job: Chapter 13.15
Though be slay me, yet will trust in him. Why should I (...) to be dismayed?
That God which dwells in the heavens has taken up my house, and is come to
so jou^^^ with me upon earth: I will speak in the phrase of a King: But will
God ^^ed dwell on earth? Behold the ^ven, 1 Kin. 8.27
and the heaven of heavens not contain thee: how much less (...) house of
mine, which thou now ^est visit! O what a happiness it to have God for our
visitant! though he comes in wrath, yet is (...) well-come. O let me have my
^^d any way, rather then not to ^^ve him at all! If he should not ^netimes be
angry with me, I ^ould suspect that he loved me not: (...) if for ever he
should be angry ^^ith me, I should feel that he lo^d me not. He is never angry
with ^e, but when I am not angry with ^y self. I will soon therefore ap^ase his
anger, by revenging my (...) upon my self, for the sins which (...) have
committed against his glori^^s name. And if I cannot be re^enged enough, I will
cry for anger; ^^en for anger that I cannot punish my self enough for
displeasing him who thus honors my roof. When the Israelites were to eat
the Pas^hall Lamb, they were commanded to take of the blood thereof, Exo. 12.7.
and to strike it on the two side-posts, and on the upper doore-post of the
houses, wherein they were to eat it: blood (says the Lord) shall (...) you for
a token upon the houses (...) ye are: and when I see the blood will pass over
you, and the Pl^^ shall not be upon you to destroy y^^ when I smite the land of
Egypt. (...) here is comfort now in the mid^ affliction: here is joy in the
de^^ of sorrow. See, there there is (...) token: there is the blood on the
(...) or at least, the representation of for the Red Cross is there. It is to
for a token, or a memorial of (...) Blood of that Innocent Lamb wi^^ spot, that
was slain, that was (...) cified on the Cross for the fin^ the Elect. Now
Lord do what the please: Spare, or strike; it (...) be all one to me, so
long as the give me a firm assurance that (...) has suffered for me. I value
(...) my stesh: I care not for this (...) of walking dust: let it be blown
(...) way; let this mud-wall be thro^ down: it is no matter; I am content, so
long as I am sure that the anger of my God will be appeased by the blood of my
Redeemer; an^ that so soon as my soul shall be freed from the prison of my
flesh, I shall for ever sit on the right hand of my Jesus. Sure I am, that
although my house be shut up, because (...) the infection, yet my Christ will
canse my soul with his blood. therefore World farewell: shut up ^^om thou
please Thy company not so good, nor thy courtesy so ^eat as to command my
joy. Alough my house here be shut up, yet (...) which is faithful has
promised at the gates of that new Jerusal^m, Rev. 21.25.
which is above, shall not be shut at all (...) day: and that there shall be no
night ^ere. O let me beg of my Lord, ^y Landlord; yea my Guest, my ^riend, my
Brother, my Father that seeing I am a man, a fearful man ^ounderfully afraid
especially (as I ^^me of a woman) of a Serpent, Chapter 20.2
or (...) Dragon) he will be pleased to lay old on the Dragon, that old Serpent
which is the Devil, and Satan; ^^e no more. O how contentedly then shall I
mourn! How joyfully shall I ^^ieve for all the offenses that ever (...)
committed! Well; now my God ^s pleased to speak to my Conscience, away will I
go in private, all alone, and cry in a corner. I will weep by my self: away I
will go; and separate my self from my fam^ yea even from her who is my s^ as we
are two but one flesh; the may the more freely weep. The will do, and this I
may do; when Jerusalem had her great mo^ning, Zech. 12.12.
not only every family moc^ apart, but even their Wives (...) mourned apart.
So will I: I will (...) apart too. But because I must offer to offer unto my
God s^^ present as a little poor bottle of to and say nothing to him when ^^der
it; Ps. 56.8
humbly therefore upon knees will I fall, and thus will l^ unto him.

The Prayer.
GLorious and ever-living (...) God, Psalm. 75.5
who do suffer the ^^ked to live in prospirity; to be in (...) trouble like
other men, nor to be pl^gued like other men: Heb. 12.6
but have to us that whomsoever thou love, the do chasten, and scourgest
every ch^^ whom thou receivest: vouchsafe (...) beseech thee, to sanctify this
affliction which thou have laid at this time upon me and mine. 1 Kin. 17, 18.
Thou a^t come, O my God, to call my sins to ^^membrance: O let me not
frustrate ^ine intent, nor repel the motions (...) thy blessed Spirit. My
self, and ^y family are now shut up from the ^^wde temptations of the seducing
World: Lord make me at this time (...) look into my self, into mine own (...)
and sinful heart, which has (...) so long shut up even from mine ^wn self,
from mine understanding and my knowledge. This, O Lord, (...) thy time to
speak: let it, I beseech he, be my time to hear. My house is ^ecome a house of
thy Correction; and any self and family are the offenders whom thou art pleased
to chastise. Je 10.24
Lord correct us, but with judgment, ^ot in thine anger, Ps. 88.7.
least thou bring us ^o nothing. Thy wrath at this time ^eth hard upon us; and
thou afflictest ^s with all thy waves. Psa. 38.11
and cannot come forth. Our Lovers, and our friends stand aloof from us; Ps.
88.9.
and our neighbors stand afar off. By reason of this affliction mine eyes
mourns: Lord I call daily upon thee, Ps. 69.15.
and stretch out mine hands unto thee. O let not the water-stood overflow us;
neither let the deep swallow us up; and let the pit shut her mouth upon us.
Psa. 73.14
(...) the day long are we plagued, Psalm. 69.3
and t^stened every day. I am weary of ^^ing; my throat is dry: my sight (...)
fails for waiting so long upon the my God. O consider thy distre^ servants,
Psa. 78.39
that we are but flesh: a^ that we are even a wind that pas^ away, and that
comes not again (...) liver us, Psa. 91.3.
O Lord, from the snare o^^ fowler, from the noisome Pestil^^ Either send unto
us or else be the thy self unto us a staff as well as rodd; Psalm. 23.4.
a supporter as well as a com^ctor, Psa. 91 5
that so we may not be afraid s^ the terror by night, nor for the arri^ that
flies by day; Prepare us, O Lord, so those heavenly mansions, where thy Son
s^teth at thy right hand making intercession for us. Hear him pleading for our
remission, and interceding for our Pardon. Out of his wounds have issued that
precious balsamone, which is able to cure the sins of the whole world. In him
be pleased to be reconciled unto us: Psa. 31.15
and since our times are in thine hands, Lord either spare us for thine honor
or else receive us to thy mercy. Let the health of our bodies make us mindful
to labor for the health of our souls: and let the sickness of our bodies put
us in mind of the diseases of our souls. Good God, either preserve us from
sickness, or protect us in sickness. Be thou our God, and make us thy servants;
and then come either with health, or with sickness; thy will be done. Thou
can cause a thousand to fall at our side, Ps. 91.7
and ten thousand at our right hand, and yet preserve us. Thou can, if thou
please, so protect us, no evil may befall us; nor any Plague come nigh our
dwelling. O grant therefore, thee our refuge; Psalm. 3^.6.
yea thee who art the most high, our habitation. We are troubled, O Lord; we
are bowed down greatly; we go mourning all the day long. We eat ashes as it
were bread, Psa. ^02 9
^^d mingle our drink with weeping, Ps. 41.9
But O thou who art our only rock, why have thou forgotten us? Psa. 43.2.
O why go we thus mourning by reason of this affliction? Thou art the God of
our strength, Est 8.3.
Why do thou cast us off? O g^ve us leave (with Queen Esther) to speak yet
again before thee the King of Kings, and to fall down at thy feet (as she did
at the feet of King Ahasuerus) and to beseech thee with tears to withdraw thy
visitation. O Lord our very souls within us do mourn; Job 14.22
for thou do cause our Sun to go down at noon; and do darken our earth in
the clear day. Thou have turned our fasts into mourning, Amos 8.9
and all our songs into lamentation: brought sackcloth upon our loins; Lam.
5.15
and made our mourning as the mourning of an only Son. and the crown is fallen
from our head: Woe unto us that we have sinned. ^^. 61.1.
But O thou who were anointed to preach good tiding unto the meek: who were
sent to bind up the brokenhearted; yea and the day of vengeance of ou^ God:
to comfort all that mourn: to appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, (...).
Thou who s^ttest up o^ high those that be low, that ^use which mourn may be
exalted to safety: Ps. 102.17
Reguard thou (we most humbly and earnestly beseech thee) the prayers of us thy
poor destitute, and despise not our desires. Thou have seen our ways; O do
thou heal us: Isa. 57.18
lead us also, and restore comforts unto us, that we may be called Trees of
Righteousness, the planting of thee our Lord, that thou may be glorified.
Wound us not, O Father, Jer. 30.14
with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the
multitude of our iniquities. sorrow be incurable, because our sins be
increased Though for a small moment thou have seemed to forsaked us; Is. 54.7.
yet with thy great mercies gather us again. In a little wrath thou do bide
thy face from us, for a moment; us, O Lord our Redeemer. O thou who art our
Redeemer, Ps. 34.15.
Let thine ears be open unto our cries: open thine eyes, and see our
afflictions, Isa. 37.17
(in so many flying out of London) and how many are shut up from the comforts
of the godly, and from the soc^ety of their indeared friends. Consider, and
hear us, Psalm 13.^
O Lord our God: Lighten our eyes lest we sleep the sleep of death. Ps. 123.2.
Behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the
eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her Mistress, so our eyes wait upon thee, O
Lord our God, until thou have mercy upon them and us. O do thou grant unto us
remssion of our sins; patience in our miseries; comfort in our distress;
physic for our health, and recovery: and in thy blessed time, bring their
souls out of prison, that we and they may give thanks unto thy Name: Ps. 142.7.
Which thing if thou will grant unto us all, then shall the righteous resort
again unto our company. So shall we that be thy people, Ps. 79.13.
and sheep of thy pasture give thee thanks for ever: and show forth thy praise
from generation to g^neration, world without end, Amen.

Tears for them who are visited with the Pestilence, BEING: 1. Either wounded
with a Sore. 2. Or, marked with the Tokens.

The Soliloquie.
The Ejaculation.
Psalm. 5. v. 1, 2. Give ear to my words, O Lord; consider my Meditation.

Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for unto thee will I
Pray.


OH! it is come, Psalm. 5.4
it is come. My heart is sore pained within me; and the terrors of death are
fallen upon me. See, See; What swelling's this? What rising's this? Oh, it is
the messenger of death, and bids me to enquire into my sinful life. I am
struck, oh, I am struck to the heart. This is the impression of anger, and the
blott of him who in ^h^ wrath may justly blott me out of h^^ wonted compassion.
Yet let me no^ despair: let me not be too mu^^ dismayed. While there is life,
there i^ hope. The woman in the Law when had gone aside to another man inste^^
of her Husband (whereof her husband was jealous, Nu. 5.20
and brought her to her purgation) was to be charged by the Priest with an Oath
of Cursing upon whose drinking of water, belly did swell, and her thigh did
rot. Surely I have drunk none of that water: or if I have, it cannot hurt me;
for by that very law, the innocent escaped free from the punishment. swelling
should light upon me. Yet (now I better consider of it) let me not deceive my
self. There is as well a spiritual, as a carnal Adultery. Even a Virgin may be
styled an Adulteress. Have I never turned from my God? Has my soul never
forsaken her dearest Husband my blessed Redeemer, to commit a spiritual
whoredom? O guilty, guilty: woe is me, I cannot choose but plead guilty, to
this my indictment. My Conscience tells me that I have followed the
temptations of the enemies of Christ, I cannot tell how often: and justly
therefore (I must confess) may this swelling be my punishment; for greater
than this, has been my due desert. Peradventure to correct my Pride, this
thorn in my flesh may be a messenger of Satan, sent to buffet me, 2 Cor. 12 7.
as once Saint Paul had one sent unto him: for who of either Sex is not guilty
of this folly? Among us are there not some, Deuteronomy. 28.5:
(the tender and delicate women (such as were among the Israelites) who will
not adventure to set the sole of the foot upon the ground, for delicateness,
and tenderness) and (not to flatter, or deceive my self) I may peradventure be
one of them. Or if I have not had power to put in practice what I desired, yet
it may be that my desire has been to be as delicate as the chiefest, and
sinest of either of the Sexes

Satan is said to have: (...) 1.^.
gon^ forth from the presence of the Lord, and to have smote Job with sore
boyles, from the sole of the foot to the crown of his hand. O that I were but
half so righteous as was holy Job, of whom God himself bears witness, that
There was none like him in the earth; Cha. 1.8
a perfect, and an upright man; one that feared God, and eschewed evil! But
alas, I am no such person; for I have, by my wickedness, as it were taught the
serpent to go forth from the presence of the Lord, and to smite me with this
sickness, this rising, this swelling, worse then those boyles which infested
Job. David had a sore too, 1 Samuel 13.14. Psa. 77.2
a running sore (although he was a man after God's own heart): for so he
complained, saying, My sore ran in the night, and ceased not; my soul refused
comfort. But his Sore was not like unto mine: for his was in the fierce combat
which he had with distrust; and it may as well be meant that his hand by night
reached our in Prayer, and ceased not: or by that sore may be meant the running
of his eyes, which dropped in the night for his grievous crimes, and ceased
not; as well as an impostume, or ulceration. But mine is not such: it is a sore
indeed, a Carbuncle, a Pestilential sore; although as yet it is not come to
such maturity as to do as David spoke of his. It is yet but a swelling, a hard
swelling, a rising: and for its swelling, and for its hardness it may either be
my very heart removed from the seat appointed it by nature: or else it may be
sent to put me in mind of the proud swelling, and the malicious hardness of
mine impenitent heart. Alas, if I do but seriously consider of that little
morsel of proud flesh, or rather stone, hard stone then flesh, that Adamantine
heart, what have I not deserved for that wicked heart, which others were ever
punished with? Worse, far worse do I deserve then ever did Judah: I only
want a Prophet to lament mine estate as Isaiah did hers, for the judgments of
God inflicted upon her for her rebellion, and to cry, The whole head is sick,
and the whole heart is faint: Isa. 1.5.
from the sole of the foot even to the head there is no soundness in it; but
wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores:

But what shall I do in this distress? May not these poisoned humors that
have conspired together in this present tumor; as well be some other disease,
as the infectious Pestilence? Lord, how fain would sinners live in ignorance,
and never either understand the offenses which they have committed, or know the
manner and the kind of their punishments! How fain would the sick delude
themselves with a conceit of health; and, hoping for life, cozen their
knowledge with the falsehood of opinion! I cannot deny but it is the sickness,
which I am stricken with; the infectious sickness, the dreadful Pestilence:
and I can have no hope of life if once it ceazeth on my trembling heart. To
prevent that danger therefore, since my heart has hitherto been, so stony, so
hard to entertain the motions of the blessed Spirit, I will request it now to
continue its obduracy, not against my great God, but against this sad, and
deadly sickness What it has usually retained almost to the utter undoing and
destruction of my Soul, I will entreat it to continue now for the preservation
of my Body. Or if that will not do; if it resolve to yield in this time of
distress, far rather then I will seek to that, I will humbly beseech my
offended Lord to take possession of my heart: and if he will vouchsafe to grant
my petition, then come what can come, I am sure I shall have comfort, because I
shall have the society of my God. But what if my heart be preserved from these
malignant humors? Have I then any assurance that my disease is mortal? Alas
no; but I must use the means, and beseech my God to give them his blessing. I
must apply those things which will mollify this swelling: it must be softened,
be broken, be drawn, before it can be healed. Thus, even thus must I deal with
my heart too. The malicious humors of sin and corruption have already
assembled there, and caused it to swell. I will hasten therefore to Joh's
Physician, who softened his heart, and troubled him: Job 23.16
and I will beseech him for Christ's sake to mollify mine; for there are more
then the seven abominations of a dissembler in it. Prove. 26.25. Joel 2.13 Hos.
10.12.
I will pray him to rent it; to break it; to break up the fallow ground of it;
for he better can break mine, than the misery of reproach could break the beart
of the Prophet David. Ps. 61.^0.
I will entreat him to take away the foreskinne of it, and to wash it from
wickedness, Jer. 4.4.
that so I may be saved, no vain thought may lodge in it. I will request him to
search it; Chapter 17 10.
that he will lay something to it; Isa. 44.7 Ps 147.3.
even all the wickenesses that ever I have committed. Then, when he has broken
it, I know that he will heal it, and bind up the wounds of it: for to this
purpose he sent his Son, his onely-begotten Son, my Redeemer, my Jesus; even to
bind up the breken hearted. Isa. 61.1.
But when this great Cure shall be wrought for me, what have I to render unto
him by way of thankfulnesse^? Alas nothing, even just nothing at all, unless
he will accept of that broken, yet therein that whole and cured heart. That,
then shall be his, and I know that he will accept of it; Act 13 22 Psa. 51.17
for so says David, that man after his own heart; A broken, and a contrite
heart O God thou will not despise: from the mal^ce of this heart does proceed
the malignity of this my disease; for sin is the cause of every sickness But
all this while I do but talk of this malady; I feek not for a Remedy. Alas to
whom shall I go? To what Physician, or Chyrurgion shall I repair? Lev. 13.2.
I read that if any man of the house of Israel had in the skin of his flesh a
rising, or a swelling, or a bright spat, and if it were in the skin of the
flesh like the plague of Lepros^, th^n he was to be brought to Aaron the
Priest, was to look on the plague in the skin of the flesh, and then to
proceed according to order. Thus, under the Law, the Priests were the
Physicians both for the body and the soul: whereupon the Prophet Jeremiah
complained, and accounted it as a great judgment upon the people for their
sins, Jer. 6.13.
that From the Prophet even to the Priest every one dealt falsely: Hence also
another Prophet reproved them, Eze. 34.4
because. The diseased they had not strengthened; neither had they heal^d that
which was sick; neither had they bound up that which was broken. Under the
Gospel also the Apostles were likewise Physicians for both: for when Christ had
called unto him his twelve Disciples, Mat. 10.1.
he not only gave them power against unclean Spirits, to cast them out; but
also to heal all manner of sicknesses, and all manner of diseases. Doubtless
by this I am likewise taught, into whatsoever sickness I fall, whatsoever
disease I am visited with; first of all to go to the Priest, to the Minister of
God: Ps. 110.5. Mal. 4.2.
First, to Examine my Soul, before I look for the cure of my Body. To the
Priest will I therefore go; (...) the Chief Priest, to the High Priest, to the
chiefest and highest that eve^ was; even to him who is a Pries^ for ever aster
the order of Melchiz^deck: And humbly will I befeed him to teach me to fear
his name; and then I know that he who is the Sun of righteousnes^ will arise
with healing in his wings; and will make me go forth, and grow up as calves of
the stall.

Make use of the Prayer which follows the next Meditation.

Tears for the visited, being marked with the Tokens.
The Soliloquie.
The Ejaculation.
Psalm. 5. v. 1, 2. Give ear to my words, O Lord; consider my Meditation.

Hearken unto the voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for unto thee will I
Pray.


THERE is a time to kill (says Solomon) and a time to heal. Ecles. 3.3.
O that time to kill is now come upon me; but I know not how so much as to hope
for the time of healing; for here I find the tokens of death, the marks of my
mortality. This flesh, this sinful flesh of mine, which has been so washed,
so unguented, so smoothed and colored, according to the choycest wit of art
and industry, has now the stains in it of a contagious sickness. Where are
now those admirers of comeliness, and those idolatrous doaters upon the Beauty
of Women? Let them come and learn the vanity of their opinions; and chide their
simplicity by these tokens of vengeance. O what a frail thing is (man) or
woman; easily deluded into a belief of their hansomenesse and beauty, and as
easily stricken with their own deformity!

But what do these spots mean to die my flesh, and strike such a deep tincture
in a smoothed skin? Are diseases blind, that thus they fasten every where
without either choice, or exception? Vain (Man) or Woman as I am, why do I
spend these minuits, these few and winged minuits allotted unto me, in such
impertinent quaeres? These bluish stains tell me that I must provide to answer
for my sins (yea shortly, speedily) before him who dispatched them hither unto
me. Death approaches; mortality knocks at my burdened heart. Lord, how heavy
is my soul! Even as if it were already at the great tribunal, and pleaded
guilty of milions of enormities.

They have corrupted themselves (says Moses by the Israelites;) their ^^ot is
not the spot of Gods children; Deuteronomy. 32.5
^^y are a perverse, and crooked gene^^tion. Is there a spot then which ^^en
the children of God may be sub^^ct unto? Why then may not these ^^e some of
those spots and my self be ^ne of those children of God? Lord, ^ow willingly,
how greedily does ^ery one strive to dye the death of ^^e right ous! How
easily are we ^^t, through ignorance, to dwell (...) the letter of the text,
when we should rather pry into a farther in^ent of the blessed Spirit! That
spot (...) the children of God is not seated (...) the body, but in the so^l;
and that spot in the soul of thy Israelites ^as chiefly Idolatry. True it is,
Verse. 15.16, 17.
that ^ven the righteous have their stains ^oo; but not such bloaches, not such
^reat and foul spots; or howsoever ^ot of such a deep tincture, not dyed (...)
in grain as are those of the wicked: ^or they are washed out with the ^ears of
sorrow through the blood of ^he Lamb. O that my spots were only in my skin,
and not in my soul; and that I could truly justify my self in the language of
Job. Job 31.6.
Let me be weighed in an even hallance that God may know mine integrity. But
alas we cannot, we dare not. (...) if we could come to a sight of (...) sins,
and be truly humbled for the then may we be sure that he (...) taught Jacob how
to increase (...) flock of the speckled and spot^^ would easily make us white
as w^^ But how, Ge. 30.39
Isa. 1.18.
or upon what grounds (...) we expect his mercy, seeing all the we can suffer
is not punishment (...) nough for all that we have trespass^^ Without sheding
of blood is no remsion, Heb. 9.20.
says the blessed Apost^ What comfort then can we expe^ or what mercy can we
hope for, se^ing that our blood, our life is not (...) value enough to suffer
what our (...) have merrited; much less to pu^^ chase remission of our sins?
what no^ shall we do? What hope can (...) have that our body can be free from
these spots of our disease, when w^ know not how to be free from the polutions
of our souls? By the Mosaical law. If any one of the common people sinned
against any of the commandments of God concerning thing which ought not to be
done, Lev. 4.27
A L^m^ without blemish was to be his offering and so the ^tonement was made
for the sin, Here yet was some ease for a distressed soul: the sin was forgiven
through the ^ead of the Lamb. But what hope ^^ve we of remission? That Law ^oth
no longer stand in force: nor ^ill the blood of a common Lamb be accepted for
the least, the smallest ^ffence. Yet Cheer up, O our drooping souls: Let our
fainting spirits, and our sorrowful hearts take comfort in the midst of our
deep di^resses: for there is a Lamb, an in^^cent Lamb, Heb. 9.28.
a Lamb without blemish which once was offered to hear the sins of many. We are
those many who h^ve sinned, and why then should We not be of those many too,
whose sins he has borne? Lord make thou us to be thy children through the
merits ^f thy Son; and cleanse the polluti^ns of our Souls by the blood of that
Lamb, Joel 1.29
even that Lamb that takes away the sins of the world.

But whilst I thus meditate upon the stains of my soul, my body bids me
to look upon these unwonted blemishes. Lord, how bluish they appear! Surely if
those doaters upon our sex should see these spots, they would forget their
idolatry, and tremble at the judgment. Est. 8.15.
When Mordecay was clothed in his blew and white, it is said that he went in
royal apparel. The apparel of (...) skin me thinks does seem to resem^ the
covering of his body; for here the ancient white which nature co^ferred, and
here is blew come no^ too, sent me from God. It is roy^^ apparel, because it
is sent me by (...) King of glory: and it is well-co^^ too, 2 Cor. 1.3 Pro.
20.20
because that glorious King is the Father likewise of all mercies, and the God
of all consolation. The blewnes^ of a wound cleanses away evil, sait^ the
wise King Solomon. Surely h^ meant not such a wound, such a sp^^ as is each of
these; for althoug^ these are blew, yet certainly they cleanse not; or if they
do cleanse their cleansing concerns nothing but my soul; they put me in
mind of that duty, for my time is short, and suddenly shall my poor soul bid
farewell to this corrupted, to this spotted body: but as for this body it
cannot be cleansed, it may be ruined by these bluish wounds. Christ says to
his Church, Thou art all fair my love; Cant. 4.7
there is no spot in thee: and St Paul tells me how it comes to pass that
it is freed from spots; Ephesians. 5.25
for Christ (says he) gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present (...)
himself a glorious Church, not ^ing spot, or wrinkle, Of this Church am
^member; a poor, weak, unwor^^ member; and yet I have my (...), my corruptions
in my soul, ^^ich these in my body peep out to ^ember me of. But why did I not
(...) the commandments without spot, (...) unrebukable? 1 Timothy 6.
Why have I not (...) my self unspotted from the world? for this, Jam. 1.27
for this very cause am I ^^w thus visited? am I now thus ^ined: and no more am
I able to ^^e these prints out of my flesh, Je. 13.23.
then (...) Ethiopian is able to change his ^in, or the Leopard his spots Yet I
(...) comfort in my Redeemer; in (...) who has redeemed me (not ^th
corruptible things, 1 Pet. 1.18
as silver and (...)) from my vain conversation; but ^ith the precious blood of
himself, Though my body therefore decay, yet I have a condence that my soul
shall live: I have an assurance of that; for he who ^ringeth me to a sight of
these spots, ^ath given me likewise a sight of my ^^nnes (his name be for ^ver
magnified for it;) and me thinks they appear a thousand thousand time more
loathsome, more urgly in my soul, then these do in my body. They are ten
million of times more certainly mortal in their own condition to my soul with
out the mercy of any Jesus, then these are to my body. Yet if it might be safe
for me to expostulate with my God, I would say unto him in the language of the
Prophet. Jer. 15.18
Why is my pain thus perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuses to be
healed? Will thou be altogether unto me as waters that fail? Chapter 14.19
Have thou utterly rejected me? Has thy soul loathed me? Why have thou
smitten me, and there is no healing for me? I look for peace, and there is no
good; and for the time of healing, and behold trouble. But if I should thus
expostulate in the phrase of the Prophet, yet must I howsoever conclude with
the Prophet, and say, acknowledge, O Lord, my wickedness, and the iniquity of
my fathers; for we have sinned against thee. Yet, me thinks, these spots will
as hardly go out of my mind, as out of my body The express word of God to the
Israelites was, Levit. 19.
Ye shall not make any cutting in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks
upon you: (...) the Lord. And good reason (...) was for this prohibition; for
(...) were apt to be led by the hea^^s, among whom it was a custom ^^e death
of their friends to la^^t and cut themselves: it was (...) manner also to make
incisions their flesh, and to fill up the ^^nds with Stibium, o^ Ink But ^s,
do find here such prints and ^s in my flesh, as the very heathen ^nselves
would have stood ama^at; yet these are no ca^ved by ^violence of my self, but
by the ^er of my God I must therefore ^ent my self, and rejoice at the ^t of
them, since they proceed (...) him who is the father of lights (...) though
they presage darkness ^o me) for every good gift, Jam. 8.17
and e^^p^rfect gift is from above. This (...) does not seem in it self to be
ei^^r good or perfect; but upon se^d, and more serious cogitations, my true
repentance ensue upon ^m, I shall find that they will ^sten me to the best
good, to the ^efest perfection; even to the ^ngdome which is purchased for
(...) by the blood of my Redeemer. Job 16.12
(...), I cannot choose but cry out with Job, and say, I was at ease but he
has broken me asunder: b^ has also taken me by my neck, and shaken me to
pieces, and set me up so his mark. Or with Jeremiah: H^ has bent his bow,
Lam. 3.12
and set me as (...) mark for the arrow. Or with Job again, through the
extremity of m^ sorrow I am enforced to expostulat^^ with my God, Job 7.20.
and say, Why ha^^ thou set me as a mark against thee, s^ that I am a burden to
my self? But I will silence my self in his words again, and say, I have sinned;
Wha^ shall I do unto thee, O thou preserve^ of men?

When it pleased the Almighty to preserve his children in the City of
Jerusalem, when the rest should be destroyed, he commanded a man that was
clothed with l^nnen, and had a writer's Inke-horn by his side, Eze 9.2.
to go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, A mark I
have too; yea more then one, and one, and one, though not in my forehead; and
they are set on as if they proceeded from the In^^e of ^^e. Writer: but, woe is
me, I have either not cried at all, or not enough either for mine own sins, or
for the abominations of Jerusalem: how then can I hope to escape the
destruction? And yet he that spared them, if he please can spare me likewise:
Isa. 59.1.
for his hand is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither is his ear heavy,
that he cannot hear. 2 King. 20.1.
When Hezekiah was commanded to set his house in order; and it was told him
that he should die, and not live; and wept sore: and presently Isaiah was sent
unto him to tell him, David thy father, I have hard thy prayer, I have seen thy
tears; behold I will heal thee: and I will add unto thy days fisteen years.
me too, as he did unto Hezekiah; for I also weep; yea I weep very sore: and I
also pray; yea I pray heartily, and say, Be not thou far from me, Ps. 22.19.
O Lord: O my strength have thee to help me. But Hezekiah was more righteous
then I am; for he walked before the Lord in truth, 2 King. 20.3. Romans 7.18
and with perfect heart, and did that which was good in his fight: whereas in
me dwells no good thing. But Miriam was a woman (as I am) yea and sinful;
Number. 12.13.
and yet when she was Leprous, Moses cried unto the Lord for her, and said,
Heal her now O God I beseech thee; and she was shut out from the camp but
seven days, healed. O but she had a Moses to pray for her, whereas I, alas,
have none; I have no such Moses to pray for me. But what, shall I therefore
remain quite destitute of all hopes? Shall I despair of the goodness, and
the tender mercies of the most high? No, I may not; I must not; for that would
but increase my sin, and add to my torments. The woman in the Gospel who for
twelve years space had an issue of blood, Mar. 5.25.
and had suffered many things of many physicians, only came behind my Jesus,
and touched his garment; and straight way the fountain of her blood was dried
up, fearing and trembling woman therefore will I in like manner fall down
before him, and tell him all the truth. I will confess unto him all my sins;
or, at least, so many as possibly I can call to my remembrance. Who knows but
that he may say unto me, as he did unto her, Daughter (or Son) Thy Faith has
made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague. I am resolved to take
no repulse. The whole multitude even the the multitude of my sins shall not
hinder me, (though they rebuke me) that I should hold my peace: but (with the
blind man in the Gospel) I will cry so much the more, Lu. 18.39
Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me. Or (if that prayer be too short)
while he shall prolong my time I will compose and settle my self to a larger
form, and earnestly, fervently, zealously I will pray unto him, and say.

The Prayer.
O Eternal, and most merciful Lord God, whose Eyes are ten thous and times
brighter then the Sun, and yet thou vouchsafest to look with thine eye of
providence even upon the meanest of the children of men: Regard (I beseech
thee) the low estate of thine Afflicted Servant. Lu. 1.48. Ps. 38.9.
Thou know all my desires; and my groaning is not hid from thee. To thee the
pollutions of my poor Soul are more naked and open, then these spots in my
flesh are obvious to my fight. The sowlnesse of my Corruptions have conspired
with the infectious air to cause these stains in my skin: and by them I am
commanded to prepare for my dissolution. Lord if thou have decreed by these
means to free me from this world of pain and misery, be pleased to translate
me from hence to the joy of thee my Lord and Master. Mat. 25.23.
Give me (O my Father) a sight of mine imperfections: make me loath them, and
tremble at them, more then I do at these messengers of death. Wean me from the
love of sin by the consideration both of thy displeasure, and mine own
mortality. These spots appear like so many Eyes, which seem to stare me in the
face, and would affright me with horror: and all because I had not always a
consideration that thine eyes in every place do behold the evil, Pro. 15.3.
and the good. Blessed God give me a sight of my corruptions, Ps. 51.9.
and a detestation of them; and then turn thou thy face away from my sins, and
blot out all mine iniquities. Speak peace, and health unto my wounded soul,
which every minuit expects thy coming. Lord thou art a God who can not
abide to behold unrighteousness: look not therefore with thy wrathful eye
upon me who am all sin, and pollution; but upon thy Son, and his Sufferings.
Or if thou can not choose but look upon me, first cloth me with the
righteousness of that immaculate Lamb; so shall thou see me with love and
delight, and I shall-behold thee with unspeakable joy. Prepare me, Rev. 19.9.
O my God, that I may be a fit guest to be called and invited to the Supper of
the Lamb. Seal unto my soul the remission of mine offenses; and then make me
willingly to resign up my body to thine own disposing. Mat. 8.^.
Yet thou may speak the word (if so thou please) and thy servant may be
healed. Lu. 17.15
There was a Leper in the Gospel who fell down at thy feet, O Jesus, giving
thee thanks, with a loud voice glorifying thy name, because thou had healed
him. It is as easy for thee to restore me in like manner, as thou did that
Leper. When Ephraim saw his sickness, Hos. 5.13.
and went to the Assirian; and Judah saw his wound, and sent to King Jareb;
there was found no bealing, nor curing of the wounds: but those that come unto
thee shall find that thou art both able and willing to heal all those that
are broken in heart, Ps. 147.3.
and to give medicine to heal their sickness; for unto Israel thou did dest
proclaim thy self, The Lord that heals. Have mercy therefore upon me, O Lord,
for I am weak: O Lord heal me, Ex. 15.26
for my bones are vexed. Ps. 6.2.
Strengthen me now upon my bed of languishing: make thou all my bed in my
sickness. Ps. 41.3. Jer. 77.14
Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be saved; for
thou art my praise. Chapter 30.12
O let not my bruise be incurable, though my wound be grievous. Let me have one
to plead my cause, Holy One, thine only begotten Son; that he may bind me up,
and give me healing medicines. Thou art he who did promise Jacob to correct
him in measure, not to leave him altogether unpunished. Thou rebukest me for my
sin, Ps. 39.11.
and make my-beauty to consume away like as it were a moath fretting a
garment. These marks in my flesh do cause a trembling even in my spirit. Lord
grant that upon my soul be not found the mark of the beast, Rev. 13.17 Ps. 86
16.
but the mark of thy Son, that he may own me for his. O turn thou unto me,
and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto thy servant, and save thy
distressed supplicant. Show now some good token for good, thou Lord do help
me and comfort me. But if in thy secret purpose thou have decreed at any time,
O gather me unto my fathers; make me with joy and comfort to render mine
account unto thee the Lord of heaven and earth. Look not upon the sins and
offenses of my misled Life; but rather look upon my Redeemer's Death, Is. 35.5.
who was wounded for my transgressions; bruised for mine iniquities: the
chastisement of my peace was laid upon him: by his stripes therefore let me be
healed. In the midst of the street of thy throne, O God, and of either side of
the river of life there is a tree of life bearing twelve manner of fruits; Rev.
22.2^.
and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations. O my God let me
but come to taste of those fruits: let me but be shaded under the leaves of that
tree of life. Be merciful unto me, heal my soul, Ps. 41.4. Psalm. 103.1 V. 3.
for I have sinned against thee. Then shall my soul bless thee O my Lord: and
all that is within me shall praise thy holy name, who forgivest all mine
iniquities, and can h^ale my diseases. (...) Rer. 22.17 Genesis 3.8.
Into thine hands I command my spirit, for thou have redeemed me O Lord, thou
God of truth. The Spirit and the Bride say Come; therefore let me who now hear
it, say Come. Let me hear thy voice; O God, in the cool of the day; not in the
heat of thy displeasure. And thou, O my Jesus, who for such sinners were made a
sacrifice on the altar of the Cross; bow down thine ear as thou did upon the
tree, and hear, and sulfill the desires of thy wounded supplicant, Come O
Jesus, and embrace me in thine arms: hide me in thy wounded side from the wrath
of thy Father. In thee alone do I trust: to thee alone do I slay: succor me,
help me, save me, O Christ. The world I leave: to thee I come. At the door of
thy mercy do I knock, I call, I cry. Lord protect me: Jesus comfort me,
strengthen my Faith; and consi^^ my Hope. As my earthly body draws nearer to
the earth; so do thou draw my soul up nearer unto thee who art the father of
spirits. Heb. 12.9
O God make speed to save me. O Lord make have to help me. Finish soon these
days of sin, and then let me enter into thy celestial Paradise; and that for
his sake in whom alone thou art well pleased, even Jesus Christ my one^^
^^^atour, and Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.

