LIGHT Risen out of DARKNESS Now in these latter Days.

Showing the dark ways and Worships of the Ministry of Antichrist now in these
Apostated Times, which is perilous, as is foretold of often by the Holy Ghost
that spoke through Paul, and now is fulfilled in these latter days, 2 Timothy 3.

Thus says the Lord,

Arise Sion, and thresh with a sharp threshing Instrument, and shine, for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen, and is arising, and
Jerusalem shall be a burdensome stone to all Nations, now that Christ is unto
his People both the Light and the Glory thereof.

WHEREIN Something is written in Reply to a Book that was set forth by the dry
and night Vines in and about Beverley, who scornfully nicknameth the People of
God, in ^eviling and falsely accusing them, and calls them Quakers, in and
about Yorkshire. July, 1653.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the black spread Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1654.

To you who suffer for Righteousness, and walks in the light about Beverley,
and elsewhere, who love the Lord Jesus Christ.
Christian Friends,
AS you have received the Lord Jesus Christ, so walk in him, and let the love
of God be an Engagement upon your spirits to love the Lord Jesus with all your
hearts, and walk as children of the light, and of the day, not in darkness, but
in light, and let the pure light of God in you, which is the free gift of God
that shows darkness, and Infidelity, lead you and guide you, which the
Priests about your Beverley faith it does not, showing that they are ignorant
of Christ, and does mightily dishonor the Lord Jesus, that say they witness
that he or the Light of God which shows sin, and darkness, shows not
unbelief: But all you that know the Lord Jesus made manifest unto your souls,
and in the Divine discovery of his love, by the Divine unfoldings of the Divine
light, of his holy and blessed spirit, which is as the key of David, and does
unlock or unsold the Divine mysteries of the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus in the
souls of his Saints, which these dry Vines are ignorant of, you may witness
against them; therefore my beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, who are my
Epistles, written in my heart, not with paper and inck, which is but carnal and
mortal, and perishing, which wears and fades away, but you are written, not
with pen and ink, but by the Spirit of the living God, in the fleshly tables of
the heart, so that you may manifestly declare your selves to be the Epistles of
Christ, to be seen and read of all men, you that are in union and fellowship
with him, who are dispersed and scattered abroad, from the rudiments of the
world; but in the Vine of the Lords free love, therefore live in love one with
another, edifying one another in love, that so you may build up one another in
the most holy Faith, laboring in the Power and Strength of the Lord, and by the
spirit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that you, my hearts, that are as
Cedars of Lebanon, may labor by the Power of God in you, to lead up others as
you have been led by the Light of God in you, which leads into Christ, the
perfection and beauty of holiness, that you may be to the praise of the glory
of his Grace, who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light, to
testify against the dark Ministry of the world, as well any where else, where
it shall be made manifest unto you, as it is now in and about Beverley, and let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven, even the Father of lights, and the Father of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that whereas these your enemies that speak
evil of you, and say, a little time will bring it forth; that so by your Godly
conversations, and upright walkings you may glorify the Lord, and put to
silence the foolishness of ignorant men, and testify against blind guides,
false Prophets, Seducers, and Antichrists, and that you may be able to
comprehend with all Saints what is the height, depth, and length of the Love of
God, and to be comprehended into that which is Incomprehensible, dwelling in
the light where there is Immortality, that so you may be able to give a reason
of the hope that is in you, which is Christ the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. and
he that has this hope in him, purifyeth himself even as he is pure, 1 John
3.1.2. It is in the behalf of all the Godly dispersed ones, that suffer under
the name of Quakers, that I have written this, as well as my self; So
commending you to the Lord God of power, even the Father of lights, I remain a
friend and lover of all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity and truth.

Rich. Farneworth.
July. 1653.
An Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
I would not have set pen to paper, had I not seen the truth much defamed, by
those that stand in opposition against it, and seek to defame it, and strangle
it, by their fallen wisdom, and pride, and fleshly boastings, where envy is
hatched; so that the Dragon casts out floods of waters of revilings after the
woman, that brings forth the man-child; but the Eaath is made to help the
woman, and the child is caught up to Heaven with God, where it is preserved and
kept safe, as in a City of refuge, and wait but upon God in patience a while,
and thou will see great things, for the Lord is bringing to pass his act, his
strange act, that is Prophesied and foretold of, and the destruction and
downfall of Antichrists Kingdom, that the Kingdom of Jesus Christ may be
established in power, and shine forth in brightness, and the Lord leading forth
his People in Power, and Majesty, and going before his ancients gloriously, and
he will be their rereward, and the Kingdoms of the World shall be the Kingdoms
of the Lord, and of his Christ, the Beast makes war with the Lamb, but the Lamb
shall overcome, prevail, and get the victory: Read this little ensuing
Treatise, and give thy Christian attention in the reading, and take heed how
thou do pass thy Judgment; If thou have not a spirit of discerning, least
thou Judge false, and Judgment return into thine own besom, it may be that thou
may find something in it hard to be digested by thy carnal wisdom; take heed
of calling truth railing, for all deceit must be cursed, burned, and cut down
by the Sword of the Spirit, that so the pure seed may be raised up, the
blessing to inherit. Leave not till thou have read it over, and if thy mind
stand free, and thy Judgment clear, It will some deceits and deceivableness of
the man of sin more clearly and fully unto thee discover: So farewell in the
Lord, and the Lord give thee understanding, and lead thee into his marvelous
light, that thou may know the truth as it is in Jesus.

R F.

Light risen out of Darkness now in these latter days.
Which is the cause of such Persecution Therefore,
Thus says Jesus Christ, blessed are they that suffer for righ teousness sake,
for 'theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.10.11.12. and again says he,
blossed are you when men revile you, and perfecute you, and say all wanner of
evil against you, all manner of evil, not some but all, but says he, rejoice
and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward, for so perseruted they the
Prophets which were before you, and says he, the time will come that they
shall put you out of their Synagogues, and they that kill you will think that
they do God good service Ioh. 16.1.
AS it has been largely manifested in and about Beverley, by them of the
Priests party, when any was moved of the Lord to go speak in their Synagogue
against the deceits that were upheld by them, they haled them forth, and gave
them into the hands of the rude people who did use them most barbarously, and
had not the Lord been gracious unto them, they would even have swallowed them
up quick, but such was the rage of the Priests party in and about Beverley that
the Servants of the Lord suffered much persecution by them as it is well known,
but it is that the Scripture may be fulfilled, as David said, The wrath of man
shall praise thee, and the remainder of wrath thou will restrain, such is the
goodness of the Lord to his poor despised people now in these days of
persecution, for the persecutors are the Priests and their associates, they act
in the same state and condition as the Jewish high Priest, and Scribes and
Pharisees did to Jesus Christ, when he came in the flesh, to fulfill the Law,
and to put an end to the first Covenant, that he might establish a second, the
new Covenant upon better premises, but as it was then, so is it now, the
Jewish high Priests, and the fair-sayers did then persecute Christ and his
Apostles, and haled them out of their Synagogues, and bear them, and stoned
them, for witnessing forth the truth, as it is left upon record in these places
of Scripture. See Acts. 4, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. See verse. 15.16.17.18.19. Act.
6.9.10. to the end. Act. 7, 57. to the end, read Acts. 17. with certain other
places.

And that Christ is coming in spirit, to manifest his power and love, and to
gather his dispersed ones together that has been scattered by the proud
Priests in the cloudy and dark day, as in Ezekiel. 34. The Lord is now fulfilling
his promises in gathering them together, out of all Kindreds, Tongues and
Nations, that they may come to worship the Lord in his holy Mount, where the
Mountain of the Lords House is to be established, on the top of the Mountains,
above all humane wisdom and carnal reason, to worship the Lord in spirit and in
truth, in his Holy Temple at new Jerusalem, where the Tabernacle of God is, and
shall be with men of pure hearts, and the Na^ions that are saved shall walk in
the glorious light and liberty of the Sons of God, to serve him in a new and
living way, consecrated for us by his Son, redeeming us by his own blood,
purchasing to himself a peculiar people, to praise and glorify his great and
glorious Name, that he may rule in us by his own power, and set up the Kingdom
of his Son in our hearts, who is our peacemaker, breaking down the middle wall
of pertition bringing us nigh unto him by his blood, reconcileing us in one
body by the Cross slaying the enmity thereby, preaching peace to us by his
spirit, so that we through him have a free access by one spirit unto the
Father, and are made fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God, being built upon the foundations of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief corner Stone, and the chief builder in us and
through us, throwing down the first building of humane wisdom, and carnal
reason, building us up into union with himself, in the makings forth of his
love to us, through the unfoldings of the divine mystery of his love, which is
Christ in us the hope of glory, in whom all the building spiritually grows,
unto an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.14. to the end: being builded
together by the divine power of God, working in us, who makes our bodies
temples of the Holy Ghost, to sound forth his holy praise, he ruling in his
Temple, and dwelling in his habitation, even in our souls, where his delight
is, causing us to delight in him to do his will, in declaring and testifying
against all deceits, and deceivableness whatsoever: And now the Priests are
found the greatest deceivers, and upholders of the deceits, as their fruits
makes them manifest, and they labor every ways to destroy the work of God,
that he is working in his Saints; and they are the greatest persecuters of him
in his Saints, as it has been largely manifested by the Priests party in, and
about Beberley, in reviling, beating, and stoning the children of the Lord.

But the Lord will plead the cause of his own people, himself alone, and then
woe to the wicked, and all that acts in unrighteousness: For thus says the
Lord, Ah, I will ease me of mine enemies, and avenge me of mine adversaries,
And says he, Woe to them that offends one of these little ones that believe in
me, it were better that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and that they
were cast into the sea.

The occasion of this my writing, was upon the reading of a Book that was
written by the Priests in and about Beverley, by name, Joseph Kellat, John
Pomroy, Paul Glisson, etc.

1. Wherein is discovered the subtilty of the Serpent that lodges in them, and
a theevish spirit in them, stealing the words of the Saints to trade withal for
money, which is their Dianah, but are ignorant of the Saints life and practice,
as their fruits does make them manifest; for it is not unknown to many the
debths of their deceits, and how great sufferings there has been to the people
of God by them: Of the Priests, Confederates, Antichrist, and his upholders,
in, and about Beberley, which the woe is to, as it was pronounced to them in
that nature: in Matthew. 23.

2. Antichrist, the man of sin, is exalted in those dissembling Priests, who
are as the painted Harlot, and scarlet colored Whore, that is spoken of by
John in the Revelations, that deceive the Nations by their glorious notions,
and gielded pretenses, which is for the fire, the whorish nature in them, being
full of flatteries, having a golden Cup, full of abominations, and filthiness
of her fornications, which the Wrath and the Plagues is to.

3. These dissembling Priests, painted Sepulchers, are full of deadly poison,
and are not acquainted neither with Christ, nor his sufferings, who causes the
truth to suffer by them, as their actions do make manifest who lives in the old
corrupt nature, and has stolen the words of the Prophets and Apostles to trade
withal, and has glossed them over by their humane and serpentive wisdom,
which the vengeance and the wrath of God is to.

4. These dissembling, hypocritical Priests, whited walls, and painted
Sepulchers are exalted above the Cross of Christ, and sits in the seat of the
scornful, acting as in a Stage Play for money, and are climbed up high into
their notions, and notionary expressions by their fleshly wisdom, which is
earthly, carnal, sensual, and divelish, but never came in at the door; as says
Jesus Christ in John 10. And are ignorant of the first principle of Religion,
that knows not the power of God, to break down the power of darkness in them,
and so that is the cause of their falsifying the truth, and speaking evil of
that which they know not, being puffed up in pride, scorn, and derision, judging
the truth by their evil thoughts, and fleshly imaginations: Now as Iannes and
Iambres withstood Moses, so do these resist the truth, standing in opposition
against it by their carnal wisdom, and fleshly imaginations, and vain glory,
boasting and vaunting themselves in their own conceits, and stands upon their
own righteousness by their gathered up knowledge, in opposition to the Spirit of
truth, and in despite to the Spirit of grace, and wrests the Scriptures to
their own destruction, speaking their own Inventions and Imaginations, which
arise out of the bottomless pit of deceit, but the Lord is coming for to bring
down Babylon's buildings, all man's inventions, and imaginations, and to cast
them into the lake that burns; and all the Babylonish Merchants, will cry
out, Alas, alas; for that great City of Babylon, where they sold their wares,
and gilded stuff, and fine dainty dishes of novelties dressed and made fit by
the Cooks in their shops of brain, study, and humane inventions, which is
Cainish; to feed curious and lusty minds withal, lusting after knowledge, and
feeding upon the forbidden fruit; which is under the curse, and must be burnt
with fire; now in the day of the Lords power, where nothing shall stand but his
own pure being; for he alone will rule and reign in power amongst his chosen
ones in Sion, the perfection of beauty, and he alone will govern his people in
righteousness, and teach them all the knowledge of his truth, to know him in
the habitation of his holiness, that they may rejoice and triumph in his love.

By this we know that we love God, because we keep his Commandments; and it is
his love which constrains us, who first loved us, and gave himself for us:
And says he, If you love me, keep my Commandments; and I command you to love
one another with the same love that I loved you withal; but he that loves not,
knows not God, for God is love; and he that says he loves him, and keeps
not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.

And here you are that lives in lying, who say that we attempt to lay waste
Scriptures, Churches, Faith, Hope, etc.

The Scriptures we own to be true in themselves, as they were given forth from
the Spirit of truth, which ruled in them that spoke them forth; which Spirit I
witness, and their declaration I own, the life of it; herein you are found
false witnesses, liars, and false accusers, and are Antichrists, and Seducers,
showing forth the spirit of error; and Antichrist is head, and exalted in you,
who opposes himself against the truth.

But your dark m^nds I do deny, and against you I do testify; That you are the
men whom you write of, and that condition is your own; for you make no other
use of the Scriptures, but to trade withal, and to give your Antichristian
Applications and Constructions of them, which the plagues of God is due to;
For, says Jesus Christ, I testify, that he that adds to the Book of this
Prophecy, I will add to him all the plagues that are written in the Book, Rev.
22.

And whereas you lie; and say, That we a people whom the Devil in you
scornfully reproacheth, and calls Quakers, which is your envy; which name I
suffer under, by such as you are, who are apostated from the truth, and the
living word which was in the beginning; which word is quick and powerful, and
sharper then any two edged sword; and is like a fire, and a hammer, Heb. 4.12.
Jer. 23.29, 30.

And though the Devil in you be suffered to cast upon us names of reproach; It
is but that the Scriptures may be fulfilled in calling us Quakers, or what you
can invent to make us odious in the sight of the world, which name I do disown;
for I know none but two in all the Scriptures, flesh, and spirit; the seed of
the Serpent, and the seed of God; which shall bruise the Serpent's head with
his internal rod, by the living power of the Eternal Jehovah, Jah.

But the seed of the Serpent is head in you who lives in lies; and Christ you
do by your proud lustful natures kill, and crucify; and his Doctrine daily by
your earthly wisdom more and more despise; and so you keep the seed of God in
bondage by your divelish, subtle, serpentive policies, and would not that it
should come forth to live, and to arise; and faith you do not know, who are so
swift such lies to report; and the living truth for to relieve you are
unwilling, and both slack, and slow; and bears the mark of the Beast in your
right hand, and in your foreheads; and it is you that do attempt to lay waste
Scriptures in all things, but to traffic withal; and knows no word, but bare
letter, and diabolical subtilty, humane invention, which you do live in, and
observes the Devils work for to commit sin, which is the fruits of death, and
so the Word and Gospel of God is his from all such vulterous eyes; And venomous
beasts as you are, who knows not the strait path that leads to life, nor the
wisdom which is hid, which Job speaks of in Chap. 28. which wisdom is not from
beneath, neither is it earthly and carnal, as yours is: for the wisdom of God
is not to be bought and sold, neither for rubies, pealrs, silver, nor gold: but
yours which is earthly, and is but dross and dung, causing you to lie, so with
your dirty Greek and Latin tongue.

Saying, That we seek to attempt to lay waste all Scriptures, Priest.
Christ, Faith, Hope, etc.

Wherein you are exceeding hoodwinked, Reply.
and your eyes i^ stopped with dirty, miery stuff; your inventions and
imaginations, and your mouths is filled with lies, and your hearts with evil
thoughts, being possessed with Satan, and that is the cause you do the truth so
much despise.

For we own the Scriptures as they are in themselves to be a declaration of the
truth; as John speaks in his first Epistle, and the first Chapter, at the third
verse, etc. where he says to them which were enlightened by the light of God
in them, which you show your selves to be ignorant of, and filled with
subtilty, craftiness, and deceit, and knows not that which John speaks of in
that place, which I own, and witness fulfilled in my soul: Says he, That which
we have heard and seen, declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship
with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and the Son: This then is
the message that we have heard of him, which I witness according to that
Scripture, where Christ says, My sheep hear my voice, and they know me, and
follow me, and I give unto them Eternal life, John 10. Which Christ is in me
operating by his Spirit, and enlightening my understanding, opening blind eyes,
and unstoping deaf ears; so that I hear, and see, and know by experience what I
say: I do not know God by hearsay from others, but mine eyes has seen his
salvation; the new man, the new heart, and new eye; he that is in Christ, is a
new creature, old things are passed away, and all things are become new, which
you show your selves to be ignorant of, and are in the old nature, and in the
fall, under the curse and wrath of the Almighty, who lives in lies, which is of
the Devil, who is the Father of lies; and him you serve, and are in the same
state and condition that Christ spoke of in John 8.44.

And that Message that John speaks of in that first Epistle, and the first
Chapter, show your selves to be ignorant of, that lives in darkness; For God is
light, and in him is no darkness at all, but they that say they have fellowship
with him, and walk in darkness, do lie, and do not the truth, 1 John 1.5, 6.
And lying ing is the fruit of darkness, Ephesians. 4.15. And you are liars, and of
the devil.

And whereas Christopher Feak, John Simpson, George Cokain, Lawrance Wise, John
Pomroy, Paul Glissen, and Joseph Kellat, do not let to publish lies, it is that
all may take notice, that they are of their father the Devil, who was a liar,
and the father of it. For,

The Church of Christ we own, which Church is in God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Ioh. 8.44
1 These 1.1. which is made all of living stones, elect and precions, and
nourished by the milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3, 4, 5. which word endures for
ever, 1 Pet. 1.25. which word is near at hand, even in thy heart, which is the
word of faith which we preach, Romans 10.8. which faith we own, even that faith
which purifies the heart, and overcomes the carnal part, for whatsoever is
born of God, overcomes the world, and this is the victory that overcomes the
world, even your faith, which is Christ in us, and we in him, 1 John. 5.4. 2
Cor. 13 5. and who is he that overcomes the world, but he that believes that
Jesus is the Son of God, which Jesus we own, even he that saves his people from
their sins, and purifi^s their souls, in yiedling obedience to the commands of
the spirit, 1 Pet. 1.21.22. which Christ we witness, even he that came by water
and blood, and it is the spirit that bears record, because the spirit is
truth, and he that believes has the witness in himself; and has eternal life
abiding in him, 1 Ioh. 5.5, 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 12. herein we come to try the
sprits, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, by reason of
whom the way of truth shall be, and is evil spoken of, and here you are, and
that's your condition, who through covetousness and with ^ained words makes
Merchandise of poor souls, but you are found out, and your Judgment lingereth
not, and your damnation slumbereth not, 2 Pet. 2.1.2, 3, 4, etc. hereby know we
the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error, every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God, which we witness and confess, that
Jesus Christ is come in our flesh, as the Corinthians did witness, in 2 Cor.
4.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and so we establish the Scriptures, and witness the
fulfilling of them in our souls, for he that believes has set to his seal
that God is true, and he that believes is born of God, and he that believes
shall never dye, and he that believes does not commit sin, and he that
believes is justified from all ungodliness, and he that believes does not
respect persons, for he that respects persons commits sin, and he that
believes has eternal life abiding in him, this the Scriptures witness, and I
witness these Scriptures fulfilled, Acts. 13.39. Ioh. 7.37, and 6.2, and 11.26.
1 Pet. 1.6. Ioh. 3.18. 1 Ioh. 5.1. 1 Ioh. 5.10. 1 Ioh. 5, 4, 5:

But your dark minds I do deny, and your gilded notions and painted
expressions, and all your formal faith which outward, and your persecuting
Antichristians, which envies and hates as you do, your deeds testify against
you, witness what persecutions and suffering, William Deusberry, and Thomas
Stubs, had amongst you at Beverley in sore stripas, and buff^tings, and others
that were stoned and shamefully entreated, these are the fruits of your
Pharisaical Saints, for shame blush, and see what you are doing, ye painted
outsides, ye self-conceited Hypocrites and dissembleers, that persecute the
just and Innocent ones, and fill up the measure of your fathers Iniquity, Man.
23.
you are of the same ge^eration that stew the righteous blood, did ever the
Saints of God do any such thing, for shame blush ye Serpents, ye generation of
Vipers, ye seed of evil doers, repent, and forsake the evil of your doings, and
live not in lies and flatteries; for your Churches are the Synagogue of Satan
where persecution is upheld, I do deny and against your deceits I testify,
that you are enemies to Jesus Christ, where he is made manifest, as the Jewish
high Priests Scribes and Pharisees were, and you are children of wrath* and his
Servants ye are to whom ye do obey, as in Romans 6.16. and says Jesus Christ,
Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say, Luke 6.46. but
know you not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10.

And whereas you say* that If in any age the Devil has transformed himself
into an Angel of Light, Priests.
or his Apostles or Ministers have transformed themselves into the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, they have don so in this Apostatizing age in which we
live, etc.

It seems that your light that is in you is darkness, Answ.
that questions the truth of what you speak, and say If in any age, etc. Were
your eyes open, you might see your selves to be in the same state and condition
that you write of, and of the number of those false Apostles, stealing the
words of the true Apostles to trade withal, and are vainly puffed up, by your
fleshly minds, intruding into those things you have not seen, Col. 2.18. but
live by conceivings and Imaginations if's and may be's, and so feed on husks,
and outsides, not holding the head, from which all the body by joints and
bands, where nourishment comes in from the Divine appearance, and glorious
administration of the spirit of truth, being administered by the spirit, which
causes an Increase with the Increase of God, Col. 2.19. which you are ignorant
of, that are alive, and lives in the rudiments of the world, which are
perishing, Col. 2.20, 21, 22. which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will
worship, etc. Verse 23. and here you are, and out of the head where the life
is, and you are Apostated, and are out of the life of the truth, guided by your
own wills, and following the Imaginations of your own hearts, and are of the
number of those that the Apostle speaks of, in 2 Cor. 11.13.14. for he had a
free spirit, and was chargeable to no man, 2 Cor. 11.9. but in all things kept
himself for being burdensome, but you are out of that condition that are
chargeable and burdensome, and have not the same spir t that the Apostle had,
who had the Lord Jesus Christ revealed in him, and spoke by Divine Revelation,
Gal. 1. but you speak by humane invention, and brain study, and so lives and
acts in deceit, intruding by your inventions into those things you have not
seen, and so are contrary to the Apostle, both in that 2 Cor. 11.10.11. and
that of Gal. 1.11.12, and 15.16. but you are in your own Inventions, and are
Apostated out of the truth, that do not speak immediately from the Mouth of the
Lord, as the Apostles did, and so you preach your own flatteries and deceits;
but what is the chaff to the wheat says the Lord, or what is the form to the
power, you sifted chaff, or fine painted expressions is for the fire, and all
your formings and imaginations must be burnt you speak your own words, and not
the Words of the Lord, and he is against you, Ier. 23.29, 30, 31, 32. and you
that bring another Doctrine then to know the power and light, and life within,
as the Apostle did, you are to be held accursed, and you are under the curse,
Gal. 1.8, 9, 10.

And whereas you say, Quest.
you will proceed to enquire into that doctrine, which says, The light in you
held forth by those you in scorn and derision call Quakers, and which light
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, is Christ.

You make enquiry, and say, What then is become of the Person of the Mediator?
in 1 Timothy Chap. 2. ver. 5. and Heb. 7.24. etc.

Were you but acquainted with the life of the Scriptures, Reply.
which is Christ in us the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. whom the Apostle which was
a Gospel-Minister did preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom to know the Mediator within him, Christ the power of God unto
salvation, and he did labor mightily by the power of God the Mediatourship
Christ revealed in him, that he might present every man perfect in Christ
Jesus, Col. 1.28, 29. That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together
in love, which love is Christ, the divine power of righteousness, who is the
Mediator of the New Covenant, to bring the soul into the riches of the full
assurance of understanding to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of
the Father, and of Christ, Col. 2.2, 3. Which had you tead on in that 1 Timothy
2.5. in the verse following, it would have answered you in that thing. Herein
you show your ignorance in the things of God, and are blind and cannot see; and
you show that you are ignorant of the same Ministry that the Apostle held
forth, teaching them-to know Christ in them, Col. 1.27. 2 Cor. 13.5. and the
life in them. And he was the Minister of the Gospel, and had the power in him,
and labored by that power in him, his Ministry was not of man, but of God, as
he did certify to the Brethren, Gal. 1.11, 12. And his Exhortation was not of
man, but of God, and he was bold in God, to speak unto them the Gospel or power
of God, Christ in him, which you here show your selves to be ignorant of, that
asks, what is become of Christ? have you lost him, or is not the lust head in
you, and the Prince of the power of the air head in you, and so your doctrine
is of deceit, and the Gospel is hid from you, 2 Cor 4.1.2.3, 4, 5. And so you
are full of uncleanness and of guil, and contrary to the Apostle in that 1
These. 2.3. who was allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel: not as to
please men, as you do, but he did please God, who tries the heart; and he
neither used flattering words, nor covetousness, as you do, that are ignorant
of this spiritual Gospel, he took God to witness it; 1 These. 2.4 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. See how ignorant you are of these things, ye blind guides, that knows not
that the first Adam was made a living Soul, and the second a quickening Spirit,
and is Lord from Heaven, and that Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, Heb. 13.8. And had you read on in Heb. 7.24, 25. would have told you that
he is able to save to the utmost all that come unto God by him, who ever lives
to make intercession for them, and he is the way, the truth, and the life, and
no man can come to the Father but by him: Herein you show your ignorance in the
life of the Scriptures, that are ignorant of the letter which is without life;
as said Jesus to the Jews, and self conceited hypocrites, Such as you are,
search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have* Eternal life, says he;
and so do you: but says he, they do but testify of me, says Christ. I am the
life, and ye will not come to me that ye may have life, John 5.39, 40. And so
you l ve in the shadow of things, wanting the substance, and are blind and
cannot see; therefore woe to you, ye blind guids, who follow the imaginations
and deceits of your own hearts, for Christ is yet a mystery unto you, and the
Med atour you know not.

For we are come to Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, and to the spirits
of just men mads perfect, the general Assembly of the Church of the firstborn
written in Heaven, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.22,
23, 24. Herein you are exceeding carnal, and the natural man knows not the
things of God, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

And whereas you say, Priest.
Does not the Scripture speak to Saints, not every man, when he says Christ in
you the hope of glory, etc. Col. 1.27.

Herein you would have all to take notice of your ignorance, Reply.
for the next verse will contradict you, and so in all you have said yet, the
very letter of the Scripture will let you see your blindness; Well may you be
ignorant of the life, when you are ignorant of the letter, for they that spoke
forth the Scriptures, they passed from death to life, and the in fellowship
(...) with the Father, and the Son, and he that has the Son, has life, 1 John
but he that has not the Son manifested in him, has not life, but is in death.

You plainly make it appear here that you are in the letter without life, and
the letter kills, but the spirit gives life; and you, never passed from
death to life, but are yet in death and sin; for to be carnally minded is
death, and the wages of sin is death, and he that commits sin, is the servant
of sin, and lying is of the devil, and an abomination to the Lord: And here you
lie, ye proud Priests, that say the Apostle did not say to every man, That
Christ, or the light was in them; for says he, in ver. 28. Christ in you, whom
we preach, he did not only preach Christ in them the hope of glory, but he
says, we preach, that is, all the Ministers of the Spirit, and we preach
Christ in you the mystery that is to be unfolded in you to every man, warning
every man, and teaching every man, Col. 1.28. Herein you err not knowing the
Scriptures; and the Apostle says to the Romans, That as well as to them God
has given to every man a measure of grace, Romans 12.31. And none shall be
condemned for that which they know not, but for that which they know, and do
not obey; who says, Obey my voice, for obedience is better then sacrifice. And
Christ says, That he is the light of the world, and enlightens every man that
comes into the world, John 1.9. And they that follow him shall have the light
of life, John. 8.12. Herein you show that you are ignorant of this l ght, and
so are in darkness, and without God in the world, living by conceivings and
imaginations; and you that are ignorant of the light, are ignorant of Christ,
and preaches death, the letter without the spirit, and your Min stry is for for
condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. and you are ignorant both of the light, life, and
power; but as you would comprehend it: by your carnal reason, but this cannot
be comprehended; the light shines in darkness, but darkness comprehends it not,
John 1.5.

And whereas you say, That Paul spoke to none but Saints, Priest.
in that 2 Cor. 5.26, 27. etc.

I looked, ply.
and could not find so many verses in that Chapter, for it has but 21 verses;
but notwithstanding I knew that Scripture, the life of it, if I had never seen
letter; but as you say, he spoke to Saints, when he says we know no man after
the flesh, and though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know
we him so no more; but your knowledge stands in the flesh, the lust, and the
fall, and here you steal the Apostles words to apply to your selves, and that
is the Serpent in you; go and make restitution, as Zacheus did, and let him
that stole steal no more, Ephesians. 4 28. And you are discovered, you that lives
by theft, and steals the words of your neighbors to trade withal; but the Lord
is against you, and all such as you are, Jer. 23.30. You are of those thieves
that Christ speaks of in John 10. That climbs up another way, and c mes not in
by the door: And that makes you to speak you know not what. See who the Apostle
spoke to in that 2 Cor. 5.10. he says there, That all shall appear, and every
man give account, that he may receive according to the deeds done in the flesh:
Did he but speak but only to Saints, when he says all, and every man. See whom
he spoke to, in ver. 14.15. and see if you be not exceeding blind: Well may you
be ignorant of the life and power, that are ignoront of the lett^r, which is
death; and so you living in darkness are ignorant of the l^ght, and now you are
discovered to be ignoront of the same spirit that spoke forth the Scriptures,
and so shows forth the spirit of error, and you are in the flesh, and know not
God, who is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29. and like a refiners fire, Mal, 3.2,
3. Your God it imagination, and the Lord God Almighty who made Heaven and
Earth, and is the Father of light, him you know not, that would limit him by
your carnal minds, but the carnal mind is death, and an enemy to the Cross of
Christ, Romans 8.6. and Phil. 3.18, 19. So are you enemies both to God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ; and know you not, ye blind, that the Grace
of God which brings salvation, has appeared unto all men, Tit. 2.11, 12. But
is turned by you, and such as you are into wantonness, who profess God in words
as you do, but in works deny him, Tit. 1.16. who lives in form without either
life or power, having a form of Godliness, denying the power thereof: but your
folly will appear daily more and more, 2 Timothy 3. And that light is your
Condemnation.

But though the Apostle did speak his experience^ in the things of God, he
spoke what he knew made manifest unto him by experience through the divine
operation of the holy Spirit: But you live in the flesh and are ignorant of the
light of God, that he did exhort others to be mindful of, which light did lead
t^em out of darkness, and they were all Children of the light, and of the day,
who were obedient to it; for their souls were purified in yiedling obedience to
the Commands of the Spirit: as in 1 Pet. 1.22. And by the word of life, they
were sanctified, washed, and cleansed, and justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of the Lord; and they that are now guided by the
Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, 1 Cor. 6.11. Romans 8.14. Which you show your
selves to be none of.

But you are ignorant of the first Principle of Religion, that makes a scorn of
the light, and show your selves to be children of darkness, having your
understanding darkened, and live in pride, scorn, and subtilty, and turns the
grace of God into wantonness, children of disobedience, which the wrath of God
is to. The wrath of God is to be revealed in flames of fire upon all the
children of disobedience, as you are, who disobey the truth, and know not the
light, but are in darkness, and walk in darkness; For darkness has blinded
your eyes who stand in opposition to the Spirit of truth, and disobeyeth the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1.8. Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, when he shall be glorified in his Saints; which glorification you
are ignorant of, 2 These. 1.9, 10. And you are so far from being new creatures,
that you are alive in unrighteousness, and live in the old corrupt nature, not
knowing them that are born again, but have your witness without you; A Chapter,
or a verse of the Saints Declaration, not knowing the power of Christ within,
who is our sanctification; who of God is made unto us, wisdom, sanctification,
and redemption: and so our glorying is in the Lord, as theirs was who were made
new creatures, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.

But you say, If any man contend to destroy your faith, Priest.
and slight the Person of your glorified Savior; for some of them, you say,
Say, Christ without will do you no good; and you heap the Scriptures together
to talk of, but know neither Jesus, nor his glorification, etc.

Your faith is corrupt, Reply.
that is outward and carnal, and is for destruction; Let me tell you, That
Christ you are ignorant of, and his glorification, and know nothing of the
offering that is spoken of in that Heb. 10. For they that spoke it forth, were
sanctified souls, that had followed the leadings of the Lamb: which you
persecute, And are as those were that is spoken of in Heb. 10.11. Priests that
stand daily offering that which will never take away sin: even your own
inventions; and you are of the number of those Priests, in Heb. 7.27. offering
up daily your own inventions, and all your prayers and sacrifices that you
offer up in your corrupt nature, is an abomination to the Lord, and you do not
abide in the Doctrine of Christ, John 2.9. but are Seducers, and Antichrists:
And believers are forbiden to receive your brain study, and diabolical subtilty
into their hearts; but to beware of you, and such as you are, that teach for
doctrine: traditions of men, and steals the words of others to trade withal,
whited walls, and painted sepulchers, says the Apostle to the Ephesians; Let
no man deceive you with vain words, such as you are that live by vain
imaginations, lest they be partakers of the evil; For because of these things
the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. And
believers are forbidden to receive such as you into their houses, who deny
sanctification by Christ in them, which was the Apotles Prayer and Doctrine,
who said, And I pray God sanctify you throughout; and he that abides in the
doctrine of Christ, has fellowship with the Father, and the Son, but he that
abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God; but his own imaginations,
and inventions, gilded notions, and glorious expressions, which are but aerie,
and to feed aerie minds withal; which doctrine is under the curse, and is not
to be received, but to be holden a coursed; and the curse is upon both you, and
your doctrine, and the vengeance of God hang^ over you for your deceivableness,
that run, but the Lord never sent you, and you do not profit the people at all,
and both you and your blessings are accursed, and your seed is corrupt, the
seed of the Serpent in you, as theirs was that Malichi was sent to, Mal. 2.1.2.
to the 10 your mind is carnal, and your Ministry is carnal, and corrupt, and
you are ignorant of Christ the power of God unto salvation, and you trample the
blood of Christ underfoot, the blood of the covenant that speaks better
things then that of Abel, and knows nothing of eating that flesh and drinking
that blood that is spoken of in Ioh. 6.53.54.55, etc. no more then the Jews
did, and your faith that is outward is corrupt, and does not purify, but is
corrupt and is unprofitable, and not l^ke the precious faith of those that are
made to partake of the Divine nature, Christ in us, which faith is tried, and
makes us that we are neither barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.3. to 9.

And as our faith stands in the Divine Power of God, so yours stands in the
letter which is carnal, and the bread which you break is carnal, and you are
ignorant of the glorification that is spoken of in Joh. 17.10. and of that
bread which is the Body of Christ, for the bread which we break is the Body of
Christ, and the Cup which we drink is the Blood of Christ, and our union is
with him in the Vine, Ioh. 15.1 Cor. 10.15.16.17. and by one spirit are we
baptized into one body, and are made to drink into one sp rit as the Saints
were, 1 Cor. 12.13. where there is but one faith, one Lord, one Baptism, one
God and Father of us all, Ephesians. 4.4.5. those spiritual Ordinances, and that
spiritual Body, Supper, and Administrations, and that spiritual Sabath* of
which Christ is Lord, and that spiritual Worship that is in that one spirit,
Ioh. 4.23.24. and all the Offices in every Church member, and spiritual Order,
in that spiritual Church, which is made all of living Stones, elect and
precious, where Christ is exalted in his Kingly Office, do we own, set up and
honor, and herein you show forth your lies and flatteries, subtilties and
deceits and you live in deceit and disorder to the spirit of truth, having the
form, but wants the powet and all your fine notionary expressions, and gilded
pretenses is for the fire: and so we commend our selves to the Lord Jehovah,
who is both the heart searcher and tryar, even the Lord our righteousness.

But your traditions, customs, and rudiments and inventions which is after the
will of man, and not after God, we do deny, and against them all testify, that
you are but as sounding brass, and t^nkling Cymbals, without either life or
power, and that's the reason why you do so bite and devour, and are ye not
carnal, and knows not the things of the spirit of God, which is spiritually to
be discerned, 1 Cor. 13. and 2.12.13, 14. herein you are carnal, and shows the
spirit of error.

Further, Quest.
say they, This light before mentioned is pure.

Your question there i^, Priest.
How does vain man justify that which God does condemn, And you say, That some
would persuade you that nature is not corrupt, etc.

H^re you show that your minds are vain, Reply.
and your hearts are corrupt, and that light is your condemnation, which stands
out of all your comprehensions, for light shines in darkness; but darkness
comprehends it not, Ioh. 1. and that will show your corrup^ions and your evil
deceitful hearts, and let you see the vanity of your minds and your evil
persuasions, that arise hour of your evil hearts, from whence your fallen wisdom,
which is earthly carnal and devilish arises, which is out of covenant with
God, and stands in enmity and opposition to the Divine Light, and you are not
guided by it; But seeks to comprehend it, by carnal reason, and that is your
Imagination, for nature is altogether corrupt, and the Light is pure, standing
out of all corruptions, and cannot be comprehended by carnal reason and corrupt
Invention of man, but does all unrighteousness condemn, and that is your
condemnation, that light is come, and you stand up in your reason against it;
But Light shines in darkness, and darkness cannot comprehend it, and that is
your condemnation, that you do oppose the Light, and so you live in darkness,
following the Imagination, of your corrupt hearts, to to the dishonor of the
Lord Jesus, the Soul Savior of all those that do believe in him, but you show
that you are full of unbelief and fleshly reason, and knows not that light
which purifieth, nor that word which cutteth down all the loftiness of men of
corrupt hearts, where it is made manifest, for the pure Light to shine forth in
brightness, and so that Prophecy is fulfilled in them that finds the
opperation of the word of life arising through to sanctify and purify, which
I bear testimony to, through death, says the Holy Ghost, Arise, and shine, for
thy light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, and so wisdom
is justifi d of her children, but the Light does condemn all that is unjust,
and justifies all those that do believe from all ungodliness, which you do show
your selves to be ignorant of, and live in corruption and in darkness,
committing spiritual wickedness.

Wherefore say you, Priests.
As the Disciples were cleansed by the Word of the Gospel, which Christ had
spoken to them, Ioh. 15.3. so we conclude that the unbeleeving are blind and
impure in their Conscience, Titus 1.15. which concludes directly, that the
Light of or in conscience before faith is not pure.

The word that cleanses you know nothing of, Reply.
that are ignorant of the Light which leads to the word, which word is a
Sword, cutting through the ground of Imaginations which you live in, and the
Word of God is as a fire in the bones, which Word does both sanctify and
purify; who knows the Word, knows the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
you are ignorant of, and of the mystery of Faith, that is held in a pure
conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9. for they only have Immortality who dwell in the light,
and in the says which is pure, and purifieth the heart and works out the
carnal part, but you show that your life is out of the pure faith, and so in
your dark Imaginations, and you are both carnal, sensual, and d^vilish that
live altogether by your own Imaginations, and in Laciviousness, lust and
excess, and in the uncleanness and filth of the flesh, and show that you never
knew the word of Life, that washes, cleanses, justifies, and sanctifies,
which you are ignorant of, that live in sin and uncleanness, and so your
Ministry is for the fire, for it is death, and seeds but the carnal minds, and
keeps that alive which must dye, for every man's works shall be tried so as by
fire, and all your sifted chaff, and high notions is for condemnation, for our
God is a consuming fire, and of purer eyes then to behold Iniquity, 1 Cor.
3.13.14.15. Heb. 12.27.28. and all that are proud, and all that do wickedly
shall be as stubble, and are for the fire, Mal. 4.1. and there will you and
your pride be with all your high notions of fleshly wisdom confounded and
tried for the fire; Wherefore we having received a Kingdom that cannot be
shaken, we have grace whereby we may serve God acceptable, both with reverence
and godly fear, and so dwell in the fire, to praise and glorify our God for
ever, Heb. 12.28, 29.

Moreover, Quest.
They affirm that this light discovers every evil in man, as it arises in
the heart.

We answer, Priest.
That the light which lighteneth every man that comes into the world,
discovers not the greatest evil, which is unbelief, but only those things
which are against the Moral Law, as pride, covetousness, oppression, etc. which
these cry out against, but never against unbelief, which is the condemning sin,
and does bind the guilt of all transgressions on the back of a sinner, etc.

1. Herein you show that you were never yet sent of Christ, Reply.
but are in darkness, and knows him not, that are ignorant of the light, that
enlightens every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. John 8.2. Here you
are ignorant of Christ, and live altogether in unbelief, and also in all
unrighteousness, which is sin, 1 John, and pride, covetousness, and oppression;
For sin is the transgression of the Law: and you are in the transgression, and
know not this light, which is Christ the hope of glory; for he that abides in
him sins not, he that sins has not seen him, neither known him: He that
is born of God, and dwells in the light, sins not, he that sins, is in
darkness, and of the Devil, and lives in unbelief, which is the ground of all
evil: and does both distrust, and also dishonor the Lord, and herein the
children of God, and the children of the Devil, as you are, is made manifest, 1
John 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And you are in the fl sh, and under condemnation, Romans
8.1, 2. And dare not trust God, that study what to eat, and what to drink, and
what to speak, contrary to the doctrine of Christ; as in these Scriptures, Luke
12.22, 23. to the 38. verse. 11, 12. and Matthew. 6.24, 25. to the end, read these
Scriptures, and you may see that you are Heathens, and unbelievers, and do
distrust and dishonor God, and you live in darkness, and covetousness, the
ground and root of all evil.

2. And herein you would have all to take notice, in whom light is manifested
that you never knew any thing of God, that say, Christ, or the true light does
not show unbelief: Herein you show your selves open enemies to Jesus Christ,
and are ignorant of the first principle of religion; For all that have the
light of God born up into their understandings will testify against you, and
the Lord will be a swift witness against you, Mal. 3.5, 6, 7. And the Apostles
will witness against you in their D^clarations, that are left upon record, that
all may take notice of your blindness, and ignorance, and despite to the
Spirit of grace.

3. Herein you show your selves to be ignorant of the true light, which is
Christ, and enemies to him; and that you are strangers and aliens to the
covenant of promise, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. And that the
Prince of the power of the air rules in you, and the Son of perdition is
exalted in you, and your doctrine is of deceit, and of craftiness, and the
Gospel is hid from you, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. And as says Jesus Christ, so say I, For
he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one, and he is
not ashamed to call them brethren, Heb. 2.11. But such as you are he does deny,
and against you, and your dark Ministry, I do testify, that it is of
Antichrist, and not of Christ; who live in darkness, and know not God, and that
is your ignorance and sottishness; we are of the light, and of the day, Ephesians.
5.13. And are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, and witness
the life of the Scriptures, Ephesians. 5.30. And I witness the washings and
cleansings with the water of the word, as they did that spoke forth the
Scriptures, which you show your selves to be ignorant of, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
Therefore, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent of the world, that the wisdom of the
world may appear to be foolishness, as it is said, 1 Cor. 1.25, 26, 27 28. and
have revealed them to us by thy Spirit, that thou may have the praise, 1
Cor. 2.9, 10. Behold what manner of love is this, that the Father has bestowed
on us, that we should be c^lled the Sons of God, therefore the world knows us
not, because he knew him not, 1 John 3.1.

4. You show that you know him not, but are in lying, and deceit, and
flatteries, walking in deceit, and craftiness, showing forth your subtilties,
that stands in opposition against the light, and so dishonors the Lord
Christ; and says, that he knows not all things, in saying that he does not
discover unbelief, and for that end came he into the world, to judge and
condemn all unbelief, and unbelievers; For he that believes not, is condemned
already, John 3.18. And says, For judgment am I come into the world, that
they that see not might see into the knowledge of the divine mystery; and that
they which see by their own conceits and imaginations, as you do, might be made
blind, to see nothing of them.

For he is the true light, and none sees any divine truth but in him, for he is
the divine light, and in him is no darkness at all; And hereby know we that we
dwell in him, and he in us, who is both divine light, and divine good, and we
know it because he has given us of his spirit, 1 John 4.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

Herein you are found liars, Seducers, and Antichrists, that say we believe not
in him, for that is your condition, that know him not that is come a light into
the world, that whosoever believes in him may not abide in darkness; which
light and life I witness, with all that do believe in the Lord Jesus, the light
of the world, but you that know not this true light, that enlighteneth every
man to guide you there is you condemnation, and your Ministry is for
condemnation; for he that loves the light, and is guided by it, that shows him
salvat o^, but he that walks contrary to the light, as you do, is in darkness
and abides in death, and are for condemnation, Ioh. 3.19, 20, 21.

You do mightily dishonor the Lord, that say this light does not show all
darkness and unbelief; Herein you err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of truth: The Apostle said, That God who commanded light to shine out of
darkness, had shined in their hearts; which I bare testimony to through death,
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the f^ce of Jesus,
and that was the doctrine that he preached, who had the Heavenly treasure in an
Earthen vessel, which you are ignorant of, 2 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7.

And so you are found to be enemies to Jesus Christ and strangers to the true l
ght; your ignorance and folly is now made manifest.

First. Christ who is the true light that enlighteneth every man that comes
into the world, Ioh. 1.9. does altogether condemn unbelief, and that is your
condemnation, for we which have the light of life, and witness against you,
that say this light does not discover unbelief, for it has condemned it, and
sets us free from it, who are redeemed to God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ by it, which you are ignorant of, and so are ignorant of the life of the
Scriptures, as in Ioh. 19. and 8.12. and 3.19, 20, 21. Act. 13.47. where Christ
is the Covenant of his people, as the Lord has promised by his Servant the
Prophet, who Prophesying of Christ, Says the Lord there, I will give thee for
a light of the people, to enlighten the Gentiles which were unbeleevers, that
thou may be the glory of my People Israel: herein you mightily do dishonor
the Lord Jesus Christ, but they are not Israel that are after the flesh, as you
are that live in the fall, and in darkness, and in enmity to God; but they are
Israel that are after the spirit, and walk in the light, bringing forth fruits
to the Praise and Glory of God, and there is your condemnation, the light which
lighteneth every man that comes into the world, and your ministry is darkness,
and not light, of Antichrist, and not of Christ, and you are men-pleasers,
time-servers, seducers, blind guides, Hypocrites and dissemblers, and shows
your envy and subtilty, being of the world, and in darkness, and guided by the
spirit of error; we are of God, he that is of God hears us, and walks in
the light which guides and leads up to the Father of Lights; he that is not
of God, hears us not, hereby know we the spirit of truth and the spirit of
error, by the touchstone and tryer and light of life. 1 Ioh. 4. which is Christ
revealed in us, as the Apostle did witness, Gal. 1. which you are ignorant of,
and live in form without either light, life or power, and are servants of sin,
and your wages are death, and destruction; tribulation and anguish: Repent and
blush for shame, woe and misery is your portion, the mouth of the Lord of H sts
has spoken it, who is the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, the Father of
Lights, even the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is God
blessed for ever.

Yet further they conclude that power accompanies that light to destroy every
evil, Quest.
as it appears in them that yield themselves unto it, and watch that their vain
minds draw them not forth from abiding in the pure light of Christ, etc.

It were a small thing, Oh, all ye that pass by, Priests.
If we and our means should sleep in the dust in everlasting silence and
contempt; but will not the stones cry out, if we hold our peace, whilst these
deceits seem to lay all upon Christ etc.

Here you show your selves to be of the number of Reprobates, Reply.
and know not Christ, as in that 2 Cor. 13.5. who yet never knew any thing of
Christ, the Divine Light, and the Divine Power, and are of those that Christ
speaks of, he came to his own, and his own received him not; such as made great
shows, and fair pretenses of him as you do, as the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees
did, he came, that is, Jesus Christ unto them, and they received him not, that
had made so much profession of him, as you have done; but were enemies to him
then as you are now, but as many then as received him, to them he gave power to
become the Sons of God, which were born not of flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God, Ioh. 1.10.11.12.13. but you are of the will of man, and of the
flesh, and not after God, and are ignorant both of the light, life and power,
and you are of that which is corruptible, and both your names and memory shall
perish, and rot in the dust, for the name and memorial of the wicked shall rot
and utterly perish, and come to naught, the old man, the old name, and that
must dye, and you are in the old nature which is corrupt, which shall rot and
per^sh, but the new man, the new name, and of the Divine nature, which is the
Gift of God, shall live and endure for ever, and every living-stone that is
elected, and enlightened, may cry out against you, that you are no Ministers of
Christ, but of Antichrist, and are in the old birth, and of the wicked one, and
must come to destruction, who are led by Antichrist, and your own corrupt
wills, and know nothing neither of watching, nor yiedling up to the light, as
those do who are enlightened by it, and guided by it, who are the Sons of God,
Romans 8.14. and are acquainted both with watchings and fastings, as the Saints
were, who do abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and are guided by the spirit of
truth, knows that there is need of watching and yiedling up to Christ, which
you show your selves to be ignorant of, that live in pride, and vain glory, and
fleshly boasting, and know not Christ calls to his, saying, Watch and pray lest
ye enter into Temptation, here must be either yiedling to Christ, or a standing
in opposition on against him, and walking in carelessness as you do, but we have
not so learned Christ, Ephesians. 4.20. but are taught to watch and pray, and not
to enter into the temptation or the evil, Mat. 26.41. and says he, what I say
unto you I say unto all men, Watch; but you are proud boasters, as in 2 Timothy 3.
and know not the Doctrine of Christ, nor the practice of the Saints: David, he
watched, and his Soul waited on the Lord, and in his Word did he hope, and so
do all the Seed of David now, that which is the immortal Word, which lives and
endures for ever, and David said, My Soul waits for the Lord, here was a
true waiter, and the same seed does so now, he waited more then they that watch
for the morning, Psalm. 130.5.6. this was David's condition, who was the Servant
of the Lord, which you show your selves to be none of, and you would have all
to take not ce of it, and of your ignorance of the practice of the Saints and
Servants of the Lord, See Heb. 2.1. he stood upon his watch, which ye neglect
who live in scorn, sitting in the seat of the scornful; but the Lord sits in
Heaven, and laugheth you to scorn, ye scorners how long will you live in
scorning? and are so blind that you are not acquainted with waiting nor
watching, which were and is the practice of the Saints which the Scriptures do
witness, and I bear Testimony to the life of the Scriptures, for watching and
waiting upon the Lord, see these Scriptures; and you that do deny the life of
the Scriptures, I do deny, and herein you show forth the spirit of error: The
Apostle who had the spirit of truth did teach the people as he was taught of
God, and did exhort them to stand steadfast upon their Watch, 1 Cor. 16.13. the
true minister of Christ did exhort the Corinthia^s to watch, and to quit
themselves like men, that they might be strong in the Lord, and do all their
works in love, that they might addict themselves to the ministry of the Saints,
1 Cor. 16.14.15. which you show your selves enemies to; and the Thessalonians
who were children of the day, and taught of God, he did exhort to watchings,
and to put on the Bre^t plate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of
Salvation, for God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain Salvation by
Jesus Christ, which we do own, and witness their practice which spoke forth the
Scriptures, 1 These. 5.5.6.7.8.9.10. and the blessing is to them that watch,
Revel. 16.15. Herein you show your selves to be no watchmen, but blind guides;
for the Ministers of Jesus Christ were to watch for souls, as they that were to
give an account to God, Heb. 13.17. And so you make good that saying of the
Prophet, and fulfill that Scripture, His watchmen are all blind; such as you
are, that act in the same condition that the false Prophets did, looking for
your gain from your quarter, Isai. 56.10, 11. Woe to you ye blind guides, for it
is Christ that works in us both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure,
Philip. 2.12, 13. And our sufficiency is of him, 2 Cor. 3.5.

And for your saying that we hold free will, that is your imagination, but God
will scatter all the proud in their imaginations. It is the will of God which
is our sanctification, which you show your selves to be ignorant of, and so
follow your corrupt wills freely; without watching over that which corrupts;
and so give up your selves to the power of darkness, to commit sin with
greediness; and here you have showed your folly, and that you neither know the
light, nor the power of truth, but are in darkness: We to you ye blind guides,
who are for wrath and condemnation, and the wicked and all that forget God,
shall be turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17. And says Christ, Depart ye that be
workers of iniquity, I know you not. And Go ye cursed into hell, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25. And take the unprofitable servant, and
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness, where shall be
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth: And now you are found
unprofitable, which ran, but the Lord never sent you; howl and weep, for woe and
misery is your portion, and the portion of all such as you are.

But if your power accompany the light, Priests.
what shall we think of Paul, who found the Law of his members warring, and
leading him captive against his will, etc.

You show that you neither know any thing of Paul's condition, nor of the law
of the inward man; for the Law has power over thoughts, and all the thoughts
of the wise are vain, and so are you vain that would find out the Secrets of
the Lord by your vain thoughts; but none knows them but those that fear the
Lord, which is a departing out of iniquity, and out of vain and evil thoughts,
which you live in, and so you are ignorant of the Apostles experience, that
would be finding it out by thought, which is vain; and so your life that you
live by thought is vain; for the just he lives by faith, which is the evidence
of things unseen, which you show your selves to be ignorant of; The Apostle he
spoke forth his experiences, as he passed through them from death to life, and
as he was made free by the Body of Christ, and said, I thank God, who has
given me victory through Jesus: for the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus made him free from the Law of sin and death, and he was made more then a
Conqueror, and was crucified to the world, and the world to him, and he had
Christ living in him, and so knew both the life and power of Christ manifested
in him, which he did w^^ness, and he has left upon record: which life and
power you are ignorant of, and would be aspiring to know his conditions, with
your vain imaginations, but the life and experience of them is hid from all
such vulterous eyes, and venomous beasts, as you are; though you can steal his
words to trade withal, yet you are strangers to that life which was made
manifest in Paul, and you cannot know it, whilst you I ve in the lust and
filth of the flesh, and in the broad way, and in the fall, and like thieves you
have stolen the declarations of Paul's experiences, and the rest to make a trade
withal, such Sir Simons as you which buy and sell the letter which is carnal,
for carnal money; but the gift of God, which is the Holy Ghost, that you know
not, and so you are children of disobedience, and are hasting to fill up your
measure, that destruction might come upon you, and fire fall down from Heaven
to burn up all your chaff, and stolen expressions; for the Lord he will, and is
now gathering his wheat into his garner, but the chaff he will burn with
unquenchable fire, all your forms, and chaff, and corrupt dealings, is for the
fire, and wrath of the Almighty; and the coming of Christ you know not, but are
carnal and corruptible; and if the last enemy be death that is to be destroyed,
what is the first? you run on, but turn you back again, and hasten not into
your self wills, which are for destruction, and your fl shly wisdom, which is
for condemnation, and look into that 2 Pet. 3.12. which you have made such
haste to, and in the latter end of the verse you may read that the face of the
Lord is against you, and all such evil doers as you are, page 16. And see how
you are hasting to an ungodly corrupt conversation, and are neither of the
mind, nor the same spirit that they were of, that spoke forth that 3d Chapter
of the Philippians, though you have made great haste to steal their Letters or
Epistles to trade withal; but see what the Holy Ghost spoke through Paul to
such as you are, who are to be marked, that do not follow their example in life
and conversation, but are enemies to the Cross of Christ, as you are; and
instead of Phil. 3.21. Let it lie where it is, and run not over, but take your
own reward, that which is ^ue to you, and such as you are, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly, whose glory in their shame, who mind
earth things, as you do, Phil. 3.18, 19.

And now you Foxes, and subul Serpents, you are found out of your holes of
earthly conceiving inventions, and imaginations; and are to be whipped with the
small scourge of the righteous judgmen^s of the Lord, for the accuser of the
brethren is head in you, which you speak of in your 17 page.

Thus says the Lord, Woe to the Idol Shepherds, such as you are, that ran, but
the Lord never sent you, and you are unprofitable, and do not profit the people
at all, Jer. 23. read that over, and s^e where you are, and you may see that a
whirlwind is to fall grievously upon all such as you are, that speak a vision
of your own heart, and not from the mouth of the Lord, and that preach for
hire, as you do, as in Jer. 5.30, 31. holding up that which is an abomination
in the eyes the Lord; but woe is your portion, that feeds you with the fat, and
clothes you with the wool, God will feed you with judgment, read Ezekiel. 34. And
woe to them that take counsel, but not of me, and that cover with a covering,
but not of my Spirit, says the Lord, that they may add sin unto sin, as you
do, that are covered with your own inventions, the woe s to you, read Isai. 30.
And you blind leaders of the people cause them to err, Isai. 31. and Isai.
9.16. So that there is like Priest, like people, Hos. 4.9. Therefore woe to you,
and all blind guides, Matthew. 23. The Lord is against you.

Moreover, Quest.
they admonish that we wait in silence until God open our mouths.

We answer, If that were the end or intent of this admonition, Priests.
to show to man his dependancy on God, etc.

Herein you show your selves to be ignorant of the same Spirit that they had
that spoke forth the Scriptures, Reply.
whose dependancy was of God, and waited upon him for to move in them by his
holy Spirit, and to put words into their mouths to speak, as the Prophets and
Apostles did witness, as you may read at large in their Declaration; For holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21.

And those that speak now, and speak not by the same movings of the Holy Ghost,
speaking in them, and through them, as they did, are false Prophets, such as
you are, as in 2 Pet. 2. Who know not the gift of God, which is as fire, but
speak their own words and imaginations from others writings, as you do, that
say none speaks immediately from God now as the Apostles did.

Herein you show that you never knew God, nor any gift of his, but have all
this time spoken your own inventions, and vain repetitions, and not from the
mouth of the Lord, and now in due time you have laid it open to the view of all
that are learned and grounded in the truth, who are not unlearned, nor untaught
of God, as you are, that wrest the Scriptures to your own destruction, being
led away with the error of the wicked, as you are, and know nothing of the
growth in grace, as they did which spoke fo^th the Scriptures; which I witness
the life of, and see you where you are in your inventions and imaginations,
wresting the Scripture, being untaught of God, following your own thoughts and
imaginations, 2 Pet. 3.16.

1. But we know God by divine inspiration, and know him speaking immediately in
us by his Son, and who are his sheep hear his voice, John 10.4, 5. And so know
you to be ravening wolves, ranging into you own inventions, and ravening into
old Authors, and stealing the Saints Declarations to speak of, and so get your
lesson beforehand what to say, but the Apostles did not so; And such vain
ravenous minds as yours are, I do deny, and now you have made your selves
manifest, that you were never taught of God, but he will bruise you all with
his iron rod.

2. We know that we are taught of God by his Holy Spirit, as he has promised,
and now is fulfilling and qualifying his Son in his Saints, John 14. and has
prayed for us, ver. 16, 17.26. And we do now find the efficacy of his prayer
to, and in our souls, and our union is with him, in that which he has prayed
for, John 16.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. And he is now the same that he was, Heb. 13.8.
John 17.20. to the end: But our life is not in the letter, as yours is, but in
the spirit, and in the power.

3. And we know that no man can come to the Father, but by Jesus Christ, the
light of the world, who is a mystery to the carnally minded ones, such as you
are, who would find out the mystery by your fallen wisdom, and studied our
knowledge, which is for the fire; for no man can come unto God, but by this
Jesus whom we preach, which is Christ in us, the life and substance of all the
Scriptures. Col. 1.27. etc. And no man knows the Son, but the Father, neither
knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him:
who calls for obedience in whom he is man festing his love, and faith, Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, But you are not burdened with
your sins, that do delight in them, and so your rest is in the flesh, and
carnal wisdom, which must be shaken; but mine is in the Lord Jesus Christ, in
obedience to the Cross, who has set me at liberty from the servitude of sin,
to serve him, having been taught of him, as the truth is in Jesus, and have
rest unto my soul through the divine unfoldings of his love, Matthew. 11.27, 28,
29.

4. And we know, That God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in
times past unto the Fathers by his Prephets, has in these last days spoken to
us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made
the world, who being the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his
person, we are reconciled to him by his blood, and are upholden by his power,
Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. To him alone be praise, honor, and glory, both now, and for
evermore.

Unless we think, Priests.
(as the Doctrine implies) That the Motions of the Spirit, are the only rule of
duty, etc.

Herein you show your judgment is carnal, and not spiritual, that would try
the motions of the Spirit by your corrupt thoughts, Reply.
which are of the earth, earthly, and you have neither salt, nor tryer, born up
in your understandings to try withal, as the Saints had that spoke forth the
Scriptures; but your tryer is a Chapter, or a verse of their Declaration, which
you experience nothing of, that live by thoughts and doubtings; and so you know
nothing real, and he that doubts is damned, you, and your doctrine is for
condemnation: For the spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man: And there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk in the spirit, 1 Cor. 2.15, 16. Romans 8.1. But you are carnal,
and are guided by your own corrupt wills, and your doctrine is accursed, and
you walk in crooked paths which lead to destruction.

All people that have any care of your souls, take heed to your souls, and
follow not these blind guides; John Pomroy, Paul Clisson, Joseph Kellat, etc.
lest they lead you to destruction; take warning betime, for they are blind
leaders of the blind, and see what Jesus Christ says, in Matthew. 15.14. And
hold them not up, nor receive them into your houses, neither bid them, God
speed, lest you be partakers of their evil deeds, Mat. 15.14.
2 John 9.10, 11.

Whereas you say, That to the best of your understandings, Priests.
you judge the Asserters to be against any constant Preacher, or Course of
prayer, so allowing every man and woman liberty in Assemblies to teach, or
pray, etc.

Here the best of your understanding is carnal, Reply.
and your judgment is the same, and so you have nothing to do to judge, or to
search out the Sa^nts liberty by your subtilties; for the natural man knows not
the things of God, and your understanding is earthly, and your judgment is for
condemnation, which is not infallible: And the salt having lost its favor, is
good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under foot, Matthew. 5. And so
your judgment is cast out, and shall never enter into the inward Court, but
must be trodden under foot; and your corrupt wills are for destruction, and you
are for condemnation, because you love not the light, the Lord Jesus Christ:
Therefore be accursed, 1 Cor. 16.22.

2. Preaching we own, and the Ministry of Christ we own, and the Course of
prayer by the same spirit we own, and we do not allow any to speak but the man
in us Christ Jesus, who is the Ministry of the Sanctuary, and preaches glad
tidings, and we own his voice, and his Ministry in any, and know his voice from
the voice of strangers; such as you are that are enemies to him we disown, and
do deny.

3. You are carnal and corrupt, and would be Lords over Gods Heritage, but you
must be cast out, and all such Foxes that spoil the Vines: You say that we
allow any liberty in the Assemblies, etc.

4. Are you so sottish know you not that the head of every man is Christ, and
where he is exalted, must his mouth be muzzled in any: In the true Church all
might speak one by one in the spirits administration, who were acted and guided
by the spirit to a spiritual order, in all things but yours is carnal; Let them
that pray pray with the spirit and the understanding also, and every one may
speak as they have received, 1 Cor. 14. And as every man has received the
Gift, so minister the same, one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold
Graces of God, that God in all thingt may be Glorified, through Jesus Christ,
to whom he Praise and Dominion for ever and ever, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. herein you
show your selves to be carnal, and know not that the manifestation of the
spirit is given to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. and that no man can
call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, and for that 1 Timothy 2.12. Romans 16.1.
and Phil. 4.3. Act. 21.9. and it will let you see that your Judgment is carnal,
and that you are not to Judge of spiritual things by carnal reason, and fleshly
fancy; But that you may lay open your folly, that it may appear to all that are
of a spiritual discerning, that you are enemies to God: and in your wicked
imaginations, which are for the fire, and you we do deny, and all vain
janglings, and fleshly carnal corrupt ways of worship, and your set times, who
live in limitation; but God will lim^t those carnal minds in you, and bind up
the wild wills which would be intruding into those things that you have
nothing to do withal, and cast the Beast and false Prophet into the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, and such deceivers as you are, Rev. 17.

It is said indeed that you may all Prophecy one by one; Reply.
but it is said also, are all Prophets? we wish that the Lords people were
Prophets.

You show your selves to be contrary minded to the Apostles, Reply.
though you steal their words to talk of, you neither have the same mind light,
life, order nor power amongst you, as they had, and he did exhort them to covet
the best gifts, 1 Cor, 12. Rom, 16.1. Phil. 4.3.
which you grudg at, and he commended to them Ph^b^ a servant of the Church;
and there were women laborers with him in the Gospel, and the Spirit of the
Lord is the same now that it was then: It is but the Beast in you that would
and does make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome, and give you all
your doom, even reward you all according to your doings; Rejoice ye Saints, and
righteous ones, the Lord will Judge and avenge himself upon the whore, that
Iezebel that is amongst all the fair sayers, and painted Sepulchers, such as
these gainsayers and opposers are, who stand in enmity and opposition against
the truth, by their evil thoughts and vain imaginations, showing the spirit of
error.

The Assemblies of the Saints of old ware constant, Priests.
and they had men, who attended on the word and prayer, who gave themselves to
it, prepared themselves, waited on God, that they might act to the edifying of
the Saints in love, Act. 20.7, and 6.2, 3, 4. 1 Timothy 4.13.14, 15, 16.

The practice of the Saints in former ages, Reply.
and in those places that you have cited may be sufficient evidence against
you, that you are none of them, but enemies to those who come to walk after
their example now, whose life and practice we do own; but you and your practice
we do deny, and altogether disown; though you have stolen their words to speak
of, yet they will be witness enough against you, and their manner of meetings,
speaking by the spirit, and waiting will condemn you, that deny the same
waitings and attendings in others, and know nothing of them in your selves, who
do not attend upon the word, to speak immediately from the Mouth of the Lord,
as they did, whereas you speak by the spirit of error, that speaks by
imagination, and not by the same spirit that administered by them, and does by
those that now speak by Divine inspiration, herein you walk contrary to the
Scriptures, and the practice of the Saints, in former ages, showing forth the
spirit of error.

See Act. 20.7. When they were met together on the first day of the Week, which
you call a Sabbath, where that place of Scripture does not call so; but it is
your imaginations, and inventions, and contrary to the Scriptures, and to that
Sabbath, of whom Jesus is Lord.

2. Paul's Preaching by the spirit, and continuing his speech till midnight does
condemn you, that study for what to say, and many speaking an hour by a glass,
shows that you do want the same power, and instead of preaching by the same
spirit, or speaking the Word of God, as Paul did; you speak, and make a trade
of Paul's letters, which he sent to Brethren and his friends, and glosseth them
over by your Serpentine wisdom, and have not the same spirit to preach by that
Paul had, so showing to all that you are acted and guided by a spirit of error.

3. And whereas you speak but your own Imaginations and inventions, Paul, he
went about preaching the Kingdom of God, and he did not count his life dear
unto himself, so that he might finish his course with joy in the Ministry which
he had received of the Lord Jesus, who did not shun to declare unto them all
the Counsel of God, Act. 20.21. to 28. and he did exhort them to take heed to
themselves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost had made them
overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he had purchased with his own
Blood, Verse 28. which Ministry by the Holy Ghost we own, and that Ministration
which stands out of all man's inventions, and such Officers as are made
overseers by the Holy Ghost, we do own; but such as you that are made by
imitation and self-conceitedness we do disown; for that is Antichristian, and
not to be owned with believers, but to be testified against, and such Ministers
as are of the spirit, who speak not their own words, but the Words of the Lord,
who does it freely, as Paul, this Gospel Minister did, Act. 20.31.32.33. to the
end; but such as you are, who have neither any spiritual gift, nor spiritual
administration, but speak brain study, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, and making a trade of the Scriptures, and gives them your
Antichristian application, we do deny; for you are under the curse, and are to
be consumed, for the Lord will consume Antichrist, and all Antichristian
Doctrine, by the breath of his mouth, and the brightuess of his coming, 2 These,
2. and you that make your Gospel, or false Ministry, burdensome, and are
covetous, contrary to that of Paul, in this 20 of Acts, ver. 33, 34. We do deny
and disown, and see you to be led by a spirit of error.

But you are discovered, and made manifest, what Master you serve, even him
whose coming is after the working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 5. to ver. 13.

And the Apostle having a discerning spirit, foretold of such as you are that
should come, which we through the mercy of the Lord are made to see, as in Acts
20.29, 30. And to have no fellowship with you, but to testify against you,
Ephesians. 5.11. Paul he labored both for himself, and others; who does condemn
you, that are as drone B^es, and live upon the sweat of other men's brows to
maintain you in pride and pomp, idleness, and fullness of bread, which were the
sins of Sodom, and it is the fruits of your dark Ministry, spiritual Sodom, and
Egypt, where the Lord is crucified; and you are of them that would shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, and neither go in your selves, nor suffer them
that would to enter; but the woe is to you, and all the plagues that are written
in the Book are due to you, and to all in that nature, Revel. 22.

This does to our discernings tend to the establishing of the sayings of them
who speak after their trembling fits with an extended voice, Priests.
as the Oracles of God, and leaves us not the liberty of the commended practice
of the Bereans to try the sayings of an Apostle by the Scripture, Acts 17.11.

Your discernings are exceeding carnal, Reply.
that have professed your selves so long to be Ministers of the Gospel, and
have no tryer, but by the Scriptures, which are without, and are carnal, not
knowing the same Spirit that spoke forth the Scriptures, which was before any
Book or writings were, and searches and tries all things, even the deep
things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. But natural men, such as you are, receive not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to them; and so are they
to you, and your discerning is earthly, the salt having lost his savor; and so
you have lost your discerning that has it without you, and not within, as the
Saints had, and have, 1 Cor. 2.13.14. But you cannot know the things of God, or
workings of the Spirit by your carnal reason, because they are spiritually
discerned. And herein you are carnal, sottish, and brutish, and know nothing of
the same power that was manifested in those that spoke sorth the Scripture, who
had the Spirit, and the discerning.

And you that are not acquainted with those trembling fits that you do despise
in others, are not acquainted, neither with the Voice, Power, nor Oracles of
God; therein you do show forth your ignorance in the work of the Lord, and that
you are ignorant of the same spirit and power that was in them, who had the
Oracles of God, and spoke them forth, as they did that witnessed forth those
Scriptures, in whom the power of the Lord was manifested. As Isaac, Genesis 27.37.
Moses, Heb. 12.21. David, Psalm. 38.8. etc. Psalm. 119.120. and Job 4.14. Chap.
21. ver. 5, 6. Chap. 37. ver. 1. Jer. 23.9. Hab. 3.16. Dan. 10.7, 8, 11. Ezekiel.
12.18.26. Chap. 16. ver. 32. Chap. 10. ver. And Paul, Acts 9.3, 4, 5, 6. and
Philipians, 2.12, 13. and the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7.15. etc. These and the rest
did witness, who had the Spirit of God, Romans 8. and the Oracles of God, and
spoke them, 1 Pet. 4. But you do show that you neither know thepower of God,
which is the salvation, nor the gift of God, which is the discerning, as they
had that spoke forth the Scriptures; but your discerning may carry you to that
in Acts 17. And see your selves to be as the unbelieving Jews were, which were
moved with envy at the publishing of the truth by the Spirit that was in Paul,
as you are by the Declaration of the truth, by the same spirit that lays open
your deceits, now as his did then, and your hearers that have been kept in
blindness by you, and such like, may search the Scriptures, as the noble
Bereans did, and so see you to act the same things that the Jewish
Highpriests, Scribes, and Pharisees did, which were enemies to Jesus Christ
then, as you are now; therefore repent, and give over deceiving the people.

The simple, Priestr.
you say, believe every word, Prove, 14.15. but in this case, you say that you
have learned that the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, etc.

You are wise in your own conceits, Reply.
and know nothing of the simplicity that is pure, Being wise to do evil, but to
do good you have no understanding: And you never yet learned the lesson of
self-denial, nor know nothing of the true Prophetical Office of Christ by
divine inspiration in you; but have stolen words to speak of, and say, you
have learned, but it is but to steal the words of others to trade withal, and
so are thieves and robbers, John 10.
that Christ speaks, and you never knew the immortal word which was in the
beginning; for in its arise it will shake down all the loftiness of man,
dividing asunder both joints and marrow, crushing down all-deceits, and
deceivableness, which you live in, and are acted and guided by deceit, and so
are learned and taught of the Devil, the doctrine of deceit; But he that does
not righteousness, is not of God, nor he that loves not his brother, but is of
the devil, as you are, 1 John 3.10. And are Prophets of the deceits of your own
hearts, as the false prophets were, and are subject to the will of the Devil,
and to deceive the simple, but your condemnation will be the greater, for the
true Prophets you know not, but steal their words, as the false Prophets did to
trade withal; but the Lord has discovered you, and laid open your deceits, and
deceivableness, how you lie in wait to deceive the simple, and would keep them
back from receiving the simple naked truth, as it is in Jesus, but it is the
simple that he does teach, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. And they recaive his words which
are pure, and need not your additions nor inventions to gloss them over withal:
Prove. 30.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2. But all the plagues that are written in the Book
are to be added unto you, that are not in subjection to the true Prophet, the
Spirit of truth, but are subject to add your own inventions, which the plagnes
are to, Revel. 22.18.

But that they intend to magnify their writings, and Epistles above, or into
an equality unto the holy Scriptures, Priests. G. E. affirmed to I. K.
seems very probably, in that they put their papers very diligently into one
another hands, but not see the Scriptures, and do soms of them say, That it is
alike for to take a sentence out of their Letters, and preach from it, R. F.
as to take a sentence out of Paul's Epistles, etc.

Here you have showed forth that you are guided by a lying spirit, Reply.
which makes it good that you are Prophets of the deceits of your own hearts,
and that you are taught to lie by the Devil, the Father of lies, John 8.44. in
saying that we magnify our writings above the Scriptures. But that which is
written from the same spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, do witness with
their spirits that spoke them forth, Zeph. 3. ser. 5.30, 31. Isai. 56.10, 11.
Mic. 3.11. Mal. 2, etc.
and have union together, as Heb. 12.11. Ephesians. 5.30.1 John 4.16, 17. And
cannot but testify against your deceits, as they did against the false
prophets then, that stole the true Prophets words to trade withal, as you steal
the Apostles Letters to sell for money, which he gave forth to be read amongst
his friends at their meetings together, 2 These. 2.1, 2. Gal. 6.11. 1 These.
5.27.2 Cor. 1.13. These, with the rest of his letters, that he sent to his
friends and brethren, which you are enemies to, and are to be marked, Phil.
3.17, 18. that walks contrary to them, And you are to be noted that you may be
put to shame, 2 These. 3.14. Gal. 6.16. And as for magnifying your writings,
that is, the stolen expressions that are conjured up out of the bottomless pit
of deceit, and that is all that we write against, to magnify the truth, in
laying open your deceits, and deceivableness, where you do deceive the people
by your flatteries, deceits, and glorious notions, and gilded expressions,
which is for the fire, and all such as you are, who are acted and guided by the
spirit of the Devil, who is a liar, and the Father of it: And the Beast, and
the 24 Elders, Antichrist, and his upholders, shall be cast into the lake
together, and they that worship the Beast, and his Image, and their own
imaginations, and inventions, as such as you do: Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. Rev. 17.
Rev. 20. there to be tormented. And as for putting our papers into one another
hands, and not the Scriptures, as you say; Here you speak but by imaginations,
but the spreading abroad of our papers, is for the laying open of deceits, and
deceivers, such as you are, that do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ, 2 John
9. but run a whoring after your own inventions; but Whoremongers and,
Adulterers that do not abide in the truth, such as you are, God will judge; but
the Scriptures we do own, and magnify the life and power of them, and all who
are guided by the same Spirit that gave them forth, Romans 8.14. 1 John 3.1. But
such as you are that live in lies, flatteries, sub ilty, and deceit, we do
deny, and disown, and restifie against all such who take the Scriptures for no
other end, but to trade withal for money, and deny the life of them, and who
walk not in obedience to the Commands of our Lord Jesus, such we deny, and
those that have but the form of Godliness, but deny the power thereof, as you
do, such we deny, and that you have nothing to do to sell the Scriptures, nor
to trade with the Saints experiences for money, which is your Dianah, for your
foundation is but Silver and Gold, which must be shaken, and cast into the
fire, that nothing may stand in the day of the Lords power, but that which is
of his own bringing forth, where those that speak may speak as the Oracle of
God, with power and boldness, from the spirit of truth, as they receive their
words from the Lord, and not from other men's writings, and gathered up knowledge
and imagination, for carnal money and carnal ends, as you and such as you do,
who make no other use of the Scriptures but to color over your deceits, and
deceivableness withal, that you may live in Hypocrisy; but woe is the
Hypocrites portion, and woe is yours: Woe to you ye blind guides and demi-lights,
wel-favored Harlots, and painted Sepulchers, for the Lord will avenge himself
on all his enemies, and adversaris, such as you are.

And your wisdom is earthly, your wills are corrupt, and you are in the old
nature, and are in the fall and lust of the flesh, Page 37.
and you are ignorant of the things of God, and know nothing of Chriff and his
Cross, but show your selves enemies to it, as in Phil. 3. and are in the broad
way that leads to destruction, and you are covered over with earthly
conceivings and earthly inventions, and imaginations, and your learning is
earthly, and no man can serve two masters, but you are ignorant of the
teachings and Doctrine of Christ, but run into the holes of your earthly
imaginations, and you are carnal and corrupt, and you are of the first birth
which is Cainish, there is a natural man, and there is a spiritual man, and the
natural man is in his first wisdom, which is earthly, carnal, sensual, and
divilish, James 3.11.12.13 14.15.16. and so is yours; but the spiritual man
has his affections set on things above, being risen with Christ, Col. 3.
having his wisdom from above, being born again, and of the seed of Abraham, and
his wisdom is not that which is bought and sold, Job 28. as yours is, but the
new man has his new name, new learning, and new wisdom, which is pure,
peaceable, and is of another, being made partakers of the Divine nature, and
the Divine wisdom, which the spiritual man is taught, and has received of the
Lord, Iam. 3.17.18. 2 Pet. 1. to 9. which you show your selves to be ignorant
of, and enemies to and knows not the teachings of God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; but are clothed with your own righteousness: and in your 38.
Page, you would make your selves to appear fair and beautiful in the eyes of
men, as the Pharisees did, Page 38.
who was of the same nature that you are, and boasted of their own
righteousness, which you are established in, and not in the righteousness of
God, which crosses all natures desires that are corrupt, and changes that
nature which is carnal, and worcester eth out all unrighteousness where it is
embraced, and the motions of it not quenched, 1 These. 5.19.20. 21.22.23. but
you are in divisions and dissimulations, and knows not that righteousness of
Christ that stands inward in the covenant of promise, as you have declared in
Page 38. which is in all, and is the power, and the life, and righteousness it
self, to establish and season their hearts with Grace, which you are not
acquainted with, whose learoing is that of the first nature, which is earthly,
and your righteousness the same, every tree being known by its fruits, Luke
6.44.45.46. and the root being corrupt, the branches is corrupt also, so your
Religion is carnal and earthly, and stands in externals and rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ, but is Ceremonial, Pharisaical, and Diabolical,
and that nature, and seed that lives in that center knows not that religion
which is pure, and keeps unspotted of the world, Iam. 1.26.27. nor that
righteousness which stands out of all men's apprehensions, and comprehensions, in
him; who is, and who was before the world was, and is incomprehensible, which
you show your selves ignorant of; But what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness, and what union has light with darkness, and what concord has
Christ with Belial; whom you serve that live in uncleanness, enmity is put
betwixt the two seeds, and they cannot bereconciled, 2 Cor. 6.15.16, 17, 18.

And as Apparel was made to cover nakedness withal, Page 39.
which we do not deny, but sees through the large Love of God to us in all his
own work, who makes us the workmanship of God the Father, creating us in
Christ Jesus, the Son of his Love, and our Souls Savior, adorning us with the
ornament of a meek and a quiet spirit, and clothing us with the Garments of
praise, and and as the Saints was that is spoken of in the Revelation, that we
may praise and glorify his great and glorious Name, and in using all his
creatures in the use and service, as they were created for the health and
preservation, and doing all thing to the Praise and Glory of God, which tends
to his Honor, who is the Father of the faithful, that we own, and that we set
up, 1 Pet 1.14
which tends to purity and righteousness not fashoning our selves like unto the
world, in obedience to the commands of Jesus Christ, knowing that the world and
the fashion thereof passes away, and that we may be to the praise of the glory
of his Grace, who has redeemed us out of all uncleanness, that are of the
new birth, 1 Cor. 7.31.
and knowing our redemption, that was not purchased neither by Silver nor Gold,
which is corruptable, as your minds are; but we are redeemed by the precious
Blood of Jesus Christ, to serve him in newness of life, and newness of
conversation, and our freedom is in the perfect Law of liberty, which you are
ignorant of, and so are contending for the Devil, to cover over deceit, and to
uphold the abominations and filth of the flesh, Prove. 16.17.18. But it is the
Lords love to let us see your deceits, and to see how you act in darkness, and
from aspirit of error; and you are clothed with your own inventions, and sets
up that which God does throw down, and you may and shall be ashamed of the evil
of your doings, and your contempt to the spirit of truth, for your minds are
carnal, and your worship is carnal, and your contentions is carnal, which tends
to vain janglings, which is forbidden.

And that which is seen is carnal, and that which is not seen is eternal.

And that which is seen is carnal, and that which is not seen is eternal.

And so are you carnally minded whech is death, Romans 8.6. 7. and your worship
is carnal, and perishing, Col. 2.20.21, 22. and not after Christ, and your
ministry will never lead up to perfection, but is for condemnation.

But the Ministry of Christ which is after the spirit, The Saints Ministry.
Ephesians. 4.^ 9 10 11. 12 13.
and not of the letter, which the letter does declare of, that which tends to
perfection, that we own, to the building up one another in love, by the spirit
of love, which you know not, but are ignorant of, who lust after envy:

The Church of Christ we own, who are of God, in God, 1 Cor. 13. The trus
Church.
born again of water and the spirit, baptized by one spirit into one body where
Christ is the head, and the Saints the body, 1 Per 2 5.
who are of one heart, 1 Thes*^ 1 Ephesians. 1* 22, 23
and one mind which is that we do own, Ephesians. 2.19.20.22, and 4.4.5.6.

But yours that is of confusion and contention, strife and debate, and are in
vain janglings, and pride, and voluptuonsness, which is of Antichrist, that we
disown.

The bread which the Saints break daily, and from house to house, The spiritual
bread.
which bread is from Heaven, and is our life, which we have union with, 1 Cor.
10.17.18.
in whom it is minisested, Ioh. 9.33. 1 1 Cor. 12. that we do own; but you that
are carnal, and yours that is perishing, that we disown.

The Cup which the Saints drink, The cup of blessing.
which the Scriptures do declare of, which is the Blood of Christ, and the Cup
of Blessing, that we do own, John 6.53.54.55, 56. 1 Cor. 10.15.16.17 and 12.13.

But the Cup of Abominations, and filthiness of the fornications which you and
all the world in their old nature do partake and drink of daily, Reve l. 17 4,
5, 6.
and that which the Gentiles sacrifice, they Sacrifice to Devils and not unto
God, all drinking the cup of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. which is not of Christ, but
of Antichrist, and that we utterly deny and altogether disown.

The Baptism which is spiritual, Gal. 3.27 28.
By one spirit one Body, where there is but one faith, one Lord, one Baptism
that we do own; Spiritual Baptism.
and they that are baptized into Christ have put on Christ, and are new
Creatures, clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, and espoused to him, and
into that union, partaking of the fruit of the Vine which is in the new
plantation, and for the friends of Christ to partake of, Joh. 15. Romans 6.
which we have privilege in, and is in order to the spirit of truth, which the
Scriptures do declare of, that union and communion which is spiritual, and not
carnal, that we do own, and those whoa re spiritual and not carnal, them we own.

They that are guided by the Spirit of the living God, and are made overseers
of the Church by the Holy Ghost, and do watch over the weak, 1 Cor. 2.8, 9, 10.
Spiritual Overseers.
and do it freely, not by constraint, nor for filthy lucre, and are grown up
into the truth, and are able to divide the word of truth aright, them we do
own, and have them in love for their works sake, who are in order to the spirit
of truth which is the life of the Scriptures.

But those that are no* of the spirit, but of the letter, and their fleshly
imaginations, and guided by a spirit of error, and constrained by gifts and
rewards, as you are, them we do disown.

That Word, the word of God, which was in the beginning, which is the word of
life, which is the word of power, The word of God, which is the word of life,
and is spiritual.
which is as a two edged sword to the dividing asunder of joints and marrow,
and does discern the thoughts and intents of the heart, and is as a fire and a
hammar to break the rocks and hard hearts, and is to be desired, which is the
word of comfort that nourishes up the soul unto Eternal life: which word is
invisible, which is the word of faith, which is the engrafted word, John 1.
Heb. 4 12. Je^. 23 29. 1 Pe^. 2.2. 1 Pe^. 1.22 Romans 10.8 James 1 21
and not the letter, which the letter does declare of, which is now the word of
power, and able to save the soul, which works out all superfluity of
naughtiness, which the Scriptures do declare of, that word we own, but you, and
your carnal inventions, and invitations, which are aerie, them we disown.

That faith which is the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is a saving, and
a justifying faith, The Saints Faith.
and that faith which purifieth the heart, and overcomes the world, which
leads into covenant with God, which is the gift of God, which is the evidence
of things unseen; and that hope which is in Christ, 1 John 5 4 Heb 11. ^ude 20.
2 Pe^. 1. 5 6. etc. Phil. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
and that mind; Let the same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus, who
though he was in the form of a servant, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God: which the Scripture does declare of, and that which is sp^ritual light,
life, peace, which passes understanding, joy, and comfort, which is eternal,
which the Scriptures do declare of, that we own.

But yours that is carnal, and stands without, in old Authors, and Books, a
studied out faith, and an hypocritical hope, which is to perish, and your love,
which is dissimulation, etc. and is forbidden by the Spirit of truth, that we
disown.

He that is a Bishop, Pastor, or Teacher, Spiritual Bishops. 1 Timothy 3.1 2.3,
4, 5. ^^t. 1.7, 8. 1 Per. 5.1, 2, 3. Acts 20.
and is taught by the Spirit, who is not of man, but of God, and is blameless,
and does contend for the faith that was delivered to the Saints, who are not
carnal, but spiritual, who are not proud, nor covetous, nor given to filthy
lucre, who are lovers of good men, who are sober, just, holy, and temperate in
all things, who are without partiality, or hypocrifie, and who watch for the
souls, as those that are to give an account to God, and are governed by the
Spirit of God, freehearted; such we do own.

For all who do prof^ss themselves to be Ministers of Christ, and to be sent of
God, and do not walk in obedinece to the Lord Christ, but go out of his
Doctrine; all such are Seducers, and Antichrists, cover over themselves with
never such fair shows, and covers by their vain imaginations, and fleshly
wisdom, as you do: But woe to them that cover with a covering, but not of my
Spirit, says the Lord, that they may add sin unto sin, as you do, Isai. 30.

You are constrained by tithes, gifts, and rewards, and large augmentations,
and preaches for hire, as the false prophets did, but the Lord is against you,
as he was against them, and you are under the Curse, and the Wrath of the
Almighty.

The Apostle, who was a man of God, taught of God, and had his Ministry and
Authority of God, and not of man, and his learning was of God, and not of man,
as it is left upon record, Gal. 1.11, 12. and were after the Example and
Doctrine of Christ: That we do witness, and that we don own.

But you that run to Studies and Arts, to raise death out of death, speaking
the letter, which is death, for money, which is carnal, and are led by your own
wills, which are corrupt, and not by the will of God, as the Apostle was; and
you are of man, and your authority of man, and not of God, and so your Ministry
is Antichristian, which differs both from the practice of Christ, and his
Apostles.

The Apostle who taught the people, as he was taught by divine Revelation, had
all his wisdom and learning cast out, which became of none account, and was
loss, dross, and dung, Phil. 3.7, 8.

The Apostle who was taught of God, and had his Ministry not of man, nor by the
will of man, but by the will of God taught freely, Acts 20.33, 34. And
necessity was laid upon him, and he labored to make the Gospel free, and
himself servant to all, 1 Cor. 9.15, 16, 17. etc.

And the Apostle who had spiritual gifts, was a Minister of the Spirit, made an
able Minister, 2 Cor. 3.5. And not of the letter, but of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6.

And the Apostle was made a Minister by the dispensation of the gift of God
that was given to him, and he was a Minster of the mystery that was revealed to
him, which you are ignorant, and know* nothing of, who deny the light, know
neither the gift, nor the power as he did, Ephesians. 3.2, 3. Ephesians. 3.7, 8, 9, 10.

And you are darkness, and your Ministry is darkness, and not of the light, not
of the spirit, which is the gift, and you are not of Christ, but of Antichrist;
and says the Holy Ghost, Little children, let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness, is of God, and knows the mind and will of God, and acts in the
light, and is righteous, and is guided by the Spirit of God, and is as he is, 1
John 3.6, 7. in the truth, and in the righteousness of Lord Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 1.30, 31.

And the Apostles who were of righteousness, and of the Spirit, were able
Ministers of the manifold graces of God, and fellow laborers with him, and had
both the gift, and the spirit, and were able to give gifts unto others, and
such was the Seal of their Apostleship, as were Epistles written in their
hearts by the Spirit of the ever living God, and not by the letter, as in 2
Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. And they needed not the recommendation of others.

But you that are carnal, and corrupt in your old nature, and being evil, how
can ye give gifts unto others out of that which you have nothing to do withal;
For the natural man knows not the things of God: you have nothing to give
(being evil your selves) but that which is evil; and go and make restitution to
whom you have robbed; For the thief comes not but for to kill, and to steal,
and to destroy, Ioh. 10.10. And let him that stole, steal no more, Ephesians. 4.28.
The Lord is against them, Ier. 23.30. And he that does not righteousness, is
not of God, 1 John 3.10. And what agreement has the Temple of God with Idols,
2. Cor. 6.17, 18.

And the true worshippers did worship the Father in spirit and in truth, John
4.23, 24. And not by imagination, and invention, tradition, and rudiments of
the world.

Those that were true worshippers, and did worship the Father in spirit and in
truth, did meet together often, and see what Temple they worshipped in, such as
were made without hands, 1 Cor. 6.19 20. 1 Cor. 3.16. Rev. 21.

But to these that are Brethren, salute me to the Church that is in their
house, as Paul to Aquila, and to the Brethren of Laodicea, and Nimphas, 1 Cor.
16.19. Col. 4.15. And those did abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and I witness
with them, but you do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ, that profess to be
sent of him, nor regard what the Holy Ghost said by Paul, and by Stephen, Acts
17.47, 48, 49.

But you who are contrary to these, and instead of being Stewards of the
manifold graces of God, and of the household of faith, are of corruption,
corrupt minds, and corrupt hearts, and are of the Synagogue of Satan, and are
proud and covetous, and snuffeth up the air, and watches for great benefits,
and large augmentations, and are Ministers of man, and sprinkle Infants,
couzening them with your inventions, and you your selves are out of covenant
with Christ, and shall never enter with your high notions, and fleshly
imaginations, which are of Antichrist, and not of Christ, who contend for
earth, and earthly things, showing that your treasure and your heart also is in
the earth, and you your seves earthly, and are in the same seats that those
were who were enemies to Jesus Christ, as you are, whom he exhorts in his
Doctrine to beware of, Mark 12.38, 39, 40. And you Christopher Feak, John
Simson, George Cocking, Laurence Wise, John Pomroy, Paul Glisson, Joseph
Kellat, and all such as you are, and your carnality and sensuality we do deny;
and against your dark Egyptian studied out M^nistry, and your painted
expressions, and gathered up notions we do testify that you are not acquainted
with the teachings of God, nor the Doctrine of Christ, and ran, but the Lord
never sent you; Therefore do you fulfill that Prophecy declared of by Jeremy,
Chapter 23.32.

And you are as the false Prophets were, all teaching for hire as they did, to
whom the Lord sent his Servants, the true Prophets, to testify against them,
and you are found in the same condition now; See Ier. 5.30, 31. Isai. 56.10,
11. Ier. 23.16, 17, 18, 19. Isai. 29. and the 9th. to the 16th. Ezekiel. 34. to
the 11th. Isai. 72.7, 8. Hos. 6.9. Hos. 5.1, 2. Isai. 9.16. Zeph. 1.4. Zeph. 3.
Zach. 13.4.5. Mal. 2. to 10. but the Lord will make you and all that are as you
are, of your own inventions and imaginations, and run, but never was sent, and
have cast the Law of God behind your backs, but your blessing is to be
accursed, as theirs was, and the Lord will make you contemptible in the eyes of
the people, and you are to be declared against.

And as Ezra had a standing place for the reading of the Law, Nehem 8.4, 5.
Mat. 23. to the 8. Verse.
it is not denied, so had the Scribes and Pharisees which took Moses Seat and
place, pretending to do Justice and take off oppressions, but did not; But did
burden the people as you do, that sits in their seats now, and acts in the same
things which Christ came to throw down, and you are Lords and Masters, contrary
to the Doctrine of Christ, but you are discovered.

But Christ did forbid his to be so, be ye not so says he, Mat. 23.8. and said
he; Be not ye called of men masters; but he that is greatest among you, let him
be your servant, Verse 11. and whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased,
Verse. 12.

But you do not abide in his Doctrine, as they did who were his Disciples, and
were in obedience to Christ commands, See 1 Cor. 9.16. to 19. 2 Cor. 4. to 6.
but you show your selves to be both contrary to Christ, and to his true
Ministers, and makes your selves manifest to be amongst the false Prophets, and
Scribes and Pharisees, which were enemies to Jesus Christ then, as you are
found now, who do not regard his own sayings, as in Mat. 23.8.9.10, etc. but
are exalted and puffed up in your fleshly wisdom, high notions, and high places,
and are as those was that were enemies to Christ; but see what is your due,
verse. 13.14.15.

Likewise see what Christ says in Mark, when he called his Discipl^s, he said
unto them, Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles,
exercise Lordship over them, and their great ones exercise Authority upon them,
Mar. 10.42. and here are you placed.

Notwithstanding Christ's command in verse. 43. who said to his; But so shall it
not be amongst you, but whosoever will be greatest among you shall be your
Minister, and whosoever will be chiefest among you shall be servant of all; but
you do not abide in his Doctrine, but are in the earth, the lust of the flesh
and in the fall, and are in Gentilizm and Pharisaicallizm, in pride and vain
glory, proud boasters, and self-conceited Hypocrites and dessemblers, and are
of those that Christ does forwarn his Discipled ones to beware of you, and such
as you are, that do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and so are of
Antichrist; blush for shame:

For says Jesus our Savior, beware of such as these, whom I declare and
describe unto you, See Mark 12.38.39.40. and such sorts of men as these, were
enemies to the Saints, and the Brethren then, as you are now, who had nothing
to do with the Saints privileges, that did not walk in their practice, and you
witness your selves to be of the same generation, notwithstanding you have
stolen the Saints words to trade withal; but do not abide in the Doctrine of
Christ, but are Antichrists.

And the woes, Judgments, Plagues, and Curses, that was pronounced to the false
Prophets, Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, Seducers, and Antichrists then, the
same is now due to you, and the Lord will be avenged on you and all such as you
are.

So in doing my duty to the Lord in declaring against you and your deceits, I
rest in the Lords own free love, and remain a friend and lover of all that love
the Lord in sincerity and truth.

Written by a laboring man. It were most part of my three days labor. R. F.

The only true God,
HIm we worship, who placed Adam in the Paradise, who dwells in eternity, and
where no uncleanness can approach, or come nigh, who dwells in the highest
Heavens, and with him also that is of a poor and contrite spirit, who causes
such his blessing to inherit, whose joy is in him, and in the Kingdom of his
love, Luke 17.21. 1 Cor. 4.20. Romans 14.17.18.

Adam in the Paradise, and after with Eve in the fall, as you and such as you
are, that are not redeemed by his power, not knowing the seed of the woman that
bruiseth the Serpents head, the enemy, the tempter: But Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, who were holy men of God, Joseph in the Prison bound under by Phaaroh,
who was a proud hearted oppressor, such as you are, Egypt, the Isralites red
Sea, Pillar of fire, Egyptians overthrough, and the Israelites deliverance, by
the Divine Power, and Moses guiding them in the Wilderness, Law, Sabbath, Ark,
Church in the Wilderness, warfare, Jordan, Canaan, Caleb, Joshua, Judges,
Prophets, Kings, Victories, large love and mercies of the Lord, in sending his
Son* that was born of a Virgin, suffered contradiction of sinners, Jews, high
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, such as you are, and glorification and
ascension into the Kingdom of Heaven, and in our souls the Kingdom of his
Grace, where he conquers and rules in love, and comforts us by his holy spirit;
these and all things, as the Scripture does declare of, in their times, places,
administrations, and dispensations, we do all own;

But your lies, flatteries, deceits and hypocrisies, whereby you would strangle
the truth, to make it appear odious to the world, we do disown.

And as for self-justification, that we deny, and who art thou that do
condemn or lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect, seeing he does us by his
own power, both save, sanctify, and justify by says in Jesus, 1 John. 3.5,
6, 7.
who was manifested to take away our sins, and who shall separate us from the
love of God, shall tribulation, or persecution, peril, or nakedness, famine, or
sword, though we be accounted all the day long as sheep for the slaughter, yet
we are more then Conquerours through him that loves us; and we know him in
whom we do believe; and though we be accounted as the filth of the world, and
offscouring of all things, and as unknown, and yet well known of the Lord, and
of all those that are the Lords, but of our selves we can do nothing. It is God
that works in us both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure, and is thy
eye evil because his is good. It is God that does us justify, and we know that
all things work together for good to them that love God. to them who are the
called according to his purpose, Romans 8.28, 29. to the end of the Chapter.

What would you then have us to continue in sin that grace may abound, God
forbid: for how shall we that are d^ad to sin, live any longer therein, knowing
that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
death, therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised from the dead, by the Glory of the Father, even we also shall
be raised up to walk in newness of life, Romans 6. Isai. 66.12.

Truth we own, and righteousness we own, and all Christian Authority, such as
is of God we own, knowing that the Law is holy, 1 Timothy 1.8, 9, 10.
and just, and good, for the lawless, and for the disobedient, and that the
righteous Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain, neither will he suffer sin
to go unpunished; Justice, such as is pure according to the Command of Jesus
Christ, that which is for the punishing of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well, and all that fear the Lord, and make conscience of their
ways and doings, who hold the mystery of faith in a pure conscience, such we do
own; And think not that we do come to destroy or declare against righteousness,
but unrighteousness, that purity may be set up, and righteousness established;
that deceits, and deceivableness, and all unrighteousness may be thrown down,
and Christ the Son of righteousness exalted in the purity of the Gospel, this
we do own, and this we do honor.

But all deceivers, blind guides, hirelings, Seducers, and Antichrists, who do
not act in righteousness, nor abide in the Doctrine of Christ, we do disown.

And all Ranters, and Libertines, who are without order, and spiritual
Government, who delight in vanities, and follow the course and fashions of the
world, and live in voluptuousness and filthiness of the flesh, and those that
say, and do not, and seem to be what they are not, speaking fair words, and
walk contrary in their actions, which preach to others liberty, and they
themselves are the servants of corruption, be they what they will be, such we
disown, and utterly do deny, and we loath and abhor all manner of evil, knowing
this, That he that does not righteousness, is not of God, 1 John 3.10. For God
is pure, and of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; and all Ranters, Sects, and
opin^ons whatsoever, we do deny; for it is purity that we do honor, knowing,
That he that does righteousness, is of God, 1 John 3.7. But such as hold that
there is neither God, nor Devil, good nor evil, but what a man does imag^ne,
and that good and evil is alike; Let me tell them by the Spirit of the living
God, that they are liars, and guided by a spirit of delusion.

Now all that love the Lord Jesus Christ, have a care, and take heed of all
such, for they are not of Christ, but of Antichrist, and we do them disown, and
utterly deny, in obedience to the command of the Spirit of truth, and according
to the Command of our Lord Jesus Christ, who says, Have no fellowship, with
them, Ephesians. 5.11. For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are
done of them in secret; but all things that are reproved, are made manifest by
the light, for whatsoever does make manifest is light, Ephesians. 5.12, 13. Let all
the workers of iniquity know, That the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And let them know, That the
wicked, and all that forget God, shall be turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17.

For the Secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him, and the grace of God
which brings salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly, and godly in
this present evil world, Tit. 12.11, 12. s;o God is thereby dishonored, but he
is zealous of his honor with a godly jealousy, and he will not give it unto
graven Images, but will judge the Heathen in righteousness, and all are Heathen
that know not God by his power ruling in them, and he will scatter the proud in
all their imaginations, and therefore be not deceived, for God will not be
mocked; And says he, If I be a Father, where is my honor? A son honors his
father in loving him, and walking humbly before him, and yiedling obedience to
him from love received; and a servant he serves his Master, and is in
obedience to him in all things: Therefore his servants ye are to whom ye do
obey, Romans 6.16. And he that commits sin, is the servant of sin, John 8.33. But
know you not that the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God to them that
love him, and serve him in holiness and righteousness, is Eternal life a
Therefore, says he, Be ye holy, as I am holy, for without holiness, no man
shall see the Lord: profess what they will: And It is not every one that says,
Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, says Jesus Christ,
but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven. And says he, Herein
is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit: But why call ye me,
Lord, and Master, says he, and do not the works that I say? Therefore, every
one that does profess love to God, and Christ, be what you speak in all things,
or else profess nothing at all, and be not sayers, but doers; for to say, and
not to perform, is hypocrisy and dissimulation: But hypocrites and dissemblers
God will judge, and pour forth fury upon the head of the wicked.

Therefore all that do walk in disorder to the Spirit of truth, God does
disown, and we do disown; but those that walk according to the Spirit of truth,
and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit; as love out of a pure heart
fervently, peace, meekness, gentleness, goodness, temperance, and patience,
godliness, and brotherly kindness, and such as these, which are according to
the Spirit of truth, Gal. 5.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. such we do own, and wish grace,
mercy, and peace to all that walk according to this rule, and to all the Israel
of God: And I say, as the Apostle did, who was a true Minister of Jesus Christ,
and a man of God, who was acted and given by the Spirit of the living God and
was hated of the world, and both by the Jews, Pharisees, Sadduces, Grecians,
Libertines, and all Sects and opinions, which were many, as there are now; and
all in confusion, and out of the way, but truth it is, but one, which stands
out of all sects and opinions, and is in that which is but one, where purity is
out of all apprehensions, and comprehensions, in the Eternal, Divine Being: And
it is for the truths sake that we are reproached, and so we are made willing to
submit to the righteousness of the Spirit: And as many as walk according to
this rule, Peace be on them, and on the Israel of God; From henceforth let no
man trouble me: For I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus Christ: And
to all that are Brethren, Gal. 6.16, 17, 18.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirits, Amen.

This Epistle was written for the Vindication of the Truth; By a Friend, and
Lover of the Truth, and a Servant of the Lord, Rich. Farnworth.

FINIS.

