The Phanaticks PLOT Discovered: BEING A true Relation of their strange
Proceedings in Gloucestershire and other Counties; And what has since happened
upon the appearing of the two great Bodies of Frogs and Toads, (as they
pretended) in sundry shapes and dreadful Colors; to the great wonder of all
Loyal Subjects, that shall seriously peruse these following Lines.
To the Tune of, Packingtons Pound.
Presbyterian Anabaptist



KInd Friends I am resolved to discover a thing,
Which of late was invented by Foes to our King;
A Phanatical Pamphlet was printed of late,
To fill honest hearted Affections with Hate:
But here lies the thing. God has sent Us a King,
That has Wisdom enough to extinguish their Sting;
And therefore I wish all Allegiance be given,
To Him that directly was sent Us from Heaven.
The Phanaticks do tell Us in Gloucestershire,
A parcel of Christians as they call them there,
Did meet for to worship their unknown Apollo;
But mark! for their baseness, hereafter does follow:
I have taken the pain, without any gain,
The truth of this matter to you to explain:
And therefore believe not this flattering thing,
But stick close to your duty you owe to your King.
Here now comes the matter which I am to declare,
The Anabaptists in Gloucestershire,
Where Brother and Sister being privately met,
They say a rude multitude did them beset:
But Villains beware, and of this have a care,
Lest you with true Subjects should have no share:
For the King is resolved their Rights to restore,
And therefore Phanaticks plot Treason no more.
After this Multitude had them beset,
They went to a Justice his Warrant to get,
Desiring his aid and assistance therein,
But he being honest disowned their sin:
He bid them depart, if they had their desert,
They deserved to be whipped at the arse of a Cart:
But yet through their policy they do Us tell,
That the Judgment of God on that Justice befell.
And for to bring this purpose about,
One of their own Congregation went out
Into the fields, where by chance he did see
Of Frogs and of Toads a great company:
But this they do say, that in battle array,
To the Justice his house they straight took their way:
O do not believe them! my Friends have a care,
For this is an Anabaptistical Snare.
Yet I Will not deny but that there was store
Of Frogs and of Toads at the Justice his door,
Which was Anabaptists, Brownists, and those,
Which ever were known to be the Kings Foes:
But thanks be to God they are under the Rod,
That never intended to do any good:
O do not believe them, my friends, least that they
Should delude you into their most damnable way.
Besides, they do tell Us the Justice his Maid
Were the cause that these Frogs and these Toads were conveyed,
Which before at the Justice his windows had been,
Was after dispierst, and never more seen:
But let them have a care, it will fall to their share,
That such Frogs and such damnable Toads as they are,
E're long will be banished, and never more seen,
Which too long in this Christian Nation have been.
I wonder, me thinks, how they can be so bold,
To continue their impudent Actions of old:
It has been their practice since Oliver's days,
To plot and foment how dissension to raise;
Not calling to mind, how gracious and kind,
Our Sovereign Lord King Charles they do find:
And as for their Pamphlet I wish you beware
How you do believe, and of them have a care.
O I wish you consider their Actions of late,
How they turned a brave Kingdom into a base State,
Throwing the Pillars quite out of the Socket,
And striving to get the coin into their pocket:
No man I Will name, then do not me blame,
But, Gentlemen, this I do speak to their shame,
That all their Intentions was only this Thing,
To hedge in the Kingdom, and murder the King.
Come, come Independent, and cast off thy hate,
Consider the workings of God here of late,
How miraculously he has brought it about
To bring in the King, whom you thought to keep out:
The Presbyter and the Episcopal man
May safely rejoice now, because that they can
Freely enjoy what is duly their own,
That Is to have their Estates, and the King have his Crown.
Entered according to Order, And Printed for Samuel Burdet, 1660.


