A CHARACTER Whereby the false Christ's, or Antichrists, Seducers, false
Prophets, and house-creepers may be known.

Now in the latter days, wherein there are perilous tims, as it is written and
has been foretold of in 2 Timothy 3, 3. And says Jesus. False Proph^ts shall
come, but by their fruits shall ye know them, Mat. 7.15, 16. and 20. And now
they are come, and by their fruits they are known, as it is written.

As may be seen in two Letters sent to several Priests in Liestershire, after
two several Meetings, betwixt them and those called QVAKERS, One Letter was to
be sent to one Tho. Cockeram of swannington, servant to the Lord Protector, at
whose house one Meeting was, as the Letter will further make mention, and show
the difference betwixt the true Prophets and the false, which Letter was
directed to him to to be read to the Priests being present at the Meeting, and
the other was to the Priest of ^wycrosse, after the meeting appointed betwixt
two Priests, and those whom the world scornfully calls Quakers:

Wherein is discovered the true Prophet and the false, and who those are that
creep into houses, leading silly people men and women captive, laden with sin,
and led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth; and who those false Prophets and house-creepers are,
that are spoken of, as is proved, both by their fruits, and also by Scripture,
as may be seen, etc.

By one known to the world, by R^^^^ ^^RNVVORTH.

London, Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert at the sign of the Black
spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's. 1654.

A BRIEF DESCRIPTION Of the true Prophets and the false, and how false Prophets
and house-creepers may be known, by a Letter to Priest Hill, etc.
Priest Hill,
THou who professes thy self to be a Minister of Christ, thou art found to be
an Antichrist, and a false Prophet, and art a a raging wave of the Sea, foaming
out thy own shame, as those spoken of in Jude 13. And thy fruits also makes
thee manifest, and thy folly and ignorance were abundantly discovered, and made
manifest at the Meeting at Twycrosse, on the second day of the week, and the 9.
day of the 8. month, and could give no account at all of any thing of the
working of God by Inward Experience; for, when I propounded a Question to thee;
and asked thee concerning passing from death unto life, thou could tell nothing
of it at all, and because it is said, that death reigned from Adam until
Moses, over all those that sinned not after the similitude of Adams
transgression, and the Law and the Prophets are till John, and John he came and
does come burning and shining; amongst those that were born of women was not a
greater than John, yet he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than
he, as it is written; I then asked thee how thou could give account of those
Ministrations in the inward man, and thy passage in the inward Ministration
through death, and withal I asked thee, what death had reigned over in thee,
and thou could not tell; I also asked thee how it was with thee In deaths
reign, and how thou came thorough the Ministration of condemnation, and to know
the Law and the Prophets fulfilled in thee, and to what, and how thou came to
John's Ministration, to know the fallow ground ripped up in thee, and the Ax laid
to the root of the tree, what the Tree and the Ax, and the fallow Ground was,
and how the burnings and the shinings came, and how that Ministration ceased,
and what succeeded and exceeded, but thou could give no account of them, and
the^ the devil in thee raged, thou being in union with him, fret and fumed,
and were like one of the Bulls of Bashan that is spoken o^ i^ Scripture, and I
told thee, thou ought to give me account with meekness and fear, because it
was required of thee so to do, for the Minister of Christ says, Sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always s to give an Answer to every one
that asks with meekness and fear, 1 Pet 3 15.

But hou showed that thou knew not the fear of the Lord: that were so fil^'d
with rage, fury, m^^nesse, mischief, and wickedness, lying, and false accusing
of the just, and could prove none of those things wherein thou so falsely
accused the innocent.

Oh, shame upon thee Priest Hill, that art such a man of Beliall; the Light of
God in thy conscience will prick thee at thy heart for it, and thy contrary
acting to the Light, and that light which shows thee sin and evil, and
checks and reproves thee in secret, that Light will be thy eternal
condemnation, who hates it, and acts contrary to it, and the Light of God in
thy conscience will witness for me, and the Truth against thee and thy deceit,
in thy condemnation thou will know what I say: Oh, shame, let shame cover thy
lips, who hates ^he Light, and acts so contrary to it, and all that fe^^s
God, that knows thee, may cry shame of ^hee for ever; thou enemy of all
righteousness, and child of the devil, who preaches up sin, and a continuance
in it, to uphold the devils kingdom, and so perverts the right ways of the
Lord, as thou do, tha^ Scripture which thou brought in the Acts shall stand
for thy elf; for when I charged thee to prove me to be that which thou accused
sme of, thou could not: But I shall prove thee to be a liar, and a false
Prophet, as I said, and so make it good, and prove it both by thy fruits, and
also by Scripture to confirm the same, as I said.

First, when I asked thee if thou did not preach for hire, thou denied it
openly, and before the people, and said, thou did not Preach for hire

Then secondly, I asked if there were none present there that could witness
against thee, in that thing, to prove thee 2 liar, whereupon, in that place
witness came against thee, and proved thee a liar before thy face, and lying
is of the devil, John 8.44. And all ly^rs are for ^he Lake; Read thy Reward
thou liar, and child of the Devil, Rev. 22.15. Rev. 21.^. and 27.

Then when thou was proved an open liar in that thing, thou proceeded further
to manifest thy lies, and said thou did not preach for hire, thou preached for
souls; and when it was asked thee and Priest Whetstone, both of you, what the
Soul was, thou answered positively, and said, No man living could tell what the
soul was; whereupon I there proved thee a liar in that thing, and withal I
asked thee, and you both, what you did minister unto, and watch over, that knew
not the soul, therein thou and he both, did discover your selves to be no
Ministers of Christ, nor the Gospel; for the Ministers of Christ in the New
Covenant did, an does watch for the Souls, as they that must give an account
unto God Hebrews 13.17.

Here Hill, I charge thee, and Whetstone also, in the Presence of the living
God, to be ignorant of God, and of Christ, and to be no Ministers of the
Gospel, nor the new Covenant, but are false Prophets of Rome, and never was
sent by the Lord, that knows not what the Soul is, as thou then said, and
therein thou lied again, and treebled thy lies, that said thou preached not for
hire, but for Souls, and upon the examination said positively, that thou, nor
no man living know what the Soul was: true thou know not, nor none living in
thy nature, and deceivablenesse of unrighteousness.

Woe to thee, thou liar, thou art of thy Father the devil, and a deceiver of
souls, John 8.44. And herein thou have manifest thy self, and all in thy
nature, to be acted and guided by a lying spirit: But remember thou liar, that
the lake is prepared for the liars and wicked, such as thou art, and the light
of God in thy Conscience, which thou art an enemy unto, will witness the same
for me, and the Truth, against thee and thy deceivings; and thou may read
thy reward, and all such as thou art, in Psalm. 9.17. Mat. 7.15, 16, 20, and 23.
Mat. 25.41. to the end. Rev. 21.8.

Thou art as one of those that Isaiah the true Prophet of the Lord was sent to
cry out against, that art blind and ignorant of the knowledge of God in the
inward ministration, that could not open thy mouth to speak any thing of the
mystery, Col. 1.27. but art a blind watchman, and a greedy dumb dog, and one
that preaches for hire, and seeks for thy gain from thy quarter, and place
where thou art seated, as the false Prophets did, and as the idol shepherds
and blind watchmen did, so do thou, thou blind watchman, idol shepherd,
and false Prophet, as thy fruits makes thee manifest, that preaches for hire,
and tithes, and lied, and said thou did not, Oh, shame, shame, let shame strike
thee in thy face, and cover thy lips, the light of God in thy conscience will
be an eternal witness against thee forever thou liar, and false Prophet, by
thy fruits thou art known and th^^ is the way to know false Prophets as Christ
has said: Man 7^.5.1^, 20. And thou may read amongst the true Prophets
writing^ and see thy (...) to be amongst the false Prophets, by thy actions, as
thy fruits makes thee manifest, and let the true Prophets words judge thee,
^hou false Prophet, who art an open liar, and Preaches for hire, and seeks for
the gain from thy Quarter, Place, and Parish where thou art, as the false
Prophets did, so do thou Hill, Read Isa 56 ^0, 11.

Isaiah, who was the true Prophet of the Lord, did not preach for hire, neither
did he seek for his gain from any quarter, but cried out against them that did
is thou do, for thou said openly, thou was not as Isaiah was; no more thou
art: For Isaiah was anointed by the Spirit to Preach; but thou art not, and
Isaiah said, the L rd God and his Spirit sent him to preach; but thou ran as
the false Prophets did, and thou that art not as Isaiah was, thou art a false
Prophet indeed, out of thy own mouth ar thou judged, and if Isaiah was here
now, he would cry out against thee, as he did against those in thy nature then,
that did as thou do, and as all you hireling Priests; and false Prophets do,
with the same Light and Spirit that was in Isaiah, art thou, and all you
hireling Priests, seen now, and cried out against now; We to you blind guides,
and false prophets, and hireling Priests, that run but never was sent of the
Lord, therefore do you not profit the people at all, Jer. 23.

And woe to thee Hill, thou blind guide, and false prophet, that preaches for
hire, and seeks for thy gain from thy quarter, Place, and Parish where thou
art, as the false Prophets did, and lies, and says, thou does not preach for
hire: Oh, shame upon thee Hill, for ever, that lives and acts in such gross
wickedness as thou do, but God will avenge himself on thee, and all such as
thou art, Isaiah who was the true Prophet of the Lord, he cried out against
such as thou art, and he spoke the word of the Lord freely, and said, Come
freely, without money, or price, and so do all the true Prophets of the Lord
now that are in the light, as Isaiah was: and they are anointed to preach, and
the Lord God and his Spirit sends them to preach freely as Isaiah did, and to
cry out against all such as thou art Hill; Read Isa. 48.16, 17. and Isa. 61.
Isa. 55. and tell, the true Prophets words judge thee and Priest Whetstone, and
all such as you are, that say, you are not as Isaiah was, be witness against
your selves, that you are the false Prophets, and all such as you are, who are
not as Isaiah was, for he was the true Prophet, and cried out against the
false, and descrybed them by their fruits, Isa. 56.10, 11.

And likewise Jeremiah, who was the true Prophet of the Lord, spoke freely, and
said, All the children of the Lord should be taught of the Lord, in the New
Covenant as Isaiah did; and Isaiah 54.13, 14. and Isaiah 55. Chapters, Jeremiah
31.31. to the 35. and Jeremiah the true Prophet of the Lord cried out then
against such as thou art, and said, A filthy and a horrible thing was committed
in the Land, for the prophets did prophecy falsely, and the Priests took gifts
in their hands, and bore Rule by their means, as thou Hill, and Priest
Whetstone, and all the Priests of the world receive gifts in your hands, and
bears rule by your means, and preaches for hire, and thou Hill lied, and said,
thou did not, till witness came against thee openly before thy face; Oh sad,
what a false Prophet, and hireling Priest, and liar art thou? Here I charge
thee, in the presence of the Lord, and all such as thou art, where ever they
are, to be no Gospel Ministers, but liars, deceivers, false prophets, seducers,
and Antichrists, as your fruits makes them and thee manifest, and the light of
God in thy conscience, which shows thee sin and evil, and checks and
reproves thee in secret, will witness against thee, and thy deceivablenesse,
and the Word of the Lord will rise up in judgment against thee, thou liar and
deceiver of the people, and all such as thou art, and the Scripture witnesses
against you, Read Jer. 5.30, 31. and let the true Prophets words there judge
thee, thou false prophet, and hireling Priest, and all such as thou art, that
bears rule by their means, and holds up that filthy and horrible thing, which
Jeremiah the true Prophet of the Lord saw then committed, by such as you are,
and he were sent to declare against them, as I declare against thee Priest
Hill, and all that acts such things, for by your fruits you are known to be
the false Prophets that Christ said should come, and now you are come, and
declared and testified against; Ephesians. 5.11. Mat. 7.15, 16 and 20.

But Jeremiah the true Prophet of the Lord, he did not preach for hire neither
did he bear rule by his means; but he declared against such as did and were set
in the stocks, by one Priest, and smitten on the face, Ier. 20. and Jeremiah
the true Prophet of the Lord, he pronounced woes to such as thou art, as thou
may read, Ier. 23.1, 2. And thou art one of those false prophets, which
speaks a vision of thy own heart, and makes the people light and vain, as thy
fruits and theirs makes you manifest, as him that thou called Mr. Kendall, and
others that were with thee, who were so foolish, vain, and sottish, which is
part of thy fruits, vanity upon vanity, like Priest, like people; read Ier.
23.16. Hos. 4.9.

Thou art of those false prophets that ran but never was sent by the Lord, for
thou, and Priest Whetstone both said, that you was not as Isaiah the true
Prophet was, and you said also, that a false Prophet ran before he was sent,
therefore be witness against your selves, that you are false prophets, and not
true, and ran before you was sent, that are not as Isaiah was, for Isaiah said,
he was anointed to preach by the Spirit, Isa. 61. but you are not, nor none in
your nature, likewise Isaiah the the true Prophet said, The Lord God and his
Spirit had sent him to preach, Isa. 48.16, 17. but so has not the Lord God and
his Spirit sent you to preach, who said, you was not like Isaiah the true
Prophet, that were sent; but you are the false Prophets, and all such as you
are, that has run unsent, as the false prophets did, Ier. 23.21.

And thou Hill, and Whetstone thy partner, and all such as you are, steals the
words of the true Prophets to trade withal, and sels them for money, as the
false prophets did, and the Lord is against you for it, as he was against them,
therefore are you false prophets, as your fruits makes you manifest, and as
you may read, Ierem. 13.30, 31, 32.

And you that say, that Revelations is ceased, and say there is no knowledge of
God, but by the Letter of the Scripture, as you did, when the Scripture says,
that there is no knowledge of God the Father, but by Revelation, Mat. 11.27.
Gal. 1.11, 12. Gal. 1.15, 16. Ephesians. 3. Gal. 2. 1 Pet. 1. Herein you are found
liars, false prophets, seducers, and antichrists, and brings a contrary
Doctrine to Christ, and his Apostles, therefore are you and all such to be
holden accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9.

Thou art one of those that the Prophet Micah speaks of, that cries peace peace
to people, whilst they put into thy mouth; but those that cannot for conscience
sake put into thy mouth, and give thee money and tithes, which thou have no
right to by the Law of God in the New Covenant; therefore because thou art a
false prophet, and no Gospel Minister, now thou art ready to prepare war
against them, or threaten them to go to Law with them, which Christ forbids,
Mat. 5.4* And thou may read thy condition, and all such as thou art, Micah
3.5: and the 11. And many false Prophets are gone out into the world like unto
thee, who through covetousness make merchandise of the people for their own
ends, as thou do, and as the false Prophets did; read 2 Pet 2 Thou and all
hireling Priests and false Prophets such as thou art, goes on in the ways of
Cain, in envy, as he did, and are erred from the Spirit, as Balaam was, and woe
is your portion; read Jude 11. Thou art one of those that takes the wool, and
feeds thee with the fat, as the idol shepherds and false prophets did, that
Ezekiel was sent to cry woe against, and woe is to thee, and all such as thou
art; as it was to them: Read Ezekiel 34. and let the true Prophets words judge
thee, thou false prophet, and all such as thou art: And I charge thee, and all
hireling Priests such as thou art, to show me one place of Scripture in all the
Prophets writings, if you can, when any one true Prophet of the Lords preached
for hire, and threatened to sue men at the Law for their goods, and said, they
had as good right to them as a man has to his outward inheritance; as thou and
Whetstone said you had, for speaking your lies to the people, who are Ministers
made by the will of man, and not by God, and so are false prophe^s; Stop your
mou^hs forever, plagues, and vengeance from the Lord expect, for your reward,
Isa. 3.11. Isa. 30.1. R^m. 2.5.6.

And thou art an evil beast, and a slow belly, and a liar like unto the
Cretians, whose mouth is to be stopped, and all such as thou art; read thy
self, who art in that nature, a liar, an evil beast, and a slow belly; the
light of God in thy conscience, which thou acts contrary to, will rip thee
up, and let thee see thy wickedness, and be thy condemnation who loves the
deeds of darkness, as thy fruits makes thee manifest rather than the light,
as thy fruits makes thee manifest, and as thou may read, John 3 19, 20.
read Tit. 1.^^ and the 16. Philip. 3.18, 19.

Thou holds up the idols Temple, (...) has the chiefest place in the Assembly
of envious and wicked ones, as the Scribes and Pharisees had, and thou art
called of men Mr. as they was, and woe is thy portion, as it was theirs; read
Mat. 23. and let Christ's words there judge thee, thou hypocrite, thou raging
wave of the sea, that foameth out thy own shame, read Jude 13. and thou may see
all such as thou art are reserved for blackness and darkness; Woe to thee,
thou blind guide, but if the blind lead the blind, shall not both fall into
the ditch? Mat. 15.14. Thou art ox of those that creeps into houses, having
two Steeple Houses to sell thy Brain-study, and carnal inventions there, and
deceives people, and keeps them ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, and preaches sin in stead of grace; and pleads for a
continuance in sin, and so for the devils kingdom, for he that commits sin is
of the devil, 1 John 3.8, but he that is born of God sins not, neither can
he sin, 1 John 3 9 1 John 5.18. John 4.16, 17. which birth thou knows nothing
of, nor none of thy raging fl^ck, that tore the other Letter that I sent unto
thee in your Beast house, before any of it was read, not willing that your
d^c^its should come to light, who yet worship the Beast and his image; but se^
your ^^ward, Revelations 14.9, 10, and 11. Revelations 20. 15. Revelation
22.15. Revelation 21.27. Rev. 13. and Rev. 21.8.

To the Light of God in thy conscience I speak, that with it thy mind may be
turned within, to see into thy wicked, evil and rebellious heart, and so to
wait for thy condemnation, that the Light may judge thee, and condemn thee, who
hates it, and acts contrary to it; condemnation thou cannot escape, and the
Light of God in thy conscience shall witness for me in thy condemnation, as
the book of conscience is penned. 2 These. 1.8, 9. 1 These. 2.11, 12.

Now all people, you that sees or hears this read, try your Priests by the
Scriptures, and their fruits, and you shall find them to be false prophets, as
this Hill, and Whetstone, and all such are, and beware of them, I warn and
charge you as you will answer it before the Lord; for false prophets ye shall
know by by their fruits, as Christ has said, Mat. the 7.15, 16. etc. And try
your Priests by their fruits and the Scriptures, Are they not proud and
covetous? are they not heady high-minded? are not they railers and false
accuse^s, and such as Paul speaks of in the 2 Timothy 3. from the first verse to
the sixth verse? their fruits is there described, and from such you are to turn
away: Of this sort are they that creep into houses, Steeple Houses, and keeps
you ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth by
them, verse the 6. and 7. Hear them not, nor hold them not up for the Lord is
against them, and your souls shall never be benefited by them, nor none in
their nature, for they shall not profit you at all, nor none such as they are,
as you may read, Jer. 23.32 Now you have time, prize it, and mind the Light of
God in your consciences, that which shows you sin and evil, and checks and
reproves you in your consciences when you do amiss, there is your Teacher,
that Light of God within you, loving it, and obeying it; there is your
condemnation, that light, hating it, and disobeying it; say not but that you
are warned in your life time; therefore repent, and turn from your idols and
idolatrous worship, for you worship you know not what. John 4.22.

God is a Spirit, and they that worship him now, they worship him in Spirit and
in truth, and the Father seeks such to worship him, as it is written, John
4.23, 24.

R. F.
Leistershire the 8. Month. 1654.
To the two Priests that were at the Meeting at thy house Thomas Cockeram, the
4. day of the week, and the 10. day of the 8. month; Read this to them and the
people, that they may learn to know the true Prophet and false prophet, and
Minister of Christ, and Antichrist asunder, etc.
Luke 10.5, 6.
FIrst, when I came in thy house, I said, Peace be in this house, and then the
wild wanton Priest that is at thy house, he laughed and scoffed at it, to show
forth his unbroken nature, and to fulfill the Scripture, where it is said, In
the last days there shall come scoffers, which shall walk after their ungodly
lusts, 2 Pet. 3 3 4. Here thou wanton Priest, I charge thee the Red headed man
to be no Minister of Christ, but of Antich^ist, and thou art without the fear
of the Lord, as I told thee, and showed that thou were never yet taught of God,
and also thou showed forth thy ignorance of the Scriptures, and art unfit to be
a teacher of others, who knowe^h not the first Principles, or doctrine of
Christ; for when he sent f^r^h his Disciples into the world, he said unto them,
When ye come in an house, salme it, and if the house be worthy, let your peace
come upon it, but if the house be not worthy, let your peace return to you
again; and whosoever shall not receive, nor hear your words, when you depart
out of that house or City, shake off the dust of your feet; for it shall be no
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorah in the day of judgment, than for that
City Mat. 10.12, 13, 14, 15. And thou, the young wild Priest Houldersh^w, thou
showed that thou were never taught of God, nor sent of Christ, for if thou had,
thou could have received his doctrine, and his Messenger, but thou showed thy
self like one of Pharaohs fed and wild horses, without government, or any
humility or moderation at all, and the Minister of God exhorted young men to be
sober minded, and to let their moderation appear to all men; but thou
Houldershaw had no sobriety nor moderation at all, nor no solidenesse, nor
gravity, temperance patience, nor honesty, nor stayednesse at all; but were
filled with laughter and folly, and foolishness, like a foolish, wild, wanton
youth, without any government, as thy deeds made thee manifest, and the light
of God in thy conscience will witness against thee, though thy conscience be
seared, and the earthly part above, where the deceit has its passage, like a
high way ground, where wilderness and wantonness, foolishness and giddiness
runs up and down, and treachery and deceit has its abode, and lodges in the
seat of darkness, where lust and access, pride, boasting, lying, vainglory,
scorn, and disdain is; yet the light that is within thy conscience will awaken
thee, and rip thee up one day, and be a swift witness against thee, and be thy
eternal condemnation that hates it and acts contrary to it, and contrary to
the Scriptures also, which says, Put away jesting with foolish talking, etc.
Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5.6 But thou takes delight in that which the Scriptures forbids,
and acts contrary to the light in thy conscience willingly, and wilfully, and
rejoiceth in thy iniquity, and in thy foolishness, here I charge thee again in
the presence of the Lord, to be no Minister of Christ, but of Antichrist, and
thou art a servant of the devil, and the light of God in thy conscience, which
checks and reproves thee in secret for sin and evil, will witness against
thee, and greater will thy condemnation be, thou liar, and wanton one, thou
scoffer and boaster, proud, foolish and profane one, thou servant of sin, and
enemy of righteousness, thou serpent and viper, how shall thou escape the
damnation of hell? Call not thou this railing, for it is Scripture language, to
the seed thou art of, and to that nature thou art in; and the light of God in
thy conscience will witness the same, as the book of conscience is opened; and
the Scriptures bears witness against thee, and all in that nature, as thy
fruits makes thee manifest, Romans 1.21, 22. and Romans 1.28. to the end, Romans
2.5, 6. Romans 6.16. John 8.34, 44. 1 John 3.8. Math. 23.33.

And when I asked the other Priest Bennet instead of you both, whether he were
a Minister of the Letter or of the Spirit, he said, of both the Letter and of
the Spirit, but Paul, and the Gospel Ministers said, ye was not Ministers of
the Letter, but of the Spirit, 1 Cor 3 6. so he and thou both was found to be
contrary to Paul and the Gospel Ministers in that; but because I know him and
thee to be but Ministers of the Letter, and no Ministers of Christ, nor the
Gospel, nor the Spirit, therefore did I ask him and thee both of you, a
Question concerning the Ministry in the Spirit, that it migh be made manifest
to others, that he nor thou, neither of you was no Ministers of the Spirit, for
I asked him as well as thee, how he could give account of the inward
Ministration and what death had reigned over in him, and how he came to the Law
and hrough the Prophets; and know J^hn in burnings and to come burning and
shining and what succeeded and exceeded, that it he were a Minister of the
Spirit, he might give account of the passing from death unto life, and to speak
in the Ministry of the Spirit, but neither he nor thou could answer to that,
nor give account of any thing at all concerning those Ministrations: Then I
begun to declare against your igno^ance to the people, and to lay open your
deceits, and that Priest Bennet, he b^lld, and ^^ared like a mad Bull, and
whouted like a Ran^ier, or a Hun e^, least the people should hear your deceits
laid open, but you are made manifest: On ^hame, ^hame, let shame strike you in
^h ^aces, and cover your lips, and st^p your mouths for ever ma ing a
pro^ession of G^^ o^ Christ more in that nature, who are desperately wicked;
and Th^^^s Cocke^am, and all that have a desire to fear God be you ashamed of
^he ^^es, carriages and actions of those wicked Priests, that were so fi^hy,
and wicked, and take heed how you hold them up; I warn you and ch^rg^ you in
the presence of the Lord, as you will answer it before the judgment seat of
Christ, lest you be partaker of th^^ plagues, and the curse of God come upon
you for it, Rev. 18. To the light of Christ Jesus in all your consciences I
speak, that with it your minds may be turned within, to see into your own
hearts, and see if ever you get benefited any thing by them at all, that will
stand you in stead, in the day of trial; no, nor never shall benefit by them,
nor none in their nature, who are out of the light, and out of the truth as
they are; hear them not, not ho^d them not up, as you will answer it, for the
Lord is against them, and all such as ^hey are, and their blessing is accursed,
like those Priests spoken of in Mal. 2.1, 2.3 to the 10. And the Lord will make
them contemptible in the eyes of all his people. And was he not blind? You
might see their baseness, as it were manifested that day; and if the blind
lead the blind, shall not both fall into the ditch? Mat. 15.14.

Now say not but that you are warned in your life time, for to the light of God
in all your consciences shall I be witnessed in the terrible day of the Lord,
to whom my testimony was declared, that day as the book of conscience is
opened; and Cockeram, to the light of God in thy conscience I speak, that which
shows thee sin and evil, and checks and reproves thee in secret, and lets
thee see when thou do amiss, and acts contrary to it, that, with the light
of God in thy conscience, thy mind may be turned toward God from whence the
light comes, in it to wait for teaching, and deny those Priests and blind
guides, for all the children of ^he Lord shall be taught of the Lord, as he
has promised, Isa. 54.13, 14. Jer. 31.31. to the 3.5. Ezekiel. 34.11, 12, to the
17. John 6 45. Heb. 8, 10, 11. John 1.9. John 8.12. Now if thou love that light
which shows thee sin and evil, and reproves thee in secret, there is thy
teacher, that light, loving it, and obeying it; there is thy condemnation for
ever, that light hating it, and disobeying it, John 3.19, 20. Now thou have
time, prize it, and take heed who thou entertaineth in thy house such a proud,
foolish, wild, wanton, heedy, high-minded, scornful, and disdainful one in
thy house, under the name or pro^ession of a Minister of Christ, as that
Redheaded fellow the young Priest is, who has not so much as a form of
godliness, therefore not the power, and if thou and the rest were not very
dark and blind in the things of God, thou and all the rest might see, that
Houldershaw, nor Bennet, nor none in their nature, who are of the seed of the
serpent, as they are, do neither follow Jesus Christ, nor his true Ministers
for their example, as their fruits makes them manifest, and they do not abide
in the Doctrine of Christ, therefore have they not God, but are the false
Prophets, seducers, and antichrists, hold them not up, for God is against them,
and all such are by Believers, and the children of the light to be denied;
therefore receive not such into thy house, under that pretense which thou
receives them, neither bid them God speed, lest thou be made partaker of their
evil deeds; 2 John 9, 10, 11. Now thou art warned, and to the light of God in
thy conscience am I made manifest, yet shut up from thy dark mind, for light
shines in darkness, but darkness comprehends it not, as it is written and
witnessed, John 1.5.

Now I shall prove them two Priests, Bennet and Houldershaw, and all in their
nature, who are out of the light, and out of the truth as they are, to be no
Gospel Ministers, but false prophets, as their fruits makes them manifest, and
the Scriptures they witness against them, for, says Jesus Christ, false
prophets shall come, but by their fruits shall ye know them, for they say and
do not, and are workers of iniquity, and are cursed, therefore must they depart
from him, as he has said, and as it is written and witnessed. Math. 7.15, 16,
20, 23. Do they not say, that they are Ministers of Christ, and do they not
say, that Christ has sent them, etc. But they have no authority from Christ,
neither are they approved of by him, who do neither abide in his Doctrine, nor
follow him for their example, therefore are they false prophets that say and
do not; they say, that they are sent of Christ, but they do not abide in his
Doctrine, neither do they follow him for their example, and he that says he is
in Christ, ought himself also to walk even as he walked, as it is written and
witnessed, 1 John 2.4, 5, 6. But Priest Houldershaw, and Priest Bennet, and all
the Priests of the world and Ministers of man, walk contrary to Christ, and do
no not abide in his Doctrine, as their fruits makes them manfest, etc. For
Christ was never proud, neither had he any man's person in admiration, because
of advantage; but the Priests of the world, or Ministers of man, they respect
rich men for their riches, and disrespect poor men for their poverty, and have
great men's person in admiration, because of advantage, that they also may be
great in the earth, and be called Masters, and bear Rule over poor people by
their means, as the false Priests and false Prophets did, and they are
exceeding proud, therefore do they not keep the Commands of Christ, nor walk as
he walked; but transgresses and abides not in his doctrine, and so h^th not
God, as it is written, 2 John 9 and they say men should not be proud, but they
do not deny it themselves, and so they are evil examples; for they say and do
not, therefore are they false prophets, Mat. 7.15. to the end. The true Christ
was never covetous, nor given to pleasures, but the Priests are both pruod,
covetous, and men that follows pleasures, and worldly vanities, therefore are
they not of Christ, and do not follow him for their example, nor walk as he
walked, and they say men should should not be covetous, but they do not deny
it, but love it themselves, and so say and do not, therefore are they false
prophets, and known by their fruits; and they are vain and light and wanton,
and given to pleasures, and so nourish their hearts as in a day of slaughter,
and kills and slayes the holy One, and the just, James 5^ and the 5. Hosea 6.
and the 9.

But the true Christ was a man of sorrows, despised and rejected of men, Isa.
53. and so is he despised and rejected now by them and the Priests that are as
they are, proud, and covetous, and light, and wanton, and vain, as the two
Priests at thy house were; therefore do they not follow the Example of Christ,
but they make the people light and vain, as the false Prophets did, and as they
do, and as their fruits makes them manifest, and as may be red in Ier. 23. and
the 16.

And the people looking at them, the Priests or Ministers of man for their
examples, and seeing them having men's persons in admiration, because of
advantage, and seeing them proud and covetous, and wanton, and vain; and given
to sports, and pleasures, and seeing them sue, and at strife, and envy and
hate, and hearing them revile and speak evil of the ways of godliness, and
seeing them given to disdain and laughter, and vanity, foolishness, and folly,
etc. And they that are without the true fear of the Lord, are ready to look at
them to walk after, and they that fear the Lord are despised by them, etc.

The people are ready to say within themselves, if it was not right, they would
not do it, professing themselves to be men of God, and Ministers of Christ, and
say they, know his mind and will, as the Priests say they do, etc. Therefore
says the people in their hearts, If the Priests, or their Ministers, as they
call them, can do so, as to be proud, and covetous, and sue, and go to Law; and
envy, and hate, and be at strife and variance, and laugh, and scoff, and
sport, and play, and follow pleasures, why may not we do so? we do but as they
do, that are our leaders, and if it was not right, they surely would not do it;
for they know more than we do, and if they do it, we may do it, etc. Therefore
are they evil Examples, and ignorant people are seduced and led into error and
wickedness by them, and takes encouragement from them to do evil, as they
do, and so the Scriptures comes to be fulfilled, the leaders of the people
causes them to err, as it is written, Isa. 9.16. And again there is like
Priest, like people, as it is written and witnessed, both by their fruits, and
by Scripture, Hos. 4.9 And if the blind lead the blind, shall not both fall
into the di^ch, Mat. 15 14. And if your understandings were enlightened, you
would see all the Priests, of the world to be out of the light, and out of the
truth, as their actions declares, and their fruits makes them manifest, and
the Scriptures bears witness against them, and their deceiveablenesse with
the light which changes not, are they and their pernicious ways seen and
comprehended, and wi^h the light are they and all deceivers, seducers, false
christ's, and false prophets, and workers of iniquities, from God, and from
Christ, to be condemned, as it is written and witnessed, and we to the wicked,
for it shall go ill with them, Isa. 3.11. Psalm. 7.19. 2 These. 1.8, 9. 2 Thessalonians
2.11, 12. Rev. 20.

The false prophets ran, but never was sent of the Lord, therefore did they not
profit the people at all, but caused them to err by their lies and by their
lightness, and so have those hireling Priests, Houldershaw and Bennet, and all
in their nature, ^un, but the Lord never sent them, therefore do they not profit
the people at all, but causes them to err by their lies, and by their
lightness, as the false prophets did, and as they do, both as their fruits
makes them manifest, and also as they run parallel with the ^^^e prophets, as
the Scriptures with their fruits largely witnesses. Jer. 12.16.17, ^8, 19, 20,
21. and the 30.3, 32. verses.

The false prophets, blind watchmen, and idol shepherds preach for hire, and
bear rule by their means, and sought for their gain from their Quarter, and
made the people light and vain, and proud and covetous, etc. So do those false
prophets, and blind guides, wil^^, wanton, covetous proud Priests now, who are
without the fear of the Lord, as their fruits makes them manifest, laughing,
and whouting, and ranting, and acting like Stage Players, for money, and ends
as they do, as their actions declares, and as Redhead and the other Priest did
at thy house Thomas Cockeram, and they preach for hire as the false prophets
did, and they feed themselves with the fat, and clothes them with the wool as
the false prophets and idol shepherds did, taking the wool, and the Lamb and
the Tithes, which they have no right ^o by the Law of God, professing
themselves to be the Ministers of Christ, the Gospel, and the New Covenant, and
they seek from their Quarters, places and parishes where they are, as the false
prophets did, so do they, their fruits does witness against them, and the
Scriptures witness the same to prove them to be amongst the false prophets,
blind watchmen, idol shepherds, and hireling Priests, as it is written and
witnessed, Jer. 5.30, 31. Isa. 56.10, 11. Ezekiel. 34. Likewise they follow the
wages of unrighteousness, as the false prophets did and they ^y peace, peace
to the people as the false prophets did, whilst they put into their mouths,
and pay them Tithes, and give them silver, for telling their lies, who when
they cannot for conscience sake toward God upho^d them in their
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, then they prepare war against them, are at
strife, sues and goes to Law wi^h them, to take treeble damage, and take their
goods by constraint, as Bennet and others have done; and so rules by force and
by cruelty, as those did as the Lord sent Ezekiel the true Prophet to cry out
against, Ezekiel 3.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. All those and such like do not abide in the
Doctrine of Christ, and so has not God, as their fruits makes them manifest,
and the Scriptures, they also witness against them, and woe to them, or they go
on in the ways of Cain, and follow the error of Balaam, preaching for gifts,
and rewards, and they have men's persons in admiration, because of advantage,
and the curse is upon all such, for they love not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
minds their be^lies, and earth and earthly things, and are enemies to the
cross of Christ, which is cause for the people of God to mourn; Paul the
Gospel Minister did, because of such, Jude 11. and the 16. 1 Cor. 16.22. Phil.
3.18, 19. What meanings needs the Scriptures? those that have eyes to see may
see, the Priests to be as a den of thieves and robbers, and never came in by
the door, but as a troop of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests
they murder in the way by consent, and by their it fruits are they known, and
the Scriptures they witness the same; here is a cloud of witnesses against
them to prove them to be deceivers and false prophets, seducers and
Antichrists, that do not abide in the doctrine of Christ, but are in the evil
nature, and guided by the same spirit that the false prophets were, and they
run parallel with them, try them by the Scriptures and their fruits, for Christ
has said, that by their fruits they shall be known, Mat. 7.15. 2 Pet. 2. Mica.
3.5. and 11. Mat 5.40. Ezekiel. 34. 2 John 9. John 10. Hosea. 6.9.

Likewise they are called of men Masters, which Christ forbids, Mat. 23.8. and
the 10. Mark 10.42, 43, 44. And they have the chiefest places in the Idols
Temples, and Assemblies as the Scribes and Pharisees had, who were enemies to
Jesus Christ then as they are now, and they act as the Scribes and Pharisees
did, which Christ cried woe against then, and woe to the Priests now that are in
their nature, and acts as they did, therefore greater wh^ their condemnation
be, as may be red, Mat. 23. to the 34. Mark 12.38, 39.40. And as they Preach
for hire, and are proud, and covetous, and oppresses poor people, and are
called of men Master, which Christ forbids, and holds up the idols temple, and
has the chiefest place; So they sprinkle Infants, for which they have no rule
in the Scripture, and tells people it is an Ordinance of Christ, when it is but
one of their inventions, and a mark of the B^ast, Rev. 13.8. and 16. And here
they are liars and deceivers of people for their own ends, and they call people
to a Sacrament, when there is not such 2 word in all the Scriptures as
Sacrament, neither in new: or old Covenant; here again they are liars and
seducers, and causes people to worship they know not what; and they tell
people, or have told them, that the Steeple Houses are Churches, when the
Church is in God, and made all of living stones Elect and precious, and a
spiritual house for God to dwell in, by and thorough the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 1 1
Pet. 2.5. Ephesians 1.22, 23. Ephesians. 2 19, 20, to the end. Ephesians. 5.5, 26, 27. Thus they
have deceived people with their lies; and they stand praying in the Synagogue
or idol temple, as the Pharisees and hypocrites who are enemies to Christ as
they are, therefore are they to be denied, and declared against, as Christ did
declare against such then, Mat. 6.5. 1 Cor. 8, 10. Luke 20, 45, 46, 47. Mark
12.38, and the 39. And they tell the people, they shall never be set free from
sin here, and nothing that is unclean shall in no wise enter into the holy
City, Rev. 21.27 And they are proud, and wanton, and foolish, and vain and
filthy, like hankers, or hunters and ranters, as they manifested themselves at
thy house that day, Thomas Cockeram; such are satannicall or the devils
Ministers, and no Ministers of Christ, for the Ministers of Christ are
blameless, as the stewards of God, not self-willed, not soon angry, not given
to wine, no strikers, not greedy of filthy lucre, etc. Tit. 1.7, 8. Acts 20.33,
34, 35. 1 Timothy 3. Ch 1 Cor. 9.16, 17, 18. etc. But thy Priests which thou
upholds, and intertaineth, and all the Priests of the world, and the Ministers
of man, are clear contrary to the Ministers of the Gospel, who are not made by
the will of man: Gal. 1.11, 12, 2 Cor. 3.6. as their fruits makes them
manifest: Oh shame, shame, let shame strike them all in the face, and Cockeram,
and all that desire to fear God, and serve him, take heed how you hold up such
as the Lord is against, as you will answer it before the judgment seat of
Christ, now you are forewarned, and this may serve to be a testimony against
all the Priests of the world, and to let people know that they are the false
Prophets, Steeple-house-creepers, seducers, and Antichrists, cease from them,
and hold them not up, the Lord is against them, now you have time prize it.

How House-creepers may be known.
Such creep into houses, and lead silly women captive, laden with sins, and
keeps them ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth, are described by their fruits to be self-seeking men, and proud men, and
heady high-minded men, and of that sort as they are prescribed by their fruits,
in the 2 Timothy 3. from ^he 1. to the 6. verse, and such as those are found
crept, and creeping into the Steeplehouse, or idols temples set up in the time
of Popery, and sells their Brain-study there to deceive the people withal, and
keeps them ever learning, and they shall never know the life of truth by them
that are such, 2 Timothy 3.7, 8, 9. But Paul did not speak against meeting in
private houses, and plain places, and upper chambers, etc. For if he should
have spoken against them that meet in privats houses or plain places, or upper
chambers, and if so then he would have spoken against the practice of the
Saints after Christ's Ascension, and also he would have spoken against his own
practice after he came into the Ministry of Christ, if he should have spoken
against Meetings in private houses, and plains, but he spoke not against such,
for that was the practice of the Saints, after Christ's ascension, Read those
Scriptures, and see, Acts 1.13.14, etc. Acts 2.1, 2. etc. Acts 4.31, 32. Acts
8.1, 2, 3. etc. Acts 10.21. to the end. Acts 17.5 6, 7. etc. 22, 23, 24, 25.
verses. Acts 16.13, 14.32. Acts 20.7, 8. and 20. Acts 28.30, 31. 1 Cor. 16.19.
Coloss. 4.15.

FINIS.

