A FUNERAL SERMON Thundered forth by JOHN FEAK In his Private Congregation, FOR
The Loss of their Dearly beloved CHAMPION, Maj. Genesis Harison

LONDON: Printed for I.P. in the year 1660.

The Honorable History of the Seven Champions of Christendom, CHAP. 15. VER.
20. Thou speak in vain, replied St. George, not all the Treasures hidden in
the deepest Seas, nor all the golden Mines of rich America, shall redeem thy
life.
It Is very true, my Beloved; for when a man must die, who the devil can help
it. Almidor King of Morocco being to die, would have given St. George more than
our deceased Champion was worth to have saved his life, yet, quoth he, thou
speak in vain. Then answered the Morocco Emperor, Why do I speak in vain?
spare but my life and I will give thee yearly ten runs of tried gold. B^t St.
George replied, Thou speak in vain. Nay further, quoth the Emperor, I will
give thee five hundred Webs of woven Silk, a hundred Ships of Spices and
refined Sugar, and a hundred wagons laden with Pearls and Jasper-stones.
Sabra, who was a woman that loved new Gowns, Caudles, and Jewels, hearing that,
fell at her husbands feet, and fain she would have begged his life but neither
her entreaty, nor the tears of the poor Emperor could prevail, Thou speak in
vain, quoth St. George, not all the Treasures hidden in the deepest Seas, nor
all the golden Mines of America, shall redeem thy life. Beloved, I think this
Text is as pat to our purpose as a Cows thumb; if you don't like it, you may go
seek a better where you can find it. For first, it is a dogged surly Text: and
secondly, it is a vainglorious, proud, imperious. Text; and therefore be not
angry that I am so testy, for we are now to preach surlily and doggedly,
according to the nature of the person whom we are to speak of. Nor shall we
call ye Brethren any more, as in preachments of a milder nature, but pitiful
fellows, such as he would have made ye, had he had but life and power together.
And if ye don't like the term, ye may get you out of the Church. First then ye
pitiful Rascals, let us consider the words. But stay: was he ever wont to
consider when he lived? No: Then why should we consider the words? I will not
consider the words. Why ye pitiful Rascals, will you make me? -- ye shall be
hanged first -- I come here to make a Funeral Sermon. -- I come not here to
consider the words. Here one interrupts him in the Pulpit.
-- Then pray good friend let ye the words alone. -- Sirrah, now I will
consider the words. -- Yes that I will in spite of your teeth. -- Let me see,
what is the first word? Thou. I marry sir, there is a bold word indeed. He does
not come sneaking, and cry You, or Your Worship, or Your Lordship, or Your
Highness, or Your Majesty, but downright Thou, to show him he was none of his
fellows that he spoke to. He was not afraid to thou him to his face; I like a
fellow that speaks with metal. For ought I know it was too good for him: nay
now I think on it, it was too good for him. -- How do I know? -- Why I do know,
and I will know, and I wonder who should know but I? Why, who did St. George
speak to? Why, he spoke to a King, what if he did? Our deceased Champion has
spoke to a King before now. Speak to the King! why he thought himself as good a
man as the King could do for his ears. He -- he card no more for the King, than
I care for a straw: He was one of his Judges mun, one of those that condemned
him; then give me leave to tell ye: give me leave do I say? nay I Will take leave
to tell ye, that a Judge is a better man than a prisoner at any time.

Thou speak: This is not a word to my mind; it is too meek, it is not sturdy
enough, ye rogues you, it should be thou pratest, and I Will lay my l^fe now it is
so in the Original; Pox take him for a Puppy, why could not he translate it as
it should be? Rogue -- an I had him here, I Would make him translate it as I would
have it -- Why, it is as it should be -- Ye lie, Another interruption
it is not as it should be -- What do I do? Pervert the Text do you say? What Is
that to you; Sirrah? I Will pervert it, and pervert it, and pervert it again; yes
and I Will pervert a hundred Texts more if I have a mind to it. Ye Rogue you,
I Would have to know that I am not afraid to pervert a Text. Am I bound to follow
the Text? No; let the text follow me and 'twill. Well then, let it be thou
pratest -- let it be! -- I say it shall be so -- The fellow -- You Will say he was
an Emperor, -- shit o the Emperor -- The fellow I say, was saucy -- What Is the
matter? -- Why, he would have begged his life of one that would not give it
him, and therefore he was answered in his own coin. Why if a Cavaleer should
come to beg his life of me, are you such Fools and Puppies to think I Would give
it him? No I warrant ye -- Yet I would not say to him as if I were afraid of
him. Thou speak in vain -- but Sirrah, thou pratest in vain: and so drive on
to the next. Thou pratest in vain. That is, thou talkest like a Fool, an Ass,
and a Cox-comb, of whose words there is no more notice to be taken, then of the
barking of a Beggars Cur Here now must I wedge in a little speech concerning
Forgiveness. He spies some body sleeping
Ye Rogues you, I command ye to give attention -- You friend, do you hear there!
what cant you hold open your eyes? I had thought I had bawld loud enough to
keep ye waking, good folks -- but some will give the devil opportunities in
spite of a man's heart -- take heed, take heed -- when your soul is gone a wool
gathering, the devil he comes and takes possession -- But as concerning
forgiveness; I Will tell ye, it is the basest quality in the world -- it is a sign
of Good nature, and what is Goodnature, but folly, and simplicity? Look ye now,
I have given you a reason for what I say, it is more then I need to do, I tell
ye, I do use to give reasons for every thing I say: Then I tell ye again that
Forgiveness is an ill quality, a base quality, a vile quality, never use it,
never practice it, y' are damnd if ye do, the devil, the devil will certainly
have ye if ye let it enter into your breasts -- Now ye Rogues, you would have a
reason for this, would ye? -- Yes when y' are hanged, ye shall have new
doublets -- Reason quether! what would you do with reason? Stop Glister-pipes?
What quirks the devil puts into folks heads? Does the devil give ye any
reason, I wonder? And yet you can believe the devil, and wont believe me. But I
care not for that, I say forgiveness is a base quality, and I Will justifi't, and
I believe if the the truth were known the devil is of my mind too, if he be
not, he is a Ninny-hammer, and a Woodcock -- But we must forgive our brother
seven times -- I confess a brother is a near relation, but I am so far from
forgiving any body, that rather then I would forgive my brother seven times,
I Would go seven mile to see him hanged. Thus much by the by. Thou speak in
vain, replied St. George.

I make no question but you have all a very great desire to know who St. George
is: But suppose I have not a mind to tell ye If I thought you did not take it for
a Courtesy, I Would not tell ye, though it were to save your Souls. However, if I
do, it is more my goodness then your deserts. Why this St. George was the likest
man to our deceased Champion that ever was in the world. He was the son of a
woman, and so was our Champion: but he was not the daughter of a woman, no more
was our Champion. He had a left arm and a right arm, and so had our Champion:
He killed a Dragon, and so did not our Champion; S. George he was for England,
and our Champion he was for the Fifth Monarchy. St. George was mighty furious,
and so was our Champion. St. George went from Coventry to Dunsmore, and our
Champion went from London to Warrington-Bridge; That journey broke St. Georges
heart; and this journey broke our Champions heart: Judge you now how like they
are. I hope ye are satisfied, if ye are not I cannot help it; I am not to stay
here all day to give you satisfaction. But why Saint George, and not Sir
George? as if Saint were a better Title than Sir. But I say, No: for every man
may be a Saint that will, but every man cannot be a Sir, unless it be conferred
upon him for some noble act. Is a Knight then a better man then the King? Yes
marry is he -- How do I prove that? -- Thus: if the Knight try the King, then
the Knight is a better man then the King; but the Knight did try the King,
Therefore -- but that was against Law, you will say -- You Rogues I know the time
when ye durst as well have bin Hanged as have said so -- But what if it were
against Law. What then? All men know, the Law's abolish't. -- But it is against
the Gospel then -- it is not, -- but suppose it were so: What Is the Gospel to
us? I have preached against it a hundred times. The Gospel! why if a man be
resolved, it signifies no more than the Story of Tom Thumb. Does it not, y'ould
say? No ye Rogues, that it don't. -- How dare you contradict me? Was I ever in
Orders? Did ye ever see me preach with a Gown on? Did I ever keep close to my
Text? Then I say again, How dare you gainsay me? Don't let me thunder among ye,
don't let me throw fire and brimstone among ye; for if ye do, I Will make you smoke
in faith: Nay I Will begin even now while I think on it.

For the fifth Vial is poured out, and a tempest, a furious tempest, and a
tempest of fury issues from the East, with a great smoke, and a Thunderclap of
wrath and indignation upon all Nations, and the terrible things that are to
come shall make the Children quake, the Nurses tremble, Big-bellyed women shall
groan at their Delivery; for the Sun shall shine by day, and the Moon shall
shine by night, the Earth shall stand still, and the Waves of the Sea shall
roar, then the wicked shall fall into the pit, but cursed is he that goes with
a Pitch-fork in one hand, and a pair of Bellows in the other, thinking to pick
up the gleanings of Ephraim where they are not to be found. -- Bounce, --
bounce, -- bounce, -- there are three Amalekites slain. -- Bounce, -- bounce,
-- bounce, -- there are six Amalekites slain. -- So shall all the Amalekites be
slain. Cucumbers shall not grow in Egypt, nor Musk-melons in the Valley of
Jehosaphat: then all things shall be as it was in the beginning. There you
Rogues you, there is an Excursion for you. Now let us see what is next.

Not all the Treasures hidden in the deepest Seas, nor all the golden Mines of
rich America, shall redeem thy life. I, did St. George say so? 'twas resolutely
spoken upon my soul: but it was spoke more like a Soldier than a Politician;
and that was our deceased Champions fault: the devil take him for me, he has
soldier'd himself out of this world by his foppery. For my part, if the fellow
would have given me half so much, I would have saved his life. But Almidor was
a dull, thick-pated fellow, and understood not how St. George mis-understood
his promise: for mark how the words run, Not all the treasures hidden in the
sea. What a devil should a man do with all the treasures hidden in the sea? but
if Almidor would have taken 'um out of the sea, and given 'um to St. George,
and St. George had then refused to save his life, he had been the greatest fool
in the world. But perhaps the times were not so hard as now. -- I don't know
that, nor I don't much mind it. Let the times be hard or soft, he ought not to
refuse such a proffer as that was, especially being a Saint; I am sure it has
not been the practice of the Saints in my time. And for my part, I believe we
have as good Saints now, as any they had then: And so Exposition farewell and be
hanged, that is twice god-buy.

Being thus quit of our Exposition, let us uncase our Doctrine, which I
perceive by the story will be a very long one, even as long as the Maggot that
was in our Champions head.

That if a man have an enemy, and that enemy lie at his mercy, then it is the
duty of that man to kill that enemy, though he would give never so much to save
his life.

This Doctrine, ye Rogues, is very true, I Will swear it to be a truth. Old Fiery
face that dyed with a horspocks was of this opinion, and left it behind him as
his Basilicon Doron to his son, but the Puppy had not the wit to practice it.
Why if the King could, and would have given that old Hypocrite a Mansion in
heaven, it would not have saved his life; and I have have heard our deceased
Champion say, That before his Son should have dominion over him, he would roll
to his grave in blood. Hector of Troy in his life of Judith and Holophernes,
says, That a man ought to seek all opportunities to murder his enemies; For,
says he, when thou have done a man a mischief, be sure thou never let it be in
his power to do thee another. Attila King of the Vandals, swears a great Oath
in his Comment upon Bell and the Dragon, that he took as much delight in
killing and slaying his enemies, as Richard Cromwell took in hawking and hunting
Tamerlane in his Treatise of Repentance, says, That he never repented of any
thing, but that he did not kill Bajazett presently after he had taken him; For,
says he, suppose the Forces of Bajazett had beaten me, and he had got loose,
then might he have carried me in a Cage, as I have carried him in a Cage.
Orlando Furioso in his book called The Vanity of Forgiveness, says absolutely
there is no such thing, and for my part I believe it, and if you wont, ye are
not of my mind, and who is not of my mind, is damned: if you wont believe
that neither, kiss my backside.

Hold! What have I forgot? Now I think on it I have a Letter from our deceased
Champion which was given me by his wife, to read to ye for your satisfaction;
But as for your satisfaction I value not that of a straw, I only read it for
my own minds sake, and because it is a novelty, and therefore ye varlets you
give attention.

My most affectionate, and dearly beloved consort,
VVIshing thee health and happiness and the enjoyment of all worldly comforts,
for I find those which we have in this place are no way like unto them, know
that I have wrote these lines unto thee, to certify to thee the truth of a
thing, which among all these spiritual experiences which I bragged to have
while I was accustomed to thy sheets, was never revealed unto me till now. Thou
know that when we last took our leaves upon earth, I swear unto thee by the
last holy parting-kiss that I gave thee, that I would not so forsake thee but
would be with thee again before three days should be at an end, after the hand
of the wretched Executioner had destroyed my carnal body. But so it is, that
upon better knowledge I now find an eternal stop put unto my journey, so that
it is impossible for me to be as good as my word, as indeed every honest man
ought to be: now because I cannot come I have sent, knowing that to be a point
of breeding which excuses breach of promise, yea even among the most exact.
Therefore I desire thee not to stay for me to supper, and unless it be for the
comfortable solace of thy own appetite, I entreat thee not to lay down the fat
Capons, nor to perpare Oysters for sauce: It Is true we had many Chimaeras in
our heads, and talked of sitting upon thrones, but I was so much deceived that
when I came hither, I could hardly find so much as a cricket to rest my self
upon, though much tired with the length of my journey.

Thou will say that Spirits may walk, and why may not I walk as well as any
other spirits. Alas my dear wife the case is not the same. For the bodies of
those that walk are laid whole in their graves, so that the Devil has nothing
to do but to open the Coffin and let him out, but my body is so slasht and so
mangled, that the devil will never take the pains to put them together again,
for you must not think my dear wife that it is a small trouble to go from gate
to gate, and there to clamber up and fetch down the quarters, and then to
clamber up and put um again in their places, besides the continual charges, as
pensions for Bone-setters, Smiths to make screws for my joints, and Loath-bury
Clock-makers, to make my eyes roll in my head. Alas what good can I do the if I
should come; for I know thou will expect that I should do as I did formerly,
but cursed be the Hangman and the Hang-mans man who cut off these members the
first thing they did, and burnt them to ashes: Therefore oh Daughter of woman
better is it that I should stay from thee, then come to cause in thee a longing
desire after that comfort which I am not able to afford thee. Therefore make
use of some body else who is among the living, for there are among the brethren
many that have as good instruments as I ever had, and will be willing to do
thee a courtesy for my sake. By this time I believe, thou may be almost
blind with weeping, therefore I shall say no more but this, prithee commend me
to all the brethren of our profession, and tell them that if they will come
where I am, they must keep on in their old course, which I the rather advise
them to do, because I would have others damned as well as my self.

A Barathro infernali, October. 16. 1660.

Look ye, ye Rogues you, did you ever hear such a Letter as this? Ye may thank
me for it, a Letter from hell ye Rogues you: There Is news for ye -- Now you that
are so much for heaven, what think ye of Hell now? -- You had thought there had
bin no honest men there, I warrant, -- but ye see there are -- Well then -- and
why goodman Cox-combs will not you go to Hell then -- a Rope take ye all, it is
too good for ye, unless ye were better. Do but mark here the honesty of this
man, he had promised his wife to come to her in three days, good woman she
could say no otherwise then she was told, and she tells you, that he said so.
Well then! what of all this? As if a man might not promise sometimes a thing
which he knows he cannot perform, and sometimes a thing which he never intends.
But this man doubtless did intend to come though when he saw he could not, he
sent word by the first return of the post. But you will say is not his wife very
sorry? Why goodman Puppies, what have you to do whether she be or no -- good
now meddle with your own business -- What need you be asking so many questions
to trouble your brains? If I don't tell you as much and more then you are able
to carry away, without your help, let me suffer for it.

For when I came in, his wife was a saying, Lord I wonder my husband does stay
so long, and knows that the meat will be spoiled. I wonder too, said I, truly I
don't think he will come to night. Yes, yes, I am certain on it, quoth she.
Would he would come away then, thought I, for I was very hungry, and was very
melancholy to see such good meat like to be over Roasted: Well -- While I was
in these meditations, my gutts chiding my stomach, and my stomach making
defenses and excuses to my gutts, in comes this Letter, I read it over, and
when I saw he would not come, I cen bid the maid set the meat upon the Table,
for we teachers ye know, are always very familiar where we come. She wept, I
swallowed my victuals; Come Sister quoth I, the more you weep, the less you will
Piss and so I comforted her as well as I could, but she would not be comforted
but wept exceedingly. From hence I gather that necessity has no law: for I
find by the story that our brother would have bin glad with all his heart to
have come again, but it seems he cannot. And for my part I don't care whether
he ever do or no, only I had a mind to read the Letter, because she desired
me, it may be she may do me as good a turn. But that is nothing to you, and so
lets jogg on to the Uses.

Is it so then that a man ought not to save the life of his foe, though he
would give him never so much.

Then let this serve for a use of admonition, to admonish us to make our selves
great in this world, that we may be able to destroy all our enemies. Namely
Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Lords, Viscounts, Knights and
Gentlemen. For these, mark what I say ye Varlets, are the posts, by which Satan
upholds his weak Government upon the Earth: Ay but ye Rogues you, I can tell
you one thing, they are but ^otten posts; stay but a little while and they
shall be all pulled down, for our King shall come among them with a fiery
indignation, who is King of the world, though he is not in the world yet, but
he shall come, and shall bring along with him ten thousand Angels with blew
Wings, and Turkish Semitars by their sides, and shall destroy all and wom^n,
that are not of our profession, then shall we swim at the top of the waters
like Cork, but the wicked shall sink down to the bottom, and shall be covered
with the waters of destruction. Then shall Satan roar like all the Bulls of
Bashan, the Rulers of the Earth shall sit bare-breeched upon Hawthorn-Bushes,
with Knitting-needles in their hands, But Ravili^ck shall sit in glory for
killing the King, for we that are the Saints shall rule the Earth: but how came
we to be saints you I say? Why you Rogues you who made you examiners? is it not
enough that I tell you so? Therefore when you get your foes into your Cluttches
use them like dogs, cut um, slice um, boil um, roast um, bake um, stew um,
hang um, hew um, torture um; and why? Because they are the accursed generation,
or the generation of the accursed. For Antichrist and the Pope are all one. Ah
Pope, have I caught thee, I Will have a fling at thy breech in faith, Oh thou
accursed whore, thou monstrous devil, thou confounded punk, how often have I
railed against thee both in private and public, but thou art still the same,
shame on thee and all thy warbling noates, and thy Queristers and thy bagpipes,
and this lawn sleeves, for you have Gold and Silver in abundance, and we can
get nothing but a little butter-mony from the silly women which they glean from
their husbands by over rating the price of provisions. But the time shall come
when ye shall all be sent out of the world will a horsepox. And then hey for
the men that hate Cuffs, and tie the latchets of their shoes with blew Tape;
for they are the blades that shall sack Rome. Then shall Scarlet be at three
half pence an Ell, and men shall pave the Hearths of their Chimneys with
Diamonds. But hold! I must not let you surfeit with too much joy at one time,
and therefore I Will keep the rest till I see you again, and so farewell.

FINIS.

