A Phanatick PLAY.

THE FIRST PART, As it was presented before and by the Lord Fleetwood, Sir
Arthur Hasilrig, Sir Henry Vane, the Lord Lambert, and others, last Night, WITH
Master Jester and Master Pudding.

This is the First Edition.

The Knave the chiefest Card has won the day,
Had not the KING come in whilst they did Play.
London Printed in the Year, 166^.

A Phanatique PLAY.
Enter a Jester, and with him a Jack-Pudding. Jester. GOod Morrow Mr. Pudding,
how is it now?


Pudding. Never more at hearts ease in all my life.


Jest. What news at Westminster to day?


Pud Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, fa, la, la, ha, ha, fa, la.


Jest. Tell me Mr. Puding what you laugh at that I may laugh with you and be
merry.


Pud. I am going to see a Play, a new Play after the old fashion, that makes me
so merry.


Jest. But prithee tell me who plays the devils part.


Pud. In good truth Sir Arthur Hasilrigg.


Jest. He Is full of compunction is he not?


Pud. He hates Charles Stuart inveterately, because he has gained a vast estate
of his lands into his hands, and holds it for his own.


Enter Lambert, Hasilrigg and Vane. Jester. What! my Lord Lambert, Sir Arthur
Hasilrigg, and Sir Henry Vane, well met all three of you, whither are all of
you bound you go so fast, and want your horses? what all alike, all alike!


Lambert. I am bound for the West, to visit Sir George Booth, and I hope he
will make me welcome; for I hear his Lands are restored again, which by my
unjustness was sequestered.


Pud. The Devil he will; he cannot choose but make you welcome, with a Fox to you.


Hasl. Sir, I am going to Portsmouth, for I hope they will entertain me with
all respect.


Jest. Thou look so like the Devil that they will raise the Bulwarks of the
great guns against your highness.


Vane. I am bound to my country house for my healths sake, thank the Rump.


Pud. I Will turn Doctor, and give you a Scotch pil; fear you not an Apothecary,
for I was Mountebanck to Nol with the great Nose; my Pills wrought so
effectually that they brought him to rest.


Jest. Puddings pills will make you shit out your disease as freely as you was
shit out of the Rump, your self, and ease your discontents.


Pud. May it please your honors to play one game at Honors, and I Will furnish
you with Cards?


Jest. What will you play for John Lambert.


Lamb. An English Crown if you please.


Pud. Are you all agreed or not?
All answers, We are all agreed.

Jest. I Will deal, Lambert do you shuffle, and Pudding shall cut and we will play
the knaves to the purpose, to make you all merry.


Hasl. I like not his cheating play, he Jugles, I Will play no longer, I Will play
no longer, by my Bishopric of Durham, he is a false player.


Vane I Will shuffle the Cards my self.


Lam. Vane, you play Legerdemain underhand, see how he culs out the Knaves, to
put them into his own hands, and cheat us all, but we want a fourth man to make
up the set.


Pud. I Will play if you please.


Lamb. Not with us, we will have no fools.


Pud. If you had cast all the knaves then.


Fleetwood. I Will make a fourth man.
Are you all greed? yes, yes.

Lamb. You shall be my partner then.


Fleet. With all my heart, I will, I will.


Jest. Shuffle Gaffer General Fleetwood.


Hasl. Vane, I see, must of necessity be with me, Gaffer Fleetwood, you are a
cunning Gamster, and the cheatingest player in this Nation, play fair or I will
kick you out of the Company.


Jest. Hark, hark, a noise, a noise!


Pud. What is it, what is it, hey, hey, hey,


Jest. The North wind, it blows strong.


Flhet. Lambert shut you the door, keep out the wind, rise and begone, I Will
keep your stake, and my own I Will warrant you.


Pud. Gaffer Fleetwood, that's fowl play, to send Lambert to shut the door
whilst you run away with all the money.


Fleet. Hold thy tongue, there is half a piece for thee; if any enquire for me,
tell them I am gone to the Committee of Safety.


Pud. Lambert is come again, call them away, to come and play out their game, I
say.


Jest. Come all away, come all away, sit down.


Hasl. Deal Fleetwood, deal Fleetwood, why are you so slow to deal to others,
and so quick to deal to your self, we all weight upon you?


Lamb. I am sure he sent me to shut the door, and carried away my money instead
of his own.


Jest. Sirs you do not make use of your time, know not you that the Drums will
beat buy and buy, are you mad, make use of time, whilst time is to be had.


Pud. Play quick, silently, and now play round.


Fleet. Who dealt, who dealt this round?


Lamb. My Lord General Fleetwood.


Jest. If he be all wood, sound or rotten t'wil burn.


Pud. Can you tell whether here or in Hell?


Jest. He Will have all the whole pack except four.


Hasl. What four I wish for no more --


Jest. What the Devil ale you Hasilrig, blow in my blowing box, and I will show
you how to Conjure, command what you please in your thoughts, it shall be
performed by your blast, blow strong sweet or sower.


Hasl. I have blown such a blast; my mind, etc.


Pud. By all the virtue in my conjuring books,
The City Gates are all blown off the hooks.

Jest. Your Honors fury to this cities known,
What would you do if that it were your own?

Hasl. The Golden Chains should quickly fly,
My self would Reign without tranquillity.

Pud. My mind unto remembrance calls one thing
That all this time you played without a King.

Jest. Through up your cards, your game is not worth a pin.


Pud. Then for a fool I will come in.


Jest. Sir Arther many maimed Soldiers wait for you.


Arthur, Let them wait and be hanged.


Pud. Speak to them your self, you will please them.


Hasl. Who desires to speak with Arthur Haslrig?


Soldiers. Your honors Soldiers for their Pention, we are all in are are
fifteen Months.


Hasl. You are no Soldiers, but a pack of rogues.


Soul. It becomes not your honor to call all Soldiers Rogues.


Jest. The Gods confound your honor.


Pud. Sir William Waller will tell you that you rid the field of your person at
the Vize, or run away, that is plain.


Jest. Play your game or give over.


Pud. Sir Arthur play Durham Bishopric, the old quit rents or yearly revenues,
was one thousand six hundred twenty one pounds eighteen shillings and three
pence, whereof the Bishop paid to the King, one hundred sixty two pounds, two
shillings six pence and odd, beside Mr. Colingwoods lands, and several Parks
and other Lands, which for the company sake I forbear to name.


Jest: Play round a Crown a head boys.


Pud. What never a King here to be found?


Hasl. I fear he will be at my hand too soon.


Fleet. Where Is the King, in your hand?


Hasl. Upon my life I Will keep him out, he shall be a King and no King at all,
by my consent.


Enter a King, a General, a Jester, and a Pudding. Jest. Suppose they have but
Fleetwood, Lambert, Haslrig and Vane into a bag, the first that comes forth,
will be a -- what you please.


Pud. Come see quickly a fine sight:


Jest. Gaffer King, Gaffer King, hear, here they have put Lambert and Haslrig
into a great Bird-Cage; did you ever see the like to this that they have now
done?


Pud. They look like two night birds, and sing most melodiously, shitten
sweetly, the one sings on this wise in the Cage:

I do desire Portsmouth, once more to see.

The other answered.

I would I was at Durham now with thee.


Jest. Lambert What have you now in your hat?


Lamb. My head yet, so long as I can keep it.


Pud. My Lord, be well advised er'e you parr with it.


Lamb. So I will I Will warrant thee Pudding.
They all sing together.
Now let us all together rant and sing,
Though here be all the knaves, we want the King
Here may we be and the Country not offend,
Waiting daily, expecting of our end.

FINIS.

