The Ranters Principles and Deceits discovered and declared against, denied and
disowned by us whom the world calls QUAKERS.

With a discovery of the Mystery the Cross of CHRIST.

And a discovery of the true Light and the false, with their ways, worships,
natures, properties and effects. etc.

A vindication for the truth against the deceit, to clear the truth, of
Scandalls written for simple ones sake, that desire to know the truth as it is
in Jesus.

Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these things comes the
wrath of God upon the children of disobedience and know you not, that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, therefore be not deceived,
for God will not be mocked. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5, 6, 1. Cor. 6.9, 10. LONDON:
Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread-Eagle at the West end of Paul's.
165^.

Leicestershire from Swanington the 29. of the 6. Month. 1654.
FRIENDS,
Seeing the deceit of the Ranters is and has been a hinderance to many simple
hearts from recovering the truth, and that their deceit has opened the mouths
of many to speak evil of the truth, I was moved to write something to lay open
their deceits, false Rests, and false liberties for the truths sake and the
simple ones sake, that it may go abroad as a testimonial of our denial of
them, and to be a witness against them and their deceits, that truth may be
kept clear and pure, so will righteousness shine and spread abroad, that
wisdom may be justified of her children, truth be established and deceits
confounded.

Being in Leicesteishire, and seeing that deceit of the Ranters there as in
some other places to be much hinderance to honest hearts, keeping them back
from recovering the truth, with the love of it, I have sent this to you, that
it may be a witness against them and their deceits for ever.

R. Forneworth.

The Ranters Principles and deceits discovered and declared against, denied and
disowned by us whom the world calls QUAKERS.
THe false rest and false liberty of the Ranters discovered, who be in that
nature which acts contrary to the light, with the light which never changes
are you seen, and with the light are you comprehended, and with the light
chained and condemned, and with the light you are seen to be in the lust, in
the filth, and accursed from God, who stands in enmity to the light, the cross
is inward, and the true light, which light is the way to salvation, and blessed
are all who walk in the light, which comes from God, the father of lights,
that with the light they may be kept out of all the pernicious ways, which way
you walk in, who are turned from the light, and that is your condemnation, the
light, and the condemnation of all that hate it, and to you this is the word of
the Lord, according to that in the conscience, the light of Christ Jesus, which
changes not.

Remember the Angels that kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation, Jude. 6, 7.
he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of
the great day, even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities about them, in like
manner giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh,
are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, Jug. 6,
7.

Mind here your types, you that have cast the pure law of God, behind your
backs, and have turned the grace of God into wantonness, here is your
character, look to your selves, you that have not kept your habitation with
God, when once you were enlightened with the pure light, after so many
troubles, sorrows, fears, and tears, and watchings, when the wrath of God was
revealed against sin and ungodliness in you, and the pure law was set up, and
the judgment within you, to have freed you from sin, and from punishment
eternally, had you kept in the strait way, and stood in the counsel of God,
that judgment might have been brought forth into victory, and the pure seed
have been borne up, to have saved you from sin, but not abiding in the
judgment, you have cr^cified the Son afresh, and put him to open shame, Col.
3.1, 2, 3. Ephesians 5.3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12.
and vo is your portion, you did run well, but you have lost the right way, and
are turned into the paths of darkness again, and you act in darkness, and
brings forth the fruits of unrighteousness, and are become servants of sin.
Remember your type, Judas likewise, who had received part of his ministry, Romans
6.16. John. 8.34.
and after betrayed the Lord of glory for self ends, and to have the love and
friendship of the world, but woe was his portion, and when he knew what he had
done, he went and hanged himself, and his case is yours, who have betrayed the
light of God in you, and the union with it, though it was in wrath to the seed
of the serpent, when your senses are opened again, you shall see the misery and
the woeful estate and condition that you are in, and how you have betrayed
Christ with a kiss, to deliver him into the hands of sinners, and so the
w^tnesse also lies slain in you, that should witness and give sentence against
sin, but the Lord will find you out, and give you your reward, Romans 2.5, 6, 7,
8, 9. 2. Pet. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. 2. Pet. 2.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Mat.
24.50, 51.
you that have fed your selves with conceits and imaginations, from the
discovery of the light to the seed, and your subtle wisdoms having intruded
into the room thereof, and so you have got into the liberty of the flesh, and
can rant and swagger in wickedness, and say you are free, but it is but the
flesh that is at liberty, and that must be cursed, and all that follow your
pernicious ways, by reason of whom, the way of truth is evil spoken of, but
you are accursed with a curse that is joined with the serpent again, you shall
see him whom you have pierced, and mourn bitterly, and as Esau did seek the
blessing again with tears, but shall not find it, but be cast into utter
darkness, where shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

I know many of you were once tender and simple hearted, and did make
conscience of your ways, and were zealous for the truth, and did practice what
was made known in some measure, and were under the sense of the wrath of God
against sin, and the witness did arise to curse the seed of the serpent, and
then you apprehended God to be an angry God, and so is he still against sin,
and will not suffer it to go unpunished, but that was bitter to the fleshly
part, but it had been good for you, if you had continued under the cross, in
the executing of the righteous judgment of God upon the serpent in you, for in
the end it would have been sweet, when you had eaten the passover, to have
came to the hidden name, but not abiding under the wrath, the light vain mind
is got up in you, and the flesh is at ease, but woe to all careless ones that
are at ease in Sion, Rev. 3.12. Rev. 22.9. Rev. 21.27.
so soon as the pure law did break out in force, and give in some refreshment
to the seed in prison, and the love and joy did spring into the imprisoned
seed, from him who lives out of time, to refresh that which is captivated by
that which lives in times, and time, and so the will turned into the conceiving
of something from what was made out to the seed, and the fallen wisdom joined
with the corrupt will, and got liberty from under the cross, and the Devil he
wrought strongly upon the imaginations, and so sought to comprehend the light,
and drew a vail over the heart, and there he acted in the mystery of the
iniquity after the pure were veiled, and he brought all into question, and
pleaded for liberty to the flesh, through his workings upon the imaginations,
and the comprehensions by carnal reason, and the fallen wisdom joining to
conceive and comprehend, to have all at command, and be as God, knowing good
and evil, and now says the Devil, all is good, and there is nothing evil, but
as thou conceivest it to be so, and thou art brought into the knowledge of
this, that is, all good, and it was but thy weakness to think that there was
any thing evil; now thou art the son of God, and thou know it, all is thine,
take thy liberty, and rejoice, let thy heart be merry, use all things in
righteousness, and there is no sin in them, thou have been so crittick, that
thou could scarce look cheerfully, or partake of any thing that was for thy
comfort, but now thou art a son, and thou see how thou have been kept from
thy l^berty merely through thy conceits and apprehensions of ev^l, and an angry
God against sin, and fear least thou should go into a place thou call
hell, but says he, now thou may see it was but the weak and low
apprehensions in those things, there is neither hell nor Devil, nor any such
thing, but what as was in thee, and thou have got through those conceits now
rejoice and be merry, and take thy pleasure, use thy freedom, thou art a son,
and if a son, then an heir, and thou may laugh the heathen to scorn, poor
fools, that they should so deprive themselves of their liberty and freedom as
they do, and be bound so to false conceits as they are, because that their
judgments are not rightly informed, to know all things to be good, and this
which they call sin, to be but a conceit, and that i^ they knew their freedom,
they might rejoice and he glad. etc. and thus the Devil he works strongly upon
the imaginations, when the light breaks forth, and the love comes to be made
manifest to the seed in prison, not abiding in the cross, the will is seeking
to comprehend and get out from under the judgment, and here Satan does delude
and deceive under fair colors, like an angel of light, and leads out into
fleshly love; fleshly joy, fleshly liberty, and fleshly pleasures; and calls
all good, and calls that a freedom by the son, but it is but by the son of
perdition; that does exalt himself above all that is called God, and that
liberty which he leads into, is a false liberty and thou shall find it, whoever
thou art that takes his counsel, after that the light do arise in thee, then
he uses all his devices to deceive withal, which before were not known,
afterward comes to be made known, and woe to them that turn out of the strait
way, and the daily cross, to seek ease to the flesh, there they took counsel
of the Devil, and he will work them into such a strong combination with the
powers of darkness, that they shall find that of the Apostle to be true, those
that were once enlightened, and have tasted of the good word of God, and the
powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew then again to
repentance, they crucify to themselves the son of God afresh, and put him to an
open shame, and woe is their portion, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
for the earth that drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings
forth herbs meet for them, by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God,
so do they that abide in the teaching and counsel of God, who works them into
a fruitfulness, to bring praise to his name, to receive his blessing, which is
as the dew of ^^aven, to water, nourish, and comfort their souls, but that
nature which is contrary to the light, and all that go out of the counsel of
God, and the daily cross, turns into the crooked paths of fleshly delights
and pleasures, and dishonors the Lord, and is as the ground that bears
nothing but thorns, and is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing and burning, and
so are they who turn the grace of God into wantonness, and lasciviousness, and
will not abide the fire, and the sword, to c^t down the thorny nature, and the
fleshly corrupt heart, and to burn the earth, and place of the serpents abode
in them, therefore must they know the eternal fire, and vengeance of God to be
revealed from heaven, for they who sin wilfully after that they have received
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a
fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation of the Lord, which
shall devour the adversaries. Heb. 6.4. to the 8.2. These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb.
10.26, 27.

Look to your selves all Ranters and Libertines, who turns the grace of God
into wantonness, the Devil he has deceived you, and you seek to deceive
others, preaching to them liberty, when you your selves are the servants of
sin, but woe and misery is your portion, yet the Lord may pluck some as brands
out of the fire, that they may be witnesses for the truth, against the deceits
to forewarn all of that dangerous way, whereby the Devil lies in wait to
deceive if it were possible the very elect, but for the elects sake does the
Lord discover your deceits, and false light, Liberties, Rests, and pleasures,
which you live and take delight and pleasure in, woe is your portion, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and this I testify unto you, from the word of
the Lord.

But you may object and say, Object. Gal. 5.1. Romans 14.14. 2. Cor. 5.18.
did not the Apostle say, stand fast in tnac liberty, wherewith Christ has see
you free, Gal. 5.1. and he said all things are lawful for me, but all things
are not expedient, and I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is
nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems it to be unclean, to him
it is unclean, and to the pure all things are p^re, and all things are of God,
who has reconciled us to himself, by Jesus Christ, etc.

I answer, Ans.
that the liberty which Christ parchaseth to and for his, is a liberty and
freedom from sin, and he that says he is in Christ, ought to walk as he also
walked. 1 John 2.4, 5, 6. who was a pattern and an example for all his to
follow, 1. Ioh. 2.4, 5, 6. 2. Pet. 3. chap to the end.
but who lives in the flesh, and have their liberty in the pleasures, and
delights thereof, and are in the lust, are out of the light, and so out of
Christ, an I know no freedom by the son, but are in the paths that leads to
destruction, and are servant^ to sin, and lives in uncleanesse and filthiness
of the flesh, which neither Christ nor the Apostles did use, but does forbid
such practice and fleshly liberty as you use, who are in uncleanesse, and are
servants of Corruption, 2 Pet. 13. to the end, with the light are you seen, and
comprehended, and with the light condemned.

And where he said all things were lawful to him, he was speaking of meats,
and such like, but he did no^ (...) any liberty to the flesh, Romans 8.16. 1 Ioh.
3.6, 7, 8. v.
but said, shall we continue in sin that grace may abound, God forbid, know ye
not says he, that they which commit sin are the servants of sin, and so
serves the Devil. Romans 6.16. 1 Job. 3.6, 7, 8. And thirdly where he says, I
know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean ot it
self, but to him that esteems it to be unclean, it is so, but he is not
speaking of sin nor fleshly liberty, but to tender consciences in that place,
and his care was so tender ever them that were in a scrupling condition about
the unlawfulness of eating all meats, and such like. Romans 14. chap. that he
would not have a weak brother grieved, for says he, if thy brother be offended
with thy meat, which he had been speaking of the pureness and lawfulness of
it, as it came out of the covenant from God, yet says he, if he be grieved,
now walk thou not charitably, destroy ^ot him with thy meat, for whom Christ
died, let not then your good be evil spoken of, for the kingdom of God is nor
meat nor drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, for he
that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men,
let us therefore follow after those things which make for peace, and things
wherewith o^^ may edify another. Romans 14. from the 14. verse, where he is
speaking of the ^awfulnesse and purity of all things as they are in God, and so
on to the end, he shows how they are, and in what manner to be us^d, but you
that follow after unrighteousness, to satisfy your fleshly lusts and
pleasures, are not in the light, nor the kingdom of God, but out of the l^ght,
and in that nature which is accursed from God and you who are turned from the
light, and live in unrighteousness, you are the very enemies of all purity,
and lives in uncleanes^e, and must be torn ented with the wrath of God, and to
the light in all your conscience shall this be witnessed, and where he says,
All things are of God, he is speaking to them that were born of God, who abode
in the light, and were new creatures, the old things were passed away, and the
old lusts, and old natural corruptions, and they were new creatures, and so
redeemed into purity with God, and in covenant with him, and they knew no man
in the fleshly union, wherefore says he, henceforth we know no man after the
flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know we
him so no more, therefore sa^^h ^e to others that were in the light, as well as
them, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17, 18.
that were in the life and power of truth, if any man be in Christ, he is a n^w
creature, but you cannot say so in truth, who lives in the unity of the world,
and in the old nature, he that is in the new nature, all things that were from
the old root of corruption, is passed away in him, and all things become new,
and that is the all things which the Apostle there speaks of, 2 Cor. 5. 16, 17,
18. All things that are in the new nature are pure, and he that is born of God
is pure, and one in that nature, and he is coined before the world was, and
before the corruptions, or filthiness of the flesh was, and he sees all things
in God to be pure and good, and from one root, and all things to be unpure and
unclean that is of the evil root, and so that which proceeds from the fountain
of corruption to be of the Devil, and if any man have an car, let him hear
what the spirit says, for the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him,
here with that light which never changes are you all seen and comprehended,
who art turned out of the light, Iam. 3.11. to the end.
and with the light chained and conemned, and lastly to the pure all things are
pure, none is pure but God, the father of spirits without Lord Jesus Christ and
he that is born of God the father and the son, they are all one, and he that is
sanctified by the Son, he is made clean in and by the divine power of
righteounesse, and ye are clean, through the word says Jesus Christ, and I am
in you, and you are in me, and all things that the Father has are mine, and
the holy Ghost shall take of mine, and show unto you all that are in covenant
with God, are made pure with the blood of the Lamb, and are redeemed to purity
again, and all things that comes out of the covenant from God, to them is pure,
his love, is pure without any mixture of the love of the world, for that is
unpure, and full of lust, and self ends, but the love of God is pure, and his
wisdom is pure, pure love, pure heart, pure peace, comfort, and joy in the holy
Ghost, all the makings forth of God to the soul is pure, and all the works of
God in themselves as they are wrought in the soul are pure, but the Devil
would defile the work, and sow in his seed, if he be not watched over, and all
his works are evil, such is his namesuch is his nature, and his seed is
corrupt, and he acts and guides it, and raises it up by the power of
darkness, to oppose the good seed which is of God, and is acted and guided,
and raised up by the power of God in those that are obedient to the commands of
the spirit of truth, and quenches not the motions of it, it works into purity
and also into unity with the divinity, and reconciliation with the father and
the son, and in that unity things are pure, but who lives in the lust, the old
nature and the fall, know it not, for great is the mystery of godliness, from
whence all purity springs, and blessed are they who are reconciled to God, and
under the dominion and government of the spirit of truth, where the pure life,
and the heavenly food is, and spiritual laws statutes and ordinances are to
walk in, and the Lord God and the Lamb, the light and glory of the spiritual
kingdom, where all variecies is in their purity; but who are yet reconciled to
God, are under the dominion of the Prince of darkness, and sucks poison from
the corrupt ^oor, and so feeds the flesh, and wallowes in the mire and lust of
their own conceivings, inventions and fleshly imaginations, and so are under
the curfe and wrath of the almighty, but God has not called us to uncleaness,
but to holiness, 1 These. 4.

I know she vain light mind, and the careless dark spring will say, Object.
let, the seed of the serpent be accursed, and let it be damned, so that God
save his own, I care not what he does with me, etc.

But be thou assured and know this, Ans.
that as the seed of the serpent is accursed from God, he that is joined to the
seed of the serpent is one, and body and soul and all is polluted by reason of
sin, and except thou know thy redemption by the power of the Lord to separate
the seed of the serpent and thou asunder, and to un^te thee to the power of
truth, thou will be accursed from God both soul and body, and all that is one
with the serpent, and be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and the presence of the holy Angels, for as they did not
like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to 2 reprobate mind,
to work all uncleanesse with greediness, 2 These. 1.7, 8. Romans 1.18, 29.
and when they knew God, they glorifi^d him not as God, but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolisih hearts were darkened, for the mystery of
iniquity does work there strongly with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness
in them that perish, because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, and for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that
they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 These. 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

Thou may say that there is no evil nor no Devil, Object. Ans.
but thou shall knew that there is a Devil and a hell, and a root from whence
all evil does proceed, and though thou say it is but a conceit, yet be sure.
O vain man; whatsoever thou art, God will be aveanged of thee, and suffer the
tormented to plague thee for thy spiritual wickedness, blasphemy and despite
to the spirit of grace, for all sins and blasphemies against men shall be
forgiven, but the sin against the holy Ghost, which is to sin wilfully after
grace received, and to speak evil of the power of truth, that sin shall never
be forgiven, neither in this world nor in that which is to come.

Thou may say it is but a conceit to tell of sin and the Devil, Object. Ans.
but it is but a deceit which tells thee there is none, and so thou art
swallowed up in uncleanesse, and the custom of sin takes away the conscience
of sinning, and thou art seared and makes no conscience of what thou do, but
thou may as well say, it is but a conceit to say, the Sun is not the Sun, it
is but a conceit to think so, as to say there is no sin nor Devil, but good
and evil are all alike etc. But will any who are endued with natural knowledge
believe thee, if thou say there is neither Sun nor Moon, night nor day, they
are all alike, only they conceive it to be day and night, Sun-light and
Moonlight, but it is but their conceit that they have of these things; But is
it so, because thou say so, will not the very natural man that has his
natural sight and knowledge of those things, tell thee thou art a liar, and
speaks but only thy conceits, and fleshly conceivings, and carnal inventions,
but it is vain for thee to deceive one that has his eyes in his head, in those
things.

But if it were to a natural blind man, that never saw any of these, but were
born blind, thou might deceive him in those things soon, to tell him there
is neither night nor day, Sun nor Moon, but as men's conceits carries them
forth to conceive of these things, according to their low apprehensions that
they have of those things, thou might deceive a blind man in those things,
because that he never saw them, but only as he heard others speak of them, but
he that sees and knows or those things, he will tell thee thou art a fool to
labor to persuade him to believe thy conceits, when he sees it to the
contrary evidently before his eyes.

So on the contrary, to say there is neither God nor Devil, heaven nor hell,
nor sin, nor sorrow, will any believe thee that knows those things, whose eyes
are in his head has evidently seen the nature and property of these, he that
is born again, and enlightened by the spirit of Jesus Christ, knows that thou
art a liar, to say that good and evil, righteousness and unrigteousnesse, is
all one, and proceeds from one root, it is but only their low apprehensions and
conceits to think otherwise, as thou say, but thy saying is false.

And I testify against thee that says so, be what thou will, or who thou will, thou art guided by a lying spirit, and art of thy father the Devil, who
was a liar from the beginning, and the father of it, Joh. 8. 44. the Devil
that deceived thee was a liar from the beginning, and he has since the
beginning got into thy heart, and has been working upon thy imaginations, and
drawn thee out into conceits, and carnal imaginations of things, through the
wiles and craftiness of his deceiveablenesse, whereby he has plunged thee
into the pit of inventions, and divinations of thy own brain, but thou art shut
out of the truth, and art blind and ignorant altogether of unfolding the divine
and heavenly mystery, and art kept in the fountain of filthiness, of the
Devils suggestions, who acts thee by the power of darkness, and casts a
mist before thy eyes, the eyes of thy understanding, that thou should be
blind, and groap by thy fallen wisdom, and the knowledge in the history, but art
yet in wickedness, and deep in the mystery of iniquity, and know nothing
but the evil it self, and calls that good, but the woe is to thee that do so,
for thou art blinded by seeking to comprehend the light by thy carnal wisdom,
thou may as well seek to comprehend the Sun in thy band, for light shines
in darkness, but darkness comprehends it not. Joh. 1.5.
This then is the message, that God is light, Ioh. 1.5,
and in him is no darkness at all, if we say we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth, but if we walk in the light as
he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, Ioh. 1.5, 6, 7
and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.5,
6, 7, he that dwells in God, dwells in light, but he that is out of God, is
in darkness, and walks in crooked paths, that leads to destruction.

Therefore I say unto you, who desire to fear the Lord, as John said to the
brethren, Little children, let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness
is righteous, even as he is righteous, but he that does not righteousness, is
not of God, neither he that loves not his brother, in this the children of God
are made manifest, 1 Ioh. 3.9, 10.
and the children of the Devil. 1. Joh. 3.9, 18.

Here is two seeds acted by two powers, and receives strength from two roots,
the seed of God acted by the power of God, and all who are in unity with that
seed, are crucified to the world, and dead to unrighteousness, Christ being
made manifest, to destroy the works of the Devil, who is the bright and
morning star, I am the root and offspring of David; Rev. 22.16. says Jesus
Christ, and he that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is saithy,
let him be filthy still, there is the evil seed, but he that, is righteous, let
him be righteous still, and he that is holy, let him be holy still, there is
the good seed, and righteousness springs from one root, and is of God, and
all who act in righteousness, who are acted and guided by the divine power of
God, are one, and are in covenant with God; but all unrighteousness does
spring from another root, Rev. 22.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Isa. 5.22, 23, 24,
Rev. 22.16, 17. Isa. 28.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
and those who are of unrighteousness are of the seed of the serpent, and are
acted and guided by the power of the Devil, Rev. 21.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
and I witness the same with the Scriptures by experience, that good and evil
it from two roots, distinct, and two powers; therefore be not deceived, for God
will not be mocked. Heb. 1.14, 15. Act. 26.28. Rev. 13.4. Rev. 16.10, 11, 12,
13, 14. Rev. 19.11, 12. to the end of the chapter. You who are of the
unrighteousness, and of the seed of the serpent are one, and all in covenant
with the Devil, and have made a covenant with death and Hell, that the
Scriptures maybe fulfilled. Isa. 28.15.28 chap. 1. 2. Isa. 5.18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 13, 24.

But you can deceive none but such as are of the same seed of evil doers with
you, who are of the serpent, and lives in the fall, and the lust of the flesh,
forsaking the fountain of living mercies, to delight in lying vanities; but the
seed of God is springing up, and begin to grow, and righteousness will be a
terror to unrighteousness, and the seed of God will be a torment to the seed;
at the serpent, and the Lord ruling in his Saints, will be a terror to the
heathen; Howl ye serpents, and all ye dragons, for you will be found out, and
have the vialle of wrath and indignation poured forth upon you, howl ye
lustful ones, who delight in unrighteousness, the Lord will be avenged of
you, Isa. 1.24. Isa. 3.11.
all vengeance is mine, all I will repay says the Lord, sury to mine
adversaries, you would have two kingdoms, but Esaus dominion is yours, and the
hatred of God it to you all, who delight in unrighteousness, and and ye shall
desire to see one of the days of the son of man, out shall not, or the mouth
of the Lord of hosts has spoken it, and this declare I unto you from the word
of the Lord.

The mystery of the cross of Christ, and the law in the heart, taking hold
upon sin and all unrighteousness, to cut it down, and cast it out, through the
working of the divine power of God in Mankind.

The cross is inward, Ioh. 16.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, v. Luke 9.23,
24, 25, 26. 1 Cor. 1.17, 18. (...). 6.14.
to the cutting down of sin and uncleanesse within, the pure light of God,
which convinces of sin and evil, and witnesses against all the branching
forth of the unrighteous power of darkness in man, when his mind, will and
affections would run forth into the world, to conceive some comfort to himself,
out of die visible objects, his heart is soon taken through the outgoing of his
eye, with the things of the world, and he transformes the very image of what
part of the creation soever his eye was out after, and sets it up in his heart;
if it be a house* field, horse, ox, or any other creature, he is taken with
beauty or riches, and so his heart is stolen away into the earth, and he sets
his affections on the things, below God, and his will falls down to worship
silver and gold, and such like things, making them his Gods, to delight himself
in, and when his heart is running out after the love and honor of the world,
there is a principle of purity within tells him, all is but vanity, and this
calls for equity, equity to take of oppression and cruelty, but the lustful
proud nature crosses that principle of purity, and draws the heart after
vanity, when the Devil bears rule in the heart, working into the mystery of
the iniqnity, but that of purity which calls for equity, still cries out, and
tells man, all is but vanity, and calls and cries in his heart for purity, and
to set up truth and righteousness; and to do to all men as he would be done
by, for that is the Law and the Prophets, and to love God with all his heart,
and his neighbor as himself, and to give over folly and vanity, this is the
cross to iniquity, which calls and cries for justice and equity, and love
and pity, let that be heard and obeyed in you, and it will shut out jollity,
and cut off vanity, and work into unity with that which calls for purity, and
cross the lustful proud nature, that hardness of heart may not rule over
justice and equity. Consider oh man, that thou art mortal, and must return to
dust, and be cast into torment and burning, if thou will not give ear to the
cry of the poor, that which is pure in thee, that it may work thee into
charity, and show thee the way that leads to eternity, and cut of oppression
and tyranny, that diligence may rule in thee, that thy lusts may be slain, that
would break the bonds of amity, the pure light will witness against the dark
nature in thee, and strike at the root of all enmity, to reconcile thy soul
unto God, in yielding to the pure law of love, and the divine power of purity,
in thee, and so circumcise thy heart, and cut off the evil nature which hinders
thy, soul of the unity; so will the righteous law kill sin in thee, and give
thee knowledge of the true way that leads to life, joy and comfort in
yielding obedience to the principle of purity in thee, heartken to that which
checks thee for running into folly and van^ity, and it will cross thy mind,
will, and affections, 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. Pro. 20.27.
that runs out after carnality and so search thy heart, and turn thee out of
the iniquity, and guide and lead thee into holiness and purity, in walking up
to God, in the right way that leads to the divinity with Christ, I am the
way, the truth, and the life, and no man comes to the father but by me, know
Christ the way in you, to lead out of darkness into the light of purity, Christ
is the light, and Christ is the way, and he comes to set up his judgment
within, and to reveal wrath against sin, and to break the peace of the carnal
mind, and to draw under judgment all the first birth, Ioh. 9.39. 1 Cor. 1.19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Col. 2.13.14. Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
both the love of the world, the wisdom of the flesh, and carnal reason, and
lead that into the pit of confusion, to slay the enmity by the execution of the
righteous judgment upon the unjust nature, that he may pour forth fury upon
the head of the wicked, and slay that which crosses purity, and opposes the
work of redemption, as man does embrace the comings in of wrath, to the
wrathful nature, to cut it down, and burn it up, that the good seed may hare
room to grow in man, and make man fruitful to God, in joining with the slayer
of sin, that the world, or the creature man may be saved by the power of the
Lord, which does redeem the soul, and unite both soul and body to God, that
they may be reconciled by the death of the cross in the mystery, to praise and
glorify God in sincerity, and in integrity.

The true light, and the false, with their ways, worships, natures,
properties, and effects.
This then is the message that we have received, to declare unto you, that God
is light and in him is no darkness at all, and that every good and perfect
gift is from above, and comes from the father of lights, with whom is no
variableness, Iam. 1.17, 18. 1 Pet. 1.22. Romans 11.16. Ephesians. 5.1, 2. Ephesians. 2.8, 9,
10.
neither shadow of turning, for of his own will begat he us, that we should be
a kind of first fruits of his creatures, being born again, and children of the
light, 1 Pet. 1.22. Romans 11.16. Ephesians. 5.1, 2.

God is the fountain of all good, and of man's salvation, and happiness, and
God is pure, his ways, words, works and worships are pure and holy, and this
holy God does inhabit in eternity, and dwells in purity, in himself, and none
can approach to come near him in their sins, nor by their fallen wisdom, none
knows him but those that are born again, and washed and cleansed (not in his
purity) therefore as he that has called you is holy, Heb. 12.14. 1 Pet. 1.15,
16.
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because it is written, be ye holy
as I am holy, for holiness becomes mine house for ever, as God is pure and
holy, so the light that proceeds and comes forth from God is pure and holy,
and stands out of all apprehensions, and comprehensions of man, by his fallen
wisdom, and so sees all man's devices, his deceits, and false ways, and false
worships, and this pure light that does proceed and come forth from God which
is pure, and perfect, it convinces man of all the deceits of his heart, and of
all his devices, and deceiveablenesse, and of all his false ways of worship,
and shows him his transgressions, and convinces him of unrighteousness and
infidelity, and all manner of evil whatsoever, and calls him out of the ways
and works of darkness, into unity with this pure light, and leads him into the
way of peace and salvation, in obedience to it, to worship God in purity, even
in spirit, and in the life and power of truth, Ioh. 16.25, 26, 17, 28. Ioh.
12.35, 36.
this light is from the fountain of lights, it is not a conceited thing, that
is conceived in the brain, but it is the light of life, and is not to be found
in books nor learning without, it gathers out of all books without, to reading
the book of life, within; this light opens all Scriptures, 1 Ioh. 5.8, 9, 10,
11. Ioh. 17.23, 14.
and Ieads man out of the fall, up to God, the fountain and father of lights,
this is the true light, and leads into life eternal, 1 John 5.12, 13. Joh.
17.10.

But the natural men know it not by their natural learning, at studies, at
universities, that is but a borrowed or false light, that leads them into books
and studies, to find out the truth by their carnal wisdom, which is gathered
up from the serpent, and is accursed from God, and that fallen wisdom, and man
that lives by conceivings, and comprehension, and catching of truths in the
nation, to speak of, and sell for money, it is earthly, carnal, and divelish,
Iam. 3.15, 16.
and he that is joined to that serpentine wisdom, is one with it, in the same
nature, and sets up a way of worship, that stands in the carnal conceivings of
his own brain, in imitation from them who lived in the life and power of truth,
and his ministry that is of the seed of the serpent, stands in his own will,
and so learns his natural tongues, and so would be a judge of spiritual
things, by his natural learning, and trades out of books, and the conceivings
of his own brain, to sell his divinations at a great rate, and calIs them his
spiritual things, when he is in his carnal corrupt nature, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 13, 14. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. Ioh. 28.7, 8, to the 22.
Isa. 30. Ier. 23.29, 30, 31, 32. Isa. 5.20. Mat. 23.24, 25. Ioh. 8.12.
and the natural man knows not the things of the spirit God, for they are
foolishness to him, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15.

And that is a false light that leads the minds of men out into conceivings and
imaginations, and to gather up knowledge out of old authors, or books without
them, and that light which is borrowed from without, and gathered into the
brain, through the conceivings and imaginations, leads the mind, will, and
affections out, after pride, and oppression, self-love, and the honor of the
world, and the like, and it conceives that to be good also, and all to be evil
that crosses his knowledge in his carnal conceivings, but the light that
leads out into such things is a false light, and a blind guide, and he that is
guided and led by such a false light, he knows not the true light, which
leads out of all books and histories, into the life, in the mystery, and
leads out of pride into humility, out of covetcusnesse, into
compassionatenesse, and fruits of that nature: but the light is in the world,
and the world knows it not, the true light, which sees all deceits, and
comprehends all Babylons ways, works, and worships, and sees where the beast
and false prophet is, and the mother of harlots, with their sorceries and
divinations, and the cup of their fornications, whereby they deceive the
nations, but God will bring them all into contempt, and make them ashamed of
their deceits and deceiveablenesse, for the light is risen and arising, that
will lay open all their abominations, and give them the cup of fury, and make
Babylons merchants and craftsmen sick with amazement, and with astonishment, at
the calamity that is to come upon them, now read where you are, he that has an
ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit says. Rev. 17.3, 4, 5. to the 18.

The true light now shines in darkness, but darkness comprehends it not.

Even that light which is pure and perfect, which proceeds and comes from God,
the father of lights, but dark minds knows it not, but walks in darkness,
disobeying the light, and there is their condemnation, the disobedience to the
light, where it is in measure made manifest. Joh. 3.19, 20, 21. God is
supernatural, and this light proceeds and comes from him, which is the true
light, that convinces of sin, and exercises the pure senses, working in the
conscience, to bring men up to God, into that which is eternal, out of
corruptions into purity, and unity with the divinity, to reconcile them to have
fellowship with the father and the Son, and receive joy and comfort from the
holy Ghost, to praise and glorify God in the spirit, who sends the spirit of
his Son into their hearts, Ioh. 16.13, 14, 15. Ioh. 14.2^, 27. Ioh. 15.1, 2, 3.
to administer true comfort to the soul, and this ministry stands not in the
will of man, nor in the wisdom of the flesh, but in the power of God, and in
demonstration of the spirit, baptizing with the Holy Ghost, into the holy
union, to drink and receive joy and comfort from the Lord Jesus, the spiritual
vine, and these fruits and effects proceeds from the true light, that works
powerfully in the spiritual ministration, drawing souls out of darkness into
light, out of corruptions into purity, out of the false ways and false
worships, into the true way that leads into life eternal, where the mystery
of faith is held in a pure conscience, and there is no uncleanesse where this
is fulfilled: for God the fountain of light is pure, and of purer eyes then to
behold iniquity, and he sends this light, to enlighten the understandings, and
draw up souls to God, out of the fall into the pure life again, and this gift
is perfect, that comes from God to draw souls up into perfection, and into the
powrings forth of the fathers love, to rejoice in him for ever. Rev. 21. to the
9. Rev. 21. 23, 24, to the end. Rev. 22. 3, 4.

But natural men, that have but learned their natural things, of Greek,
Latin, and Hebrew? which the natural man may easily do, and yet be an enemy
to God, and to his own soul, for all his natural learning and languages, and
be ignorant of God, for the natural man knows him not, and he is a very
natural indeed, that says this pure light of God which does convince of sin,
and uncleanesse is a natural light, he that says so, is a dim light, and
blind guide indeed, and knows not God.

For this light that reproves for sin in the conscience is a divine principle,
and was with the Father in the beginning, but in due time he manifests himself
by it, to the view of the minds and understandings of men, to let them see into
their selves, that they are all gentiles, in their first nature, and sinners,
and are under the curse and wrath of God, and no reconciliation can be made,
whilst the seed of the serpent is head, unbruised in them, and had not this
come forth from God, to give man a discovery of his heart, he had not known
sin, but the light coming and appearing in him, he sees himself to be a vile
sinner and miserable wretch, and he would fain quench the light, rather then
obey it, but there is his condemnation, for the light will find him out, if he
hide himself never so closely in his own conceits, and thoughts, by his carnal
reason and fallen wisdom, and the woe will follow him, go where he will; this
light will not have union with the corrupt nature, nor with man, whi^st he is
one with that nature, but the light will check and reprove him both in secret,
and openly, and be a testimony against sin eternally, and also against him that
is one with the evil, this light will leave all natural men without excuse,
that they can have no cloak for their sins, for it is privy to all their
actions, both at home and abroad, and it will not be bribed to hold its peace,
but it will cry out against sin and give sentence against thee, that disobeys
it, be what thou will: This light does not waver nor wander, but shows thee
thy wavering and wandering mind, and tells thee of all thy base actions, and if
it were a natural light, it would not so much oppose nature, and cross its
desire, as it does, and will do more and more, as it does break forth into the
understanding, it will tell thee that thou art a natural blind man, in the
things of God, and it will not be beholding to thee for all thy natural
learning and tongues, but cross it and thee both, and tell thee the wisdom of
the flesh, and the world, is foolishness with God, and the love and friendship
of die world is enmity with God, and thou must ^ye to thy own wisdom, and
natural learning, and tongues, before thou know God indeed and in truth,
this light was before the fall, and comes forth from God, to call out of the
fall again, and if thou will not obey it, it will condemn thee eternally, as
light as thou makes of it, but it is because the wild nature is head, but thou
may go where thou will, it will not leave thee, and it will tell thee that
all thy worships which thou sets up in thy own will, and by thy own wisdom, not
acceptable with God, and this light will tell thee that all thy prayers are an
abomination to the Lord, whilst thou regardest iniquity in thy heart, this
light will tell thee that except thou be born again, thou shall never inherit
the kingdom of God, and when it breaks thy peace, and raises up torment in
thee, for thy unrighteous actions, then thou apprehending the wrath of God
against sin in thee, thou would be applying the promises of the Saints
conditions, which was to another seed, to heal the wound in thee, when the seed
of the serpent gets a blow, by the stroke of the righteous judgment of God;
But this will confound thy wit, and muddle thy memory, and scatter all thy
conceits and imaginations, and cross thy will in its expectations, and tell
thee thou art reprobate from God, in that nature then thou shall see this is
not a natural light that does so oppose and strike at all natural ways,
worships, tongues learnings and vanities, it will work thee into unity with it,
if you give up to be guided by it, and lead thee into eternity, but it will
confute, and confound, and condemn thee, if thou do not obey it, and so thou
art left without all excuse, thou natural blind man, that lives in thy motions
and high conceits, but thou art found out, and thy place of abode, and art in
Sodom and Egyptian darkness, this light shines in darkness, but darkness
comprehends it not, thou that would go about to comprehend the light of thy
subtilty and serpentine wit, thou art an enemy to God, and to thy own soul, and
thou would fain know much, that thou might have it at command, to talk of,
but thou would not put in practice, therefore thou know so much as will
serve to condemn thee, For thy disobedience to the light, the light will not be
comprehended by thee, thou theif, thou would fain comprehend it, that thou
might thereby be exalted, and thou would rob God of his glory, and take it
to thy self, and thou would command the light, that thou might be a Lord
thy self, but it stands out of thy reach, and it will not be commanded by thee,
though thou may conceive something from it, and catch it to talk of, yet
except thou do walk accordingly, it will tell thee thou art for destruction,
and this light will be thy condemnation, who ever thou art that do not obey
it, and it will scatter thy imaginaons, and dash down all thy conceivings, and
high motions, and tell thee thou art yet unreconciled to God, and check thee,
and break thy peace, if thou do but give ear to it, it will witness for me in
thy conscience, this light is within thee, Ioh. 1.9. Ioh. 8.12. Psalm. 36.9.
Isa. 49.6. Isa. 1.60, 19. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Cor. 13.5. Col. 1.23.
it is not without, in books, nor Scriptures: The Sriptures do declare of it,
but they are not the light, it is within, and springs from a divine root, and
thou can not comprehend it, therefore wait upon God, in obedience to it, and
it will teach thee, and show thee the way to salvation, and the way to
condemnation, and set before thee life and death, good and evil, choose thee
whether thou will join to, if thou join with the good seed, thou will find
power against sin, to withstand the evil, and it will judge and break down
wickedness in thee, and slay the seed of the serpent, and administer to that
which is captivated through the lust, and raise it up, that thou may worship
with it a God near hand, and as the seed of God does arise in thee, it will
open parrables and dark sayings, and bring every secret thing to judgment in
thee, and the seed being raised up by the power of the Lord, to rule over the
deceit, it will not bend to the Devil, if he would give it all the world, one
seed raised up out of one grave, by one power, and brought into one covenant,
baptized by one spirit into one body, though ten times ten thousand in
particulars, yet they are but one in the body, one faith, one seed, one
baptizing, one supper, one covenant, one God and father, all one heart, and one
soul, serving God in one way, worshipping him in the spirit, and with one
mouth, all glorifying his great and glorious name, and who are of this seed,
are of Abraham, and where it is carried up into power, it will tread upon the
seed of the serpent, and strike at the head of it, where ever it sees it, who
are of the seed of the serpent are one, though ten hundred thousand, and are in
unity with the deceit, the beast and false prophet, and in the false worships,
worshipping the works of their hands, and the imaginations of their own hearts,
and they are acted and guided by the power of the Devil, but they shall drink
of the wine of the wrath of God powered out without mixture, and be tormented
night and day. Rev. 14 9, 10, 11. and all that seed shall be shut out, and
shall never enter into the city of the living God, but death and hell shall be
cast into the lake of fire, this is the second death; and whosoever is not
found written in the Lambs book of life* must be cast into the lake of fire.
Rev. 20 14, 15. and the seed of the serpent never was, nor never shall be
written in the book of life, and those that are joined with that seed, are one,
and shall never enter into the holy city: for the seed of God, and the seed of
the serpent have enmity placed betwixt them, and they can never be reconciled
together, and that which defiles shall not enter, for without is all that seed
cast, and is reprobate from God, and must not enter into the kingdom. Rev.
21.8. Rev. 22.15.

Blessed are they that do his commands, that they may have right to the tree of
life, and enter into the city, through the straight way. Rev. 22.14. he that
overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my
son. Rev. 21.7.

This seed where it has overcome through the power and strength of the Lord,
and is set above, it does comprehend all languages* kindreds, and tongues, and
all BabyIons ways and worships, and does triumph and rejoice over them all,
and sees where the Antechists and deceivers all are, and from whence they all
come, and whither they shall return again.

The Ranters Principles, and denial of them by us.
ON the first day of the seventh month, we met with one Robert Wilkinson of
Coaton in Leistershire, and he said he was born of God, and could not commit
sin, and said he was both God and the Devil, and he said there was no God but
him, nor no Devil but him, and he said whom he blessed was blessed, and whom he
cursed was cursed, and he said he was a serpent, and so he is, he said the
Apostles were liars and deceivers and I gave him a Bible to prove that, and he
said die Bible was a pack of lies, and there was neither heaven nor hell but
here, and yet he was both in heaven and in hell, and he had as lieve be in
hell, as in heaven, and he said he was a serpent, and a whoremaster, and before
he said he was born of God, and could not commit sin. Now all that are in the
light may see this confusion, and this Beast is full of blasphemy, and the
vengeance of God he shall not nor cannot escape. Woe to the Ranters, this book
is as a testimony against you, from us whom the world calls Quakers, and you
and your wicked principles we deny, and hold them and you accursed. GaI. 1.9.

The Apostles were not as many that did corrupt the word of God, but were of
sincerity, and in the light of God spoke they in Christ. 2 Cor. 2.17. and he
was no liar nor deceiver, though the wicked ones counted him one, Joh. 7. as
thou wicked one do, and the Apostles were not liars, and deceivers as thou
Wilkinson Ranter said they were. The world called them deceivers, and counted
them deceivers, as I told thee, yet they were true, though counted deceivers by
such as thou art, the Apostles were the Ambassadors of Christ, and they prayed
the Corinthians in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God. 2 Cor 5.20. and
Christ was no liar, nor no guile was found in his mouth, and they were without
guile as he was. Rev. 14.5. 1 These. 4.6, 7, 8. Pev. 18.20. But thou Wilkinson,
and you Ranters, false Apostles, are full of guile and deceit, that says the
Apostles of Christ were liars and deceivers, when first they were Christ's
Ambassadors, and secondly they were workers together with him, and he did not
work in the iniquity as you Ranters do, for they in all things prove themselves
as the ministers of God. 2 Cor. 6.11.2.7. which thou Wilkinson and you Ranters
are enemies unto, thirdly, they had wounded the hidden things of dishonesty,
and did not walk in craftiness. 2 Cor. 1.12. as thou Wilkinson and you Ranters
do, and fourthly, they were a sweet favor of Christ, with them that were
saved. 2 Cor. 2.15. but thou Wilkinson and you Ranters stinks, and are an ill
savor amongst them that walk with the dogs, sorcerers and liars. Rev. 22.15.

Wilkinson, of a God thou art born with, but thy God as I told thee before, is
the God of the world, that has blinded the mind and the minds of all you
Ranters, wicked ones, and from them the Gospel is hid as it is written. 2 Cor.
4.3, 4. and that God that is of the world and the Devil is one, which is the
father that begat thee, and all the generation of liars and lustful ones, such
as thou art. Joh. 8.44. and the serpent thou art a whoremaster as thou said,
and art in the mystery of Babylon, committing fornication, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal.
5.10, 20, 21. Rev. 20.15. Rev. 21.27.
and art full of the filthynesse thereof. Rev. 15. thou beast that carries the
whore, shall go with her into perdition, and all whoremongers and adulterers
God will judge, and the serpent thou art, and you Ranters, Scorpions, Serpents,
you shall not escape the damnation of hell. Mat. 23.33. for heaven thou have
nothing to do to talk of, who has no part nor portion in it, for the lake thou
art, and the tormentor thou shall know, as Dives did, and thou wiucked one, and
you wicked Ranters, and the wicked, and all that forgot God shall be turned
into hell. Psalm. 9.17. Mat. 25, 41. with the light are you seen, and all thy
crooked ways, thou crooked serpent, with the light comprehended, and with the
light for ever condemned, and all the Gods of the heathen shall be famished.

FINIS

