A CONFESSION AND Profession of Faith IN GOD: By his People who are in scorn
called QVAKERS.

ALSO SHOWING That the People of God are no Vagabonds, nor Idle, Dissolute
Persons, nor Jesuits, though they wander up and down, and pass from one
Country to another, and from one Nation to another, as they are moved of the
Lord in his service.

And this is to clear the Truth from all false Aspersions.

By R. FARNSVVORTH.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle near the VVest-end
of Paul's, 1958.

A CONFESSION AND PROFESSION OF Faith in God, etc.
TO all true Act. 11.26.
Christians Gods 1 Pet. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Elect, and Phil. 1.1, 2.
Saint; of the most High God, who are begotten by the 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. Joh.
3.5, 6
Immortal Word, and born again of Water and the Spirit; The Church Col. 1.18.
Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Ephesians: 5.26, 27.
of which Christ Jesus is (in the Holy Scriptures) declared to be the Head: And
to all faithful moderate People whomsoever, wheresoever, and by what Names and
Title: soever known by, or distinguished to (or amongst) the sons of men; know
ye hereby assuredly, That we who of the world are slanderously reported (as the
people of God were in former ages, Romans 3.8.) and who are reproachfully called
Quakers, do profess, and confess, testify, own, believe, and declare as
follows:

THat we Profess and Confess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his
eternal Son, the true God; and in the Holy Spirit: And we do acknowledge the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be the Words of God: This we
testify; and we are not ashamed to Confess and Profess Faith in God the
Father, and in Christ Jesus his eternal Son, and in the Holy Spirit, as the
Scriptures says; but we do believe in them, and acknowledge subjection and
dutiful obedience unto them, viz. The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: And
moreover we do hereby declare and testify to all true Christians Gods Elect,
what God we do own, and profess Faith in even in that God that appeared unto
Abraham, ( the Father of the Faithful, when Abraham was ninty nine years old)
and said unto him, I am the Almighty God walk before me, and be thou perfect,
Genesis 17.1. The everlasting God, Genesis 21.33. The God of Heaven and Earth, Genesis
24.3. The God of Truth, who is just and right, and without iniquity, Deuteronomy.
32.3, 4. The faithful God, that keeps Covenant and Mercy with them that love
him, and keeps his Commandments, to a thousand Generations, Deuteronomy. 7.9. The
faithful and merciful God, who will not suffer his to be tempted above that
which they are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that they may be able to bear it, 1 Cor 10.13. 1 Samuel 2.3. 1 Samuel 2.2.
He is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 2.3. Neither
is there any Rock like our God, 1 Samuel 2.2. As for God his way is perfect, the
Word of the Lord is tried, he is a buckler to all them that put their trust in
him, 2 Samuel 22.31. and therefore he is worthy to be believed, and have Faith in
him professed, for who is God save the Lord, and who is a rock save our God, 2 Samuel 22.32, 33. He is the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, Neh. 9.32.
That God who is the King of all the earth, Isa. 45.21, 22. Isa. 45.5.
who reigns over the Heathen, and sits upon the throne of his Holiness,
Psalm. 47.7, 8. A just God and a Savior, Isa. 45.21, 22. Thus says the Lord,
the King of Israel, and his Redeemer, The Lord of Hosts, I am the first, and I
am the last, and besides me there is no God, as you may read, Isa. 44.6. Isa.
43.11, 12. Who is a God near at hand, as well as a far off, Jer. 23.23. That
God who dwells in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, Isa. 57.15. Yea, the God of patience and
consolation, Romans 15.5. the God of hope, Romans 15.13. Jude 25.
and that God who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of all
Mercies, and the God of all Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. The God of Love and Peace, 2
Cor. 13.11. The King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise God, 1 Timothy
1.17. God who is Light, and in him is no darkness at all, 1 John 1.5. The only
true God, Joh. 17.3. and the Lord our God is one Lord, Mark 12.29. For there is
one God, Mark 12.29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.
and there is none other but he, Mark 12.32.34. And there is none other God but
one, 1 Cor. 8.4. Isa. 44.8. And this is God the Father which we own, and
profess Faith in, and in Christ Jesus his eternal Son, who said, I and my
Father are one, Joh. 10.30. (upon which saying, the Jews took up stones to
stone him, Joh. 10.30, 31.) yet notwithstanding the same Christ that the Jews
hated, we love, believe in, and own, who was delivered up to be crucified for
our offenses; and was raised again for our justification, Romans 4.25. Who is the
true God, and him we own, and profess Faith in, and in the Holy Spirit, God;
together equal with the Father, and the Son, one God over all, God blessed for
ever, Isa. 45.6. Joh. 10.30. Romans 8, 9, 10, 11. Ephesians. 4.4, 5. Ephesians. 4.30. Romans
9.5.
1 Cor. 2.10, 12. Joh. 4.24. Romans 9.5. And unto (us and al true Christians) the
Saints in Christ Jesus; Phil. 1.1. It is given in the behalf of Christ, not
only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his names sake; As you may read
Phil. 1.29.

As concerning the Scriptures, etc.
That which in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament is declared and
testified of to be the Word of God, that we believe in, own, and confess to be
the word of God, according to the Scriptures; And that the holy Scriptures of
the old and new Testament, as they are the Words of God, so to be we own,
Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture came in old time by the
will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2
Pet. 1.21. Who prophesied of the grace that should come unto the Saints [and
us] in after ages, searching what or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ
which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of
Christ, and the glory that should follow, unto whom it was revealed, that not
unto themselves but unto us they did Minister the things which are now declared
unto you, by them that have preached the Gospel unto you, with the holy Ghost
sent down from heaven; 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. And God spoke all these words
saying, I am the Lord thy God, etc. Exodus 20. chapter So the words and sayings of
God we do not deny, but own them so to be, according to the Scriptures of the
old and new Testament as aforesaid: But unto the Wicked God says, What have
thou to do to declare my statutes? or that thou should take my covenant into
thy mouth? seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words behind thee, as
you may read Psalm. 50.16, 17. As the holy Scriptures are the words of God, so
the wicked are not allowed nor appointed by the Lord to preach or declare them,
as the statutes of God, nor take his covenant into their mouth, as God has
said: And the reason is, because they hate instructions and cast his words
behind them: But such as are instructed and taught of the Lord, Isa. 48.16, 17,
etc. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
who love his Instruction, and hear his word, they may preach and declare his
statutes, etc. as they are thereunto directed and led by the holy spirit of the
Lord; for the words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace of
earth, seven times purified; as the Scriptures testifies, Psalm. 12.6. Have not
I written unto thee excellent things in counsel and knowledge? that I might
make thee know the certainty of the words of truth, that thou might answer
the words of Truth to them that send unto thee. Prove. 22.20, 21.

For the preparation of the heart in man (that Isa. 50.4, 5 Lu. 12.12.
is taught of God) and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord; Prove. 16.1.
And says the Lord, Ye shall lay up these my words in your heart, and in your
soul, as you may read, Deuteronomy. 11.18. And again says the Lord, observe and hear
all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and as you
may read, Deuteronomy. 12.28. But [saith the Lord] if they had stood in my counsel,
and had caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them
from their evil ways, and from the evil of their doings, as you may read, Ier.
23.21. And says the Prophet Jeremiah, Mine heart within me is broken, because
of the Prophets; All my bones shake, I am like a drunken man, and like a man
whom wine has overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the words of his
holiness, as you may read Ier. 23.9. But if that true prophet of the Lord had
been here now, and his bones had shaked, would he not have been mocked, and
reproachfully called A Quaker or Shaker, etc. and might he not have been
excommunicated, or cast out from amongst men, as A Quaker, without any just
cause, and all such also as trembled at the word of the Lord, as many now
adays are; and for being faithful to the Lord, and owning his power, and the
words of his holiness, as the true Prophet did; But the Prophet Ezra says as
follows, Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words of
the God of Israel; as you may read, Ez. 9.4. And says the Prophet Ezekiel, The
word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, Eat thy bread with quaking,
and drink thy water with trembling, etc. Eze. 12.17, 18 There was the word of
the Lord that came to him, and here are the words and sayings that proceeded
from the word; But if any eat their bread with Quakeing, and drink their Water
with trembling now, according to the sayings of God declared from the word of
the Lord, will they not be mocked and called Quakers in much scorn? And must
they not for owning the power of God, and his works, be cast out from the
societies of great professing men: Would not such have cast out the Prophet
Ezekiel, and such as these Scriptures makes mention of, if they had been here
in these times, Ezekiel. 12.17, 18. Dan. 10.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Job 21.5, 6. Job
37.1. Psalm. 38.8. Psalm 55.2. Psalm. 119.120. Isa. 66.2, 5. Ier. 23.9. Ier.
30.5.6, 7. Acts 7.32. Heb. 12.21.

And says the Lord unto Moses, who trembled at the word of the Lord, and did
fear Act. 7.31, 32. Heb. 12.21.
and quake, I will raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto
thee; and will put my words in his mouth and he shall speak unto them all that
I command him, Deuteronomy. 18.18, 19 And says the Lord by the Prophet, I have put my
words in thy mouth, Isa. 51.16. As for me, this is my covenant with them says
the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth; nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor
out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth for ever;
as you may read Isa. 59.21. Every word of God is pure, he is a shield to them
them that put their trust in him; Ad thou not unto his words, lest he reprove,
thee, and thou be found a Liar, Prove. 30.5, 6. And says Christ Jesus, the
eternal son of God, Math. 7.24, 25, 26.27, 28, 29. Joh. 15.7. 2 Pet. 3.2 Jude
17.
and the true God, he that is of God hears Gods words, John 8.47. And because
we are of God, 1 John 4.6. and hear his words, we are bound as a necessary duty
to profess faith in him, and do confess it before men; And they that are
ashamed to do it, they may justly fear that Christ will be ashamed of them: For
says Jesus, Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in
this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the son of man be
ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels: as you
may read Mark 8.^8.

And that which in the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament is declared
by the holy Spirit, to be the eternal word of God; That we believe in, own, and
confess to be the word of God, which lives and abides forever; as the
Scriptures says, and as you may read 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. Through faith we
understand, that the Worlds were framed by the word of God, as you may read
Heb. 11.3. God who as sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in times past
unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by
his Son, whose name is called the word of God; Rev. 19.13. Whom he has
appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds, as you may read,
Heb. 1.1, 2. And he upholdeth all things by the word of his power, ver. 3. In
whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, who is
the Image of the invisible God, for by him were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in earth; and he is before all things, and by him all
things consist? as you may read Colos. 1.14, 15, 16, 17. For the word of God is
quick and powerful, John 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
sharper then any two edged sword, pierceing, even to the devideing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart; neither is there any creature that is not
manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of
him, with whom we have to do: seeing then that we have a great high Priest,
that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the son of God: Let us hold fast our
profession, Heb. 4.15, 16.
as the Scriptures says, and as you may read, Heb. 4.12.13.14. Of his own will
begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits
of his creatures, as you may read, Iam. 1.18. Wherefore lay apart all
filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the
ingrafted word, Jam. 1.21.
which is able to save your souls: as you may read James 1.21. As ye have
therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, Colos. 2.6, 7. The
righteousness of faith speaks on this wise, say not in thy heart, who shall
ascend into heaven, that is to bring Christ down from above, or who shall
descend into the deep, that is to bring up Christ again from the dead: But what
says it? The word is nigh thee in thy mouth and in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12,
13, 14.
that is the word of faith which we preach; as the Scripture testifies, as you
may read, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. For We preach not our selves but Christ Jesus the
Lord, as you may read, 2 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7. Therefore they went every where
preaching the word, Act. 8.6. Then Philip went down to Samaria, and preached
Christ unto them, Acts 8.5.
Act. 8.5. And as concerning the Gospel of Christ, and the Declaration of the
Gospel, we are not ashamed to confess; for the Gospel it is the power of God
unto salvation, to every one that believes, for therein is the righteousness
of God revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, the just shall live by
his faith, and as you may read, Romans 1.16, 17. And as concerning the
Declaration; Moreover Brethren, I declare unto you, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, etc. Lu:
1.1, 2.
the Gospel which I preached unto you which also you have received, and
wherein ye stand, by which also ye are saved, unless ye have believed in vain,
for I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received how that
Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried,
and that he rose again the third day, according to the scriptures, etc. as you
may read in the Declaration of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 15. But the word of the Lord
endures for ever: And this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto
you, Romans 1.16, 17. and 1 Pet. 1.25. For this the mockers and scoffers that
were foretold of, and are come in these last days, who walk after their own
lusts, 2 Pet. 3.3 they willingly are ignorant of; That by the word of God the
heavens were of old, and the earth standing out of the Water and in the Water,
as the scripture says, and as you may read, 2 Pet. 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Whereby the
World that then was, being overflowed with Water perished: ver. 6. But the
heavens and the earth which are now by the same word are kept in store,
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men:
as you may read 2 Pet. 3.7. For by the word of the Lord were the heavens made,
Psalm. 33.6. Therefore above all things take the shield of faith, wherewith ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Wicked; and take the helmet
of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the Word of God: The Rev.
19.13, 15. Heb. 4.12. Ephesians. 6.17:
Word of God is the sword of the spirit, and the sword of the spirit is the
word of God: Wherefore pray always with all prayer and supplication in the
spirit (for Phil: 4:6. 1 Pe: 3.12. Rom 12.12 Joh: 4.23, 24. Phil: 3.3. Ephesians:
4.4, 5, 6, 7.
prayer is an ordinance of God) and watch thereunto with all perseverance and
supplication for all saints, Ephesians. 10, 17, 18. Building up your selves (ye
beloved) on your most holy faith praying in the holy Ghost; as you may read
Jud. 20. Rom: 8.26, 27. 1 Pet: 4.7.

And as we profess faith in God the Father, and Christ Jesus his eternal son,
and in the holy spirit, as the scripture says, and own the word of God, and
prayer, and the ordinances and worship of God in spirit and truth, acording to
the scriptures; so likewise among the rest, we own Ministry and Magistracy to
be ordinances of God, acording to the holy scriptures; For as it says, there
is one body and one spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
Father; so likewise it is said of Christ, that when he ascended up on high, he
gave gifts unto men; For he gave some Apostles, some prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers. For this end that is to say, the
perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, til we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fulness of Christ, as you may read, Ep 4.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 13. See 1 Pet:
4.10, 11. Also see Rom: 12.6, 7, 8. And let every soul be subject to the higher
power, for there it no power [which the soul is to be subject to] but of God,
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
they that resist the power and ordinance of God, shall receive to themselves
damnation Romans 13.1, 2. For Rulers (that rule for God in his power and
ordinance as aforesaid, they) are not a terror to good works but to the evil.
But if they rule not in the power of God, by which they are to discern and
judge between good and evil: it will be otherwise yet, acting and ruleing in
the power of God, they are for the encouragement and praise of them that do
well, and so are to them the Ministers of God for good: as you may read Rom:
13.3, 4.

Concerning Magistracy that rules for God, etc.
MOreover, how Magistrates that rules for God, according to the^ holy
scriptures of the old and new Testament are to be qualified, and by what power,
and for whom they are to act; The spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and the God
of Israel said, he that rules over men must be just, fearing God, as you may
read, 2 Samuel 23.2, 3. Rulers [for God] must be just men, and fearing God, as
God has said; and such are as the light of the morning, when the sun arises
without clouds, ver. 4. Therefore they that are so must needs be good examples,
and not hate the light in others, nor them that walk in the pure Religion;
spoken of Jam: 1.27. Which is to visit the Widows and Fatherless in their
distress, and to keep themselves unspotted of the World. When the righteous are
in authority the [good] people rejoice; but when the wicked bears rule the
[good] people mourn: Prove: 29.2. For the righteous considers the cause of the
poor, but the wicked regards not to know it, verse 7. And if a Ruler hearken
to lies all his servants are wicked: as you may read Prove: 29.12. Therefore how
just and upright ought Rulers to be, that they may not encourage the wicked,
and cause them to rejoice in their wickedness, and cause the godly to mourn and
be sad: Judges and officers which God commanded and ordained in the time of old,
to be set up in all the gates throughout the Tribes. 1. They was to judge the
people with just Judgment. 2. They were not to wrest Judgment. 3. They was
not to respect persons. 4. They was not to take a gift, for the Lord says, A
gift does blind the eyes of the wise: And 5. They was not to pervert the words
of the righteous. But, 6. That which was altogether just they was to follow as
the Lord has said, and as you may read Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19, 20. And 7. When a
controversy did arise between man and man, so that it came before the Judges
to be determined, the Judges was enjoined by the Law of God to make diligent
Inquisition, to the end that they might before judgment, find out the truth or
falsehood of the Witnesses: and if the judge by diligent enquiry, etc. found out
the Witness to be a false Witness, and testify a false thing against another:
8. Then he was to have passed the same judgment upon the false Witness, that
he should have done upon the other that he witnessed against, if his testimony
had been true; as you may read Deuteronomy. 19.15.16. to the end of the chapter.
Judges are forbidden by the Lord, and by his Law to wrest the Judgment of the
poor in his cause, as aforesaid. And 9. Judges and officers are required by the
Law of God, to keep them far from a false matter. 10. and the Lord does forbid
Judges, for slaying (by false judgment) the innocent and righteous; and again
Judges are forbidden taking a gift; as you may read, Exodus 23.6.7, 8.11. Also
the Lord says, Thou shall not raise a false report. 12. Nor put thy hand with
the wicked to be an unrighteous Witness. 13. Thou shall not follow a multitude
to do evil. 14. Neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many, to
wrest judgment, the Lord does forbid it. Exodus 23.1, 2. And Moses in his
charge to the judges, commandded and charged them; First, to hear the causes
between their Brethren; And, 2. To judge righteously between every man and his
Brother. and the stranger that was with him: And thirdly, That they should not
respect persons in judgment: But 4. That they should hear the small as well as
the great; And, 5. That they should not be afraid of the face of man; for says
he, The judgment is Gods; and the judgment that it too hard for you bring it
unto me, and I will hear it; as you may read Deuteronomy. 11.16, 17, 18. Deuteronomy. 16.18,
19, 20.
And by the Law of God he is pronounced accursed that perverteth the judgment
of the Stranger, fatherless and widow; Deuteronomy. 17.19. Jehoshaphat the King of
Judah when he returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles: 19.1. He
set Judges in the Land, throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, City by
City, Ver: 5. And charged them, or said to the Judges; 1. Take heed what ye do:
2. For ye judge not for man, 3. But for the Lord, 4. Who is with you in
judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and
do it: 5. For there is no Iniquity with the Lord our God, 6. Nor respect of
persons, 7. Nor taking of gifts. And he charged them saying,, Thus shall ye
do in the fear of the Lord, and with a perfect heart, See 2 Chronicles: 19.5, 6, 7,
8, 9. And such Judges, Magistrates and Officers we own and honor in our hearts
and souls, who rule for God, by the holy spirit, and according to the holy
Scriptures of the old and new Testament, God is our Witness that we ly not. And
if any would have such owned to rule for God, and honored with the honor given
from God, who are not led by his holy Spirit, but act contrary thereunto, and
contrary to the holy Scriptures; then speak it out plain: For all such as are
owned and honored by the only true God, we honor and own.

And as concerning the office and duty of Rulers and Magistrates, or officers
and Ministers according to the new Testament; He that rules [for God, must
rule] with diligence, Rom: 12.8. One that rules well his own house, in the
first place: 1 Timothy: 3.4. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of
double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. For Rulers [that rule by the power of God] are not
a terror to good works, but to the evil; will thou then not be afraid of the
power? do that which is good, and then thou shall have praise of the same, as
you may read, Rom: 13.3. Is any power for the praise and encouragement of those
that do good, but the power of God? and is not that the highest power, which
every soul is required to be subject to? and if the soul be not required to be
subject to any powers but the powers of God, which are the higher powers, then
ought every Ruler amongst men, before they rule for God, having Souls, to let
their souls in the first place be subject to the higher powers which be of God;
And then being ordained, and empowered by the power of God, to rule for him,
they will not be a terror to good works, (because good works, they are brought
forth by virtue of the power of God, and by the same power in him, and powers
comunicated by him, to men, to rule for him, they are to be defended and
encouraged by the men of God, that rule and minister for him, and to the praise
of his) but to the evil, Whose works proceeds from the power of the Devil, 1 John: 3.8, 10, 12. They are a terror, [who are in Gods power ordained and
empowered to be Ministers of his justice, and peace,] will thou not then (as
aforesaid) be afraid of the power of God? do that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same: For he (that rules therein) is the minister of God to
thee for good; but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not
the sword in vain; for he is the minister of God; and therefore ought to
discern between good and evil, to the end that he may not discourage them that
do well, under pretense that they do evil; nor to encourage them that do evil,
under pretense that they do well: For if he err from the power of God, and want
discerning, he may turn his sword against that which it is to defend and
preserve, where it is not born in vain, and for want of discerning, and being
gone astray as aforesaid, may nourish vice and profanenes, and so be a
discourager of them that do well, and an encourager of them that do evil, if he
know not the power of God, or be erred from the same, and have not his soul in
subjection to it; That he may know them that in the power of God have their
souls subjected thereunto, and are doing good by virtue of the same, and
abstaining also from evil in all its appearances. Therefore whosoever resists
the power of God (by which his ministers of justice are ordained to rule for
him) they resist the ordinance of God, and shall receive to themselves
damnation. Rom: 13.1, 2, 3, 4.

And to that power and ordinance of God are we subject for conscience sake,
Rom: 13.5. And the Law is good if a man use it lawfully, Knowing this, that the
Law is not made for [the punishment of] a righteous man, but for the lawless
and disobedient; for the ungodly and for sinners; for unholy, and profane, for
murderers, for manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves
with mankind, for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and such like,
being the fruits of the flesh: and as you may read, 1 Timothy: 1.8, 9, 10. and
Galat: 5.18, 19, 20, 21. But the fruit of the spirit is love, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance, against
which there is no Law: as you may read, Gal: 5.22, Gal: 5.24, 25, 26.
23. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections,
and lusts, and are neither desirous of vain glory, nor of provoking, and
envying one another, ver: 24, 26.

Written the 3. day of the 10. month, commonly called December, 1657.
Who are no Idle, Wandering, Dissolute Persons, nor Jesuits; and who are no
Vagabonds, etc.
SVch as are moved and directed, and commanded by the Lord God and his Spirit,
to go and declare his mind and will, by the Assistance and according to the
appointment thereof; though they go from one Nation and Country to another,
accordingly as aforesaid, yet notwithstanding they are neither Idle, Wandering,
Dissolute persons nor Jesuits, nor Vagabonds.

Abraham was called out of his Fathers house, Gen: 12.4 Read Ge. 12. chapter and
Gen: 13. c.
and native place to go abroad according to the directions of the Lord, and did
so, and were as a stranger and sojourner in a strange Land, yet he were neither
an Idle, wandering dissolute person, nor Jesuit, nor Vagabond, no more are his
seed now, though falsely they are accused to be so.

Moses went down into Egypt from Midian, Exodus: 3.1. Exo: 38.9, etc.
where he had been a keeper of Jethro 's sheep, to do the will of the Lord, and
yet he were neither an idle wandering person, nor a Jesuit or Vagabond, though
Pharaoh the king then of Egypt falsely accused the servants of the Lord to be
idle fellows, or to take the people off from their work. And Pharaoh the king
regarded not the words of the Lords messengers, but accounted them vain; and as
the false accusing spirit did then, so does it now, though the persons guided
thereby profess more then Pharaoh did, and accuses them to be idle, wandering,
dissolute persons, or Jesuits and Vagabonds that are not, no more then Moses
the servant of the Lord was then.

Elijah the servant of the Lord was not an idle wandering dissolute person, nor
a Jesuit, nor Vagabond, Exodus: 5: 4.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, verse. etc.
though he passed much up and down the country in obedience to the Lord, and
went to beg, or ask some relief of the widow of Sarepta; And if any of the Lords
messengers should do so now, would not this generation of men accuse them for
running wandering abroad a begging, and so accuse them to be idle wandering
dissolute persons, and vagabonds, and troublers of the Nation. Did not king
Ahab then king of Israel accuse the said Elijah the servant of the Lord falsely;
and say, he was his enemy, and a troubler of Israel, but it was not so, viz.
That he was a troubler of Israel, but of the wicked: Therefore the servant of
the Lord, 1 King 19. chapter 1 King: 17.10, 11.
(to cast off the false accusation charged upon him by the king, and to clear
his own innocence) said to the king that it was he, viz. the king and his
Fathers house that was so, even the troublers of Israel the people of the Lord;
And so the false accusing spirit in this generation is apt to charge the
Servants of the Lord falsely, and to seek to lay upon them that which the
accusers themselves are guilty of, as Ahab and his fathers house was, when the
innocence of the innocent, though falsely accused, is clear, and stands
justified in the sight and account of the Lord.

The Disciples of Christ sent forth by his own power, when he were personally
amongst them, was commanded to go abroad in the Countries, to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel, Mat. 10.5, 6. Mat. 10.9, 10.
and forbidden taking thought what to eat, drink or put on, and commanded to
take neither silver nor gold nor brass in their purses, yet they was no idle
wandering dissolute persons, nor Jesuits, nor Vagabonds; But if any be sent of
the Lord now, and forbidden to take any silver or gold in their purses; This
generation would be ready to accuse them to be idle wandering dissolute
persons, mad men and Vagabonds; might not the Disciples that Christ so sent
have objected and said, Lord, how shall we do to be provided for, when we come
amongst Strangers and in other Countries, if we must not take any Silver nor
Gold, nor Brass in our Purses? had we not better take Silver and Gold and
Brass in our Purses, that we may make provision thereby for ourselves, when we
come amongst Strangers (and so stop their mouths) rather then to rely upon
them? and will not they be ready to say, These are idle loose fellows, mad men
and Vagabonds, that wanders about to live upon other men's labors, and cannot
otherwise tell how to get a living? They neither have Silver nor Gold nor
Brass in their Purses; do any that have means to live on go out thus, when
they are to go into far Contries, and amongst Strangers, except they be idle
wandering dissolute persons, and Vagabonds, such as have no Silver nor Gold to
take in their Purses? yet notwithstanding the Disciples of Christ that were so
sent as aforesaid, were neiher idle wandering dissolute persons, nor Jesuits
nor Vagabonds; No more are the Servants of Chrst, though they may so go, now,
in obedience to the command and council of Christ, yet this generation of men
are ready to accuse them, to be idle wandering dissolute persons, or Jesuits or
Vagabonds, as that generation of men accused the said servants of Christ
aforementioned, and others that succeeded them, Acts 4.13. Acts. 24.5 6.
to be ignorant unlearned men, and deceivers, and turbulent pestilent fellows,
mad men, and ringleaders of Sects and the like, though they was not, but that
the false accuseing spirit of the world was then, and of ancient standing is
now, yet accustomed with that work.

Before Christ ascended he called his servants together, and gave them command
to wait at Jerusalem, till they was endued with power from on high, Saying,
then shall ye be my witnesses, not only in Judea and Jerusalem, but also to the
uttermost parts of the earth: Act. 1.4 and 8. verse.
Might they not then have objected, and said Lord, would it not be better (if
thy excellency would be pleased) to choose out Messengers for thy own work in
every Country that are native and Inhabitants, then to send us as strangers
amongst them, where we are generally to them unknown? shall we not by that be
hardlyer thought of, because we are not (to any of them) known? and will not
that be a means to bring us into great sufferings and persecutions amongst
them, Mat. 4.18.19, 20.21.12. Mat. 9.9. Tit. 1 16.
and when we come abroad in far Countries and beyond Seas, where we are not at
all amongst them known, will it not give them cause to say we are Jesuits, or
idle wandering dissolute persons and vagabonds? yet not withstanding what they
might have objected against such a sending, (as leaving estates, relations
behind them,) and coming under false censures and great persecution, they gave
up freeely and went, leaving behind them their estates and relations: But such
as are moved of the Lord to do so now, (in the cross to their wills, and
through the trial of their faith and exercise of their patience) they are
hardly judged of by those that are at ease in the flesh, and do greatly suffer
by reason of the subtilty of the serpent that is clothed over and hid under a
pretense and profession of Godliness, professing God in words, but unto every
good work are abominable and reprobate; as such like aforetime was.

When the Church was met at Antioh, as they ministered and fasted, Acts 13.1, 2.
the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have appointed them, and they being sent forth by the holy Ghost, they departed
unto Selucia, and from thence they passing over Seas sailed to Cyprus, Act:
13.4. and so to Salamis, ver. 5. And yet notwithstanding they were neither idle
wandering dissolute persons, nor Jesuits, Act. 18.18 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
nor vagabonds, no more are such that are sent by the Holy Ghost now, though
they may pass abroad in several Countries and over Seas, about the work of the
Lord now to act by his spirit as they are directed, as Paul and Silas before
mentioned did then.

Likewise Paul and Barnabas, they passed much abroad in the countries after
that, for after they had been at Salamis, they passed through the isle unto
Paphos; Acts 13.6. And did the work of the Lord for which they was sent by the
holy Ghosts order and appointment: And when Paul and his company loosed from
Paphos, Act. 13.13. They passing through the countries came to Perga in
Pamphilia, and when they departed from Perga aforesaid, passing over the
countries they came to Antioch in Pisidea, and did the work of the Lord,
appointed them by the holy Ghost there also, Acts 13. from ver. 14. to ver. 45.
But then (as now) the Jews, the old envious professors, being offended at the
truth, they out of their envy, spoke against those things which was spoken by
Paul, and so was in an error therein, and also for contradicting and
blaspheming him and the truth; ver. 45. Yet they that was so contradicted, and
as aforesaid, was neither Jesuits, nor idle wandering dissolute persons, nor
Vagabonds, but they was the dear servants of the Lord, and waxed bold against
the deceit, to declare and testify the truth of the Lord, Act. 13. from ver.
45. to ver. 50. But though they was neither Jesuits, nor idle wandering disolute
persons, nor vagabonds, no more then such as are the Lords Messengers now; yet
the envious professors the Jews stirred up the devout and honorable women so
called, and the chief men of the City, and raised persecution against Paul and
Barnabas, and banished them, or at least expelled them out of their Coasts, but
they shook off the dust off their feet against them, and came to Iconium, see
Acts 13.50. And the servants of the Lord that were so persecuted and banished
were at peace, Act. 13.50, 51.
and justified in the sight of the Lord, and the Disciples were filled with
joy, and with the holy Ghost.

The professors of them times, and the chief men of the City, and even such as
were accounted devout and honorable amongst them, they were in great error in
being so ready to be stirred up by the envious professors, and so raise
persecution against the servants of the Lord, and banish or expel them out of
their Coasts, insomuch that they shook off the dust of their feet to be a
witness against them, according to the command and counsel of the Lord Jesus;
and then the chief men of the City, and the professors, (and as aforesaid) they
did not believe that the Apostles and servants of the Lord was the Lords
Ministers and Messengers that so passed abroad in the countries and over Seas,
into many Nations, no more then the chief men in many Cities; and such as are
old, envious professors, and also them that are accounted devout and honorable
by men, do believe that the Servants of the Lord are the Lords Ministers and
Messengers now, that pass abroad in the Countries and over seas into other
Nations; but being envious against the truth, they raise persecution against
the servants of the Lord, and are ready to expel (or banish) them out of their
coasts, and call them idle, wandering, dissolute persons, or Jesuits, or
Vagabonds: so void of discerning of truth from error are they, being prejudiced
in their minds against the Lords Messengers, (as such in the cursed nature
aforetime were, and now are) that they cannot abide that truth should be truly
declared, or entertained in the families, and cities, and countries where they
are; but as the witness of God arises, and answers to the judgments of God
upon them, and that which shall be against them for their disobedience to the
truth, and envy against the truth, and servants and messengers thereof, they
shall then be ashamed of such their ignorant or wilful actions, and cry out in
the bitterness of their spirit against themselves for so acting, as aforesaid,
when the Book of conscience is opened, and the judgment of Christ against them
is pronounced.

Therefore while you have time, prize it, and fear the Lord God, so will you
not oppose nor persecute his servants and messengers, but receive them, and
delight in the truth, as to you it is revealed.

And after that Paul and Barnabas had been banished, as aforesaid, or expelled
out of their Coasts at Antioch in Pisidea, Heb. 13.
and those Regions, when they had been in the synagogue there, and sat silent
till the legal Preacher or Reader had done, who after that declared the truth
in opposition to the deceit; but the enmity standing in the minds of the old
envious professors and citizens, as aforesaid, they did not only act
Antichrists part in rejecting the truth declared, to cast it out of the peoples
affections, by contradicting and blaspheming the Lords Messengers, but they
proceeded further in Antichrists work, as to reject and banish, or expel the
said Messengers of Christ out of their coasts; and such an Antipathie there is
between Christ and Antichrist, that the Antichristians now, though formal and
feigned professed Christians, they cannot endure that the truth, and true real
Christians and servants of Christ should be entertained and abide in their
Coasts, but endeavors are used to get a Law to whip them (by the advice or
consent of the professed Ministers of Christ) till blood come, and then bannish
or expel them out of their coasts, who are the Lords true Messengers and
Ministers, according to the order and appointment of the Holy Ghost, and so
send them away with a Pass, to the end that (as much as in the will of
corrupt man is) truth may be kept under, from growing and taking place in the
peoples hearts and affections; but though Antichrist has now, as then he had,
such as will so act his part under specious pretenses against the truth, yet
the prosperity of the truth is a torment to the adversaries thereof.

And when Paul and Barnabas had been bannished as aforesaid, yet they were not
discouraged, but waxed bold in the Lord, and afterward went to Iconium, and
went both together into the synagogue of the Jews, though they had not the
command there to stand up, as the parish priests do in the high places; and the
said Paul and Barnabas so spoke, that a great multitude both of the Jews, and
also of the Greeks, believed: But then [as now] the unbelievers that were
Jews, even great professors, they stirred up the Gentiles, and made their
minds evil affected against the Brethren, Act. 14.1, 2. Yet notwithstanding
they abode a long time, speaking boldly in the Lord; but the multitude of the
City were divided (then, as now, where the truth takes place in the hearts
and affections of some of the Citizens, etc.) and part held with the Jews, and
part with the Apostles, Act. 14.3, 4. insomuch that there was then (as
oft-times now is, or of late has bin) an assault made both of the professors
and people, together with their Rulers, to use them that received the truth,
and the Lords Messengers both, despitefullie, and stone them, Act. 4. Yet they
that were thus assaulted by the people, professors, and Rulers, and against
them had such cruelty intended, they were neither idle, wandering, dissolute
persons, nor Jesuits, nor Vagabonds, no more are such as the envious professors
falselie accuses to the Magistrates to be so now.

And after that cruelty intended against the said servants of the Lord, and as
beforementioned, after they left Iconium, as it were ordered, they went abroad
in the Countries without a Passe-port from the said Rulers, etc. to Listea and
Derbe, Cities of Lyconia, and unto the Region that lies round about, and there
they preached the Gospel, Act. 14.6, 7. but though they so passed abroad in the
Countries or Cities, and Regions round about without any man's Passe-port, or as
aforesaid, yet they were neither Jesuits, nor idle, wandering, dissolute
persons, or vagrants, no more then such the Lords Messengers that pass abroad
in the Countries to declare the mind of the Lord, are now, though this
generation falsely accuse them to be so, and are ready to get a Law made
intentionallie against them, to punish them under such false censures and
denominations; but yet notwithstanding the innocence of the innocent stands
clear in the sight of the Lord; and his servants and messengers that are so
accused as aforesaid, does and will stand justified in the sight and account of
the Lord, when the wicked, whoever they are, that are troublers of them, shall
be troubled, and justly condemned before the Lord, when he takes vengeance on
them that are the troublers of his children and servants, and as you may read,
2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. v

And whilst the aforenamed servants and messengers of Christ that passed
abroad in the Countries, and as aforesaid, Act. 14.6.
was preaching the Gospel in those places and Regions last mentioned, Act.
14.19, etc.
as Listra, Derbe and the Regions round about, etc. there came thither certain
professors, as Jews from Antioch and Iconiom, places and cities where the said
servants of the Lord had declared the truth, and from one of them places were
banished, as is apprehended, and at the other, toward them much evil by Rulers
and people was intended, as aforesaid, who persuaded the people against them;
and having stoned Paul, drew him out of the City, supposing he had been dead:
Mark this, you that are envious professors, and all such as are persecutors,
and read your examples by comparing the fruits of your envious spirits, with
the fruits of such as so acted before you against the Lords truth and his
messengers, etc.

Howbeit Paul was not dead when they supposed that he he had so been, upon the
aforesaid persecution and stoning, but he rose up, and came into the City, and
the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe, and when they had preached
the Gospel to that City, and had taught many, they returned again to Listra,
and through the countries to Iconium, where so much evil were, and had been
intended against them, as aforesaid; and from thence to Antioch, and at Antioch
in Pissidia, they had been banished or expelled out of their coasts, as
aforementioned, confirming the souls of the Disciples, exhorting them also to
continue in the faith, and that we must through great tribulation enter into
the Kingdom of God. And after that, and when they had passed throughout the
Country of Pisidia, they came to Pamphilia, and when they had passed abroad in
the Country, and had preached the word in Perga, they went abroad in the
Countries down into Attalia, and from thence passing over Sea, sailed to
Antioch, from whence they had been recommended by the Grace of God for the work
which they fulfilled, Act. 14.19. to the end. Act. 13.1, 2. And though they
passed so much abroad in the Countries, and beyond seas to declare the truth,
and met with such great persecution, and had so much evil intended against them
by Rulers and people, yet notwithstanding they had not any Passe-port or
certificate for their traveling under the hand or seal of any Port-Graves,
Bailiffs, Constables of Castles, Conservators of the Peace of Cities,
Corporations, Towns, places, or Countries and Provinces, Sheriffs, Mayors,
Keepers of National Liberties, etc. nor from under the hand or seal of any
called Justices of the peace, or any other head Officer or Officers of such
aforesaid repective places, that ever we read of, yet they were no Vagrants,
nor idle, dissolute, wandering persons, etc. No more are the servants of the
Lord now, though they do, and may pass much abroad in the Countries, and over
seas, to do the will of the Lord, as he them moves thereunto, and without any
man's Passe-port, etc. as the aforesaid servants of the Lord did, though they
may pass through many tribulations, the footsteps of the flock of Christ, and
paths to the entrance into the Kingdom of God.

R. F.


