The League illegal. WHEREIN The late Solemn League and Covenant is Seriously
Examined, Scholastically and Solidly Confuted: For the Right informing of Weak
and Tender Consciences, and the Undeceiving of the Erroneous.

Written long since in Prison, by DANIEL FEATLEY D. D. And never until now made
known to the World.

Published by JOHN FAIRECLOUGH, vulgo FEATLEY, Chaplain to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty.

PETR. CHRYSOL Magna debet esse in promissione discretio; quia inanis promissio
saepe de amicis sibi comparat inimicos.

HE. XI. 4. By it He, being dead, yet speaks.

LONDON: Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1660.

Resurgam.

Tim: Cap: 4. v. 7. I have fought a good fight

I have finished my course

I have kept the faith.

I was in Prison, and ye came unto me

I was sick, and ye visited me:

Matt: 25. 36. Siste gradum Viator;

Paucis te volo:

Hic situs est Daniel Featlaeus;

Impugnator Papismi;

Propugnator Reformationis;

Instigator Assiduae-Pietatis

Tam Studio, Quam Exercitio

Theologus- Insignis;

Disputator Strenutts:

Concionator Egregius

(...):

Facete Candidus; Candide. Facetus Natus Charltoniae educatu Oxo^: Obijt
Chelsei. Scpultus fuit Lambethae



To the Right Honorable Sir Edward Hyde Knight, Chancellor and Under Treasurer
of his Majesty's Exchequer, Lord Chancellor of England, and one of his
Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Counsel.
My LORD,
IT is a sin as great to be insensible of our mercies, as to turn them into
wantonness. The best of Kings is the blessing of our Nations; who (in imitation
of the Malach. 4. 2.
Sun of Righteousness) is risen unto us with healing in his wings. The
rebellious are indemnisied, and their sins made venial by it: the Loyal and
charitable admire, and rejoice in it. To that overruling Providence therefore
in the first and chiefest place belongs the sacrifice of our praise, (who has
Psalm. 13. 43.
delivered his Royal servant from the strivings of his people); and in the next
place to his instruments. Among these how much your Lordship has merited. by
your constant. Attendance, your faithful Counsels, and such unshaken
Allegiance, as has neither been tainted with Suspicion, nor tired by
Calamities; is too great and high for me to calculate. Next to that private
brazen wall of your serene Conscience; you have the public testimony of our
most Gracious Sovereign, to witness your Fidelity: and it is written in golden
Characters, both in and for your eternal Honor. He has entrusted you with the
jewel of his Conscience, in relation to the sharper Laws; knowing that you are
Tam Marti quam Mercurio. As you are Juvenals Sat. 8.
Lawyer, Qui juris nodos, and legum aenigmata solvis:
So you are his Majesty's Champion, and have excellent skill at the best of
weapons, the pointless, edgeless sword of Mercy. He has entrusted you with the
great Seal of his Indulgencies and Pardons; to the astonishment of the very
Malefactors: that they may be surprised by his gentleness even above hope, who
had offended without fear or suspicion of this happy Revolution. He has
enstrusted you with many encouragements and rewards for the Loyaller and
sounder Clergy: yea and with a conquest of the erring, by the streams of his
Munisicence. And who more fit to be entrusted with Conscience, Mercy, and
Bounty, then a person Religious, Gentle, and Noble? Your own Conscience is
(according to the famous M. T. Cic. in Tusc. qu. l. 2.
Orator) the greatest Theater of Virtue: and your Liberality is Homer's
Nepenthes, which cheers up the drooping Clergy. It is not long since the
Orthodox (but despised) Divines, were almost every where entertained by the
Mushrome Cacotopian Lords, and others, but with that scorn which Alexander
threw upon the Cynick, when he sent him Max. Sermon. de benef.
Discum ossibus refertum, a mess of Bare-bones. O what a blessed change both
in men, and manners, do we now admire! For as all that are vested with a Legal
power, and (loathing the Idolatry of Avarice) sincerely endeavor the Practice
of Piety, do foster the Levites, and pour Oil into their wounds: so it is
thought that your Lordship more particularly does strive to out-vye even
Alexander Severus; who quarrelled with every virtuous person that either asked
nothing, or but little of him; and his challenge stands upon record in these
very words, Aelius Lamgrid.
Quid est quod nihil petis? An me tibi vis fieri debitorem? You have learned of
Elisha so to favor the Sons of the Prophets, and their Relations; as in stead
of rendering them but a poor moyty of the Tithe of their Tithes (which was the
pia fraus, and reforming sacrilege of our late Lay-preachers, and
Black-Saints); you make it much of your business to fill their empty vessels
with the Oil of gladness.

The clear and winged fame of these your Noble Virtues encourages me to
Congratulate them in the Dedication of this little Book: and the rather, both
because the Author (my best of Uncles) was not (I presume) unknown to your
Lordship; and because my self had the honor to be your Lordships
Contemporanian in our Renowned University of Oxford. Nor may I entertain the
least diffidence of a Candid Acceptance; since you so well know, that Plut in
apoph.
Non est minus regium parvula accipere, quam largiri magna. Artaxerxes
disdained not a pitcher of water presented by a Peasant. Here is, my Lord, a
little ewre filled with such precious water, as has virtue (I hope) to cleanse
the stains of a seduced Conscience; and to open the eyes of them that were
born, and have continued, blind. The Author thereof penned it in a Prison:
whose honor it was that he was See his Life and death in a bo^k entitled
(...) (...).
Plundered, Sequestered, Imprisoned, yea and dyed, for his Religion and Loyalty.
Full fifteen years has this Book continued a private and close mourner for the
death of the Author, and the Heresies of the later times: and it had not yet
appeared in the eye of the world, but that I hope it will be sheltred under
your Lordships Pratronage. Mine it was, by the right of an Executor: and Yours
it is by the right of Dedication. The merit of the work will be improved by
your acceptance: the judicious, and sober-minded will bless you for delivering
it from the womb of Obscurity: and I shall be obliged to subscribe my self,

My LORD, The humblest John Faireclough, vulgo, Featley.
London, Augst.
The Publishers (...), OR INTRODUCTION To the ensuing BOOK.
SEcond Cogitations are reputed the wiser and better, because we carefully
weigh them in the scales of solid judgment and serious discretion. The misery
of our late and wasting Maladies we have not forgotten: for our Land was
sufieted with blood; and our garments were rolled in blood: we carried our
lives in our hands; and our Estates were exposed to rapine: Heresies and
Schisms did eat like a Gangrene; and Religion was near lost in the Atheism,
Blasphemy, Epicurism, and Liberty of those looser times. But Unde hoc repent
commentum? Whence arose this sudden fury? Whence sprang this Epidemical
Madness, Apostasy, and Ruin? Perditio tua ex te, o Israel, says God by his
Prophet: Hos. 13. 9.
O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. And most true it is; for as in general
our crying sins pulled down the Vengeance, and justified the Revenger: so there
was something in particular of Covetousness, Ambition, and cunning Malice which
contrived and managed our Civil Wars; but cannot justify the Contrivers.

Not to touch upon those State affairs which were merely such; it may well
become us now, as Christians, in the pleasant bowres of our quiet solitude, to
sit down and re-view that pretense of Divinity, and regulating of our
Consciences, which plotted and fomented our Rebellion; and put a gloss upon
our Insurrections. To this purpose we find in the Preface to the Covenant,
That the Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
Ireland, called to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies,
Attempts, and Practices of the enemies of God against the true Religion, and
Professors thereof, etc. especially in these three Kingdoms, etc. and how much
their Rage, Power, and Presumptions were of late, and at that time, increased
and exercised. But who were these enemies? Papists: it is granted. But were
these the only enemies? Suppose they were (which yet cannot be yielded) how
must they be suppressed? By a National and Solemn League and Covenant: for thus
we were taught by our Neighbor Nation. I need not therefore enquire, Who
composed our Covenant? or, By what Authority it was Imposed, and pressed? Let
it suffice that This Covenant was concluded to be the way, and the only way to
advance the glory of God, and the Kingdom of Christ; the honor and happiness
of the King, and his Posterity; and the true public Liberty, Safety, and Peace
of these Kingdoms. Here were indeed specious Pretenses; and fair hopes, as full
of confidence as the simple people could be hugged and dandled with.

-- Virgo formosa superne.
But did the Physic work as the Physicians promised, and the Patients
expected? Did it produce any of those saving effects, which the grave Dictators
assured us it would? Surely no. It may well therefore now become us their
Patients (who suffered many things of many Physicians, Mar. 5. 26.
and spent all that we had, and were nothing bettered, but rather grew worse)
to enter into a serious consultation about that which they contrived to be the
Methodus medendi: and (since it pretends to Divinity) to enquire whether it
were indeed either lawful, or proper? If we truly desire a Sober, Judicious,
and Solid Resolution; I presume that the ensuing Book will answer our doubts,
and inform our Consciences.

I confess that this Book might have slept still in private, and should not
have grown public (especially at this time), if the spirit of contradiction
were not now so prevalent, and malice so industrious. The troublers of our
Israel enter upon the stage again: and furious men whom nothing will satisfy,
join in a new and lawless Corporation; and send up their Burgesses upon the
errand of scurrilous and factious Libelling. Is this their Divinity, Sen. de
benef.
to be thus unthankful? Male collata male debentur, faith the quaint and Divine
Philosopher. Has our God of peace so lately beaten our Swords into
Plough-shares, and our Spears into Pruninghooks; and must we go to the
uncircumcised Philistines for a Smith to reduce them into weapons again? Has
he not once again sent us a King in mercy, and fitted an incomparable head to
the shoulders of our Kingdoms? Are not our Scorpion scourges gently removed;
our Sequestrations taken off; our Religion restored; our good old Laws
revived; and our propriety and just liberty recovered and enjoyed? Do we not
seem to be blessed with a well-grounded hope, that both King and People, Church
and Commonwealth, will peaceably repose and solace themselves in those
glorious and mutual ties of a righteous Government, and a dutiful Obedience; a
Religion pure and undefiled; and such Love and Loyalty as may never be
interrupted? What means then this bleating and lowing of these sheep and
oxen, and the hideous braying of unclean beasts, in our Christian ears? Must
our Music stop upon a fret, and our Harmony be disturbed by such harsh and
unwelcome discords? Are we already sick of our ease, and weary of our mercies?
Will Jeshurun kick as soon as ever he waxes fat? Alas, alas! the moth
endeavors to eat into our Garments again; and the canker into our purest Gold.
We daily see how these discontents of ungrateful and irreligious Spirits
endeavor to blast our fairest hopes, by disturbing our Peace, and renewing our
contentions. The ambitious are discontented, and want promotion: the malicious
are troubled; and want revenge: The needy sufferers are impatient and want
preferment: the heretical are vexed, and fear a Curb: and the schismatical are
unquiet, and suspect a settlement. Too many forget the miseries of war: too few
are thankful for peace and truth; and the full soul loathes the honey-combe.
That foolish fowl which saved the Capitol, has moulted her sicker quils; and
the unwise turn them into gaping penns, to scrible sedition.

I have therefore awaked this book, that it may tell the deluded world how
unsafely we formerly credited the croaking of such Egyptian Frogs: and hope
that are-view of our former contentions, grounded upon the Covenant, will make
us repent, and be Wise. Deliberandum est diu quod statuendum est semel, says
Seneca: We should seriously consider before we certainly decree; Psalm. 126. 5.
and with good advice should make war. Those that sowed in our tears by their
hasty Covenanting, may thank themselves if they reap not in our joy. If their
League was Illegal, and made their grapes so sour; certainly to revive it
(except in their sorrow) is the way to continue their teeth on edge. Aug. Sermon.
de Johan. Bap.
Juravit David temere, says the Father, sed non implevit Jurationem, majore
pietate: David was a grievous sinner, when he became so rash a swearer: but he
showed more piety when he broke his Oath. Although some few do seek our
disturbance, and those none of the best; yet we see and rejoice that many
Learned and Conscientious Covenanters retract their Errors. Some there are
whose judgments are convinced by the syllogism of Conscience: some who are
calmed by the gentleness of Remission: and some also who are reclaimed by the
Royal care and indulgent tenderness of our most gracious Sovereign; who makes
the Children of the Bondwoman, Heirs with those of the Freewoman. I presume
that I need not to commend the ensuing Book to any of these, unless to confirm
them in their conversion by strength of Arguments; that as their repentance is
visible, so their resolves may be constant. But I greatly suspect the
inflexibility and pertinacious obstinacy of some few of our dissenting
Brethren; whom peradventure nothing will content but an illimited Power to Lord
it in their Parishes; and (assisted with their Confederates) to make their
Consistories as well the Benches for secular Cases, as the Tribunals for
Ecclesiastical; and all under a notion of The Power of the Keys. To these in
particular (if such there are) I do friendly recommend this following work;
hoping that when they feel the force of Argument in their strong convictions,
they will not be ashamed to confess their mistakes, and study to be quiet.

The Author of this Book was known to be a burning and a shining light, until
malice and mischief shut him up in a Prison, and put out his Lamp. His Speech
in the Assembly against this Covenant was at that time so distasted, that his
impatient and too zealous Brethren suffered him not to render those his Reasons
in defense of Episcopacy which are added to this Work. When they therefore
hastened to swear the League, he retired to his house to grieve and to pray. Y
from that time forward he was neither secure in his study, nor safe in his
house. It was his seeming sin that he so freely delivered his conscience; and
his punishment was Plundring, Sequestring, Imprisonment, and Death. While he
continued a Prisoner he composed this Book at the request of a friend, and the
importunity of his Letter wherewith it begins. I suppose that none will
gainsay the observation of the Father, Cyprian Se^n. l. 4. de im nort.
Conflictatio in adversis probatio est veritatis. He was not ashamed of his
chain, because he endured those pressures as a faithful Son of that true Church
whereof Cassiod. in Psalm. 1. says, Novit Ecclesia beneficia Domini; triumphat
de suis cladibus; afflictione semper augetur; sanguine martyrum irrigatur;
tristitia magis erigitur: angustia dilatatur; fletibus pascitur; jejuniis
reficitur; and inde potius crescit unde mundus deficit. Let the judicious and
impartial Reader censure it as he pleases: I shall end this Introduction with
the words of Horace,

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.
TO My Reverend, and much esteemed Friend, D. F.
SIR,
THE Wind is stormy, and the Sea troubled; and we are to cut a way through a
narrow passage between two dangerous Rocks, wherein if we steer not warily and
evenly, it cannot be avoided but we shall make shipwreck on the one side, or on
the other; on the one side of Loyalty, and a good Conscience; on the other of
Liberty, and our Estate. In this case to whom should we rather have recourse,
then to an ancient and skilful Pilot, who has sounded the depths of
Theological Controversies, and heretofore hazarded his life to save others from
drowning in the Sea of Errors. Moreover, none in my judgment so fit to resolve
a Case of Conscience, and that of greatest importance, as a faithful Minister
of the Gospel, who has suffered for Conscience. I pray Sir be not shie of your
best advice; for if we miscarry through want of your Direction, all your
excuses will prove unexcusable before God. What though you have resolved to
conceal your self, and you lie hid at this present in the dark? Yet like a
Chrysolite or Carbuncle glowing with. Divine fire, you shine the brighter. I
entreat you therefore of all loves to cast a careful eye upon the late
Covenant; and in the sieve of the refined judgments of the subtilest Casuists
to sift it to the bran; and send the result of your thoughts upon it to

Your Ancient E. G.
From London this 12. of February
TO My Noble, and much Honored Friend, E. G.
Worthy Sir,
IN this tempestuous season (like that in Rome, when as Livie relates it
rained blood for many days) the best counsel I can give is, That you and all
who are like you, (from whose Prayers offered up with strong cries heaven
suffers violence) would cry aloud with the Disciples (when the ship was
covered with waves) Save us, Mat. 8. 24, 25.
Master, we perish: that so he being awaked by our watchful devotion, may
rebuke the winds and the Seas, and restore unto us our former calm and
Halcyonian days. For particular directions how to steer your course between
the Rocks you mention, upon which you are in danger to split either your
Conscience, if you enter into this New Covenant; or your Estate, if you enter
not into it; you cannot expect them from me. For though I have for many years
studied the Compass of Gods word; yet I am no Pilot. I have ever lived under
the hatches, and never sat at helm in Church or Commonwealth. And if I should
take upon me the office of a Steerman; and you following my advice should
miscary; and be dashed in pieces, or sunk in your fortunes; in stead of thanks
from you, I were like to receive curses from your family and posterity. Yea but
I am (say you) a dispenser of the mysteries of salvation; and it is required of
a Steward, that he be found faithful: and I have suffered already for the
testimony of a good Conscience; and therefore ought not for any fear or terror
conceal my judgment, or stifle the truth. I cannot deny my function; neither
will I betray my innocence; neither am I afraid of any thing so much herein as
this; That if you make me your Casuist, your case will be soon like mine; and
by gaining the truth you will be a loser. But I check my self in these thoughts
with the words of our Savior, Mat. 16. 26.
What will it advantage a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul?
What will it avail the master of a Ship to save his whole freight, if he lose
that precious pearl which the rich Merchant sold all that he had to buy? Mat.
13. 46.
This peerless pearl no plunderer can rob us of: this affords me a
comfortable light in the thickest darkness of melancholy thoughts. Save for
this, I account my self nothing worth at all. No carbuncle (as your love
overpriseth me) but a dead coal now resolving into ashes: and as I lie hid in
the dark, so I desire from this obscure state to steal into heaven; and in the
mean while Ita vivere ut nemo me vixisse sentiat; so to pass through these
angry and working seas, that none may discern the print of my Keel.
Notwithstanding, because you charge me so deeply by all the ties of Christian
charity, which is the bond of perfection; I will freely open my self concerning
the Engagement of our Conscience in the New Covenant; and return you not so
much a punctual, as a poignant resolution.

Yours to serve you in the Lord D. F.

THE COVENANT Which caused these Scruples of Conscience, Here follows.
A Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation and defense of Religion, the
honor and happiness of the King, and the Peace and Safety of the three
Kingdoms, England, Scotland, and Ireland.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the
Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms wherein every one private condition is included, and
calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts, and
practices of the Enemies of God against the true Religion, and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms, ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power, and presumption are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Charch and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public Testimonies; We have now at last, (after
other means of supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and
destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the Example of Gods People in other Nations; after mature
deliberation resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League
and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself with our
hands lifted up to the most High God, do swear:

I.
THat we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies; The Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best reformed
Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and our posterity after us may as Brethren live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II.
That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy)
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to
be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we partake in
other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that
the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III.
We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our estates and lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms,
and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
that the world may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just power and
greatness:

IV.
We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as have
been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by hindering
the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his people, or one of the
Kingdoms from another, or making any faction or parties amongst the people,
contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to public
trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall
require or deserve, or the supreme Judicatories of both Kingdoms respectively,
or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient.

V.
And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our progenitors, is by the good providence of God granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both Parliaments: we
shall each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all posterity; And that
Justice may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in mannr expressed in the
precedent Articles.

VI.
We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof,
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives zealously and
constantly continue therein, against all lets and impediments whatsoever; and
what we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal, and
make known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do
as in the sight of God.

And because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof; We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins, and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned purpose,
desire, and endeavor for our selves, and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and man, to
amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian tyranny; to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the peace and tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

The two first clauses of the Covenant, as they were offered to the Assembly,
licensed, and entered into the Hall book according to Order, September 4. 1643.
and Printed at London for Philip Lane.
1. THat we shall all and each one of us, sincerely, readily and constantly,
through the Grace of God, endeavor in our several places and callings, the
preservation of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, in the Church of
Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government according to the word
of God, and the reformation of Religion in the Church of England (this
Explication to be at the end of the Covenant, as far as we do or shall in our
consciences conceive to be according to the Word of God) according to the same
holy Word, the Example of the last Reformed Churches, and as may bring the
Church of God in both Nations to the nearest conjunction and Uniformity in
Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship
and Catechizing; that we and our Posterity after us may, as Brethren, live in
Faith and Love.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism and Profaneness,
and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power
of Godliness in both Nations, lest we partake in other men's sins, and thereby
be endangered to receive of their plagues, that the Lord may be one, and his
Name one in both Kingdoms.

To which first printed copy, the Doctors Speech delivered in the Assembly,
relates, page 48.

The two clauses of the Covenant, as they were altered and Printed by Order of
the House of COMMONS.
1. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches, and shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; that
we and our Posterity after us, may, as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and
the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on the Hierarchy,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be
contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we partake in
other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues, and that
the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

THE League Illegal.


I answer Negatively.

Covenant with my self, Rebus sic stantibus, or rather jacentibus, never to
question this Covenant; which the authority of both Houses, Mr. Nigh. p. 21. Our
last refuge. Tabula post naufragium. Hendersons Speech, p. 32. Were this
Covenant written on the plaster of the wall, over against the Pope,
Beshazzar-like in his sacrilegious pomp; it would make his heart to tremble,
his countenance to change, his head and Miter to shake, his joints to loosen,
and all his Cardinals and Prelates to be astonished at it.

E. W. his Preface to the Solemn League: It is the cleerest that ever was
penned here below; the finger of God is in it too. By help of that hand which
wrote the Ten words first, this was indicted and written sure enough: for truly
it is as the good Word of God.


and Piety and Learning of the Assembly of Divines, has commended as the
Sovereign Remedy of all the Maladies of the times: yet because my conscience
tells me that it has not approbation from the Three that bear record in heaven,
I dare not conceal those Reasons which at the first made me doubt of the
lawfulness of it, and in the end put it out of doubt. The reasons propounding
the naked truth, without any clothing of art, or ornament of Rhetoric, are
these. Audi non phalerata, sed fortia.

preposterous order in setting down the parts of this Covenant, wherein he that
runs may read a double Solecism. (For in it the Church of Scotland,
precedeth the Church of England; and the Liberties of the Subject are set
before the Royal Prerogative, and Imperial Dignity of the Prince. Surely such a
sacred and venerable Evidence of fidelity, is a public Covenant made by two
Nations, and signed by the Name of the great Jehovah; that in it both matter
and method, phrase and order ought to be maturely advised on: and not only
every period and line, but every word and syllable therein to be exactly
scanned, before the conscience of millions of men be charged with it. If we
cannot brook or keep our hands from tearing a List, Catalogue, or Register,
wherein they who are many degrees below us, are yet ranked above us, and named
before us: can his Majesty take it well at our hands, that we should accept of
a Covenant hand over head, wherein the members are set above the head, and his
Sovereign Majesty slighted; and that not only by misplacing his person, but
limiting and restraining the preservation of his Person, and Authority to the
defense of the true Religion, and maintenance of the Liberties of the Kingdoms?
What is this but to indent with our Sovereign, and capitulate with our head; as
Ochan sometimes did with the Emperor Frederick, Defend me gladio, and ego
defendam te argumentis; Defend me with thy Sword, and I will defend thee with
my Pen? If his Majesty will defend our Faith, we will bear faith to him; if he
will keep safe our Pendants, we will safeguard his Crown. Which limitation I
except at, not that I doubt but that there is and ought to be a mutual tie
between King and Subject; and that if he either desert the true Faith, or
infringe the Laws and just liberties of his Subjects, for which he pawned his
Faith at his Coronation; God will call him to an account for it: but this does
not discharge us of our Allegiance to him. Though he keep not touch with us,
yet we may not break with him; for he is, (as Tertullian gives him his true
dimensions, according to the golden reed of the Sanctuary,) Solo Deo minor,
caeteris omnibus major: and consequently questionable for his breach of faith
before none but God. Alas, what a fickle estate and lamentable condition were
princes in, if upon pretense that they defend not that Religion which the
people believe to be true; or maintain not those Liberties which they challenge
as their birthright; their royal Crowns may be exposed to rapine, and their
sacred persons to violence!

dive into the depths of State, nor anxiously to enquire into the reason which
moved the first contrivers and projectors of this League to set it on foot at
this present, and press it with all earnestness; I am persuaded that none will
deny that their main scope and aim therein was, to engage our brethren of
Scotland in the present quarrel, for pulling down Episcopacie, and setting up
the Presbytery; and by this National and solemn league to strengthen their
party, and foment this unnatural war which has already drained the wealth of
the Kingdom: and is like to draw out the lifeblood also. Nemo tenetur
divinare, say the Canonists; neither will I take upon me the office of a
Prophet to foretell the Catastrophe of these Tragedies. Yet sure I am, this
Queen of all Islands never received such prejudiced and wrong, nor ever was so
near the brink of destructions when she drew in forain Forces to defend her
self against homebred Enemies: and I pray God we experimentally interpret not
the mystery of Pharaohs dream concerning the lean kine which eat up the fat,
and yet were never a whit the fatter. If there be a decree of Heaven, that
these two Nations shall be drowned one in another blood, for the crimsons sins
of both not yet repented of: yet let not us draw this most fearful judgment
upon both Kingdoms by the cord of an oath. But to argue syllogistically.

true Religion, and a Defender of the orthodox faith may enter into a public
and solemn covenant for the reformation of religion, without the consent,
(much less against the express command) of their Sovereign. For such
disobedience and sleighting of their King cannot stand with the duty we ow him
of fear and loyalty, enjoined Prove. 24. 21. My son, fear the Lord and the King.
Eccles. 8. 2. I advise thee to take heed to the mouth of the King, and to the
word of the oath of God. Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers: whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they
that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. V. 4. If thou do evil,
fear; for he bears not the sword in vain. Prove. 16. 14. The wrath of the King
is the messenger of death. Prove. 19. 12. The Kings wrath is like the roaring of
a Lion. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme. v. 17. Fear God, honor the
King; Nor with the prayers of the Church made for him, that we may serve,
honor, and humbly obey him in God, and for God: Nor with the principles of
right Reason; for the King is the supreme head of the Church, and
Commonwealth, under Christ; and all his Subjects conjunctim in Parliament, or
divisim, are but Members of the same Body politic; and how should the members
enter into a covenant, or frame and devise it without the head?

But the King is so far from yielding his royal assent to this Covenant, that
he strictly forbids it; and that under the pain of Treasonin; his Proclamation
printed at Oxford.

Ergo, we may not enter into this Covenant, nor entangle our consciences with
this new Oath.

The Covenanters answer.
we must obey God rather then man.

vertua consent l thereunto: for though he be not present in person at the
Parliament, nor has given his royal assent under his hand; yet this
Parliament is called and continued by his authority, and his consent is
vertually contained in the Votes of both Houses.

It is a ruled case in Divinity, Reply.
That we must obey God rather then man, when God commands one thing, and man
another: but when the commands of God and of his Vicegerent upon earth: clash
not one against another, St. Bernards doctrine is most true, We must obey him
as God who is in the place of God, in those things which are not against God.
When St. Peter and St. John returned this answer to the Council, the Council
forbad that which God commanded. God commanded the Apostles to preach Christ's
resurrection; and the Assembly of Priests and Elders forbad them. This is not
the Covenanters case: for where does God command the English to swear to
preserve the Scotch Discipline and Liturgy, which they themselves have often
varied? Or to abjure Episcopacie, which was the only government of the Church
for more then 1500 years, and under whose shade Christian Religion most
flourished, and the Church stretched forth her branches to the Rivers, and her
boughs to the ends of the earth? Where does the Scripture warrant, See Mr.
Coleman his Sermon.
(much less command) the association of two Kingdoms and jointly taking up
arms in the quarrel of the Gospel, and defending and propagating religion by
the sword?

Militia, and the extirpation of Prelacie and Pluralities, send to his Majesty
and humbly entreat his royal assent? nay, why in all Parliaments since the
first even till this day, after both Houses had past bills, did still the Lords
and Commons lay them at his Majesty's feet, beseeching him in humblest manner
to take them up, and sign them with his royal hand? and if he liked them, his
answer has been, Le Roy vieut; if he distasted them, Le Roy s'avisera. Did the
calling of a Parliament in the Kings name and by his authority, vertually
include or conclude his Royal assent to all the Acts; King Richard the 2d. had
given his consent to his own deposing: for that Parliament wherein he was
deposed, was called in his name and by his Authority.

4. No Covenant, especially public and solemn between two Nations for
reformation of Religion, may be taken without warrant from Gods word; for in
every such Covenant God is a party, and his consent must be both had and
known, which cannot be but from his word. Beside, this Covenant is bound with
an Oath, which is an Act of Religion, and cultus latriae, that is a part of
divine worship; and if it be not commanded by God, it is forbidden in Scripture
under the name of will worship.

Moreover, that golden rule of the Apostle applied by by him to the use of
things indifferent, stretches also to this case of conscience, Whatsoever Oath
we take, or Covenant we enter into, not persuaded in Conscience that we have
good ground for what we do in scripture, is sin to us.

But this Covenant has no warrant for it in holy Scripture: for from the Alpha
of Genesis to the Omega of the Apocalypse there is no vola nor vestigium of
such a Covenant as this.

Ergo, this Covenant must not be taken by any, who desire to walk exactly
before God according to the precise rule of his word.

There is warrant in Gods word both for the matter of this Covenant, The
Covenanters answer.
and the form and manner of taking the oath. For the matter we have a pattern
of a Covenant taken for the reformation of the false, and preservation of the
true worship of God, Coleman sermon. p. 21.
and the uniting of Kingdoms in the truth thus reformed, 1 Samuel 18. 3. 4. 2
Kings 23. 5. 2 Chr. 25. 8. 9. 2 Chro. 30. Ezra 10. 2. And for the form and
manner of taking it by lifting up the hand, Nye's Speech, p. 15.
we have a precedent Apoc. 10. 50.

None of these instances are ad Rhombum: Reply 1.
all those Covenants were made against idolatry and other sins expressly
forbidden by the law of God; but this Covenant is against Prelacie and such a
form of worship practiced in the Church of England, as has been justified by
the word of God, and unanswerable arguments drawn from Scripture by Whitgift
and Hooker in their answer to Cartwright, C^vell to Barrow and Brown, Burges
to Ames, and Ball to Can, and many others.

In all those Covenants the King had the main stroke, but in this none at all.

1. For the Covenant mentioned, 1 Samuel 18. 3, 4 it comes not home to our case;
for that was a private Covenant between two intimate friends, for the safety of
both their lives, sought after by a bloody Tyrant: this is a National Covenant
between two Kingdoms, for the Reforming Religion, and settling Peace; that was
made by the true King appointed by God, and anointed before this by Samuel,
against him who indeed held the Crown, but was rejected by God himself; this is
a Covenant made by Subjects against the Commands of a most gracious Prince.

2. For the Covenant mentioned 2 King. 23. 5. the text says, King Josiah made
this Covenant, that they should walk after the Lord, and keep his
Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes with all their heart, etc.
And that he put down the Chemarims, etc. There the King makes a Covenant, and
reforms a Church, and not the People; here the People enter into a Covenant
without the King, and they take upon them, against his command, to Reform, or
rather Deform the Church, by overthrowing the Hierarchy, and abolishing
Episcopacy. Chius ad Choum, these things agree as well as Harp and Harrow.

3. For the Covenant mentioned 2 Chr. 15. 8, 9. King Asa gathered all Judah and
Benjamin together to Jerusalem, where they offered to the Lord of the spoils,
and made this Covenant, and in performance of this Oath or Covenant, v. 16. he
deposed Maacah his mother from her Regency, because she had made an Idol in a
grove, and Asa brake down her Idol, and stamped it, and burned it at the brook
Kidron.

4. For the example of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 30. who in the days of Hezekiah,
though they were under another King, yet joined with the men of Judah in
keeping the Passover, it yields no support at all to their tottering cause. For

1. They entered not into any solemn League with the men of Judah, though for
the present they joined with them in a Religious duty commanded by the Law.

2. What they did, they were invited to do by King Hezekiah; whereas the Scotch
are not invited to this League with the English by the King.

3. The King of Asshur forbad not the Israelites to join with their Brethren of
Judah in keeping the Passover; but the King forbids any of his Subjects to
enter into this Covenant.

4 The King who Reigned over the Israelites, was an Idolater; but our King is a
worshiper of the true God. And albeit, in some case and quarrel, the worshipers
of the true God may join with their Brethren of the same Religion in another
Kingdom, in a Defensive League (though the King being an Idolater, should
forbid it) yet it follows not, that they may do so without the consent, and
against the command of a Christian Prince, who is a professor of the true
Religion.

Lastly, The Israelites, besides the invitation of King Hezekiah to keep a
solemn Passover with the Jews, had the express command of God himself; whereas
neither English nor Scotch have any command from God expressly or implicitly, to
enter into this League for the Defense of the Protestant Religion against
Papist without the King, the King himself undertaking, and that by most solemn
Oaths and Protestations to defend the same.

5. For the Covenant mentioned Ezra 10. 3. that was merely to remove a Scandal
from the Jews, and to fulfill the express command of God, for putting away
strange wives, set down in the Law of Moses: in which case no man doubts but
a Covenant may be made not only without, but against the commandment of a
Prince. Yet here the Jews (besides the command of Nehemiah the Viceroy) had the
approbation of the Prince for making this Covenant: for the King of Persia at
this time favored the Jews; and contributed largely to the reedifying of the
Temple; and gave order to Ezra the Priest to adorn the house of God, and
perform all things in his service according to the Law, Ezra 7. 10.

The last example Rev. 10. 5. is least to our present purpose: for the Angel
there made no Covenant, but only swear by the living God, that time should be
no more. It is true he lifted up his hand; yet that no way helps the
Covenanters cause: for that might be a fit gesture in an Angel menacing a fatal
doom to the world, and the outdating of all time; which yet may not be thought
so fit a gesture for men entering into a holy League for the preservation of two
Kingdoms. If they can, as the Angel did, stand upon the earth and the sea at
the same time; let them also further imitate the Angel in lifting up their
hands to heaven, when they make their Covenant. Howsoever for the gesture we
will not contend with them: I think it fitter in taking this Oath, then after
the usual manner, to lay the hand upon the Bible; for this Oath and Covenant
has no ground or foundation at all in that book: and the lifting up of the
hand very well expresses the purport of this Covenant, which is a lifting up
of their hands against the Lords anointed, and his Church: yet under pretense
of defense of the Kings person, never so much endangered as by their Armies;
and of Religion, never so profaned as by their Reformadoes; and of the
liberties of Subjects, never so much infringed as by arbitrary votes.

Before we take this Oath of reformation, we must desire a reformation of the
Oath: for it is full of ambiguities and contradictions: whence I thus frame a
fifth argument.

ambiguous Oath ought to be taken, or Covenant signed: for here one of
Pythagoras golden Precepts takes place, Loquere cum lumine: all Ambiguities,
Equivocations, or mental reservations (especially in Leagues and Oaths) are
abominated by all Protestants. He that swears ambiguously swears not in
simplicity of heart, nor can keep his Oath sincerely and entirely.

But in this Covenant and Oath there are many Ambiguities.

For what is meant in the first clause by common enemies? Either the world, the
flesh and the Devil; which indeed are (as it were) sworn enemies to all true
Religion: or Papists, or Independents; who are both enemies to the Discipline
and Government of the Scotch Church.

In the second clause what is meant by Church government by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc? either all government by Bishops; or the present Government only,
with the late Innovations and abuses thereof. If all government by Bishops,
then in taking this Oath, we condemn not only the perpetual Government of the
Church from the Apostles time till the reformation of Religion in the days of
Hen. 8. but also the reformed Churches in England, Ireland, Denmark, Swethland,
Poland, Saxony, and other parts of Germany; where either they have Archbishops
and Bishops, or tantmount Intendents, and Superintendents; If the present
government only, with innovations and abuses; let them explain what are the
innovations and abuses we swear against: else we cannot swear in judgment.
What is meant by Hierarchy? the word signifies holy Government, being derived
from (...) holy, and (...) rule or government. And is it fit crudely, without
any gloss, to forswear all holy Government?

In the third clause, what is meant by defending the Kings person in the
defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms? Is it a
limitation, or not? If it be no limitation, what does it there? (...).
There ought to be no idle, and (if I may so speak) hang-by words in an Oath:
for the Wiseman teaches us, Eccles. 5. 1.
when we speak to God, our words must be few. If it be a limitation, how does
this Covenant agree with the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance; by which we
are absolutely bound to defend the Kings person, royal Dignities and
Prerogatives of the Crown, without any if or of, restriction or qualification?

In the fourth clause, what is meant by Malignants or evil instruments? a word
never used till of late in any Statute, Law, or Ordinance; and never so much
abused as at this day.

In the sixth clause, how far extend these words, I will assist and defend all
those that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and
persuance thereof? Does it reach to giving battle to the King, Sequestring
Estates, plundering houses, and trampling all Laws under foot; and to the
justifying all the outrages committed in the maintaining and pursuing this
League? If not, why is it not circumscribed with that limitation in the first
Protestation, By all good and lawful means? or, so far as lawfully I may? There
being so many Amphibologies, Ambiguities, and riddles in this Oath, we must
have some Oedipus of the Synod to read and clearly expound them, before we can
safely engage our conscience by Oath to perform them.

Covenant may be made, or Oath taken, which implies in it contradictions; for
in such an Oath or Covenant we play fast and loose; say and unsay; and
overthrow the nature of an Oath; and take Gods name in vain. The Schools and
ancient Doctors constantly maintain, that it exceeds even Divine Omnipotency
to reconcile Contradictions; which are amongst those many things St. Augustine
speaks of, which God therefore cannot do, because he is Omnipotent.

But there are apparent contradictions in this Covenant, and Gordian knots
which cannot be untied. For,

Noblemen, Barons* etc. enter into this Covenant according to the commendable
practice of these Kingdoms in former times; and yet Mr. Nigh in his Speech,
published by special order of the House, upon the very day the Covenant was
read and sworn unto, and subscribed by the Honorable House of Commons, and
Reverend Assembly of Divines, Sept. 25. says p. 12. That such an Oath for
matter, persons, and other circumstances, has not been in any age, or oath we
read of in sacred or humane stories. And Mr. Coleman in his Sermon commanded to
be printed by the Commons of the House of Parliament, Sept. ult. 1643. p. 18.
Ask your Fathers, consult with the aged of our times, whether ever such a thing
were done in their days, or in the days of their Fathers before them? And in
his Epistle Dedicatory, An Oath, if vain, makes the Land to mourn: an Oath, if
weighty, makes it rejoice. This is a new thing, and not done in our Land
before; and I hope will have a new effect, not seen by our people before.

we will really and constantly endeavor the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government: and yet in the same branch we swear to endeavor to bring the
Churches of God in these three Kingdoms (of which Scotland is one) to the
nearest conjunction and uniformity in form of Church Government, according to
the Word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches. But this cannot
be done if Scotland be preserved in her present Directory for Worship,
Discipline and Government: for the Government in the Church of England,
Ireland, Denmark, Swethland, Poland, Saxony, and in all the Churches of the
East (not subject to the Pope) is Episcopal: and that is proved to be most
conformable to the Word of God, by the writings of Bilson, Downham, Armagh,
never yet answered by any.

we will endeavor to reform the Doctrine of the Church of England according to
Gods Word; and yet preserve the reformed Religion in Scotland in Doctrine:
whereas the Doctrine of the Church of England and Scotland is all one; as
appears by the Confession of the one, and Articles of the other. All the
difference between the Church of England and Scotland is concerning Discipline
and Liturgy; not Doctrine, as it is distinguished from them.

we will endeavor the extirpation of Prelacy and Schisms: whereas Prelacy has
been ever, and is, the special, if not only means to extirpate Schism. If
Prelacy be taken away, says St. Jerome ad Luc. and the preeminencie of one
Presbyter above another; tot Schismata erunt quot Sacerdotes. That is to
extirpate Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. and yet in the third
branch we swear to preserve the rights and privileges of the Parliament, and
liberties of the Kingdoms: among which liberties of the Kingdom of England, and
privileges of the Parliament, are the contents of Magna Charta, and Petition
of Right; in which the Government of Archbishops and Bishops, and the rights
and privileges of the Church are comprised.

preserve and defend his Majesty's Person, and Authority, without any
diminution of his just power and greatness: and yet in the sixth Article we
swear to assist and defend all those that enter into this League and Covenant,
in the maintaining and pursuance thereof: whereas it is known by their daily
practice, that they levy arms against the King; seize upon his Forts, Ships,
Magazens, and Revenues. How can a man take away the Kings Munition, and
Castles; and yet not weaken his power? How can a man forcibly encounter and
discomfit an Army raised by the Kings power, and yet not diminish his power?
How can a man take away his Revenues, Houses, Parks, etc. and not diminish his
greatness? how can he give him battle, and yet defend his Person? Therefore
before we enter into this Covenant to make up all the breaches in the Church
and Commonwealth, we must make up the breaches in the Covenant it self; before
we reconcile and unite the three Kingdoms, we must endeavor to reconcile the
contradictions in this our Oath and Solemn League.

League and Covenant confirmed by oath is free and voluntary; or forced and
compulsory. If it be free and voluntary, why is there annexed a most severe
penalty to be inflicted upon all those who refuse to enter into it before the
first of March? If it be forced and compulsory, how is it a Covenant?
especially with God, who respects not our words, but our hearts? If it be a
constrained Oath imposed upon us whether we will or no; then it is a heavy yoke
laid upon the Conscience, inconsistent with our Christian Liberty: and the
requiring it of us is not like to procure a blessing from Heaven to the Land,
but to pull down the vials of Gods vengeance upon it. If Tertullian could say,
Non est Religionis Religionem cogere, it is no religious act to force Religion:
we may swear that such a constrained Oath is no way acceptable to God. Well it
may be termed in our language a League or Covenant: but in the language of
Canaan it is not so. For Berith, a Covenant, comes from Bara, which signifies
eligere, says Buxtorfius; that is, to choose. Neither is it any act of virtue
in Aristotle's School: for virtus est habitus electivus; a habit whereby we
exercise our free choice.

knows not; for an oath must be taken in judgment, truth, and righteousness,
Jer. 4 2. A man cannot swear in judgment, or judiciously, who knows not that
to be true in an assertory Oath; and honest and righteous in a promissary;
which he swears unto. For if that be false to which he swears, he is
perjured: and if it be a dishonest thing which he promises to do, he is
unrighteous. Besides, it is great precipitancy and rashness, to enter into a
Covenant blind-folded, and to swear to maintain that we understand not.

But the subjects of England (at least for the major part) know not what the
Scotch Discipline, Government, or Worship is: which notwithstanding by this
Covenant they are bound to preserve, even with the hazard of their fortunes and
lives.

We do not swear to observe that Discipline, The Covenanters answer.
but to preserve it; I may preserve that which in point of conscience I cannot
observe, Mr. Case sermon. p. 42. Chapter 10. 28.
or at least not swear to observe.

The wives, sons, and daughters in Nehemiah's time took a Covenant; who yet
knew not in particular what that Covenant did bind them to. Mr. White in a
Sermon at Lambeth.
Students in the University take an Oath to observe the Statutes; Apprentices
in London to maintain the privileges of the City; and all of us in our late
Protestation, the Liberty of the Subject; and yet neither Scholars, nor
Apprentices, nor we, know in particular all the Statutes, and privileges we
swear to observe and defend.

These Answers yield no stay at all to support a weak and doubting conscience:
Reply 1.
for such as our Oath is, such must be our knowledge: what we swear to in
general, we must know in general; whatwe swear to in particular, we must know
in particular. But in this Covenant we are sworn to preserve the reformed
Religion in Scotland, not only in general, so far as it is Protestaut; but in
the particulars therenamed Doctrine, Discipline, Government, and Worship which
we cannot do, if we know not what they are, unless (as the Papists believe, so
we swear) fide implicita.

Case gives us a Rhetorical Agnomination for a Logical Solution; a Jingle for a
Distinction. It is true, that to preserve and observe is not all one. A thief
that observes a Port-manteau or a cap-case, behind a Traveller, does not intend
to preserve it for him: yet as a man cannot observe that he sees not; so he
cannot in judgment swear to preserve what he knows not.

Nehemiahs time, who entered into that Covenant, knew in particular what it
was; namely, to put away their strange wives: and the Text says expressly,
Chapter 10. 28.
that none took the Covenant, but such as understood it: and therefore I
confess I understand not how this example is to the purpose.

Statute Liberties of this Kingdom, and the Discipline and Government of
another Kingdom: Our Statute Liberties and Privileges are in continual use; we
know most of them: and concerning those we know not, we may easily inform our
selves out of the Books of Statutes, and Records. But for the Scotch Government
of the Church and Liturgy, not one of a hundred among the learned, nor one of
a thousand of the illiterate vulgar, are instructed in it; neither can we know
certainly where to find it. For the Scotch have no Book of Canons, or set Form
of Prayer ordered by their Church, and ratified at this day by the Royal
assent, as we have

Subjects of England should be bound by Oath to preserve the Discipline and
Liturgy of Scotland; whereas the Subjects of Scotland are not at all bound, nor
to be bound, to preserve the Discipline and Liturgy of the Church of England.

It seems altogether unreasonable that we of this Realm should be bound by Oath
to preserve that Government and in Scotland, which Scotch themselves are not
necessarily bound to observe: For they have often, and may still, change it at
their pleasure. In the 18. year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, they conformed to
the Church of England; as Buchanan relates in his Scotch story: after they
conformed to the Church of Geneva: upon which occasion Bancroft wrote the Book
entitled English-Scottizing and Scottish-Genevating. In King James his Reign (
of blessed memory) they returned in part to the English Form of Government: See
the Assembly at Perth.
but since of late to the French. To swear then to preserve them in their
Discipline, Government, and Worship, is to swear to keep a Camaelion in one
color, which changes color every hour.

English man ought to enter into a Covenant which is derogatory to the honor
of the Church and Kingdom of England. For he deserves not to enjoy the singular
privileges and commodities of this Land, nor so much as breathe English air,
who will not stand up for the honor of this Nation. Cic. off.
Omnes omnium charitutes patria complectitur.

But this Covenant is many ways derogatory to the honor of England. For the
Church of Scotland is not only set before the Church of England in it; but is
also propounded as a pattern of a Church entirely reformed, not only in
Doctrine, but in Discipline also and Worship; and therefore to be preserved in
all three: But the Church of England as an imperfect draught of a Church
defective in all; and consequently to be reformed in all, according to Gods
Word, and the pattern of other reformed Churches: whereas in truth the Church
of England, as it was reformed before the Church of Scotland; so it was more
exactly and perfectly Reformed (prius tempore, dic and honor.) And no marvel;
since the Church of England was reformed by the authority of the Prince, and the
wisdom of the State: but the Church of Scotland by the zeal of private men. The
Church of England was reformed not only in Doctrine, but also in Discipline and
Liturgy, conformably to the ancient and best Churches: whereas the Church of
Stotland, though it embraced Apostolical doctrine, yet it had not the exercise
of Apostolical discipline since the Reformation, till King James of blessed
memory restored Episcopal Government there: where (they before writing after
the copy set by Calvin) they had set up the Presbytery, or government by Lay
Elders, unknown to any Elder age of the Church. But howsoever the glory of the
English Church of late has been eclipsed in the eyes of many; yet by the
testimonies of the best Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, in the Reign of Qu:
Elizabeth and King James, it may appear, that she shined among all the Golden
Candlesticks set in the Western and Northern parts of Christendom, velut
inter^ignes Luna minores. She supported all other Reformed Churches; and the
Church of Scotland by name; as their own Chronicles relate: And howsoever some
thing has been questioned in the Discipline and Liturgy of the Church of
England by the Scholars of Aerius the Heretic, opposing all Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy and Liturgy: yet the doctrine of the Church of England has been
always kept sarta tecta; and held sound and Orthodox by all that carried the
name of Protestants: and the Articles of Religion, together with the Apology of
Bishop Jewel, (wherein the whole Doctrine of the Church of England, is
comprised) are inserted into the harmony of Protestant Confessions; and
approved by the suffrage of all Orthodox Churches. To swear therefore to
endeavor the reforming of the Church of England in Doctrine, according to the
Word of God, is either to swear actum agere, to do that which is done already,
and so to swear vainly: or to swear to pervert it, it being straight already;
which is to swear impiously.

Covenant (especially confirmed by millions of Oaths between two Kingdoms)
ought to be made without necessary and urgent occasion: for otherwise in such a
solemn and public manner to call God as it were from heaven to attest with us,
would be a taking of his Name in vain. Eras. Adag. (...).
Such Covenanting is like the casting the holy anchor among the Athenians, and
the creating a Dictator among the Romans; never to be acted or attempted, but
in some great exigent of state, to preserve it from imminent ruin and
destruction.

But there is no such necessity at this time of engaging both Kingdoms, and
locking them fast in such a League: for the Popish party is at a lower ebb now
in England then it has been heretofore; and his Majesty has bound himself by
many Oaths (even signed with the blood of his Redeemer at the holy Communion,)
to maintain the Protestant Religion; and not only to enliven the Acts formerly
made against Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and Popish Recusants; but also to give
his royal Assent to any such further Acts as the wisdom of the Parliament and
State should offer unto him, for the advancement of the Protestant, and
suppressing of the Romish Religion. And as for the Privileges of Parliament,
and Liberties of the Subject, there needs no entering into this New League for
their ratification and confirmation. For they are sufficiently established by
former Acts of Parliament unrepealed, and by the late Protestation generally
made by all the Subjects of this Kingdom, May 5. 1641. The Reasons alleged in
the preface of the Covenant have scarce any color of truth; and not so much as
a shadow of necessity.

etc. have proved uneffectual: and therefore no remedy for a desperate cure,
but this uniting of minds and swords with the strongest tie of a National
Covenant.

Supplications, Remonstrances, and Protestations his Majesty has given
gracious answers; and has often heretofore, and of late, offered honorable
conditions of Peace; which have been refused.

League.

Religion and the Church are in danger of ruin and destruction, as well by the
Anabaptists, Brownists, and other Sectaries (who take this Covenant, and have
grown most insolent upon this new League,) as by the Papists: and that the
greatest fear of utterly ruining and destroying this Kingdom, is from the
continuance of this Civil and unnatural War, which is fomented by it.



Obsignatis tabulis; they avouch that which never has been, nor can be
produced; and the contrary has been proved before.



Whom they mean by these other Nations is expressed in the exhortation to the
taking of this Solemn League and Covenant, p. 5. namely, the Netherlands and
Rochellers. But as he in Plato's Dialogue said, Exemplum o holpes eget exemplo;
so we may say of these, these are examples without example: late practices in
our age and memory, without any Precedent in former ages and the best times of
the Church. Neither yet are they parallel to this: For the King of Spain
(against whom the Netherlands) and the French King (against whom the Rochellers
entered into a League Defensive and Offensive with us) were persecuters of the
true Protestant Religion, and oppressors of their known Liberty: whereas our
gracious Sovereign is a Professor of the Gospel, and a Defender of the
Orthodox Protestant Faith, and a maintainer of the Privileges of Parliament,
and Liberties of Subjects: as appears by his Royal Assent to the Petition of
Right.

swears, must have an eye to the conditions of a sacred Oath set down by the
Prophet Jerem. 4. 2. He must swear in truth, judgment, and righteousness; in
truth not falsely, in judgment not rashly, in righteousness not wickedly.

But no man can take this Oath in righteousness: for not only Scripture, but
even Nature teaches every man, That it is an unrighteous thing, if not impious
and sacrilegious, to disanul, abrogate, and overthrow the last Wills and
Testaments of all the Founders of, and Benefactors to Bishoprics, Deanaries,
and Cathedral and Collegiate Churches; and to alienate their revenues to
another end then they intended; especially those lands being dedicated to God;
and that for the maintenance of his true worship, and not any superstitious
end. It is an unjust thing to thrust out a world of men without any crime, or
legal forfeiture, out of their dignities, preferments, and Estates, whereof
they and their predecessors have been legally possessed time out of mind. I
appeal to their own consciences, whether a man might lawfully swear to
endeavor the extirpation of all the Judges of the Kings Bench, and Common
Pleas, Barons of the Exchequer, Sergeants at Law, Counselors, Barrestors, and
Atturneys: or of all Majors, Sheriffs, Aldermen, Common Counsel men, Masters
and Wardens of Companies, Sword bearers, Officers and Beadles. I am sure such
an Oath were Votum devovendum, and faedus faedum; not only an illegal, but a
detestible and execrable Oath. this from such a one? If they say, Lord Bishops,
Deans, Archdeacons, etc. are no where mentioned in Scripture: no more is there
of Lord Majors,or Lord chief Barons, etc. Magistrates and Judges are named;
though not with such honorable titles. So are Bishops and Deacons: and there is
as great a necessity of Ecclesiastical Magistrates, as civil; of order in the
Church, as in the City and State: of some preferments and encouragements for
Clergy men, and Civilians, as for Common Lawyers. As this Oath cannot be taken
in righteousness, so neither in judgment: for who can judiciously swear to
preserve the Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship of a Nation, which he knows
not? How can he swear in truth that he will endeavor to Reform the Doctrine of
the Church of England according to Gods Word, which he knows and has
acknowledged in his former Protestation, and subscribed to the Articles of
Religion, to be (as it is) conformable there-unto. But these reasons have been
touched before, and the Readers stomachis like to loath Cramben his coctam.

Oath ought to be taken, or Covenant entered into, which is repugnant to the
just and wholesome Laws of the Kingdom now in force. For to take such an Oath,
is to swear to sin, and consequently to sin in swearing; unless they can make
disobedience to the Laws of the land no sin.

But this Covenant is repugnant to many Laws of England; namely all those
Statutes and Acts of Parliament whereby Episcopal Government and Ecclesiastical
Courts are established and regulated.

To this Argument it is answered by those who have a The Covenanters answer.
hand in pulling down that sacred order that has laid holy hands upon them:

That the Acts of Parliament are not like the Laws of Medes and Persians, that
cannot be altered: and in particular that all the former Acts passed in favor
of Episcopacy, are vertually repealed by that Ordinance of both Houses, wherein
it is resolved, That Episcopal Government shall be cut off root and branch.

satisfactory, nor better then their former. For first, The resolution to make
an Act is not the enacting a Law. Many things may fall out between such a
Resolution and the Execution thereof: in which interim they who take this New
Oath may absolutely forswear themselves in breaking the Oath of Canonical
obedience to Bishops yet in being.

both Houses should concur to make such an Act for the utter abolishing of
Episcopacy; yet till the Royal Assent were gained thereunto, such an Ordinance
could never be improved to an Act of Parliament; much less of force to Repeal
many former Acts. For as neither the King with the Commons without the Peers,
nor the King and Peers without the Commons: so neither the Peers and Commons
without the King can Make or Repeal any Act made by the Three Estates. For that
which is Established by Authority, must be abrogated by equal Authority; Eras
Adag. de tripode dictum.
and the concurrence of the Three Estates in their Votes is that golden tripos,
out of which we are to hear the Sovereign and authentical Oracles of the Law.

Contrary Oaths and Protestations may not be taken: for they destroy one the
other; and he that takes them is like the Satyr in the Poet, who out of the
same mouth blows hot and cold. Jam. 3. 11.
Can the fountain, says St. James, out of the same place send out sweet and
bitter waters?

But this new Covenant and Protestation is contrary to that which was taken by
both Houses, and all the Subjects of this Kingdom, May 5. 1641. For in that we
swear to maintain the Privileges of Parliament and Liberties of the Subject:
(and no man doubts but Bishops, Deans, etc. are Subjects; and their liberties
and privileges are expressly mentioned both in Charta Magna, and the Petition
of Right:) But in this we abjure all Prelacy; that is, Government by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, etc.

solicit (much less enforce upon penalties) any of the Clergy to take an Oath
contrary to the Oaths they have formerly taken, both in their ordination, and
institution and induction into their Benefices; namely the Oath of Canonical
obedience to their Bishops, and of the Defense and Maintenance of the
Privileges of their Sees.

But such is the Oath comprised in this New Covenant: Therefore it can in no
wise be taken; at least by any Clergy, and Beneficed men.

As for these Clergy men who pretend that they above all others cannot Covenant
to extirpate that Government, The Covenanters answer.
because they have (as they say) taken an Oath to obey the Bishops in licitis
and honestis: See exhortation to the taking of the Solemn League, p. 4.
they can tell, if they please, that they that have sworn obedience to the Laws
of the Land, are not thereby prohibited from endeavoring by all lawful means
the abolition of those Laws, when they prove inconvenient, and mischievous. And
if yet there should any Oath be found into which any Ministers, or others, have
entered, not warranted by the Laws of God, and the Land: in this case they must
teach themselves, and others, to call for Repentance; not pertinacy in them.

absolutely swears obedience to the Laws of the Land actively (for then every
disobedience to the Laws of the Land should be perjury); but actively or
passively; that is, either to do that which is commanded by the Law, or
patiently to submit to the penalty thereof. Which Oath notwithstanding, any
Member of Parliament may move for the abrogation of such a Law.

Oath, a Member of the Parliament may move to have a Bill preferred for the
abolition of a Law; in case it has proved inconvenient and mischievous. But
such are not the Laws by which Episcopacy is estabished, and spiritual Courts
regulated All the inconveniency and mischief in the Church has grown from the
corrupt and ill execution of the Laws; which may be removed by a Reformation of
the Bishops, and inferior Officers, without any change of the Law.

endeavoring the abolition of any Law,by lawful means. But this entering into
Covenant, and swearing the extirpation of Bishops themselves, and abrogation of
the Laws made in favor of them, without and against the Kings Command, will
never be proved a lawful means of alteration of Laws, either by the Law of
God, or the Land.

lispe, but dare not speak out, That the Oaths which Ministers take at their
Ordination and Institution are unlawful, and call for Repentance: I demand of
them, Whether they are yet unresolved concerning the unlawfulness of their
Oaths taken at their Ordination? If they are not resolved, will they take a
contrary Oath, and so run the hazard of Perjury? If their belief of the
lawfulness of that Oath be pendulous and wavering; so must needs be their
belief of the lawfulness of their Ordination, and entering into the Ministry.
For they hang both upon the same string: if the one slip, the other falls down
to the ground. Have they not subscribed the Articles of Religion, Article 36.
whereof one is, The justification of the form of Consecration of Archbishops,
and Bishops; and of the Ordination of Priests, and Deacons. Is it not an
express Canon of the Apostle, Heb. 13. 7.
Obey them that have oversight of you in the Lord? and is there any color of
pretense to question the lawfulness of obeying them in licitis and honestis,
The Ordering of Priests.
that is, in things lawful and honest? Let us hear what they cansay to this
Dilemma. Quest. Will you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief
Ministers, unto whom the Government and Charge is committed over you, following
with a glad mind and will their godly Admonitions, and submitting your selves
to their godly judgments?
Either the form of Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and Ordination of
Priests and Deacons, confirmed together with the Articles of Religion by Act of
Parliament, is a lawful form, Answ. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.
and agreeable to Gods word; or not. If lawful and agreeable to Scripture, then
the Oath they take at their Ordination to Obey their ordinary, and submit to
his godly Admonitions and just Censures, God being their helper, binds their
conscience from taking this, in which they vow their utter extirpation. If it
be an unlawful form, and repugnant to holy Scriptures, then no Bishops or
Ministers have been lawfully made, or by a lawful form, since the first
Reformation in England: which to aver were to cast such a fowl blurre upon the
Church, as cannot be fetched out with the tears, no nor with the blood of those
who so slander the Queen of all the reformed Churches.

This Dilemma with the two horns of it, wounds them which way so ever they go.

Some fly to an extraordinary Calling; but there they are stopped with a counter
demand, viz. What miracles do they, whereby they may prove their extraordinary
Calling? for an extraordinary Calling, must be extraordinarily proved.

Others say, That Oath was tyrannically imposed upon them by the Bishops; and
therefore binds not their Conscience.

Oaths imposed by a lawful Authority, though tyrannically abused, bind the
conscience, if the thing promised be lawful; not because such an Oath is
imposed, but because Gods name is interposed; by whom they engage themselves to
the performance of what they have sworn; so it be not malum in se.

this Oath was imposed by Bishops: for it was appointed by Act of Parliament,
in which the Articles are confirmed: neither are any Ministers enforced to take
Orders; but they offer themselves to the Bishop, and humbly desire him to lay
his holy hands on them; and freely and voluntarily submit to the taking of this
Oath of Obedience to their Ordinary.

That indeed they took the Oath of Canonical obedience to their Bishops; but
they have long ago repented of such an Oath.

crushed in their flight, and driven to the wall. For if they repent of that
Oath taken at their Ordination, they must repent also of their Orders given
them by Bishops. For their Orders were given them upon the undertaking to
perform that and other Conditions assented to by them, with this clause, so God
help me, or God being my helper.

repent of a lawful Oath taken (and such I have proved it to be even now) is in
plain English and down right terms, To confess themseves perjured. And if such
an answer might pass for current, no Oath would be any tie upon the
conscience: for they might say as these Ministers do, That they indeed took
such an Oath; but they repent the taking it.

color of probability, That the Oath made to Bishops expired with them: and
that Bishops now, if they are not dead, yet they are dying, and breathing out
their last gasp; for both Houses have voted them down.

Brethren should have weighed with themselves, and communed with their own
hearts, before they put their hands to this new Covenant, Whether the present
Votes of both houses can dispense with a lawful and solemn Oath taken at their
Ordination, and signed with Christ's blood at the Communion; which they
immediately receive from the hands of the Bishop, after he has laid hands on
them?

Dalo et non concesso, granting that (in regard of those precedent votes, and
this new Covenant taken by both Houses for the extirpation of Episcopacie,)
Bishops might be said to be dying: What then? does this discharge them of their
Oath? No more then it will a Wife for withdrawing her duty and loyalty from
her Husband while he is a dying, and looking for a good hour. The Ceremonial
Law was dying as soon as Christ was born: yet till it was dead and buried too,
both he and his Apostles observed it. Therefore till Episcopacie is dead and
buried, this Oath may not be lawfully taken by any ordained by them. Nay nor
then neither, by their leave: for how know they whether it may not be revived
and raised up again by future Acts of Parliament, in times as well affected to
the Clergy as these are ill? And if it be so, the wounds of their Consciences
will bleed afresh. No man can doubt but that Episcopacie better sorteth with
Monarchy then Presbytery, or Independency; and it is certain that Episcopacie
concurring with Royal Majesty, and the Authority of the Peers, first
constituted Parliaments: and it has likewise been confirmed by Parliaments in
all succeeding Ages. It is a plant which either Christ himself planted, or his
Apostles: as is demonstratively proved in Bilson his perpetual government of
the Church; Downams answer to Paul Bains; Dr. Reynolds his letter commented
upon by the Primate of Armagh; and Bishop Andrews his Opusc. It sprung up
together with the gospel in this Nation; and has ever since grown by it as a
succor. They were Archbishops and Bishops who had a hand in platting the
Garland of our peace and safety, by uniting first the two Roses; and after
adding the thistle unto them. Nay they had the chief hands in planting the
reformed Religion in this Kingdom; and some of them watered it with their
blood. If in this Covenant the Wow had been to endeavor the removal of all
Antichristian Prelates, Popish Archbishops and Bishops, corrupt Chancellours,
Archdeacons and Officialls: that would have been no more then as it were
pulling off some withered buds from the rod of Aaron. But simply to abjure
Prelacie (with an English gloss far worse then the Scotch Text) that is Church
Government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. is either to blast with a poisoned
breath, or to pluck up that rod which ever since the reformation has happily
budded in this Church; and to deprive us (so far as in them lies) for ever
of the goodly and fair Almonds it has heretofore, and no doubt will in
succceding Ages bear, if they be not nipt in the bud: Many glorious Martyrs;
such as were Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Farrar, Philpot: Many noble
Champions of the reformed religion; as B Jewel, Bilson, Andrews, Abbot, Fr.
White Dr. Reynolds, Nowel, Sutcliffe, Field: Many eminnet Preachers; B.
Mathews, King, Babbington, Felton, Lake, Party Dr. Sinnewes, Thompson, Goodwin,
Eedes, Boyse: Many munificent Patrons of Learning, and Religion; Founders of,
or Benefactours to Universities, Schools, Colleges, Halls, and Hospitalls; as
Merton, Chichley, Wai^fleete, Wickham, Kemp, Leichfield, Fox, Oldham, Grindall,
Whitgift, G. Abbot, and diverse others.

Here if they cast in our dish some Beckets, Ob.
and Gardiners, and Bonuers, which were indeed bitter Almonds; we can easily
rid our hands of them. Sol.
For it was not Prelacie, but Popery, that imbittered, or rather poisoned them:
Which poison, since the reformation, is drawn out, and taken away from
Episcopacie in England, by the Oath at their Consecration, which cutteth off
all their dependencie from the Pope: and since that none have given him a more
deadly Wound then our learned and every way accomplished Vshers, Mortons,
Halls, and Prideauxes. Howsoever, was there not a Saul among the Prophets; a
Julian among the Emperors; a Judas among the Apostles, a Diotrophes among the
Elders; and a Nicholas among the Deacons? and must these most sacred and divine
Callings (like so many trees of Paradise, planted by God himself) be extirpated
for (here and there,) some rotten or perished fruit found at some times upon
the branches?

Desine paucorum diffundere crimen in omnes.
Yea but manifold abuses have crept into the ecclesiastical Courts; Ob.
Commutations, Sol.
delays, and excessive fees. And have not the like, or as bad in secular? Shall
we then have no Consistories, or Courts at all? The Bishops (as it is objected
but not proved) have corrupted the Gospel: and have not some Judges the Laws?
Shall we then have no more Judges upon the Bench? A Synod of Priests and Elders
condemned our Savior; and diverse Councels have defined heresies for Doctrines
Defide, and set up Idolatry and Superstition: shall we then have no more
Aslembltes of Divines? Nay truth cannot be concealed: Rupto jecore exibit
caprificus. There have been strange passages in former Parliaments, at which
our Archives and Records blush: must we therefore v^te down all Votes, and take
away all Parliaments? God forbid. Let all those who are now most exasperated
against the reverend Fathers of the Church, and others (as they term them) of
the prelaticall Clergy; cool their heat, and put water into their Wine,
either with that precept of our Savior, Math. 7. 1.
Judge not that ye be not judged, condemn not that ye be not condemned: or that
Item of the Apostle, Devour not, l^st ye be devoured one of another: Gal, 5.
15.
or of that modest and ingenuous confessiou of a devout Father, Toleramus, and
toleramur; we must bear with some things in the Clergy, for they must bear
with more in the Laity. Tolerari, and non tolerare, est intolerabile: He is of
a most intolerable nature and disposition, who expects that others should
tolerate him in all things, and he tolerate others in nothing: for such a
disposition is diametrically opposite to the Apostles precept, Gal. 6. 2.
Bear ye one another Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

ought to be taken, or Covenant made, which is against Charity; For Covenants
and Leagues are made to confirm and strengthen, not to weaken or any way loosen
those natural and civil ties, whereby we are bound one to another. Charity is
the end of the Law, and sum of the Gospel; and bond of perfection it self.
As whatsoever is not done out of faith, so whatsoever is not done in Charity is
sin.

But this Covenant is against Charity, and offers violence to Humanity it self.
For by it we are bound to loose and untie all Bonds whatsoever; whether, of
affinytie, or consanguinity or of intimate friendship, cum qua mariuntur, et
pro qua moriuntur verae amiciliae candidat. If our brother, or our son and
daughter, or the wife that lies in our bosom, or our friend that is as our own
soul, be a malignant; we are sworn by this Covenant to detect them, and betray
them to the seve^itie of the close Committee, and barbarous cruelty of the
Sequestrators, and their instruments. And Malignants (in the sense of them who
tender this Oath) are all such without exception, who swim against the stream,
or rather torrent, that bears all down before it; all who comply not with the
times; all who complain of the Liberties of Subject trencht upon, and their
propriety invaded; of Churches profaned, monuments of the dead defaced; of
hundreds of able, and learned, and orthodox divines, of irreprovable life and
carriage, turned out of their benefices; and illeterate Ignonoramus's, and
zealous beautifeux's set in their rooms; who preach as familiarly blasphemy
and treason, as they pray Nonsense:

Lastly, who make scruple of the managing of this present war, whereby the
Kings person and life is endangered. It is true they profess to fight for King
and Parliament: To rescue the one, and preserve the other. But as in the Civil
broils in Italy a great Commander sometimes said, My sword, though it have a
keen edge, and can divide between the bone and marrow; yet it cannot
distinguish a Guelf from a Gibbeline: So it is most certain, that the Canon or
musket bullet distinguishes not between King and Subject; much less between
the King his Head and his Crown; his Person, and his power. The primitive
Christians (though they desired nothing more then to glorify Christ by their
death, who saved them by his; and therefore ran with as much alacrity to
Martyrdom as to silver games wherein prizes of infinite value were to be
won: yet they) could never be brought by any tortures or torments to discover
any Christian to the heathen persecutors that sought to bereave them of their
estate, liberty, or life. But here by virtue of this new Covenant, not only a
Christian Brother is bound by a strict Oath to detect another; but the son his
Father, the Wife her Husband, the Daughter her Mother, the daughter in law her
mother in law, the Servant his Master, the Tennant his Landlord, the Scholar
his Tutor, and the Pupil his Gaurdian: and not to discover them only, but to be
active also in bringing them to such heavy Censures, as they who have the
Legislative power in themselves can inflict. What great outcries have been
heard of late? what bitter invectives against the Oath commonly called ex
officio; and that (as it has been used in some Courts) not without cause? But
here is an Oath, not ex officio, but rather as it may be used contra officium;
not of duty, but against the duty we ow by all Laws of God and man to our
Superiors, Inferiors, and Equals. Bishops and their Chancellours were hardly
thought of, and suffered much in the opinion of many, for pressing innocent
Ceremonies, and Vestures; as the Cap, Surplice, Gross in Baptism, Ring in
Marriage, etc. upon all such of the Clergy as were instituted and inducted into
Benefices. What then will be thought of them, who with greater Eagerness and
Violence, under worse penalties, press upon the conscience not Ceremonies, but
Oaths; nor upon a few of one calling, but all sorts of men, not innocent, but
nocent Oaths, to the grievous wounding of their troubled spirits, and utter
ruin of their Estates?

To conclude with the most Christian resolution of Lactantius; Religio
defendenda est, Divin. Instit. lib. 5. c. 20.
non occidendo, sed moriendo; non saevitia, sed patientia; non scelere, sed
fide. Nam si sanguine, si tormentis, si malo Religionem defendere velis; jam
non defendetur illa, sed polluetur. Nihil enim est tam voluntarium quam
Religio; in qua si animus sacrificantis aversus est, jam sublata est, jam nulla
est. The fairest pretense, and most plausible scope and end of them who first
Devised and Framed this Oath, was to engage the Subjects of England in a firm
League with the Scots, against the Popish party: that so by their associated
Arms, they might the better Protect the Protestant Religion in England; and
Vindicate it, and Restore it in Ireland. But what if it may be made good by
authority of Scriptures, and the testimonies of all ages, that Christian
Religion approves not such a kind of defense? That such a strengthening of
her cause is indeed the weakening it; and such a forcible propugning the
Protestant Doctrine, a strong opposition to it, and a real impugning it? Surely
Mr. Coleman in his Sermon commanded to the Press by the Authority of the High
Court of Parliament, says as much terminis terminantibus; and verish, not only
disertis, but exertis, page 36. May the Reformation of Religion be brought in
by Arms? I answer Negatively; it may not. The Sword is not the means which God
ordained to propagate the Gospel. Go and teach all Nations; not go and subdue
all Nations, is our Masters Precept. And Bosquier truly observes, That Fish
will not be caught with a bloody net: if they spy but a drop of blood upon it,
they will swime away. Nay Christ himself refused to be rescued by force of
Arms; commanding Peter to put up his sword; Mat 26. 52.
and adding withal, He that takes up the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. And
if the ancient Doctors as well as Historians may be believed, they speak out,
and tell us, That Christian Religion though she could, yet never would draw any
other weapons in her defense against the Powers that are Ordained of God, then
prayers and tears: and therefore her style was, (when she had cause to weep and
lament for thousands of her children executed with most exquisite torments by
bloody Persecutours) in her Remonstrances to the Emperors, Rogamus Auguste,
non pugnamus: We prostrate our selves at thy feet, O noble Emperor; we rise
not up in Arms against thee: For we have learned from our Master, That true
and undefiled Religion before God is, to be defended, not by the Sword, but by
the Word; not by Resistance, but by Patience; not by Wickedness, but by
Loyalty; not by Killing, but by Dying. For if Religion be defended and
maintained otherwise, (as by laying wast Countries, Plundring Cities and
Villages, slaughtering men, and copious effusion of blood) she will not be
thereby defended, but defiled. God open our eyes that we may see the way
chalked out before us in his word; and in this day of our visitation timely
pursue those things that belong to our peace! Amen and Amen.

THE END.
D. F. his Speech before the Assembly of Divines, CONCERNING The New LEAGUE and
COVENANT.
M. Prolocutor,
OUr Brethren of Scotland desire a Resolution from this Assembly, concerning
the Necessity and Lawfulness of entering into this New League: and how can we
resolve them, if we be not resolved our selves, as some of us are not? I shall
therefore humbly offer to your serious consideration, Whether it be not fit to
qualify the word Prelacy, when it is ranked with Popery and Superstition,
after this manner; I will endeavor the extirpation of Popery, and all
Antichristian, Tyrannical, or Independent Prelacy? for otherwise by abjuring
Prelacy, absolutely some of us shall swear to forswear our selves. For Prelacy,
as also Hierarchy, in the former and better ages of the Church were taken in
the better part; Hierarchy signifying nothing but a holy Rule or Government;
and Prelacy the preeminence of one in the Church above another. Prelation is a
relatio disquiparantiae, and Praelati are Relati to those over whom they are
set; who may be either the flock, or the Pastors themselves. If the Flock, in
that sense all that have charge of souls may be truly called Praelati, viz.
Gregi; for they are set over them to be their Overseers and Spiritual Rulers,
Act. 8. 28. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Heb. 13. 17, 24. 1 Timothy 5. 17. In this sense both St.
Gregory and Bernard take the word; Praelati non quae sua sunt, sed quae Domini,
quaerant: and non Pastores, sed Impostores; non Doctores, sed Seductores; non
Praelati, sed Pilati: let Prelates not seek their own, but those things which
are the Lords; now a days we have not Teachers, but Seducers; not Shepherds,
but Deceivers; not Prelates, but Pilats: in which sentence, Teachers, Pastors,
and Prelates are ranged together, as signifying the same persons: In which
elegant Antanaclasis you hear that Doctors, Pastors, and Prelates, are a kind
of Synonyma's. In this sense if we condemn Prelates, and Vote their
Exterpation; we shall with one breath blow all the Divines that have cure of
Souls, not only out of this Assembly, but out of their Parsonages, and
Vicaridges also. But if Praelati are here in this Covenant taken in reference
to Pastors themselves, and Ministers of the Gospel; and thereby such are meant
only who are Praepositi clero, set over Clergymen themselves, as having not
only some precedence to, but authority over the rest: neither in this sense may
we piously swear the Eradication of them. For there are Classes in the
Netherlands, Intendents and Super-intendents in Germany; Presidents in the
Reformed Synods in France; and Masters, Provosts, and Heads of Colleges, and
Hals in our Universities, who have a kind of Prelacy, and Authority over the
Fellows and Students, whereof the major part are Divines, and in holy Orders.
Here I conceive it will be said, That none of these are aimed at; but only
Diocesan Bishops already banished out of Scotland. And Prelates indeed they are
in a more eminent degree; and if Prelacy be restrained to them, it is
Episcopacy that is principally shot at; to the Extirpation whereof I dare not
yield my Vote or Suffrage, lest this New Oath entangle me in perjury. For both
my self, and all who have received Orders in this Kingdom by the Imposition of
Episcopal hands, have freely Engaged our selves by Oath to obey our Ordinary,
and to submit to his godly Judgment, and in all things lawful and honest to
receive his Commands. If then we now swear to endeavor the Abolishing of
Episcopacy, we Swear to Renounce our Canonical Obedience; that is, as I
apprehend, we swear to forswear our selves.

It is true that the Dr. was furnished with many other Reasons for Episcopacy,
besides these; and of some he gave a hint in the Assembly it self upon other
occasions, as namely these that follow.

Dr. Featley's Sixteen Reasons FOR Episcopal Government, Which he intended to
have delivered in the Assembly immediately after his precedent Speech; but was
not permitted.
1. THat the name of Episcopacy, even as it signifies a degree of Eminency in
the Church, is a Sacred and Venerable Title; first in holy Scripture ascribed
to our blessed Redeemer, who as he is Dominus Dominantium, Lord of Lords, so
also, 1 Pet. 2. 25. (...). Act. 1. 20.
Episcopus Episcoporum, Bishop of Bishops, the Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls: next to the Apostles, whose office in the Church is styled by the holy
Ghost Episcope, a Bishopric, Let another take his Bishopric; though it be
translated, Let another take his Office, yet the Original signifies not an
Office at large, but an Episcopal function; that Office which Judas lost, and
Matthias was elected into; which was the Office and Dignity of an Apostle:
Ambros. com. in Ephesians. cap. 4. v. 10. Apostoli sunt Episcopi. Jerome. ad Marcel.
Apud nos Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi. Cyp. c. 7. l. 3. Apostolos, ^d est,
Episcopos, and praepositos Dominus elegit. August. in Psalm. 45. loco patrum
erunt silii, id est. Apostolorum Episcopi. Et ibid. Dilatatum est Evangelium in
omnibus sinibus mundi; in quibus principes Ecclesiae, id est, Episcopi sunt
constituti.
lastly to those whom the Apostles set over the Churches, as namely, to Timothy
and Titus, who in the Subscription of the Apostles Letters, Divinely inspired,
are styled Bishops in the restrained sense of the word 2 Timothy 4. written from
Rome to Timotheus, the first Bishop elected of the Church of Ephesus; and to
Titus, the first elect Bishop of the Church of the Cretians. How ancient these
Subscriptions are, it is not certain among the Learned. If they bear not the
same date with the Epistles themselves (the contrary whereof neither is nor can
be Demonstrated), yet they are undoubtedly very ancient, and of great
Authority. And in them the word Bishop cannot be taken at large for any
Minister or Presbyter, but for a singular person in Place or Dignity above
other Pastors; for there were many other Presbyters in Ephesus, both before and
besides Timothy, Act. 20. 27, 28. and in the Island of Creet or Candie there
must of necessity be more then one Pastor or Minister. Besides, St. Paul
investeth Timothy in Episcopal power, making him a Judge of Presbyters, both to
rebuke them, 1 Timothy 5. 1 and to prefer and reward them, verse. 17. and to
censure them, ver. 19. Against an Elder receive no accusation, but under two or
three witnesses; and gives to Titus exp^esly both potestatem ordinis and
jurisdictionis, of O^der and Jurisdiction; of Order in these words, Chap. 1. 5.
That thou should ordain Elders in every City; and of Jurisdiction, I left
thee in Creet that thou should continue (...), to correct or red esse the
things that remained, or those things which the Apostle before intended to
amend, but had not redressed.

2. The Angels of the seven Churches, Apoc. 10. 20. were no other in the
judgment of the best Learned Aug. Ep. 162. and Comment in Apoc. hom. 2.
Ambrose 1 Cor. 11. 16. Occumenus, Arethas, Marlorat. Pareus in Apoc. c. 1. 2.
Policarp. Episcopus Smyrnae, Onesimus Ephesi, Antipas Pergami, etc.
Commentators both Ancient and Later, then the Bishops of those Sees; for in
those Provinces or Territories there cannot be conceived to be less then many
hundred ordinary Preachers and Pastors; yet there were but seven precisely
answering to the seven golden Candlesticks. Seven Candlesticks, seven lights
burning in them, these can be no other then seven prime Pastors, who had the
oversight of the rest: for the Errors and Abuses in all those Churches are
imputed to them, and they reproved for not redressing them, Chap. 2. 14. Thou
have them that maintain the Doctrine of Balaam; and verse 20. Thou suffer the
Edit, Teclae, it is (...) thy wif, which demonstrateth that the Angel there
signifies one singular man of Authority in the Church, and not the whole
Clergy of that place, Ep. ad Episc. Winton.
woman Jezebel to teach, etc.

3. It is confessed by Molinaeus, and other Learned Patrons of Presbyterial
Government themselves, that Episcopacy is a plant, either set in the Church by
the Apostles themselves, or their immediate Successors in the first and best
ages of the Church; and is it agreeable to Piety to swear the Extirpation of
such a plant?

4. It cannot be denied, that when the Church most flourished, and was of far
larger extent then now it is, over the face of the Christian World; there was
no Council. Nice. Can. 5. Conc. Antioch, Can. 6. Council. Sard. Can. 14. Conc.
Chal. Act. 15. c. 29. Ignatius in Ep. ad Philad. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 3. Tertul.
l. de baptismo. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 40. Jerome ep ad Nepot. Optatus l. 1. cont.
Parmen. Amb. in Ephesians. cap. 4. Basil Ephesians. 70.
other Government then Episcopacy regulated by Divine precepts, and
Ecclesiastical Canons: and shall we swear to Extirpate that Government under
the which the Church most thrived and slourished? Shall we swear against our
Prayers, viz. for the rooting out of that, upon which we are enjoined to pray
God to pour down the dew of his blessing? Surely the dew of heaven burns not
the root of any Plant upon earth, but waters it and makes it grow.

5. They were Bishops who had the chiefest hand, first in the plantation of
Christian Religion in the days of Lutius, King of Britan; and after in the
restitution in the days of Etheldred King of Kent; and in the Reformation of
it in the Reign of Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth: and is it a Religious
act to eradicate that Government and Power which both planted and pruned
Religion it self?

6. Christ died not intestate; he made his last Will and Testament, and by it
bequeathed many Legacies to his Church; and among them not only Catholic
Doctrine, but Discipline also. This Discipline, if it be not Episcopal
Government moderated by Evangelical and Apostolical Rules, the whole Church is
guilty of the loss of a Sacred and Precious Jewel; for certain it is out of
Records of all ages of the Church, that no other was ever retained or can be
found save this, before the Religious Reformer and Magistrates of Geneva,
having banished their Popish Bishops, were after a sort necessitated to draw a
new Plat-forme of Ecclesiastical Discipline by Lay Elders. Christ, as the
Apostle teaches us, was faithful in the house of God, as Moses: and if Moses,
after his forty days speech with God on the Mount, received a Pattern from God
and delivered it to the Jews, not only of Doctrine but of Dicipline also,
which continued till Christ's coming in the flesh; it cannot be conceived, but
that Christ left a Pattern of Government to his Church, to continue till the
end of the world: and doubtless, his Apostles with whom he conversed forty
days after his Resurection, speaking of those things which appertain to the
kingdom of God, Act. 3. 1. delivered that to the Church which they received
from their Master. What Government or Discipline was that? There can be
conceived but three forms of Government; Episcopal, most conformable to
Monarchy; Presbyterial to Aristocracy, and Independent as they term it, to
Democracy. Presbyterial or Independent it could not be, for Presbyterial is no
Elder then the Reformation in Geneva, and the Independent no Elder then
New England; whereas Episcopal Government has been time out of mind, not in
one but in all Churches. A and since it was not first constituted by any
Sanction of a General Counsel, it follows necessarily, according to St.
Augustins observation, that it must needs be an Apostolical Institution. For
what not one Church, but all Churches, not in one age, but all ages, has
uniformly observed and practiced, and no man can define who, after the
Apostles, were the beginners of it; must needs be supposed to be done by Order
or Tradition from them.

7. This form of Government was not only generally received and embraced by
Catholics, but even by Heretics and Schismatics; who though they severed
from the Communion of the Church in Doctrine, yet not in Discipline. For the
Novatians and Donatists had Bishops of their own, from whom they took their
names; only Epiphanius Haeres 75. p. 295. Aug. ad quod vult Deum. Aeriani ab
Aerio quodam sunt nominati, qui cum esset Presbytr, doluisse fertur quod
Episcopus non patuit ordinari, dicebat Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla
differentia debere discorni. Hieron. in Tit.
Aerius, who stood for a Bishopric, and missed it, out of discontent broached
that new Doctrine wherewith the heads of our Schismatics are so much
intoxicated, viz. That there ought to be no distinction in the Church between a
Bishop and a Presbyter: and for this confounding those Sacred Orders, was
himself ranked among Heretics, and stands upon record in the Bedrolls of them
made by Epiphanius, Angustin, and Philastrius. It is true, he had other brands
on him; but this was the proper mark put upon him by those ancient Fathers, who
mention this Tenet of his as Erroneous and Heretical. I grant some of the
ancient Doctors affirm, That in the beginning, till the prevention of Schism
made this distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, they were all one in
name, as now they are in those essential parts of their function, viz.
Preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments. But Aerius was the
first who professedly oppugned the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, maintaining, That
there ought to be no difference and distinction between Bishops and Elders.

8. This assertion of Aerius, as in the Doctrine thereof it was defined by the
Doctors of the Church to be Heresy, so in the practice thereof it is condemned
by the great Council of Chalcedon, to be Sacrilege: To confound, say they, the
Ranks of Bishops and Elders, Con. 1. Art. 15. c. 29. Episcopum in Presbyteri
gradum reducere est sacrilegium. Anatolius Constant. Episcop. dixit, ij qui
dicuntur ab Episcopali dignitate ad Presbyteri ordinem descendisse, si justis
de causis condemaantur, nec Presbyteri honor digni sunt.
and to bring down a Bishop to the inferior degree of an Elder, is no less
then Sacrilege. Now I would fain know how that comes to be truth now, which
was condemned for Heresy; and to be Piety now, which was branded for
Sacrilege above 1200 ago.

9. Neither were the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon only zealous in this
cause, which so much concerned the honor of the Church: but the other three
also, whose authority St. Gregory held to be the next to the four Evangelists
and the Doctrine thereof is after a sort incorporated; into our Acts of
Parliament, Eliz. 1. In these Councels which all consisted of Bishops,
Episcopacy it self is almost in every Canon and Sanction either Asserted or
Regulated

10. Next to the Primitive Church, we owe a reverend respect to the Reformed
Churches beyond the Seas; who either have Bishops, as in Poland, Transylvania,
Denmark, and Swethland; or the same function is in Nature, though not in Name:
to wit, Intendents and Super-intendents; as they would have them if they could,
as I understood from many Ministers in France; or at least approve of them, as
appears by the testimony of Beza, Sadiel, Scultetus, and others.

11. What should I speak of the Articles of Religion ratified by a Sequence of
Religious Princes succeeding one the other, and confirmed by Act of Parliament;
to which all Beneficed men are required under pain of loss of their livings,
within a month to profess their assent and consent, in which, both the Power
and Consecration of Bishops and Ministers is expressly asserted, and their
distinction from Presbyters? or of the Statute of Carlisle, the 15. of Edw. 2.
and the first of Qu. See Art. 36. and l. de Consecrat. It is evident to all men
reading holy Scriptures and ancient Authors, that from the Apostles time there
have been these three Orders in the Church of Christ, and that a Bishop ought
to correct and punish such as are unquiet, criminous and disobedient within his
Diocese, according to such authority as he has by the word of God.
Eliz. with very many other unrepealed Acts, in which Episcopal Government is
either related unto, or regulated and confirmed in such sort, that quite to
abolish and extirpate it would bring a confusion, and make a stop as well in
Secular as Ecclesiastical Courts? And therefore our zealous Reformers, if they
think themselves not too good to be advised by the Great Counselor, ought to
take heed how they rashly and unadvisedly pluck up the tares, as they esteem
them, of holy Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws, ne simul eradicent and triticum,
lest together with those tares (as they count them) they pluck up by the roots
the good wheat of many profitable and wholesome Laws of the Commonwealth and
Acts of Parliament.

12. But if the Authority of both Houses could soon cure these sores in
precedent Acts of Parliament, yet how will they make up the breaches in the
Consciences of all those, who in the late Protestation and this New Covenant,
have taken a Solemn Oath to maintain the Privileges of the Members of
Parliament, and the Liberties of the Subject? The most Authentical evidence
whereof, are Charta Magna, and the Petitionof Right; in both which the Rights
of the Church and Privileges of Episcopal Sees, are set down in the Forefront
in Capital Letters.

13. To strain this string a little higher, the power of granting Congedeliers,
together with the investitute of Archbishops, Bishops, and Collation of
Deanries, and Prebends, with a settled Revenue from the First Fruits and Tenths
there, is one of the fairest flowers in the Kings Crown; and to rob the
imperial Diadem of it (considering the King is a Person most Sacred) is
Sacrilege in a high degree; and not Sacrilege only, but Perjury also in all
those who attempt it. For all Graduates in the University, and men of Rank and
Quality in the Commonwealth, who are admitted to any place of eminent
Authority or Trust, take the Oath of Supremacy, whereby they are bound to
defend and Propugne all Preeminences, Authorities, and Prerogatives annexed to
the Imperial Crown; whereof this is known to be one inherent in the King, as he
is Supreme head of the Church within his Realms, and Defender of the Faith.

14. Yet for all this, admit that Reason of State should enforce the
Extirpation of Episcopacy thus rooted, as it has been said, both in the Royal
Prerogative and Privilege of the Subject, and in the Laws of the Land; it is a
golden Maxim of Law, Possumus quod jure possumus, we can do no more then
lawfully we may. If Episcopal Government must be overthrown, it must be done in
a lawful way: not by Popular Tumults, but by a Bill passed in Parliament; and
that to be tendered to his Majesty for his Royal Assent. And how such a Bill
can be pressed upon his Majesty, who has taken an Oath Vide, Record in
Exchequer. I will preserve and maintain to you and the Churches committed to
your charges, all Canonical Privileges, and I will be your Protector and
Defender to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good King in his
Kingdom in right ought to defend the Bishops, and Churches under their
Government, etc. Then laying his hand on the book on the Communion Table, he
says, The things which I have before promised, I shall perform and keep, so
help me God, and by the contents of this book.
at his Coronation, to preserve Bishops in their Legal Rights, I must learn
from our great Masters of the Law. For by the Gospel, all inducements to sin
are sin; and solicitations to perjury are tainted with that guilt: neither is
there any power upon earth to dispense with the breach of Oaths lawfully taken.

15. If we desire that this Church of England should flourish like the Garden
of Eden, we must have an eye to the nurseries of good Learning and Religion,
the two Universities; which will never be furnished with choice plants, if
there be no Prefe^ments and Encouragements to the Students there, who for the
far greater part bend their studies to the Queen of all Professions, Divinity;
which will make but a slow progress, if Bishoprics, Deanries, Archdeaconries,
and Prebendaries, and all other Ecclesiastical dignities, (which, like silver
spurs, prick on the industry of those who consecrate their Labors and
endeavors to the glorifying of God, in employing their talent in the Ministry
of the Gospel, be taken away. What sails are to a Ship, that are affections to
the soul; which if they be not filled with the hope of some rewards, and
deserved preferments, as a prosperous gale of wind) our sacred studies and
endeavors will soon be calmed: for, Cic. Tusc. quast.
honos alit arts; omnesque incenduntur studio gloriae; jacentque ea semper,
quae apud quosque improbantur; Honor nourishes Arts; and all men are inflamed
with desire of Glory; and those Professions fall and decay, which are in no
esteem with most men. And if there are places both of great Profit, Honor, and
Power propounded to Statesmen, and those that are learned in the Law, like
rich Prizes to those that prove Masteries; shall the professors of the Divine
Law be had in less esteem then the Students and Practicers in the Municipal?
And shall that Profession only be barred from entering into the Temple of
honor, which directs all men to the Temple of Virtue; and has best right to
honor by the Promise of God, Honorantes me honorabo, those that honor me, I
will honor; because they most honor God in every action of their function,
which immediately tends to his glory?

They will say; Ob.
That Episcopal Government has proved inconvenient and prejudicial to the
State; and therefore the Hierarchy is to be cut down, Sol.
root and branch. Of this argument we may say, as Cicero does of Cato his
exceptions against Pro Mur. toll nomen Catonis.
Murena, Set aside the Authority of the Objectors, the Objection has very
little weight in it. For it is liable to many and just exceptions, and
admits of diverse Replies.

First it is said, That Episcopal Government is inconvenient and mischievous,
and prejudicial to the State: but it was never proved to be so.

Secondly, Admit some good proof could be brought of it; yet if Episcopacy be
of Divine Institution, as has been proved, it must not be therefore rooted
out; but the Luxurious stems of it pruned, and those additions to the first
institution from whence these inconveniences have grown ought to be retrenched.

Thirdly, If Episcopacy has proved inconvenient, and mischievous in this age,
which was most Statut. Edw. 3. Ann. 25. The Church of England was founded in
the state of Prelacy, etc. for we ow to it our best laws, made in the Saxon
times, and Charta Magna it self: The enion of the two Roses, York and
Lancaster, the marriage with Scotland; and above all, the Plantation and
Reformation of true Religion. See Vindication of Episcopacy, page 23, 24. See
also the Statute book of 16 Rich. 2. where the Commons show, That the Prelates
were much profitable and necessary to their Sovereign Lord the King, and the
Realm, etc.
beneficial and profitable in all former ages, the fault may be in the Maladies
of the Patient, not in the method of Cure. This age is to be Reformed, not
Episcopacy Abrogated; that the Liberty and looseness of these times will not
brook the Sacred bands of Episcopal Discipline, is rather a proof of the
integrity thereof, then a true argument of any malignity in it to the State:
without which, no effectual Jerome Advers. Luc. c. 4. Ecclesiae salus a summi
sacerdot^s dignitate pendet, cui si non exors quaedam, and ab omnibus eminens
detur protestas, tot in Ecclesia efficientur Schismata, quot sacerdotes. Cypr.
Ep. 3. Non aliunde Haereses abortae sunt, aut nata Schismata, quan inde quod
sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur; nec unus in Ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos, and al
tempus judex vice Christi cogitatur.
means or course can be taken, either for the suppressing Schismatics, or the
continuation of a lawful and undeniable succession in the Ministry.

16. Lastly, Though some of late think they have brought gold, and silver, and
precious stones to build the house of God, by producing some stuff out of
Antiquity, to prove the Ordination of Presbyters by mere Presbyters; yet being
put to the test, it proves mere trash: for there can be no instance brought out
of Scripture of any Ordination, without Imposition of Apostolical or Episcopal
hands; neither has prime Antiquity ever approved of mere Presbyters laying
hands one upon another, but in Orthodoxal Councels revoked, cassated, and
disannulled all such Ordinations, as we may read in the Apologies of Athanas.
Apol. 2. Colithus quidam presbyter in Ecclesia. Alexandrina alios Presbyteros
ordinare praesumpserat; sed rescissa fuit ejus Ordination, and omnes ab ^o
constituti Presbyteri in laicorum ordinem redacti. See Epiph. Haer. 75. The
order of Bishops begets Fathers in the Church: but the order of Presbyters Sons
in Baptism, but no Fathers or Doctors.
Athanasius, and elsewhere.

What shall I need to add more, save the testimony of all Christians of what
denomination soever under the Cope of heaven, save only the Mushrom Sect of
Brownists sprung up the other night, all who have given their name to Christ,
and acknowledge and have some dependence on either the Patriarch of
Constantinople in the East, or of Rome in the West, or of Muscovia in the
North, or of Alexandria in the South, together with the Cophtie, Maronites,
Abissones, and Chinese, not only admit of Episcopal Government, and most
willingly submit to it, but never had, or at this day have any other? Neither
is this, or can it be denied by our Aerians: but they tell us, that these are
Christians at large, who hold many Errors and Superstitions with the
Fundament^ls of Christian Doctrine: their Churches are like oar not cleansed
from earth; like gold not purged from dross; like threshed wheat, not fanned
from the chafe; like meal not sifted from the bran; like wine not drawn off
the lees: we are, say they, upon a Reformation, and the new Covenant engages
us to endeavor the Reformation of the Church of England in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God, and according to the
example of the best Reformed Churches. The best Reformed, which are they?
whether the remainders of the Waldenses and Albigenses in Piemont, and the
parts adjoining; or of the Taborites in Bohemia; or of the Lutherans in
Germany; or those that are called after the name of Calvin in France, and else
where?

First, See also G. Abbot in his Tract of the Visibility of the Church, and in
his Answer to Hill.
for the Waldenses, the forerunners of Luther, as he himself confesses, they
had Bishops who Ordained their Pastors; a Catalogue whereof we may see in the
History of the Waldenses, first written in French, and after translated into
English by a learned Herald.

Secondly, for the Luther an Churches, they have Prelates governing them, under
the titles of Archbishops and Bishops in Poland, Denmark, and Sw^thland; but
under the name of Super intendents and Intendents in Germany: and as for their
judgment in the point, it is expressly fet down in the Apol. Confess. Augustan.
c. de numero and usu Sacrament. Not saepe protestati sumn^ summa cum voluntate
conservare politiam Ecclesiasticam, and gradus in Ecclesia factos etiam summa
authoritate: scimus enim utili consilio Ecclesiasticam disciplinam have mode
quo veteres eam describunt constitutam.
Apology of the Augustane Confession, in these words, We have often protested
our earnest desires to conserve the discipline of degrees in the Church by
Bishops. Nay, Luther Tom. 2. p. 320. Nemo contra statum Episcoporum and veros
Episcopos, vel bonos pastores dictum putet, quiquid contra hos tyrannos dicitur.
Luther himself, who of all men most bitterly inveighed against the
Antichristian Hierarchy, yet puts water into his wine; adding, Let no man
hereby conceive, that I speak any thing against the state of Bishops, but only
against Romish Wolves and Tyrants. Neither are the Lutherans of another mind
at this day, witness their every-way accomplished Gerard. de Ministerio Eccles.
Nemo nostrum dicit nihil imeresse inter Episcopum, and Presbyterum; sed
agnoscimus distinctionem graduum propter (...) Ecclesiae, ut concordia
conservetur.
Gerard: None of us, says he, affirms, That there is no difference between a
Bishop, or Presbyter, or Priest; but we acknowledge a difference of Degrees,
for good Order sake, and to preserve Concord in the Church.

Here, methinks, I see the Smectimnuans bend their brows, and answer with some
indignation: What have we to do with Lutherans who have Images in their
Churches, and Auricular confession, and maintain Consubstantiation, and
Ubiquity, and intercision of grace, and many other Errors? We are of Calvin,
and hold with the Doctrine and Discipline of Geneva, which has no allay at all
of Error and Superstition, but is like the pure Angel-gold.

Here though I might (as many have done) crave leave to put in a Legal
Exception against the authority of Calvin and Beza in matter of Discipline,
because they had a hand in thrusting out the Bishop of Geneva, and the Lay
Presbyterian Government was the issue of their brain; and we know it is natural
for Parents to dote upon their own Children and account them far fairer and
more beautiful then indeed they are: yet such was the ingenuity of those worthy
Reformers, and such is the evidence and strength of Truth, that in this point,
concerning the Abolition of Episcopacy in the Church of England, I dare choose
them as Umpires.

First, let Calv. de necess. reform. Ecclesiae. Talem nobis Hierarchiam si
exhibeant, in qua sic emin^ant Episcopi, ut Christo subesse non recusent, ut ab
i^o tanquam unico capite pendeant and ad ipsum referantier, in qua sic inter se
fraternam societatem colant, ut non alio modo quam e^us verit^te sint
colligati; tum vero nullo non anathemate dignos fateor, si qui erunt, qui noa
eam reverenter, summaque obedientia observent.
Calvin speak in his exquisite Treatise concerning the Necessity of Reforming
the Church, the most proper place (if any were) clearly to deliver his
judgment in this Controversy; where, having ^ipt up the abuses of the Romish
Hierarchy, in the end thus he resolves: Let them show us such an Hierarchy, in
which the Bishops may have such preheminency, that yet they refuse not
themselves to be subject to Christ, that they depend upon him as the only Head,
and refer all to him, and so embrace brotherly society, that they are knit
together by no other means then his truth, and I will confess they deserve any
curse, if there be any who will not observe such an Hierarchy with reverence
and greatest obedience.

After him, let us hear Beza de grad. Minist. Evang. c. 18. Sess. 3. Quod si
nunc Ecclesiae instauratae Anglicanae suorum Episcoporum and Archi episcoporum
authoritate suffultae perstant, quemadmodum hoc illis nostra memoria contigit,
ut ejus ordinis homines non tantum insignes Dei Martyrs, sed etiam
praestantissimos Doctores and Pastores habuerit, etc.
Bezae in that very Book which he wrote against Saravia, a Prebend of
Canterbury, concerning different Degrees in the Clergy: but, says he, if the
Reformed Churches of England remain still supported with the authority of their
Archbishops and Bishops, as it has come to pass in our memory, that they have
had men of that rank, not only famous Martyrs, but most excellent Doctors and
Pastors (which happiness I, for my part, wish that they may continually enjoy)
etc. Surely, he that so highly extolled our Bishops, and wished that that Order
might, like the tree in the Poet, continually bring forth such golden boughs
and fruit, would not readily swear to endeavor the utter Extirpation thereof.

THE END.
BY THE KING.
His Majesty's Proclamation, forbidding the Tendering or Taking of the late Vow
or Covenant, devised by some Members of both Houses, to Engage His Majesty's
good Subjects in the Maintenance of this odious Rebellion.
WHEREAS We have lately seen a Vow or Covenant pretended to be taken by some
Members of both Houses of Parliament, whereby after the taking notice of a
Popish and Traitorous Plot for the subversion of the true Reformed Prote stant
Religion, and the Liberty of the Subject and to surprise the Cities of London
and Westminstr, They do promise and covenant according to their utmost power to
assist the Forces pretended to be raised and continued by both Houses of
Parliament, against the Forces raised by Us, and to assist all other persons
that shall take the said Oath, in what they shall do in pursuance thereof;
which Oath as the same has been taken without the least color or ground, the
Contrivers thereof well knowing that there is no popish Army within this
Kingdom, that We are so far from giving countenance to that Religion, that We
have always given, and always offered Our consent to any Act for the
suppression of Popery, and the growth thereof; and that the Army raised by Us
is in truth for the necessary defense of the true Reformed Protestant Religion
established by Law, the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and Our own Just
Rights according to Law; all which being settled and submitted to or such a free
and peaceable Convention in Parliament being provided for, that the same might
be settled, We have offered and are still ready to Disband our Armies: and as
the said Oath was devised only to prevent Peace, and to pre-engage the Votes of
the Members of both Houses (directly contrary to the Freedom and Liberty of
Parliament) and to engage them and Our good Subjects in the maintenance of this
horrid and odious Rebellion; so it is directly contrary, as well to their
natural Duty as to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy established by Law,
which obliges them to bear to Us Truth and Faith of Life, Members and Earthly
Honor, and to defend Us to the utmost of their powers against all Conspiracies
and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against Our Person, Our Crown and
Dignity and to do their best endeavors to disclose and make known to Us all
Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies which shall be against Us and to their
power to assist and defend all Jurisdictions. Privileges, Preheminences and
Authority belonging to Us, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm. And whereas We are informed, that some desperate seditious persons do
endeavor to persuade and seduce others of Our good Subjects to take the says
Oath, thereby to engage them and this Kingdom into a continuanee of these
miserable and bloody distempers, We do therefore out of Grace and Compassion to
our people, and that they may not by any craft or violence suffer themselves to
be seduced against their Duty and Conscience, warn them of their natural
Allegiance, and their Obligations by Oaths lawfully administered to them, and
wish them to remember the great Blessings of God in peace and plenty, which the
whole Kingdom has received, whilst that Duty and those Oaths were carefully
observed, and the unspeakable miseries and calamities they have suffered in the
breaking and violation thereof. And we do straightly Charge and Command Our
loving Subjects of what degree and quality soever, upon their Allegiance, that
they presume not to take the said Seditious and Traitorous Vow or Covenant,
which endeavors to withdraw them from their natural Allegiance which they owe
unto Us, and to which they are or ought to be sworn, and are bound by the known
Laws of the Land, albeit they are not sworn, and engages them in Acts of High
Treason by the express letter of the Statute of the 25th. Year of King Edward
the third. And We do likewise hereby forbid and inhibit all Our Subjects to
impose administer or tender the said Oath or Covenant: And if notwithstanding
this Our Gracious Proclamation any person shall presume to impose, tender, or
take the said Vow or Covenant, We shall proceed against him or them with all
severity according to the known Laws of the Land.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the One and Twentieth day of June, in the
Nineteeth Year of Our Reign.
God Save the KING.

