A TRUE TESTIMONY Against the Popes Ways, etc. In a Return To that Agreement
of 42. of those that call themselves Ministers of Christ (but are proved to be
wrongers of Men and of Christ) in the County of Worcester, and some Adjacent
Part, who subscribe their Agreement and Catechism with the Names and the
Places where they are Pastors, Teachers, and Rectors, etc. as they say: or as
follows: Richard Baxter Teacher of the Church at Kiderminster. John Boraston
Pastor of Ribsford and Bewdley. Richard Eades Pastor of Beckford
Glocestershire. Charles Not Minister of Shelsey. James Warwick Minister at
Hanley-Castle Thomas Evans Minister at Welland. Tho. Wright Teacher at
Hartlebury. John Not Teacher at Sheriff Hales in Staffordshire. Henry Osland
Teacher of the Church at Bewdley. John Hill Minister at Clifton upon Them.
Tho. Baldwine Minister at Wolverley. Rich. Wolley Minister at Salwarpe. Joh:
Freeston Minister at Hampton Lovet. Richard Sergeant Preacher at Kiderminster.
Andrew Trusteram Pastor of the Church at Clent. Tho. Bromwich Minister at
Kemsey. Tho. Francke Teacher at Wanton-beachamp. John Tailor Minister at
Dudley. Will. Spicer Minister of Stone. Humphrey Wolden Minister of Broom.
Sam: Bowater Rector of Astley. Benjamin Baxter Minister at Upton upon Severne.
Will: Lole Minister at Priton. Tho. Francis Minister at Doderhill. Tho: Jackman
Minister at Barrough. Will: Durham Pastor at Tredington. Tho: Easton Pastor of
Batesford Glocestershire. Giles Collier Pastor of the Church at Blockley.
George Hopkins Minister at Evesham. Tho: Matthews Minister at Evesham. Joh:
Dalphine Pastor of the Church at Honiborne. Joseph Treble Pastor of
Church-Lench. Will: Wills Preacher at Littleton. Rich. Beeston Preacher at
Breedon. Will: Kimberly Preacher at Ridmerley. Joseph Baker Preacher in the
City of Worcester. Rich: Fincher Preacher in the City of Worcester. Jo: Willmot
Preacher at Pershore. Fra. Hyatt Minister at Eckington. Robert Brown Minister
at White Lady Aston. Gervice Bryan Pastor of the Church at Old Swineford and
Sturbridge. Joh: Dedicote Preacher at Abbotesley.


London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West end
of Paul's, 1656.

To the Subscribers of the Agreement, etc.
YOu say, you are made Overseers by the Holy Ghost, etc. Page 1. But I say,
that such as are dead in sin, and alive in miscarriages, growing worse, and
running yet further from God, wronging Christ and Men, they are not made
Overseers by the Holy Ghost, but rather are Wolves that spare not the flock,
Act. 20.29. 2 Pet. 2.3. and you confess that you are such: as your Agreement
and fruits does witness, as will hereafter more clearly appear; and therefore
(are you liars against the Holy Ghost, and) are not made overseers by him:
being such as act directly opposite to him, who are as the Wolves that spare
not the flock, but are turned, as you say, wrongers of Christ and of Men: and
therefore in wronging him and them, you are not doing his Work; for such as are
Laborers for him, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and abide in his doctrine, they wrong him not: but you, say you, are wrongers
of him, and growing worse, who are running yet further from God: and therefore
in running further from God growing worse, and wronging his Son; you make it
manifest that you neither abide in his Doctrine nor labor for him; and so are
not made overseers by the Holy Ghost; for they that are made overseers by him
do not as you have done: but to confute your selves, you go on and say you
preach and teach in all wisdom, that you may present every man perfect in
Christ, page 1. Then it seems in words you are grown preachers up of
perfection, the doctrine which before you so much hated, opposed, contradicted
and denied, and so are preaching up that which before you preached against,
opposed, contradicted, crossed and denied, to wit, the doctrine of perfection,
to show your self-contradiction as well as self-opposition: and therefore let
your people and others mind, if you deny it not again; for if you do any more
preach and teach against perfection, you will further confute your selves, (and
teach your own confutations, and self-contradictions) and preach against that
which you call your Warrant, and also deny the same, and cut your selves out by
your own rule (as is here done): for such as are in the miscarriages and
growing worse, wronging Christ and Men, and running yet further from God, (as
you say you are) such are not yet come to repentance, (according to your
saying) that are not thoroughly turned from the world, the devil, and the flesh,
etc. and therefore are unfit to preach up perfection. You say in page 2. You
have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the Oracles
of God; and I say the same: for you have made manifest your Ignorance therein,
who are not yet quickened, but (as you say) naturally dead in sin, growing worse
and are yet running further from God: and where you say, Let a man account of
us as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God: but I say,
that such as are dead in sin, not quickened by Grace, who are in the
miscarriages unturned out of them, but growing worse, and running yet further
from God, wronging both Christ and men (as you do) they never were to be
therein accounted so: and therefore you that say you are such, are not to be
accounted as you would be; Titus 1.6, 7, 8, 9.
to wit, neither Ministers of Christ, nor Stewards of the Mysteries of God: for
they was blameless, but you are blameable, accusing and opposing your selves,
therefore you are not they that are to be obeyed, neither do you watch for
souls, but for your own ends; who are, as you say, in the miscarriages growing
worse, and so it appears both by your fruits, and way also be seen in this
Return to your Agreement, and Catechism.

A Short Answer, to that called, The Agreement of the 42. Teachers, Pastors,
Ministers and Rectors, etc. In the County of Worcester, and some Adjacent
parts, etc.
YOu two and forty Teachers, Pastors, Ministers and Rectors, as you call your
selves in your Agreement, dated (in page the 33.) May the 4: 1655. I have read
over your Agreement, and weighed the same in a Balance of truth and equity: in
which you are found wanting, and in confusion. And now since the Lord has sent
some of his servants and messengers, amongst you (to awaken you) you are made
sensible of your negligences, and your miscarriages, and how little your people
are profited by your preaching; and you are reviving your old former works, and
setting the people, as it were to make Brick without straw: rather then you
would have them to come from under your unprofitable Ministry, to wait upon the
teachings of God; And you set up a worship in your wills, and is it not the
same that was set up by the Archbishops, Bishops, Priests, Prelates, and old
Episcopals, (if not by the Pope)? and that you say is for the killing of
ignorance, which your preaching could not do. And yet it has been used by (the
Popish Race, and) your forefathers the Bishops, and Prelates, and were not
killed thereby; but is found living amongst you, their children and offspring.
And you are found in the deceit, and would keep people, in the same, by your
flatteries, and inventions, which will all be to no purpose, that is acted by
the spirit of deceit and miscarrying nature; which you are in; And leaves the
same ignorance unkilled, by your familiar, and personal Instructions, as your
forefathers have done: you being in the miscarriages wronging men and Christ,
and not guided by the true spirit, but by the false, as your fruits, as well as
your Agreement, makes it manifest.

Concerning your warrant.
You have gathered certain verses of the Apostles words, and calls them your
warrant from God, when you are found our of the Apostles practice and order,
and not at all warranted by them, to wrong men and Christ, as you have done,
and confessed the same; you also are in the miscarriages and disobedient
nature, neglecters of the great works of God, and therefore you being in that
deceit, are out of the counsels of God, and liars like the false prophets,
whose examples ye follow, that stole the true prophets words, and were ready
(like you) to call them their warrant from God, or saying they spoke from the
Mouth of the Lord, when the Lord did not warrant them in it, no more then he
does you) but witnessed against them by the true Prophet; And said, he had not
spoken to them, but they ran unsent (as you have done) and therefore they
should not profit the people at all (no more then you shall) though they spoke
the true Prophets words (as you may do) yet they was not guided by the true
Prophets spirit (no more then you are.) And though they spoke their words for
their own ends (as you do) yet for all that they were without Warrant from God,
(as well as you are) and also found out of his Counsel in their inventions, and
speaking for their own ends, and for money, as you do, and they caused the
people to err by their lies, and by their leightnesse (as you do) and the Lord
by his Spirit in his Servants witnessed against them, as he does against you,
saying, I sent them not, nor commanded them, and so they were without warrant
from God (as you are) though they could speak the true Prophets words (as you
do) yet running unsent as you have done. The Lord said they should not profit
the people at all, ( Jer. 23.16.21.30.31, 32. Mi cah. 3.5.11.) No more do you,
who are as you say neglecters of the works of God, and in the miscarriages
unpardoned, as well as wrongers of men and Christ: as you your selves in your
Agreement have all so acknowledged, therefore your gathering of Paul's words,
and the true Prophets words (being out of their life and spirit) to paint and
garnish your selves withal, and are found persecuting the truth, as your
forefathers the false Prophets, and Scribes, and Pharisees did their words
gather together, with your dark minds, and no warrant to you from God so to do,
nor to be called of men Masters, Matthew. 23.8.10. Nor to preach for tithes, or
hundreds a year, Paul did not do it, but preached freely coveting no man's
silver or gold, but has showed an example, which you refuse to follow, Act.
20.33, 34, 35. therefore his words is no warrant for you to do as you do; As in
page: the 1. or 2. of your Agreement.
neither did Paul go to take a ground from the Pope, or sixth general Council,
held either at Trent or Trull, and say from thence, that they that are baptized
ought to learn the Belief, and on the fifth day of the week say it over, to the
Bishops, etc. as you do, which you lay down as the ground of your Catechism
and familiar and personal instruction, and so build upon the Bishops and old
popish root, as you have done; But Paul as he was a Minister of Christ, Act.
26.16, 17, 18.
he was sent to turn people from darkness to the Light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, and not to keep them in darkness and sin unturned to God, as
you and your Minister does; therefore you are out of this life and not guided
by the Spirit of God as he was; And Paul as he was a Minister of Christ and the
Gospel, he were called of God, and appointed to preach, by the power of the
holy Ghost, Gala. 1.1. Gala. 1.11.12.15, 16. Act. 13.2, 3, etc. Act. 18.9, 10,
11, etc. Act. 16.9, 10. Colo. 1.25, 26, 27, 28.
who was not made a Minister by the will of man (as you are) but by the Will of
God, Gala. 1.1, 2. in which his Ministry stood, who had the mystery of
godliness, and Christ the Son of God revealed within him, Ephe. 3.2, 3. etc.
Gala. 1.15, 16. And so had his warant from God, and after Christ and the
Ministry were so revealed in him, then he went forth immediately (and not
before for) to preach him, as he has certified to the brethren, Gala. 1.11,
12. And he preached the Light, 2 Cor. 4.5, 6. Law, Romans 8.3. Hebr. 8.10, 11.
And heavenly treasure within, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. And the word in the heart, Romans
10.8. by which, faith is wrought, and Christ the Mystery and hope of glory
within them, Col. 1.25, 26, 27. And they that believed, and were baptized into
him, they put him on, Gala. 3 27. As Paul the Gospel-Minister has certified,
but he did not make a ground of Catechism and familiar personal instructions,
from the Pope, or general Councels, held at Trent or Trull (as you do) for the
cutting down of Ignorance, Heresy and wickedness (as you pretend you will
do); but Paul was to turn people from the darkness, in which error, heresy,
and wickedness was, and so turning them from that, he turned them to the
light, and power of the Spirit of God which was the way and means whereby
Ignorance, Error, and wickedness, was to be cut down, crucified and killed,
which you are yet ignorant of, as your Agreement does manifest as well as your
fruits, who lives in ignorance, Miscariages, Error, Heresy, and wickedness,
uncrucified or killed; And was not the same way and means, which you pretend
to kill it by, used, (by the Pope) Bishops, Prelates etc. (or at the Council at
Trent, or Trull) and by your forefathers the old out-rooted Bishops, and
Episcopals before you, and yet it left the Ignorance, Errors, Miscariages,
Heresies, and wickedness, amongst you Living, and had no power to crucify the
same, and you say your preaching this many years, has not yet killed it; and
therefore you have agreed, to use the same, (Antidote or) means for the killing
of it, (as they did, and if it could not expel, and kill it, by them useing
the same before you, as you also have done) do you think to blind people by
casting a mist before the eyes of their understanding, seeking to insinuate
into them by flatteries and garnishing your flatteries, with colorable
glosses, to cause them, to think that, your reviving, that which has been used
amongst them with outside, Matthew. 23.27, 28.30* 31, etc.
will now from you receive life, to do that which it could not do, neither, by
the (Pope or) Bishops, nor by you (their offsprings). And with the Light are
you seen, (at your wits end) and troubled that you cannot have your wills
fulfilled, who are the enemies of the Living truth, and wrongers both of men
and God, as you also in your Agreement, acknowledge, and therefore all your
Evasions, and Colorable glosses must fall with your Image, and Imaginary
worships, (as in your forefathers before you) and the Ministry that stands out
of man's will, which you are yet Ignorant of, must through the cross cut down,
and crucify, and kill that which your Ministry does not, nor your forefathers
(or the Pope or Bishops) before you, and that Ministry which comes forth from
the Light, and power of the Spirit of God, is for the discovering, and killing
of the Error, Heresy and Miscariages, (which yours has and does leave people
in): and so as it kills that and the Ignorance, Gala. 3.4, 5. Ephesians. 2. John
8.12. 1 John 3.8, 9. 1. Pet. 1.18, 19, 22, 23, 1 John 4.16, 17: John 14.20.
it quickens, and raises the soul out of death, destroying the Ignorance,
Error, Heresy, and Miscariages, and all the works of the Devil, and so
brings souls out of death, and from under the power of darkness: to live in
the life of the Eternal truth, in the Enjoyment of the Fathers love, and to
Enjoy and walk in the liberty of the Sons of God: And says John, We know that
the Son of God is come and has given us an understanding to know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, and this is
true God and life eternal, 1 John 5.20. Whose Ministry without your familiar
personal Instruction, discovers, and kills, sin, Error, and Miscariages,
which you live in unkilled, and therefore out of his Minstiry, who kills
that, and quickens the other that has suffered under it, raising that, and
them together with it, saving them by grace, and causing them as they at
Ephesus did, to sit with Christ Jesus in the heavenly place; Ephe. 2.1, 2, 4,
5, 6. For by grace were they saved, ver. 8th. Through faith, and not of
themselves, nor of works lest any should boast, Ephesians: 2.8, 9. As Paul the
Gospel-Minister, does witness, in his Affirmation, who did not (as you do in
your confusion) set up a form of words without Spirit and Life, grounded upon
the Popes practice, or general Council held at Trent or at Trull; And bid
people get these to say and be catechized, etc. And say them over to the (Pope
or) Archbishops, Persons, Priests Rectors, and Curates, upon pain of
damnation, neither does his words warrant you so to do: Therefore are they not
your warrant from God for that work. Neither did Paul (go and) write out a few
words, out of the 20. Chap. of Exodus. and the 6. Chap. of Matthew and set the
people to get them upon pain of damnation and salvation. Which words he had
before you, and witnessed the life in the spirit and power of Christ, for the
killing of Ignorannce Sin, Error and Miscarriages: Ephesians. 5.13. Ephesians. 6.10, 11,
12, 13, 14. Gal, 2.19, 20.
and to quicken the mortal body, Romans 8.10, 11. as well for the purifying of
the heart, and the soul: 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. Which you have showed your Ignorance
in, and to be out of; And therefore Paul's words, is not your warrant from God,
who are out of that righteous life: And Paul said they were delivered from the
law, that being dead, wherein they had been held, their service stood in the
newnes of the Spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the Letter; Romans 7.6. But your
service stands in the oldnesse of the Letter (and the old Law) and not in the
Gospel and newness of spirit, Romans 1.16, 16.
as your fruits and Agreeement does manifest: Therefore you that serve in your
wills, and set people to serve in theirs, and in the oldnesse of the Letter,
without the [Gospel and power of God to salvation, and the] newness of Spirit,
Clo. 2.21, 22, 23. Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16.
Romans 1.26. you are not by Paul's words warranted from God to do it: who was
himself a minister not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, as he has witnessed,
2 Co. 3.6. etc. Therefore your garnishing your selves, with his words, and
wanting his ministry and spirit, to guide in the ministration, and worship of
God: that spirit John 4.23, 24. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. you are but as founding Brass
and tinkling Cymbals, being in the envy, and out of love the of the Father, as
the false Prophets was, therefore let Paul's words rest where they are, 1 Cor.
13. H s 16.9. Mic. 3.11. Jude 11.
till you depart from your lusts (and go make restitution) for the Lord is
against you, (and all such) who are yet without warrant from God, for all your
stealing of words to garnish your selves, as your forefathers did. But thus
says the Lord, therefore behold I am against them that steal my words from his
neighbor, I sent them not, nor commanded them: Therefore they shall not profit
the people at all, Ier. 23.30. etc.

And now that you are without warrant from the Scripture, being out of the life
of truth; and reviving your forefathers works, taking a ground from the
sixth-Generall Council held at Trent or at Trull, in the time of the (Pope or)
Bishopps: Matthew. 7.15, 16, 17, 20, 22, 22, 26, 27. ver. 2.
and are you not also left without warrant from them, then where are you now,
and what ground do you stand on: are you not without ground, or bottom, and on
the Sandy foundation, ready to be washed away when the floods come etc. Whose
fall, as Christ says, therefrom, is like to be great, and as may be Read,
Math. 7.26, 27.

Let the Priests mind and see, If they know From whence they came.
BEhold and see from whence you came, and mind your return: was not your
Original I head, root, and foundation the (Pope or) Archbishops, and Bishops?
amongst which was not the Bishop of Rome, called the Pope, Chief Supreme
head, etc. Until the time, or reign of Henry the 8. Late King of England, as
by the Laws of this Nation may appear, etc.

And the Called Arch-Bishopps, and such, as received Orders from them to be
Priests, Ministers, Deacons, and Clarks, etc. Were they not called the body
Spiritual, and were and are they not called the English Church. etc.

And after the Pope was put out of Tithes (and that which he had begott) by
Henry the 8; the Arch-Bishopps (your fathers) Priests, Ministers, Deacons,
Rectors, Clarks, etc. called the body Spiritual and the English Church etc.
Were they not endowed with Tithes, etc, (or the Popes honors) and such
Parochial rights etc. As the Pope had begot, and were put out of, when your
forefathers, (and you) his offspring entered into his seat, and were they not
(adorned, as well as endowed) with the Popes Bringings forth into Parochial
rights, etc. And your forefathers (the called Arch-Bishopps: and Bishopps) and
(you and) such as received orders from them to be Priests, Ministers, Deacons,
Rectors, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, and Clarks, were they not (as before is
said) called the English Church, as by the statute of Henry the 8. may appear:
and did not the Kings and Nobles endow the said Church both with honors, 24
Hen. 8.12.25 Hen. 8. Cha. 20.
and possessions (the Popes ornaments) viz. Tithes, Oblations, Obventions, etc.
to keep them from corruption and sinister affection: which it has not done (as
you confess that are in the miscarriages, Neglecters of the work of God, and
wrongers both of men and of Christ, as your Agreement witnesses Page, 3, 4,
19, etc. And the Pope and the Sea of Rome, had the Trial (amongst other
things) of the right of Tithes, Oblations, and Obventions etc.

And by that statute, The Statute. 24 Hen. 8, Cap. 12.26 Hen. 8. Cap. 1.
is it not ordained and declared that all spiritual Prelates, Pastors,
Ministers, and Curates, etc. as they are called, may Use, Minister, Execute and
Do, all Sacraments, and Sacramentalls, and Divine service unto the subjects of
the same: and is not there the (ground of your sacraments, or) proofs of
calling them so, The Pope had the Peterpence pensions, etc. till the time Hen.
the 8. who endowed the Bishops, and Priests, etc. in the Popes pensions,
peterpence, fruits, suits etc. See your selves and read 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 21.
and not the Scriptures, in which there is not one word that speaks of
Sacraments and Sacramentals, as they are called, and is not King Henry the 8.
and his Successors declared there the only Supreme head in earth of the
Church of England.

And by the Statute of the 25. Hen. 8.20. Is it not said, that the Annals or
first fruits, which were paid by the Arch-Bishopps of England unto the Bishop
of Rome, called the Pope, etc. should cease and not be paid to him, etc.

And by the Statute of the 26, of Hen. 8. Chap. 3. Is not the first Fruits and
profits of every Archbishopric, and Bishopric, Parsonage, Vicaridge, etc.
said to be taken, and given to Hen: 8. and his successors, and ever and besides
a yearly Tenth of all spiritual livings, etc. as they are called: And did not
the Bishopps, etc. receive their places and rewards from him etc. See more at
large in the 26. Hen. 8. Chap. 3.

How they did Proceed to the Election of an Archbishop.
FOr by the statute of the 25, of Hen. 8. Chap. 20. Is it not said, to be
Ordained and Established, that the King and his successors, may grant to the
Prior and Covent or the Dean or Chapter of the Cathedral Churches, or
Monasteries, a license under the great seal, as of old time has been
accustomed to proceed to the election of an Archbishop at every Avoidance of
any Archbishopric or Bishopric, within the Realm of England with a Letter
Mislive, containing the name of the person, which they shall elect and choose,
etc. See more at large concerning the same, in the 25. Hen. 8. Chap. 20.
aforesaid.

The Ordination of a Priest, or [pretended] Minister, etc.
BY a Statute made, the 13. of Eliz. Chap. 12. Is it not said to be ordained
that every person, under the degree of a Bishop, which does or shall pretend to
be a Priest, or Minister of Gods holy Word and Sacrament, etc. shall in the
presence of the Bishops, declare his Assent, and subscribe to all the articles
of religion, which concern the confession of the true Christian faith, and the
doctrine of the Sacraments, in a book imprinted, entitled Articles; And
whereupon, was it not agreed, by the Archbishops, and Bishops, and the whole
Clergy in the Convocation holden at London in the year, 1562. And that none
should be made Minister, or admitted to preach, or adminster the Sacraments in
England, under the age of 24. years, or unless he be approved by the Bishop
of the Diocese, being a Deacon at the least, etc. And all admissions to
benefices, etc. And all licenses, or tolerations, made to the contrary to be
merely void in law, as if they never were, etc. Therefore mind where you are,
and see if you know,

A Manifestation of your Downfall, etc. or, your Foundation shaken and razed,
etc.
FOr, is it not manifest, that the Foundation of (your Forefathers) the late
Archbishops and Bishops, etc. here in England, was man, etc. viz. Kings and
Queens of England, with the Priors and Covent of Monasteries, and the Deans, 3
Elizae Cap. 1.12.
and the Chapters of the Cathedralls, And that the ministers, Pastors, Rectors,
Parsons, Preachers, Vicars, Curates, and Clarks, etc. as they call them, were
Members and Branches arising from that root, and body, viz. The Archbishops
and Bishops, of which the Bishops of Rome called the Pope, was head till Henry
the eight: and King Henry the eight, put him out, and let him in, etc. Which
Archbishops and Bishops, by a Late Ordinance of Parliament, were, and are taken
away, and also rendered useless.

And by another Ordinance, or act of Parliament, is not the Kingly Power and
Government (by which they had been set up) taken away? etc.

And is it not therefore manifest, by the laws, statutes, and ordinances before
said that the called Priests, Ministers, Rectors, Pastors, Preachers, Vicars,
Curates, and Clarks, etc. were Members and Branches of the late Arch-Bishopps,
and Bishopps of this Nation: and had their risings and sprung from that root
and body, and of that root and body were members and branches: and that the
Arch-Bishopps and Bishopps themselves, were made and had their Rise from the
Kings and Queens, Priors, Covents, Monasteries, Deanes, and Chapters:
Archbishops and Bishops, Root and Branch, and their power and Authority being
disanulled, rendered and declared useless, abolished, and taken away as before
said, etc.

Does it not clearly appear, that all the Priests so called, and is it not
manifest, that they and the ministers in England, with the called Rectors,
Parsons, Pastors, Preachers, Vicars, Clarks, and Curats, being branches and
members of that body and root, are (or ought to be) as branches taken away,
disanulled and abolished, and the Root of their root, The Kings and Queens of
England, etc. And it being clearly made manifest and proved that their
foundation (and yours) is of man, and from man, and them, and their foundation;
and the root (of their root) by man razed, taken away, made null, and rendered
useless: are not they (and you) left without foundation and bottom? etc.

Who were not one amongst themselves, 24. H 8.12. and the 25.8.20.
neither (are you) the same this generation, that was the last before, but
alters and changes, with times, and men, etc. As your forefathers, and Priests
of England, and their predecessors have done, and is it not* manifest that in
the time of Henry the Eight, the late King of England: their predecessors,
denied the Pope for their head; 2. and 3. of Ed. 6. Chp. 1.
and owned Henry the Eight for their head, etc. ( viz. the Priests)
Archbishops and Bishopps etc.

And in the time of Edward the sixth, did not their predecessors ( viz. the
Priests) and your forefathers deny the Masse-Book, and instead thereof
received the Common prayer book; at this hand, etc, And again in Queen Marry
her time, they denied the Common prayer book, and received the Mass book, etc.

Sessio secunda Anno Mariae primo. Chap. 2.3.

And after that in the time of Queen Elizabeth they denied the masse-book, and
again received the common prayer book, etc. 1 Eliz. Chap. 2.

And in the time of the late Parliament; was not the Common Prayer Book denied,
and the Directorie received (by you), rather then you would deny your worldly
honors, and possessions, and what you now own is manifest to all the Children
of light, etc. And how that you are setting up your forefathers works, and
though you be made sensible of your deceipts, and the unprofitablenesse of your
Ministry, yet rather then you will deny your selves, of what you have received
by tradition, from your forefathers, and forsake your deceipts, you rather
would keep people still, by force as it were, under your dead dark, cold,
barren Ministry, (and destroys their souls) for your own ends, who are
wrongers, both of them, and of Christ, and are made sensible of it, as you say:
page 19. and fears least God require their blood at your hands; etc.

And Richard Baxter and the other 40. and odd, who calls your selves Ministers
of Christ, and are the untaught teachers (out of the doctrine of Christ) and
are in the miscarriages, growing worse as you say, you have, in the grounds and
reasons in your Agreement and Catechism, acknowledged the same, and so has
made your selves also manifest to be both the untaught teachers, and the
unprofitable servants, and wants your pardon, (and then you must needs want
your warrant) from God, for the same: therefore (as you are proved by Law and
Gospel to be without warrant) you are also proved by your own confession, so to
be, in your Agreement: for you say page 3, We the Ministers of Christ, whose
names are under written, etc. do humbly bewail our too great neglect, that we
have not employed our care, and time, and labor, on so great a work, according
to the strict and holy precepts and paterns in Gods word, etc. We earnestly
beg of God to pardon this our great neglect, etc. Here you have proved your
selves to be the untaught teachers, that are neglecters of the work of God:
Act. 6.4. Act. 20.20, 21, 22, 23.24.25.26, 27.
for such as are taught of God, and abide in his doctrine, are diligent in the
work of the Lord, and do not neglect it as you do, who are the idle loyterers,
and now you idle loyterers, and unprofitable servants, are you made so far
sensible of your idleness and negligence in that work, which, as you say, is
according to the strict and holy precepts and patterns in Gods word, and yet
you would shelter your selves under the name of Christ whil^st you are such,
and also wrongers of men, and of Christ, page 19. etc. And calls your selves
the Ministers of Christ, whilst you are acknowledging your idleness,
negligence (miscarriages, page 4. etc:) and the wrong you do to men and to
Christ, and yet without a pardon for the same; Be ashamed of your idleness,
and negligence in that which you have professed and for which you have taken
peoples monys; for your idleness and negligence, miscarriages, and wronging
men and Christ (which you your selves also confess) therefore be ashamed of
your deceit, and of your miscarriages (and the wrongs you have all this time
done to men and to Christ (and have taken their money for the same). Go and
restore fourfold, and cease your deceivings, be ashamed also of your lies,
never call your selves the Ministers of Christ whilst you are the idle
loyterers, wrongers of men and Him, and such as neglects his work, as you do,
and have all this while done, and that according to your own saying too? If you
have all this while been in the miscarriages unpardoned (as you say) you must
needs be the untaught teachers (as you are) and if you have all this time been
wrongers of men, and of Christ (as you say) and unpardoned for the same, you
must needs be the enemies of God and good men, and so no Ministers of Christ,
for he does not teach his Ministers to live in miscarriages as you do, nor to
wrong him, and men (as you do) who are not taught yet to deny and forsake the
same: therefore you are out of his doctrine, who receive not his teachings, and
so are ye untaught teachers, as well as the unprofitable servants (and cursed
deceivers) for if you have all this while been in the miscarriages; doing
wrong to God and Men, and also idle, and out of the work of God, and now being
sensible of it confessing the same, and bewailing your idleness and
negligence, and wants yet your pardon for the same; whose works have you done
all this while, Mica. 3.5.11. Isa. 56.10.11 Jer. 5.30, 31. Isa. 55.2, 3. Ezekiel.
34.
(the Devils or your own)? and for what have people spent their means and
money on you, for your idleness and negligence, keeping them in blindness and
ignorance, and for doing God and them wrong, who have confessed the same, and
that you have been idle and neglected to do the great work of God according to
his word, therefore in neglecting that and being idle therein, and instead of
doing the same, Your third Answer agreeing with page 3.4.17.
have been wronging both Men and Christ himself, you have cleared your selves
from being his Ministers, and proved your selves (to be the cursed deceivers,
and are found and proved) to be the unprofitable servants, being idle and
neglecters of the great work of God, by you left undone; and then you must
needs have been doing the works of your Father the Devil ( John 8.44.] and
your own; who are wrongers of God, and men, and so has deceived their souls,
and taken their means, and money for the same, and for that which is not bread,
as the false Prophets, and idle Shepherds aforetime did, therefore you that are
such, your judgment and condemnation will be the greater, Mark. 12.38.39.40.
Have you both wronged men, and of them sought your own ends and gains, and
luld them asleep in security, and taken their money and means for sleeping
therein, and as you confess have not awakened them out of the same, nor yet
turned them from darkness to light, that have them yet unturned from sin unto
God, as your Agreement does witness: therefore be not offended at others, who
are sent from the Lord, to tell you the same, and for that your work of
deceiving, and wronging Christ and them, take you the shame and give over
deceiving souls for your own ends, and earthly gains; for you are those that
labor in vain, being wrongers of God and Men, and idle and negligent (as you
say) in the great work of God, according to his holy word; and so you have
proved your selves to be none of Christ's Minister, but enemies, and cursed
deceivers, for it is written, cursed be such as do the work of the Lord,
deceitfully or negligently, and as you have done, therefore that curse stands
upon you and them that with you remain under the same; Jer. 48.10. Jer. 11.3.

And now that you are discovered, witnessed against, and made manifest to be
deceivers, wrongers of God, and wrongers of Men, and to be idle negligent and
the unprofitable servants, you have also confessed (since you say you were your
selves awakened unto the same) yet you make flatteries and excuses, and false
glosses to hide your deceipts under? Promising amendment, but does not regard
to forsake your false Ministry and worships, and turn to the truth in the life
of it, being found out of the life in the lust, and miscarriages, wrongers of
God and Men, and has your people asleep in security, etc. But if any should
have been sent of the Lord, into your market places or steeple houses, where
you sell your ware, and use your trade of deceit, to deceive souls, and wrong
Christ and them, for your own ends, and if they had but told you that which you
have confess, you would have been all on an uproare, and have had your
disciples, ready to fight for you with clubs and fists, and after have sent the
messenger of God, to Prison for it, as at Kidderminster and Worcester, were
made manifest, when there was not so much spoken against you, Titus 1.16. 2 Timothy 3.8.9. and 12.
as since, in your Agreement, you have confessed; but yet continue in and rather
grow worse and worse, as deceivers (like you) evil men and seducers in former
ages did; 2 Timothy 3.12* but your folly is made manifest as theirs was, who
professes God in words, but in works deny him as such did that did so before
you, who were reprobate concerning the true Gospel purifying faith, (as you
are) and to every good work abominable and reprobate: therefore behold your
blindness and folly made manifest, and for the time to come bear your
reproves, and take shame to your selves, if any be moved again by the Lord to
come into your steeple houses, and tell you that you have confessed the same;
and that your own mouths witness against you and your hearers, as in your
Agreement, is also made manifest.

That you are wrongers of God, and of your hearers, page 19. and in the
miscarriages liven formerly in ( page 4.) unpardoned, and that you are
bewailing your negligence or idleness, in the great work of God according to
his word, page 3. and saying you will amend, and beg pardon for the same; And
if any be moved of the Lord to come amongst you, seeing you still continue as
you was, and asks why you do not come out of your miscarriages, and give over
deceiving of souls, and cease to wrong God and Men, for your own ends, and say
unto you, why do you not perform your promise, but say and do not, as
hypocrites and the false Prophets do and aforetime did, as the Scripture
witnesses; or if there come any amongst you, and ask you, If you have yet got
a pardon, etc. granted for your former negligence, miscarriages, and wrong done
to Christ, and to Men, or to ask you (seeing you go on in the same) if you
have any toleration or warrant from God so to do, etc. Will you not cause them
that so do come to ask you or speak as the Lord shall more them) to be haled
out of your Steeple Houses, and had to prison for the same (as formerly some of
you have done) and, If any be moved of the Lord, to come to your
Steeple Houses, and ask If your hearers be awakned, out of their sleepiness,
and to ask also If you be turned out of your Miscarriages, from preaching for
hire, and being called of men masters, and from wronging others, and also from
your Idle Lazy Negligence, John 16, 2, 3. Act. 17.5.6. etc. Act. 22.27, 28, 29,
30.
etc. Will you not be offended at them, for it, as Richard Baxter was with me,
when I spoke to him in the Steeple-house in Worcester, who caused me to be
haled out, (as Anti-Christian-Ministers before time did) and afterward the same
day, when he was spoken to, in the Street would not stand, but fled as the
Hireling uses to do, John the 10. And suffered the prison, to be a place of
security to keep truth shutt up into those bonds, rather then to be at liberty
to reprove his deceipts, which is evident by his fruits, which now also under a
cover he has confessed, and is in that Agreement of his and 40. odd, Priests,
Pastors, Ministers, Preachers, Rectors, and Curates and Teachers, further made
manifest.

And, Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord Negligently, but Richard
Baxter thou have done it Negligently this many years; and above 40. Priests
with thee, according to your Confession, in your Agreement, and therefore you
are under that Curse. And now, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you; If ye
will not hear, to give glory to my name, says the Lord of hosts; I will even
send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings, yea I have cursed them
already, therefore will I make you contemptible, and base before the people,
according as ye have not kept my ways Mal. 2.1, 2. and ver. 9. Mal. 2.1, 2, 3,
4.8, 9.
Behold says the Lord I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your
faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts; and one shall take you away with
it, Mal. 2.3. Your agreement in which you have confessed your wrong to Christ,
and to men, and your former miscarriages then continued in, and in which you
have confessed your negligence, etc. It was dated the 4. of May 1655. And then
you wanted your pardon both for your wrong done to God and men, and your
negligence in the work of God also: as also for your former miscarriages, etc.
as you have confessed, and therefore are guilty, and must come under
condemnation for the same, but, (To flatter and dissemble with the people) you
say, you will resolve for the time to come to amend, but does not yet do it,
being still in the old nature and will-worships, perfection, miscarriages, and
doing wrong as you did, yet you say you and all the adjacent-churches will set
apart a day publicly, to fast and pray for a pardon, etc. I say; the church in
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 1 These. 1.1. Which is the pillar and
ground of Truth 1 Timothy 3.15. does deny you and all wrongers of God and men; and
persecuters of the Innocent, and such as are called of men masters, professing
themselves Christs-Ministers: and all such as deceive souls for dishonest gain,
and lives in perfection, and such, and the like miscarriages as you and your
generation do, and the prayers of the wicked are sin, and such as turns their
care from hearing the Law [in the heart, and of God, Jer. 31.33.] their prayer
is an abomination to the Lord God, Pro. 28. and 9. ver. And such as you that
neglect the work of God, and lives in persecution, (the work of the Devil) and
in the miscarriages wronging God and men, as you do, they are those that turns
their care, from hearing the law, and their hearts from receiving the truth,
standing in opposition aganst it (as you do); and therefore their prayers are
abomination to the Lord, as yours and all that work such wickedness, as you do,
is: for thus faith the Lord unto such; Isa. 1.15. when ye spread forth your
hands I will h^de mine eyes from you; yea when you make many prayers I will not
hear, your hands are full of blood and (hearts as well as) houses are full of
deceit, and over passes the deeds of the wicked, Ier. 5.26, 27. and such like,
and they that neglect the work of the Lord are cursed children, having hearts
exercised with covetuous practices, 2 Pet. 2.3, 13, 14. And what Churches are
you, and you that are such, who are in the cursed nature, and wicked practices
in sin, and unturned to God, Isa. 59.2? What is your fasts worth that lives in
strife and debate, persecution and wickedness, behold in the day of your fasts
do you not find pleasure? And are you not bringing forth persecution, as in
this Nation is manifest, (as well as you exact all your labors) Isa. 58.3.
behold do not ye fast as hypocrites and persecuters do, that fast for strife
and debate: Matthew. 23.4, 5. etc.
who smite with the fists of wickedness, causing your voice to be heard on
high, afflicting the soul for a day, and hanging down the head as a bullrush,
and, instead of loosing the bands of witkedness, you strengthen the hands of
evil doers; and instead of undoing the heavy burdens, you bind them
Pharise-like upon men's shoulders and will not your selves touch them with one
of your singers (sueing some for Tithes and taking treble damages etc.) And
instead of letting the oppressed go free, you and your generation cast the
Innocent into prisons-holes, and dungeons, as your prisons in these parts
against you may sufficiently witness: and are not these the fruits (of
Jezabel, and) of the Hypocrites fast, and not that which the Lord does require,
Isa. 58.3, 5, 6, 7. Wherefore be ye witnesses against your selves that you walk
in the false Prophets and Pharisees your forefathers steps, as your fruits
make you manifest: and as you may read, Math. 23.31, 32, 33, 34. etc and you
have under a cover confessed the same, who wants a pardon for your negligence
(in the work of God) as you say, and for your former miscarriages [which was
before the 4. day of May, as aforesaid] and therefore you want a pardon for
your perfecting and imprisoning of Tho. Goodaire, once in Kiderminster, and
twice in Worcester, before that time, and some others has been imprisoned at
Worcester, and in Worcest* Anne Himing: Richard Ke^bey for Tyths, etc.
and many at Evesham since your hypocritical false hearted and deceitful
confession, promising amendment, and rather grows worse and worse, so
manifesting your hypocrisy and filling up your measure of iniquity, as your
forefathers did, and leaving both your words and actions to be standing
witnesses against you, as they did; that it may appear for all your Evasions
and Colorable glosses that you are their offspring and bears their marks by
which you are known, Ma^th. 7.20. Matthew. 7.15. etc.

And seeing that your ministry takes little place in working any good effect in
your hearers, but leaves them ignorant in matters of salvation, page 19. of
your Agreement, you are resolving in your wills and miscarrying womb or nature
and Spirit, from whence your continued miscarriages proceeds, to revive your
Forefathers work, and set up a form of words for them to get to say over to
you, as was used to be done to the Bishops at Trent or at Trull, and you
promise salvation upon the performance, and threatens damnation upon the
refusal (Pope-like) saying that that way of using Cathechising], familiar and
personal instruction, and to have the people to get the Creed, the Lords
prayer and ten commandments or any other And is not those (which you call any
other Orthodox Catechism) such as were set out by he old Bishops and their
offspring that were in the miscarriages as you also are etc. And confess page
the 4. of your Agreement.
Orthodox Catechism, and your expositions, to say over to you; and so that
will be a means you say to kill ignorance. But the same means has been used
by the Bishops and Prelates, and yet it has not done that which you would have
it to do, and do you think that if it did not do it by your Forefathers
applying, that it receives any more virtue or power from you, to do it by your
revieing their work, and useing the same means, and with the same miscarrying
nature, and wrongful Spirit, which they did make use of it with all: but your
covers are too narrow, and leaves you bare, and ignorance remains still
amongst your hearers, Math. 11.27.28.29. Act 4.11.12. Heb. 7.25.
and the miscarriages amongst you their untaught teachers, (as it did with your
Forefathers.)

And you say the diligence of Papists and Sectaries will condemn you, if you
will not do half so much in a right way to save men's souls, Math. 6.24. Math.
7.13.14.^5.16.17.18 ^9, 28*
as they will do in a wrong way to pervert them; would you not here have people
to set you up as their savior, and so cause them to neglect coming from you to
look unto Christ for teaching, who is a true Savior, and teacher of his
people, and perfectly able to save all that come unto God by him (without you):
but your design is seem; and all your covers will not hide you, who seeks to
cast that off from you to the Papist and Sectaries, which your selves are
guilty of and found in, for if the way of neglecting the work of God, and
living in miscarriages, wronging Christ and Men, growing worse, and running yet
further from God, as you do, and have done, be not the wrong way, and
destructive to men's souls, what is? for there is but two waves the right and
the wrong etc. If you walk in that wrong way, wherein you miscarrie, and wrong
God and Men, growing worse and running further therein; do not the Papists the
same, and are not you and they therein one, and so walk with them in that way,
whose actions proceed from one ground and Spirit, though in some words and
formalities you differ, but in the evil (and wronging God and Men, etc.) are
Joined together; and therefore may stop your mouths of condemning others, for
that which you are found guilty of: your words as well as your actions bear
witness against you, and your bitterness and persecuting the servants of
Jesus, as your Prisons (and barbarous or cruel usage) at Evesham and other
places may witness for the truth, and against your deceit, and wrong done to
men and God (as you say in your agreement) therefore you and the Papists goes
on in one nature together: the Papists you say bring all ^he people to confess
their most secret sins unto their Priests, and do not you labor to bring the
people to do so unto you, the Parish Masters, idle Shepherds, and hireling
Priests, and then are not you and the Papists therein both one in nature, and
property, Ez^k. 3^, ^^ and^
though differing a little in words and colorable clauses. And where you tell
of creeping into houses; who more then you creeps into the Popes houses, which
you (with and from them) call Churches? but let me ask you that run so out of
them (from whence you sprung) wherein do you and they differ in worships and
practice therein? Whether in manner or matter? if in manner only you differ,
and not in matter, then do you not agree in the maine? if so, then are not you
and the Papists in religion, and worships as well as nature and property one,
though differing in some words and formalities etc. but both in the vain
traditions, and observing your fancies, and brain imaginations as the Serpents
seed did in all ages.

You resolve in your wills to set on a work (in your imaginations) promising
salvation upon the performance, and damnation upon the refusal, page 30. and
so would merit Heaven by your actings, in the nature from whence arises
negligence, and miscarriages, page 3, 4. and wrong to men, and to Christ, page
19. and do not the Papists hold the same? thinking to merit Heaven by their own
actings in that nature, and spirit of deceit, which guides them to neglect the
work of God, and also into miscarriages, and to wrong men and God, (like you
and persecuters, and seed of evil doers.) If so, then are not you and the
Papists one therein, and why do you cry out against that so much in others;
your selves being guilty of and found in the same, and doing their work; only
differing here and there in words, formalities and some colorable glosses, etc.

You say page 23. you have all need to join heart and hand, to help one
another safe to heaven, and all little enough you say; I answer, yea and too
little too, for in that nature in will not be done, which teaches you to wrong
Christ and Men, for if in that nature you could do it; why might not the Papist
in the like nature with you, do the same? and are not you therein with the
Papists, one? or if any get out of your ignorance and come from under the
wrong, and out of the miscarriages in obedience to the teachings of Christ the
true teacher and Savior whom you wrong, that they get into Heaven before you,
or sit with Christ Jesus in heavenly places, whilst their bodies are on the
earth, as the Saints at Ephesus did, whilst their bodies were there: and such
as are saved by grace having their souls purified in obeying the truth through
the Spirit, where self is denied, are not you (through ignorance of the way
that leads out of error, heresy, miscarriages, Popery, and darkness) ready to
call such heretics as are come out of that, and into the glorious light and
enjoyments of the sons of God, to worship the Father in Spirit, I say, are you
not ready to call such heretics; who are come out of it (viz) the darkness,
E^he. 1.6. Co. 1.13. 1 Pet. 1.22.23, 24. Reve. 21.3.23.24. Joh. 4.23.24. 2 Cor.
3.16.17. Gal. 4.4, 5, 6, 7.8. 1 Cor. 4.6.7.
and heresy which you live in, and would rank them with the Papists under that
denomination, to cover and shelter your selves, thinking to cast that upon them
which they are freed from, and you and the Papists are found in union with, and
guilty of, being both of you out of the right way and in the wrong, that are
neglecters of the work of God and wronging God and men, and living in the
miscarriages, and so in the heresies, error, and disobedience to the truth,
following your own Spirits, and obeying the imagined fancy, formed up in your
own wills, and living in the vain traditions and customs of the Heathen, as
you and they do; but your mist dazels the eye of none but the wilful blind
and such as are in sleepy security, and in sin unturned to God, who are already
deceived, and the eye covered or blinded, by which they should see both
delusion and heresy, in which you and they therein agree, who grow worse, and
run yet further from God, etc.

For the Papists believe they shall never be free from sin here in this life:
and therein they are reprobate concerning the true Gospel soul-saving and
purifying faith: and you believe the same [viz] that you shall never be freed
from sin here in this life; and then must not you with the Papists have a
purgatory? seeing that nothing which is unclean shall in any wise enter into
the holy City, Rev. 21.27. and the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God, as it is said, and by the Ambassador of Christ declared, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
and are not you reprobate concerning the true Gospel, Gal. 5.20, 21.
soul-saving and purifying faith who denies the property of it in denying
purity of heart; and abiding in darkness, and the nature opposite to the true
light believing, or saying you believe, you cannot or shall not be free from
sin here in this life, and therefore are not you and the Papists both one, and
your faith and theirs in nature and property (being dead and corrupt) therein
agrees together; but I deny the Papists and you, the wrongers of Christ and
Men, and that faith which does not purify the heart, and witnesses that faith
and power which does, Act. 15.89. H^b. 2.10.11.
and as the Saints did, as the Scripture witnesses, and God which searches
the hearts bears me witness as he did them who (gives the holy Ghost that)
purifieth the heart by faith: and we know that we were not redeemed with
corruptible things as silver and gold, from that vain conversation which had
been received by tradition from your fore Fathers, etc. Who received Silver and
Gold, and did not the work which they and you pretended, who took and takes
the dishonest gain, but we were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, as a
lamb without blemish, 1 Pet. 1.18.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

The Papists, they say they believe in one God and three persons, and in your
Agreement, in the exposition of the Creed, you say the same: but neither you
nor the Papists believe in that God that freeth from sin without your tradition
and vain imagination; who say you are in miscariages growing worse and running
yet further from Him: but by what part of Scripture the Papists and you prove
your three persons I know not; for the Scripture speaks not so, but says
there is three witnesses which three agree in one, and are one, Joh. 14.20. 1
John 5.7.8. Joh. 7.21.22.23.
and he that abides in the doctrine of Christ has both the Father and the
Son, 2 John 9. and the holy Ghost remains within, Joh. 14.15, 16, 17. 1 John
3.24. which you have showed your ignorance of and both of that doctrine, union
and faith* that in the same power does stand, where the flattering and entising
words of man's wisdom (like yours and the Papists) are judged and condemned,
Statute 2. Mariae 1. Chap. 3.
as well as shut out by that which does the world comprehend.

The Papists they call Steeple Houses Churches, and there sell their
inventions, and brain-imaginations for their own ends, deceiving souls with
their traditions and vain observations, Stat of 2. and 3. Edw: 6. Chap. 1.
who wrong them and Christ himself: and do not you the same, and such as are
in ignorance of the foundamentals of true religion, being ignorant of, and out
of the way of salvation, in the vain traditions, familiar and personal
instructions, arising out of the miscarrying nature, It seems that which is
called Communion or the Sacraments so called, were commonly called the Mass,
as appears by the Stat 2. and 3. Edw. 6. Chap. 1.
and are in sin and sleepy security as you and your hearers (as you say) are:
therefore in that are not you and the Papists both one?

The Papists they sprinkle their Infants, and holds that infants baptism (as
they call it) came in the room of Circumcision, and you hold the same;
therefore in that as well as persecution and other things, are not you and the
Papists both one? but what Scripture proof without your imaginations have you
for the same, and seeing that in the order of Circumcision they did but
circumcise the male Children only, and not the female, and, if Infants
baptism as you and the Papists affirm, came into the room; why do you break
that order, etc. in baptising not the males only (as you call it) but the
femnles also; what trick has the Pope taught you and them to make a cover for
that?

And do not the Papists worship that which they have received by tradition from
their Forefathers and also set up an image according to their fancy, and
imaginary worship in their own wills, and the miscarrying nature contrary to
God: binding all they can to submit to their fancies, and worship their Image,
and vain conceivings, Banbury, Bristoll Exetor, Maidstone, Colchester Bedford,
etc,
and those that cannot for conscience sake toward God submit with them to the
same, but oppose their deceit and false worship, those they persecute and
imprisson; and cause them to suffer affliction, distress, and necessity, etc.
and did not you so at Kedderminster, Worcester, and Evesham; as well as they in
your nature do at Northampton, Oxford, and Cambridge, and other places, who (do
and) have done the same; Therefore in that are not you and the Papists both
one, or guided by one Spirit, and in union together with the deceit, etc? and
would cast it upon the innocent whom you persecute, that denies the Popes
ways and your false worships, and stands a witness against all deceit in
Pope and Papists and all the false worshippers, who are jarring and jangling
about words and formalities, and joins together to oppose and persecute the
life and power of truth, but it is in vain for you to strive against the
stream, or hard for you to kick against the pricks, Statute 1. Mary 1 Cap. 3.
without getting an inward wound or mayme, if not broken and dashed to pieces by
so doing.

The Papists have sacraments and sacramentalls, as they (and you) call them,
which there is no Scripture for, and you have the same; then wherein do you and
they therein differ, except in the manner, and agree in the matter, and so
therein become one: and yet you cry out of those, who ranking you with the
Papists deny both you and them and your will worships, and the deceit and
miscarriages which you and all such live in, who are wrongers of God and Men,
and worships their fancies formed up in the dark mind, and the imaginations of
their own brain, and so are without Scripture proof, and warrant from God for
the same, as you and they therein are.

John Stelham Preacher of the Gospel, at Edenborough as he says in Scotland,
P. E. etc.
Does not the Papists hold that the bread which they receive at a Sacrament so
called, that though it be bread before in the nature and substance: yet
notwithstanding, would they not have it to be Spirit and Life in the
institution at the receiveing, after their consecration? and if they do so,
there is of those that call themselves Preachers of the Gospel, at Edenborough
in Scotland, which Church you speak of; that holds the same, as I can produce
under their hands, and if you own it with them do you not go against the oath
of Abjuration, and also agree and join with the Papists therein, and though
you may differ in manner, yet owning that; is there not an agreeing in the
matter: and if so, then do not you and the Papists agree therein? and are you
not one in the maine, and yet are not ashamed, some of your generation as well
as you, to accuse others for Papists, and Jesuits, that deny all their ways
and false worships in manner and matter, and denies their deceit and yours and
stands to witness against the same, turning that upon you and them again,
that you may see your casting the name of Papists and Jesuits upon them that
denies both their deceipts and yours, neither proves them to be as you say
they are, nor cleares your selves from the old relics of Popery: and if you
take the oath to renounce it all? and yet live in it; are you not forsworn,
and perjured persons, or any that do so: consider well of it.

And what difference is there betwixt the call of the Papists, Priests,
Mimisters, Rectors, and Curates, etc. to the Ministry which they live in, and
the call of you the Priests, Ministers, Pastors, Teachers, and Rectors, as you
call your selves, to the Ministry which you live in? Are not they called of
men? And is not your calling the same? For had not they the rule of creating of
Priests, Ministers, Pastors, Teachers and Rectors, or ordering amongst them,
etc. (until the reign of Henry the 8th.) in this realm, and then did not he
cut the Pope out off that which he had brought forth into Parochial rights so
called, as Tithes, Obventions, etc. And did not he set up Archbishops and
Bishops, and they created or called your Forefathers the Priests, Pastors, and
Rectors, and Teachers, etc? And were not the Archbishops, their and your
Creators or Callers, cut off by the late Parlirment, and rendered useless; and
do not you now call and create one another; and if so, are not you
selfe-callers to selfish Ministry? and how can you clear your selves from
being instead of young, Popes, or like the young Bishops that were before you,
creating or making and calling, Priests, Pastors, Teachers, and Rectors, and so
self-callers of self-seekers, putting out and in at your pleasure and
displeasure, and so are creating, and begetting, or calling one another for
your own ends, and now are found (as you say) wrongers of Christ and men, and
therefore may well fear that God will require their blood at your hands, and so
you are on uncertain grounds, men also (as you say) of miscarriages, growing
worse, and are yet without pardon for the same: The papists sets up a worship
in their wills, and in that nature which teaches them to neglect the great
work of God according to his word, and do not they excommunicate such as will
not walk with them in their inventions, and worship their Imaginary worship,
set up in that nature, out of which arises all Miscarriages, etc. and do not
you promise the same? And then wherein do you and the Papists differ but only
in the manner? if you do so agree in the matter, and be all one in the main, etc.

It is not your calling others Papists that are not, that can clear you from
that root; neither does your saying that you are the Ministers of Christ prove
you to be so: who are found out of his doctrine and not knowing his commandes,
or call, his ministry and worship; that refuse his way and walk in the practice
of his ministers, who your selves are Lords and Masters, and called by man,
approved, set up, and are receiving your wages of the world, and persecuting
Christ's messengers that are sent to witness against deceits, and deceivers,
and would think to make people believe you to be that which you are not, by
casting that upon others which is yours, received from your forefathers, and
returns upon you and Papists again, to remain from whence it came, and the
burden you are like to bear, and judgment from God expect for the wrong
against him and men which you do, and have done.

And now that your deceits is made manifest and testified against, you are
seeking to revive your former work, and to deceive people by your flatteries
and false confessions and Colorable glosses: for you set up your
will-worships, in the nature which is contrary to God, and has taught you to
neglect his work (as you say) according to his word, and in that nature by
which you have been led into your miscarriages [and promises salvation upon
the performance and damnation you threaten upon the refusall] and say you shall
proceed with those that refuse, and deal with them as the obstinate despisers
of Instruction ought to be dealt withal (but are not you the obstinate
despisers of the Instructions of the Lord who have neglected his work etc. and
lives in the miscarriages wronging Christ and men etc? then expect to be so
dealt withal in the first place your selves) for all this you say you will do
to others, etc. whilst you are bewailing your own negligence in the work of
God, and confessing your Miscarrigaes, and wrong by you done to God and men,
and telling of the little effect which your ministry has wrought, and of your
peoples sleep in security, and being in sin unturned to God: and you had then
to go a begging for your pardon, May 4. 1655.

And yet you being in the old birth and the fall, in the evil nature bringing
forth such evil fruits, and whilst unpardoned, you frame your Image, resolves
to go on, and states your time, lays your penalty, and promise how you will
deal with those that refuse to (worship your Image, set up in your wills and
the old nature) and will not submit, you threaten to deal with them as
obstinate refusers of Instructions, but is but such instructions as proceeds
from your obstinate spirits, which has kept you in the Miscarriages and
neglect of the work of God, Luke 16.11, 15. Luke 12.45, 46, 27. Math. 25.41,
42. Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23. etc.
wronging both Men and his Son, and wants your pardon then, as you say, for the
same: and I say you cannot tell whether the Lord in the first place will deal
with you as obstinate refusers of his Instructions and cast you out as unjust
stewards for both your obstinacy, negl^gence, and wrong done to men and to
Christ his Son he has good grounds to proceed against you on, and needs little
evidence from others: for your own mouths and tongues has confessed the same,
and it had been wisdom to had waited till the trial had been over; and to know
whether you should have a pardon or be cast out for what you in the rebellion
of your hearts, (against the Light and Living truth of God, etc.) have already
done: And to see how you should have been dealt withal your selves for the
same, before you should have threatened what you would do to others, Romans 2.5,
6, 8, 9. Rev. 14.9, 10, 11, Rev. 20.10, 13, 14, 15.
that refuses your Instruction. Remember, That when you so said, you was not
then in the counsel of the Living God, and therefore you spoke it without the
fear of God, rashly, out of a reprobate sense, presumtuously saying so, before
your pardon for your high contempt, that wronged Men and Christ, etc. and knew
not but that you might be condemned at the judgment seat, and cast out as
reprobates and neglecters of the work of God, [and for your Miscarrariages
etc.] into perdition and receive according to your deserts, and into the pit
which for others you have dug you your selves to be cast and be tormented
for, Joh. 16.13. Heb. 5.8, 9.
at the last.

In page the 4. you set up your will-worships which you call Catechism end
personal familiar instruction not being then pardoned, nor knowing the Spirit
of Christ to guide you [out of your Error, Heresy, Miscarriages, and Wrong by
you done to men and to Christ, page 19. and to guide out of deceits and
flatteries] into the truth, which spirit is for instruction, and to guide all
that obey it you say that Catechism and personal Instruction is for the
killing of Ignorance, and quickening the understanding, and so puts that instead
of the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.1. Col. 3. Romans 8.13 14. 1 John 5 20, Joh. 14.26.
which is to Instruct and kill Ignorance, and quicken the understanding* by
bringing the things of Christ to remembrance, as Christ has said, Joh. 14.26.
but wanting the Spirit you set up your personal and familiar Instruction to do
it, as it appears by page 21. you Entreat them there to come for some familiar
conference and personal instruction, for the less they know and remember the
more help they need; and you are there calling them to come to you that are
untaught, to deny your Miscarriages, etc. And coming from the sprituall
teaching to your personal Instruction they come from the true means and
helps: and that is the cause why they do not profit, andy on set up your paper
and personal Instruction instead of the spirit of truth, which is the guide
into all truth; John 16.13. and the remembrancer also, killing Ignorance; and
is the means that prevents and keeps from it, etc. but you say your Catechism
and familiar and personal Instruction is so (because you are Ignorant of the
same) you say you observe that the younger, when they are once married, will
come no more to be Catechized publicly, and too many forget that which before
they had learned, which this course you say may prevent but it has not
prevented you [the personal familliar structers] for running into miscarriages
and doing wrong to others, neither does it lead you out of it, who are therein,
and without pardon for the same, etc. and is people so silly to think it will
do it in them, your hearers, when it has not yet done it in you their
teachers, and wrongers, whereby you manifest your selves to be mere deluders,
and also deceivers; though the blind see you not, yet are you seen and your
ways and windings with the true light are discovered, comprehended, and with
the light, which you act contrary unto, Joh. 8, 12. stoh. 14.6. Joh. 15.6. Heb.
5.8, 9. Heb. 7.25.
are you to be condemned.

You say page 4. that Catechizing and personal Instruction is the doctrine of
salvation? You speak you know not what, and without understanding of the way of
salvation, putting that in the rome of Christ who is the way to salvation, John
14.6. he is the way to the father? Then your Catechism and familiar personal
Instruction is not the way, for it is not Christ, and no man can come to the
Father but by him, John 14.6. And he is perfctely able to save to the utmost
all those that come unto God by him, Gal. 1.9, 10.
Heb. 7.25. without your Catechism or personal and familiar Instruction:
which is set up in your old evil and miscarrying nature, Prge, 19. and 29.
who yet know not the way of salvation that are seting up a way of your own,
and turning thereby people as much as in you lies from Christ the true way: to
walk in yours, who are cursed Children, neglecters of the work of God, and in
your miscarriages, wanting your pardon for that and your wrong done to Christ
and to men, etc. (when you so said) and then you set up your Image, and stayed
your time, saying, you would set a convenient stated time for that work in your
Parishes, telling people you will grant their desires, and examine some
privately, some openly, or as they please, and so manifest your selves to be men
pleasers, and time-servers, when you will, and as you will to please people for
your own ends; rather then lose your gain: and if their souls perish you will
take their moneys and means and tell them on their death bed, when you visit
the sick, that you dare not speak a word of Comfort unto them; yet you dare
take their money in their life time for your deceiving and dead dark, dry,
barren and uncomfortable doctrine, and now that your preaching is found so
useless you cry up your Catechism and personal and familiar Instructions at a
very high rate, saying it is that which life or death must depend upon ( page
10.) but what will it effect more then your preaching has done? even leave
people as they was: except in conceits higher, and grow into Ignorance of the
power of truth and way of salvation [for all that] when they have done, as they
yet are, and also Ignorant of what you your solves have many years taught them,
whose doctrine deceives their souls and deprives them of understanding the
same. And if they perish in their Ignorance, are not you the cause of it? who
says (in page 11.) you find by experience that the people understand not your
public preaching; though you study to speak as plain as you can: Isa. 55.2.
Jer. 23.30, 31, 32. etc.
but do you not take their money for the same, and so for that which is not
bread, neither does it profit their souls, and that after many years too; many
you say can scarce tell any thing you have said: therefore you, and they may
see how little they are benefited by you, and what little use your studied
stuff is of, and how useless that is which you study and invent in that old
miscarrrying nature, which does deprive peoples understandings (of knowing the
truth) and so keeps them in blindness and Ignorance of the only true God. And
therefore as you say in page 19. you are wrongers of Christ and of them, and
may well fear that God will require their blood at your hands, who make it
manifest that you have run unsent, and your ministry does not profit the people
at all? And how should it be otherwise being untaught your selves (to come out
of your self ends) but are in the negligence of the work of God, and the
miscarriages, etc. ministering from the same spirit your forefathers [time
servers and men pleasers] did, Jer. 23.1.16.20, 21, ver. it appears by the
Statute, of 25. H. 8. Cap. 21. The Pope cast out for his miscarriages and
usurpation and beguiling the people, etc,
that were not the servants of Christ, and now you are mainfest to be the
unprofitable servants and ministry (for to be accounted or rendered vselesse as
theirs is) or be holden accursed as it is said in Gal. 1.8, 9. 2 Cor. 16.22.

The Pope that had the rule amongst Tithes and such like things etc. [till Hen.
8.] here in England, was not he put out for his miscarriages, and after the
Pope was put out by Hen. 8. did not then the Archbishops bear rule [in his
stead,] and set up Priests, Rectors and Curates, and did not they as you do
[and all their Branches as Prelates, Episcopals, Priests, Rectors, and Curates,
etc.] open their mouths wide to speak first in their own cause and behalf, to
cry up themselves by the name of the Ministers of Christ, as you do? and did
not they cry up their ministry and means as Jure divino, but they were
discovered and made manifest that they was not so. And your forefathers the
Archbishops, and Bishops etc. were found in Miscarriages, and was they not
both wrongers of men and of Christ, and cut off, (or turned out) for their
Miscarriages, etc? And by the late Parliment they were dis-annulled and
rendered useless, and they are cried down and their mouths stopped (viz.) the
Archbishops and Bishops, etc. who cried themselves up with as wide a mouth as
you can do saying, they was the Ministers of Christ, (and Jure divino etc.) and
were ready to call all heretics, and the like, that dissented from them, and
witnessed against their deceits: and how did they punish and afflict them for
the same? And have not you learned to walk in their steps? And did not the
Episcopals, and Prelates, and those that were branches of the Bishops (as you
are) ^o as you do? and cried up themselves by the name of the Ministers of
Christ, and counted others Heretics and were ready to rank them with Papists
as you do? But was not the Prelates, and Episcopals, sound to be in the
Miscarriages, and wrongers of God and Men as you are, and was not they cut off
and turned out for their Miscarriages etc? And are not they silent and their
mouths stopped and cried down, though they were forward to cry up themselves as
you do, and to call others Sectaries and Heretics that are not so as you are,
but though you now open your mouths wide to cry up your selves, as your
forefathers did, (being a bough or branch from them) yet with the Light you
are now seen: and if they was cut off (or turned out) for their miscarriages
and wrong done to Christ and to men; do you deserve to stand who are found in,
and confessing the same? But when you have filled up your measures and comes by
all to be seen in the same, must not you then descend, and turn back from
whence you came and be as you are, men in miscarriages and neglecters of the
great work of God, wronging men and Christ as you say, and your fruirs with
your Agreement stands witness against you: but in patience let all that see
your deceits possese their souls and praise God for the riches of his love
that has led them out of your miscarriages, and from under your mist or popish
darkness, into the pure and glorious light, and teaching of Christ, wherein
they are growing in grace, Col. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 3.17.18, 19, Col 2.7, 8, 9.
Col 3.12, 13, 14 15. Ephe. 5.11, Rev. 3.9.
being rooted and grounded in the true Gospel, soul-saving purifying faith, in
which their souls are purifyed, whose loves runs out unto the brethren, from
a pure heart, being of the new birth, 1 Pet. 22.23. and denying your deceits
and dead doctrine, who witness against the works of darkness and all that
which proceeds from your Miscarrying nature, and from the popish root and that
spirit of deceit by which you wrong men and Christ, and are neglecters of his
work, and without pardon for the same, etc. Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. Growing worse
and running yet further from God, as you also say.

And you say page 19, It astonished you many times, when you have occasion to
talk with your hearers, page 19.
to perceive that they know very little of the doctrine which you say you have
been preaching to them so many years there? The people may take notice of the
unprofitablenesse of your preaching and ministry, and that they have spent
their money upon you for that which is no bread, and does not after long time
hearing and living under (little or) not at all profit them: Luke. 16, 15.
but how should it profit Them, when it has not taught You to come out of your
miscarriages, and that cursed nature from which your wrong to Christ and men
does proceed, in which wrongful and miscarrying, nature your ministry stands,
and therefore is not like to profit the people. But you speak in your own
behalf, as self justifyers, Pharisees, false Prophets, and Hypocrites use to do:
and you say you know that they must understand it or perish; and yet though
they have made use of you, and spend their time and money upon you, you have
not, nor does not bring them to understand it: and then with you their
miscarrying and untaught teachers, them to understand it: and then with you
their miscarrying and untaught teachers, they (accordingly as you say) are like
to perish, yet you cry up your own way at a very high rate for your own ends,
and sets the price of a perishing condition without the understanding of [your
brain Imaginations, which you call] your preachings [or your humane Inventions]
and poor people your hearers, etc. that after they have spent their labor and
means or money upon you this many years, yet want their understanding, and
benefit from you: therefore it is high time for them to cease from you and
hearken to the light of Christ in their conscience, that calls to repentance
that it they may obey and thereby come into the teaching of God, Isa. 54.13.
Joh. 6.46. which causes all to profit, 1 Cor. 12.7. that obey the true light
and follow the same, Ioh. 8.11. Heb. 5.8, 9.

But people have many years heard you and are yet little (or nothing at all as
you say) benefited by you, for they remain yet in Ignorance etc. you say, and
are like to do so for you, I say: Whose ministry stands in your wills, and not
in the will of God, and can alter and change as times and men's wills alter and
change, but now that you see your ministry does not kill Ignorance, etc. you
are using the same means which your forefathers did, to do it, but left
undone: and is found with you in the Error, Heresies, and Miscarriages, but you
say that Catecthisme and personal Instruction is a great means to overcome
that killing Ignorance, etc. page 9. If so, how was it that the same means
viz. personal Catechizing and familiar Instruction from the same spirit, that
led into miscarriages and to wrong men and Christ as you do, did not kill that
killing Ignorance in the time of the Pope, Prelates, Episcopalls, and old
outcast (or) rooted out Bishops, whose branches from that body (are you)? and
did not they set people on the same work, and to use the same means as you do?
(which did not kill it, etc.) they set them to get the Creed as you call it,
and the same Creed as you do, and the Lords prayer, ten Commandments, and
those Catechismes which they as well as you call Orthodox Catechismes, and
their old Expositers as you do, and yet the killing Ignorance is unkilled
amongst you their offspring, that grows a little more into subtilty, and gets
words to talk of, and sets people to get a few words, by you [summed together
to talk of] but are out of the life of them: and are in pride, coveteousnesse,
vain glory, self conceitednesse, Error and Heresies, persecution and commiting
abomination in as high a degree as your forefathers did, though under a
refined subtilty, who pretends much in words, but brings forth the same evil
fruits from the same old birth, and evil Spirit as they [and such did] that
drew near to God, Isa. 29.10.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Isa. 59.23, 4. etc.
with their mouths, and lips, when their hearts were far from him: and
devising mischief, and bringing forth cruelty, and wickedness like you, and
your hearers that are asleep or in the sleepy security, and in Ignorance, in
sin unturned to God, and you their teachers neglecters of the work of God and
in the miscarriages, wrongers of them and of Christ, as you say; and yet, in
your self commendation, you are not ashamed to call your selves the Lords
laborers, when you are wrongers of him and the people; and neglecters of his
work, also living in the miscarriages: and where you tell of a land of light,
and a garden; you are found to be out of both, and in darkness, and the field
of wickedness, in whose hearts the miscarriages and weeds grows: and where you
say, The Lord has not dealt so with every Nation? I say, Mark. 7.21.22*22.
Romans 1.28, 29* etc.
not so much yet: as to discover to the inhabitants their teachers abominations
and miscarriages, and cause their own mouths to utter, and their pens to write
the same against themselves, and their fruits to confirm it, as in this Nation
you and yours does, and has done, which is but the forerunners or first
discovered, and so much made manifest before other Nations, who have not yet
heard and seen what we have done. Most of the world you say, page the 17. do
lie in the darkness of, Heathernisme, Idolatry, Infidelity, and
Mahometanisme; and too much of Christendom in the darkness of Popery and
Heresy. True all the world lies in wickedness I say, and so says the
Scriptures I Joh. 5.19. but we know that we are of God, and you (in that
wickedness and Popish darkness) that are in the miscarriages are of the
world, etc. And what can Heathenisme, Idolatry, Infidelity, Mahometanisme,
Popery, and Heresy, (though by pretended Christians) bring forth more against
the honor of God, etc. then to live in the miscarriages, keep alive in killing
ignorance, wronging both men and Christ, and neglect the work of God, according
to his word, etc. growing worse and yet run further from God (as you do) and if
Papists, Idolaters, Infidels, Mahometans, and Heretics can bring forth
nothing more against the honor of God, (and destruction of souls) then to live
in killing ignorance unkilled, and in miscarriages unpardoned, and in sin
unturned to God, in sleepie security, wronging both God and men, and neglecting
the work of God according to his word, growing worse and running yet further
from God: then you and your hearers are found in the same, and so agreeing in
that old nature from whence arises negligence, miscarriages, Idolatry;
Popery, Infidelity, Heathenisme, and Mahometanisme, Heresy, etc. and being
out of the new birth in the old, and guided by that nature and Spirit, do you
not with Heathens, Popes, Turks, Heretics, and Infidels agree in the maine
for they can but live in the miscarriages, asleep in security, works of
darkness, in sin unturned to God, and in killing ignorance unkilled,
neglecting the work of God according to his word, to wrong Christ and men,
growing worse and running futther from God, which you and your hearers are
found in, and does the same as your fruits and book (called Agreement) does
against you stand witness, etc. and here (by your fruits spirits and your
words) you are left amongst your own (with infidels, idolaters, Popes, Turks,
and Heretics) that are of the old birth and wicked seed, out of the way of
salvation, neglecting Gods work, and persecuting or doing the work of the
Devil, in a high measure, amounted so high as to turn wrongers of Christ and
of men, and so are deceivers of souls, and therefore instead of a pardon,
expect judgment and greater condemnation, like such, Mark. 12.38.39.40. and
Math. 23.31.32, 33. etc. Behold! are you not left desolate, being shut out of
Christ's Ministry, and from amongst Christians, and are in the nature of Popes,
Papists, Idolaters, Infidels, Heretics, and the Mahometans, etc. that are
upon the same evil root, living on the evil tree, and bringing forth the
evil fruit, though you differ in some words and Colorable Glosses, Math.
7.15.16.17.18.16.20. Isa. 29.14.15.16.
you are of the cursed root, and bears that fruit that is a^cursed, and can
deceive none but the deceived, such as are of that evil seed, bearing evil
fruit, who are strangers to the new birth, and without the true knowledge of
the living God, and now your vizors or covers are too narrow, and all your
garnishing and Colorable Glosses will not mask nor hide you, Act 20.28.33.34.
ver. Act 26, 26. 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.7. 1 Pet. 5.1.2.3. 2 Cor. 6.3.4 5.6.
but leaves you naked and bare; In that which you call your Warrant; you say,
the Holy Ghost made you overseers, etc. but you have proved your selves liers,
for the Holy Ghost makes those overseers that do not neglect the work of God,
and such as are out of miscarriages, that shun not to declare the Counsel of
God freely, and covets no man's Silver nor Gold, who are not persecuters nor
wrongers of God, but such as are blameless as the stewards of God, etc. Tit.
1.7. But you that are wrongers of men and of Christ, and neglecters of the work
of God (according to his word) growing worse, and running yet further from God,
2 Cor. 41.2. 2 Timothy 3.10, 11.12.13.16.17. 1 Th^s. 4.7.
you never were made overseers by the Holy Ghost, and therefore you have lied
of or against the Holy Ghost, and so are liers against God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, for in page. 3.4. you tell of your unfaithfulness or
negligence, and are bewaileing the same, as you say, and wanting a pardon, and
yet you confute your selves in uttering your lies, for your own ends, where you
are seeking your praise in that, called your Exhortation, etc. page 17.18.19.
etc. Saying, it has pleased the Lord of the Harvest to send forth laborers
into this part of his Harvest, though you confess too weak and imperfect, yet
more numerous, and faithful, and diligent, then most of his Churches
elsewhere, proportionably can show. That God has sent forth laborers into his
Harvest, is true; and they are strengthened by him to labor against your
deceit, and they are both diligent and faithful in his work, who neither
wrong Christ nor men: but if you mean that you are those laborers or would
have people to believe that you are; your own words and fruits do witness
against you, that you ave not laborers in the Lords Harvest, nor sent by him,
that are neglecters of his work; and in miscarriages not pardoned for the
same, and then not sent: neither are you faithful and diligent, that are in
the miscarriages, and negligent, your own words are your contradictions, and
self confutations, and if ignorance be the cause that thousands perish; if
your people perish, are not you the cause of it? that has your people in such
ignorance; that though they can talk understandingly about the matters of the
world, yet they can scarce speak a word of sense about the matters of
salvation as you say, ( page 19.) and upon the experience of their ignorance,
you have been b^ought to consider of your negligence, and to know how you have
wronged Christ and them, in fear least God should require their blood at your
hands: though you would put off with flatteries and excuses; be sure the Lord
will call you to a swer before his judgment seat for it; your trial is not
yet past: and your pardon you have not, and where you say he has wonderfully
dispelled (or expelled) the mists of Popery: I answer yea that he has, and
therefore those that dwell in his light sees you in those mists undispelled,
that are such deceivers and wrongers of men and of Christ, page 18.19. and you
say many of Gods servants have laid down their lives in flames in witness
against it, I answer so they have; but what is that to you that are in the
miscarriages and wronging Christ and men, growing worse and running (as you
say) yet further from God, etc. who are casting or causing to be cast into
Prison, and persecuting the Lords faithful witnesses, that are sent to
witness against your deceipts, and gaainst all the Popish mists of darkness,
in which mists and darkness are such as are wrongers of God and men, in the
heresis and miscarriages as you are, who being in that mist of darkness and
the miscarrying nature, which has taught you to lie against God and his work (
page 18.) saying, he writes his law in the hearts of his living witnesses
imperfectly. I say you are ignorant of the living witnesses; being your selves
dead branches and persecuters of his living witnesses, as the filling of your
Prisons and cruel usage at worcester, Evesham, Banbury, Oxford, Northampton,
and other places may witness, which persecution and cruelty (proceeds from
that Popish mist, or the miscarring nature) being works of darkness and are
reproved by us Ephesians, 5.11. and as you have showed your ignorance of the
living witnesses in whose hearts the law of God is written, so have you showed
that you are ignorant of the writeing of the law in the heart, and ignorant of
the law written therein, that accounts the work of God an imperfect work,
and accounts God to be an imperfect writer of the law in the heart. If he
have written his law in the heart of his living witnesses imperfectly as you
say, who must perfect it? would not you be the perfecters of it? or make people
believe in you to do it, who are the transgressers of it, being in the
miscarriages growing worse, etc. And, as you say you are wrongers of men and of
Christ; so are you wrongers of God himself, that calls his work an imperfect
work, and accounts God himself to be an imperfect worker, and to do his work
imperfectly; when he is a perfect worker and his works are perfect, and so does
he write his law perfectly in the hearts of his faithful living witnesses, as
both they and the Scripture bear a true testimony, though yours be false and
not true (therein). And here I charge you (42 Priests Teachers, Pastors,
Ministers, Rectors,) in the presence of the Lord to be false witnesses, and
liars against God and his work, and his law which he writes perfectly in the
hearts of his living witnesses, as the Scripture witnesses, Jer. 31.33. Heb.
8.10.11. The Lord is a perfect worker, and his law is perfect, so does he write
it perfectly, to do its work: Give ear o ye Heavens and I will speak says the
Lord God (whose words witnesses against you, and all false witnesses that are
known by your false testimony, therefore says he) hear o earth the words of
my mouth. Deuteronomy. 32.1.2 my doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall
distill as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herbs, and as the
showers upon the grass, because I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe
ye greatness unto our God, He is the Rock, his work is perfect, Deuteronomy. 32.34.
As for God, his way and work is perfect, the word of the Lord is tried, he is a
buckler to all those that trust in him: for who is God save the Lord, or who is
the Rock save our God? It is God that girdeth me with strength, faith David,
and makes my way perfect, Psa. 18.30, 31, 32. And this the living witnesses,
in whose hearts the law of God were perfectly written, witnesses, against you
42 false witnesses, that says It is imperfect; but your folly is made manifest
(as well as your false testimony) in your Agreement.

But this is but like thy former writing, Richard Baxter (in that deceitful
book of thine which James Nayler answered in print, as I did in writing, and
sent to have come to thee, before I knew of the printing of thine, or James his
answer to that called the Quakers Catechism) wherein thy deceit was (to some
purpose) made manifest, in which thou poured forth the venom and filth out of
thy old bottle: And did thou not say that when (such as you) the Ministers
were overtaken with a lazy fit they could preach without study, as well as a
woman fit for the gumble stool: and has not the lazy fit overtaken thee, and
you 42 Ministers, that you have declared your laziness or negligence, and
preached in your Agreement (or therein declared) your ignorance of God and the
truth, and of the law in the heart, perfectly written in the heart, by the true
and perfect writer of the same, in his faithful witnesses, who bears
testimony against your deceipts and filthiness, which you daily make
manifest, who (as you say) grow worse, and are running yet further from God.

You say in your Agreement, page 26. that repentance is a through turning from
the flesh and the world to God, etc. then they that thoroughly turn from the
flesh and the world to God, they turn out of imperfection unto perfection: and
art not thou here in words become a Preacher of that which thou Richard Baxter
in thy book called the Quakers Catechism, there, called the doctrine of the
Devil, for thou called the doctrine of perfection in that book the doctrine of
the Devil: and here, in thy agreement thou Acknowledged covertly that which
thou therein denied openly, and says in that called your Warrant that you are
to present every man perfect, etc: And if it was the Devils doctrine to preach
perfection; and the Papists dung to feed on, as therein (to wit the book
called the Quakers Catechism) thou said it was: Then art not thou either
denying in your agreement, what in the other thou asserted, and so art thy own
confuter and self contradicter; or else if thou do not so, do not thou now
preach that which thou therein said, the Devil bred, Christ detested, and none
that had any spark of true grace ever believed or received. And besides, do
not thou endeavor to feed people with it which thou therein called the papists
dung? Consider well of it, and where thou said in thy scorn, when you have
rubbed your eyes give us leave to smell the Pope in your endeavors; but now
behold thou thy folly, and that Popish mist or darkness, which thou art in,
how it has blinded thy mind, and led thee into self contradictions; and to
manifest the mote thy confusion who art speaking thou knows not what, but by
imagination that art not yet to repentance come, and therefore art very unfit
to preach Repentance or Perfection
either: for if repentance be (as thou says and the 41 more in consent and
approbation with thee) in that Agreement (viz) a through-turning from the flesh
and the world to God, page 26. then you are not yet come to repentance, that
are not thoroughly turned from the world, and the flesh unto God, but are in the
world and the sleshin the miscariages and negligence, page 3. and 4. and
wrongers of men and of Christ, page 19. Therefore behold your folly made
manifest, 2 Timothy 3.8.9. who say you grow worse and so it appears (and that you
are in confusion) and that is a clear Character to know evil men and seducers
by, as the Scripture says; for they shall grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3, 13.

And remember, Richard Baxter, in thy book of slander called the Quakers
Catechism thou did not only slander us and all the Saints and servants of
God and Ministers of the Gospel (to prove thy self to be none of them) but
thou also slandered God himself, and Christ his Son: as well as in thy
Agreement thou says thou have wronged both Christ: and men, and yet continues
therein (growing worse and running on) a though thou use words of flatteries to
make Colorable Glosses for thy own ends, yet art thou comprehended and seen,
as in thy other thou was* who wronged God and Christ, and all the Saints and
Ministers of the everlasting truth and Gospel of God, (showing thy self to be
ignorant of them, etc:) for thou said the doctrine of perfection was bred by
the Devil, thou believed: and here thou art reprobate concerning the faith
that stands in the power; where thy entising words are shut out and all the
deceivers: for God himself bred or brought forth first that doctrine of
perfection, and not the Devil as thou have said. And here Richard Baxter I
charge thee in the presence of God to be a false witness against the eternal
truth, and also to be a slanderer of the truth, and art against God himself,
who first preached that doctrine of perfection, viz. the doctrine of sinlesse
perfection, and said to Abraham when he appeared to him at the age of 99.
years, or when Abraham was 99. years old, and preached the doctrine of
perfection unto him, when he promised to make a covenant with him, and multiply
him exceedingly: he said unto him at that appearance and in his doctrine, I am
the Almighty God walk before me and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1.

But Abraham did not cross the doctrine of perfection preached by the Almighty
God, (at 99. years old) and say, he could not be perfect; as many of the
Priests disciples and such in the old nature of miscarriages (like you) do now,
that say you cannot be perfect (though God and Christ commanded it) neither did
Abraham say that the doctrine of perfection was a doctrine of the Devil, or
first bred by him as thou Richard Baxter has said (in the book called the
Quakers Catechism) but art without proof for the same; Genc. 17.1. Math. 5.48.
and have thou not called the doctrine of Almighty God the doctrine of the
Devil? and besides have thou not called the Almighty God (a Devil) as the
Jews, chief Priests, and such in thy nature called Christ a Beelzebub or
Prince of Devils, in that wicked slander of thine? where thou said thou
believed the doctrine of perfection was first bred by the Devil, Joh. 8.48,
49.50, 51, 52, 53. Mark 3.22.
when it was first bred or brought forth and preached by the Almighty God
himself: and how will thou clear thy self from the sin against the
Holy Ghost, who art not a wronger of men only, but of God and Christ, also? and
now has in thy Agreement with the 42. Priests, Ministers, Pastors, Teachers,
and Rectors, (under a cover appeared and) confessed the same, to wit, thy wrong
to Christ and to men, and so to God himself, and is here made manifest, etc.
And you say, you are growing worse and running yet further from God: then you
do not amend, but bears the marks of evil men; and seducers (as the Scripture
says) which shall wax worse, and worse deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy
3.13.
as may be read, 2 Timothy 3.13. so fulfilling the Scripture therein.

And again, that doctrine of perfection was preached (but not bred by the
Devil as thou says) where it is given forth by command saying, Thou shall be
perfect, with the Lord thy God, Deuter. 18.13. And, the way of the Lord is
perfect, Psalm. 18.30. his law is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. his work is perfect,
Deuteronomy. 32. and God himself was the Preacher of the doctrine of perfection, Genesis
17.1. and also did command it, Deuteronomy. 18.13. then it was neither the breeding
and bringing forth of the Devil: nor the Papists dung (as thou, Richard
Baxter, has said) except thou would dare to call the Almighty God by the name
of the Devil, and his truth and doctrine (by him brought forth preached and
commanded to be walked in) by the name of the Papists dung: Jam. 2.7.
and if so, then behold thy blasphemy, as well as the Popish mist of darkness
which thou art in, to wrong God himself and both Christ and men.

And as thou said in that book called the Quakers Catechism, thou believed
the doctrine of perfection was bred by the Devil the greatest sinner, and
detested by Christ, and never believed in heartily by any man that knew
himself, or had any spark of true grace or Christian experience, etc. page 24.
Here thou have done wrong to Christ and the Saints, and to the Ministers of the
everlasting truth, and Gospel of salvation, and thy sayings as aforesaid
agrees against thee, with thy false confession, wherein thy lies are fastened
upon thee, and thou art confirming them in that Agreement of you 42. Priests,
Ministers, Pastors, Teachers and Rectors, wherein you say you are in the
miscarriages unpardoned, page the 4. and wrongers of Christ and men, page the
19. and therefore growing worse, and running yet further from God, it is no
marvel that you preach against the doctrine of perfection, which is the
doctrine of the Father and the Son.

For as God himself preached the doctrine of perfection, and said to Abraham,
Walk before me and be thou perfect, and said to the Children of Israel, Thou
shall be perfect with the Lord thy God, Christ himself did did not detest it,
(as thou says he did) for he was so far from detesting it that he highly
approved of it viz. the doctrine of perfection, and when he was upon the mount,
he so far showed his love, estimation, and true approbation of it that he (
viz. Christ himself) did preach the same and gave it forth by command upon the
Mount to his Disciples, saying, Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is
perfect: Math. 5.48.

And here thou have wronged Christ and lied against him, saying, he detested
it: thou blind guide, and false accuser of the truth; behold thy absurdity! If
Christ had detested the doctrine of perfection as thou says, would not thou
have had him to have gone against the command of the Father? and to have
detested his own doctrine? but none will believe thee, except the wilful
blind, and such as are wrapped up in deceit with thee, and hereby instead of
ministering, and maintaining the truth, thou have both ministered and maintained
lies, slanders, and deceits, and wronged Christ: therefore art thou no Minister
of his.

And if the Devil should have bred the doctrine of perfection, would not he
have bred a doctrine against himself, to have rooted out his own Kingdom? But
are not you and the Devils disciples so much against that doctrine that you
labor with all your skill to preach it out; Genesis 17.1. Math. 5.48. Joh. 14.20.
2 John 9. Joh. 14.15. 1 John 5.3, 4. 1 John 2.3, 4.5.6. Joh. 14.23.24.
and keep it for taking place in the peoples hearts? and is there any that are
against the doctrine of perfection (which is the doctrine of the Father and the
Son) but such as are against the Father and the Son, and as you are, who are
wrongers of Christ and men; and do not all those that deny the doctrine of
perfection, deny the doctrine both of God and Christ and so are neither
Gospel Ministers, nor true Christians; seeing they both do command it: and he
that loves Christ, keeps his command, but such as love him not keeps not
his command, and so are out of his doctrine, and without God, 2 John 9. in the
iniquity and self separation, and in sin unturned yet to God, Isa. 59.1, 2.
and yet in the Heresies, Errors, and Miscarriages, in the killing ignorance
unkilled, filthy dreamers that defile the flesh, or in the sleep of security,
wronging Christ and men, as in your Agreement you confess you do, and says you
grow worse and are running yet further from God: and so it appears.

And as thou, Richard Baxter, ministers against the Father and the Son, and
have wronged them; so have thou wronged the servants of God, and Ministers of
Christ, and all the Saints and Sons of God: saying the Devil thou beleives
bred the doctrine of perfection, and saying Christ detested it, when God
Almighty bred or brought forth the same, and both he himself and Christ his
Son, did not only bring it forth and preach it; but commanded it to be obeyed
and walked in: and thou says thou beleives that none that had any spark of
true grace did heartily believe in or receive the same: and so hereby with thy
false doctrine or reprobate faith thou would exclude all from grace that
received the doctrine of perfection, viz. the doctrine of God and Christ; and
so the doctrine of the Father and the Son: but let me tell thee, that such as
does not transgress but abide in the doctrine of Christ they had and have
grace, for they had both the Father and the Son, eternal life, and the holy
unction abiding in them; and this the Scripture with me does stand a witness
against thee and thy lies, false doctrines and deceipts, and let those that
please read 2 John* 9. 1 John 2.20, 27. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. and 20. verses. to
be witness for them that had grace (and received the same) against thy false
testimony and lying Spirit by which thou art acted and guided.

Also several of the servants of God received the fathers doctrine in the time
of old, viz. the doctrine of perfection and walked in it, and would thou
exclude them all from grace? What a devilish doctrine is thine, and cross unto
the Scriptures, and contrary to the true Gospel ministers? Therefore is both it
and thee that brings it for to be holden accursed. Gal. 1.8, 9.

Noah was not without grace, and he received the doctrine of God the Father, and
were accounted perfect in his generation: who found grace in the eyes of the
Lord: and being a Just and a perfect man he received the doctrine of the Father:
and walked with God, Genesis 6.8, 9. Abraham was not without grace, and he
received the doctrine of perfection, taught him by God almighty: when he
appeared to him when he was 99. years old, etc. And God blessed him, and made a
covenant with him, Genesis 17.1. Genesis 6.18. etc. Job 1.8. Heb. 13.20, 21.
as he did with Noah: and they both had experience of his goodness, and found
favor in the eyes of the Lord: Job 1.8. was not without grace, and he were
accounted a perfect and an upright man, being one that feared God and eschewed
evil, as the Lord has said. King Hezekiah was not without grace, and
experience of the Lords goodness who walked before him in truth and with a
perfect heart, and did that which was good in his sight, 2 Kings 20.3. And
David that said, Mark the perfect man, for the end of that man is peace, Psalm.
37.37. was not without grace, and he exhorted or rather commanded his* Son
Solomon to serve the Lord with a perfect heart: 1 Chronicles. 28.8, 9. And, as David
said, The way of God was (and is) perfect, Psalm. 18.30; So Solomon says that
the path of the Just is as a shining light, that shines more and more unto the
perfect day, and they are not without grace that walk therein: Pro. 4.18.

Christ, the way to the Father, Joh. 14.6. and to salvation to all that obey
him Heb. 5.8, 9. he commands to be perfect, Math. 5.48. And his command ought
to obeyed: his ministry is to lead to a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. The
ministers of the Gospel preached wisdom amongst them that were perfect, 1 Cor.
2.6. And as many as are perfect be thus minded Phil. 3.^5. that the man of God
may be perfect, 2 Timothy 3.17. to press others on to perfection Heb. 6.1. that
they may attain Heb. 12.22, 23. And the God of peace make you perfect, says
the minister of the Gospel to them he ministered unto, and exhorted to go on
unto, it. And another of the Gospel ministers said to them he ministered unto,
The God of grace make you perfect, 1 Pet, 5.10. Go on to perfection, Heb. 6.
finally my brethren farewell, and be perfect, 2 Cor. 13.11, says the Embassad
or of Christ, Having these promises cleanse your selves from all filthiness of
flesh and of Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord. And Christ
prayed to his Father for those that were given to him that they might be made
perfect in one, Joh. 17.23. And all these had grace and Christian experience,
that both received the doctrine of perfection, and walked in it: and some
preaching it, and some pressing after it, and some attaining it; their words
and fruits and the Spirit by which they were guided, [who had grace, and
Christian experience, with such as received the doctrine of the Father and the
Son having grace and abiding therein] does witness against thee Richard
Baxter, and thy false doctrine, who garnisheth thy self with their words and
calls them thy Warrant from God, when thou and you 42. Priests are without
their life and not in their practice, but are in your miscarriages, wronging
others, and growing worse, etc. Therefore are you without your warrant from
God, and are none of Christ's ministers, but enemies of the truth, and are
against the doctrine of the Lord Jesus, but you are made manifest and your
deceit and false doctrine is denied by the Children of Light, and in and with
it, you are reproved and against testified.

You say you receive the public maintenance to this end, that you may be
enabled to lay out your endeavors for the good of the whole parishes from
which you do receive it, etc. page 13. of your Agreement.

But have you not made it manifest, to have received the public maintenance of
your parishes and whom you receive it for your evil endeavors, that are men of
miscarriages unpardoned, growing worse and running further from God, whose work
is by you neglected according to your own sayings: and your people
understanding little you have said (or many years preached to them) who can
scarce (as you say) speak a word of sense concerning the matters of their
salvation and here you are witnesses against them for their Ignorance, etc. as:
well as you are witnesses against your selves for your miscarriages and wrong
done to Christ and them: and is not your negligence one chief cause of their
Ignorance, and Ignorance the cause of destruction, and for runner of eternal
perdition? who say you have wronged Christ and them, page 19. Therefore may it
not be concluded from your own confession, that you are a chief cause of souls
destruction: and by your confusion have you not run into self-contradictions,
and makes it manifest, that you take the public maintenance of your parishes,
not for good endeavors but, for your miscarriages, and so for evil endeavors;
who has not profited the people that are so Ignorant of the work of God and
their souls good, that they can scarce speak a word of sense in matters of
salvation, as you say, and you are the wrongers of them and of God according to
your own sayings, and so deceives souls for your own ends: but the Lord has
shaken his hand against your dishonest gain: and such as through covetousness
makes merchandise of people: Ezekiel. 22.12, 23.
your Judgment of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not
that (with you) are such: as you may read: 2 Pet. 2.3, 13* 14, 15.

But let me ask you, From whence you and those that pretend themselves
ministers of the Gospel, who receives Tithes or Hundreds a year etc. took
their first example? and by whom to receive Tithes, by compulsion, and that
which they and you call their public maintenance, etc. had you your example so
to do from the practice of the Apostles of Christ, Observe, Though Priests was
very scant after the (rot or) pestilence spoken of, in the time of Edw. 3. yet
then the parish Priests, was not by any manner of color to receive above 6.
marks wages by the year (without the Bishops dispesnation and suspension and)
and the pain of people of holy Church so called giving above 5. or 6. Marks
wages a year to a Parish Priest, they was to pay the doubble of that which they
gave more to any parish priest then 5. or 6. Marks wages in the year: and it
was to be converted to the use of Alms at the arbitrament of the Diocesan,
etc, Anno. 36. Ed. 3. Chap. 8.
or from the constitution and decretall epistle of the Pope etc. For the
ministers of Christ, had no command to take Tithes nor hundreds a year for
preaching the Gospel, but freely they received and freely they gave according
to Christ's command.

And I read in the law of England, that Tithes after the Apostles time were
free: for the people was not bound to pay them so far as I see, till the
Council of Lateran in Pope Innocents time: and then by his constitution and
decretall epistle, etc. the Tithes, it seems, became bound, etc. and were to be
paid by the subjects of the Realm: and so came Parochial rights, (as they call
them) etc. to the Priests or Patrons of the Churches, so called: Then it is
clear to me that you have your ground to take Tithes and maintenance of the
World, for preaching: etc. not from the Apostles practice and order, but from
the Popes, etc. And that mist of Popish darkness is not so far dispelled (or
expelled) from you, as to cause you to forsake the Popes Constitutions: or your
Tithes and maisteries and follow the example of the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ; and to leave your Miscarriages, great parsonages: and give over
wronging God and men for your own ends, and to deny your selves and your
preaching for filthy lucre, and cease bearing rule by your means: And if any
of you receive the word and command from God, become servant to all and
minister freely as the ministers of the Gospel (who dwelt and dwell in the
Light) do and afore-time did: but before you do so, you must turn from the
broad way, where the Lust, Pride, Pomp, Covetousness, earthly-mindednesse,
and vain glory of the world has so much liberty in you: and cease persecution,
take up the cross to your wills: Learn to know the bridle for your tongues:
And let the Issue of lies, and slanders be stopped, etc. that the stone may be
set upon the neck and head of deceit.

Cook in his second part Institutes says, Before the Council of Hateran,
Tithes were free or (then) any man might have given his Tithes to what
spiritual person he would, and it was provided at the Council (of Laterean)
etc. that Tithes etc. should be given to the Rector or Parson of the parish,
etc. (under pretense) that he that gave spiritual food should reap temporal, so
far as I gather: see Cooks second part Institute about fol. 641. Here the
Popes and their Priests, Rectors, etc. it seems (like you) they could call
themselves spiritual men and Ministers, Rectors, etc. as you do, and they
claimed or took Tithes and public maintenance under pretense of Ministering
spiritual things as (you and) their off spring from that succession now do,
when they was carnally minded, etc. as you are.

And Tithes by a decretall epistle of Pope Innocent the 3. dated at Lateran
directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. in or about the year 1200. It
is said by Cook that then Tithes became lex terrae and the subject, became
bound to pay them etc. Cook saiths that of Ancient time before a new
Constitution made by the Pope, the patron of one Church might grant his Tithes
to another parish: and says Cook, second part Institutes, thus began portion
of Tithes, that the parson of one parish has in another: vide Concilium
Leteran. Anno Domini 12 15.17. of Jo. regis.

So that Tithes it seems were free for any man to give etc. till the time of
Pope Innocent* and were they not then divided into portions to the Priests, and
Rectors, etc. from Pope Innocent the 3? For since, says Cook, that which is
called parochial right of Tithes were established, etc. And Pope Innocent by
his Bull discharged those of the order of Praemonstratenses of the payment of
Tithes of such lands as were of their own manurance, or other Improvement: and
Pope Adrian the 4. said, all Orders should pay tithes, etc. And so it appears,
Tithes sprang up the second time by one Pope: and so from one to another: and
did not they spring from the Popes to the Bishops, Rectors, and those parish
Priests: Consider well of it, and see if you know your succession. And had not
the Popes the ordering and rule amongst Tithes, and other things, till the time
of King Henry, 2 Hen. 4.28. Hen. 8. Chap. 16,
for says Cook by the statute of Henry 4. not only Cisterciences but all other
religious and seculars, which put any of the Popes bulls in execution for
discharge of Tithes of their lands, in the hands of their farmers, should be in
danger of a praemunire, as says Cook second part Institures.

And by the statute of the 28. of Henry the 8. Chap. 16. says Cook there it is
Enacted that all Bulls, Brieffes, Faculties, Dispensations, of what names
natures or qualities whatsoever they be of, had or obtained from the (Pope or)
Bishop of Rome or any of his predecessors, or by authority of the Sea of Rome,
etc. should from thence forth by that Act be clearly void, and never after
that, to be used admitted or pleaded, in any places, or Courts of this Realm
(as they had been, etc.) or any other the Kings Dominions upon pain contained
in the statute of praemunire, etc. See Cooks second part Institute Fol. 641.
and 652. etc.

And does it not appear hereby, that the Pope, etc. (that had begot Tithes by
his constitution, to be distributed into parishes by his decretall epistle, and
council, etc.) were himself thrust out of those Parochial rights of tithes,
(as he called them) which he had begot and by his constitution, and council
brought forth, etc. And as the Pope was thrust out of Tithes etc. in England,
did not the Bishops, Priests, Pastors, Teachers, Rectors, etc. their offspring
from that root enter in their stead, and was not they let into the same? And
being grafted or let in, did not they take the Popes places, and rewards, at
the hands of him that disinherited them, ( viz the Popes etc.)? Consider and
see where you are: And was not the Bishops, Priest, Pastors, Teachers, and
Rectors, etc. adorned or endowed (by Hen. the 8, etc.) with honors and
possessions (or with the Popes ornaments) viz. Tithes, oblations, obventions,
etc. And was they not said to be given to God and holy Church, etc. and to keep
them from corruption and sinister affection, etc. 24. of Henry the 8.12. Cap.

And seeing that Tithes etc. by the laws and statutes of this Nation, were
(said to be) given to God and holy Church, etc. And being that both by God and
the holy Church Tithes are denied as the Scripture under the Gospel
dispensation does witness; And seeing that the called Church of England the
body spiritual as they call it and by them called the spirituality, who
receive Tithes, are now found to be unholy, and not being free from corruption
(but pleads for sin and so for corrption for term of life, etc.) and sinister
affection; and stands in need of (the worlds) honors, and possessions to keep
them (which rather corupts them the more, and cannot nor does not keep them)
from corruption and sinister affection, for which end they ( viz. Tithes etc.)
are said to be given, as by the statute of Henry the 8. it appears: therefore
by the laws and statutes of England (it is clear to me that) the called
Priests, Ministers, Preachers, Rectors, etc. (which names you bear) who are
unholy and corrupt, etc. have no right to Tithes, etc. for by the laws of the
Nation, they are said to be given to holy Church, etc. and you are unholy* that
are in miscarriages, and neglecters of the great work of God (as you say): and
are mongers both of men and of Christ, growing worse and running yet further
from God, therefore you are unholy and corrupt, (and are not running for God,
that runs further from him as you say): and so are cut out of Tithes, and his
ministry by your own rule and confessions, etc. And now stop your mouths and
do not cry up your selves to be ministers of Christ and neither plead for old
Levi his right that neglects his work? Nor for any of the Saints privileges?
(Nor for Tithes from the law of the land) till you come out of Miscarriages,
and give over wronging Christ and men, and become holy, free from corruption
and sinister affection, 2 Timothy 3.11, 12. Heb. 11.36, 37, 38.
etc. And as you come off from the old rotten root, and out of the old nature
and be born again, etc. when you are made Christ's Ministers, you will deny your
Tithes, and maisteries, and be content with what he sees meet for you: and
instead of persecuting be persecuted: and suffer of the world, and that
generation which you are yet in union with, as the Ministers of Christ do now:
and aforetime did. Whose approbation etc. was not of the men of the world, but
of God 2 Cor. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 2. Cor. 11.23, 24, 25. etc.

And as you are neglecters of the work of God, page 3. and your selves in the
Miscarriages unpardoned, page 4. your hearers can scarce speak a word of sense
about the matters of salvation, 1. These. 1.1. 1 These, 1.1*
and you are wrongers both of them and of Christ, page 19. So you say there are
many untaught Children and families, page 29. Therefore you make it manifest,
that you are unholy, and corrupt, and that you are not the holy Church, who are
unholy and profain, teachers and people, and therefore have no right to that
which is said to be given only to God and the holy Church, which is in the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and both without corruption, and sinister
affection, whose ministry is free and not put to sale as yours is, which is not
the true Church but the false, whose Teachers are men of miscarriages wronging
Christ and men, growing worse, prone to do more evil as well as their people:
running yet further from God, and so themselves making manifest, or rendering
their ministry to be unprofitable and useless: and how should you choose but
have untaught Children and families where there is such untaught Teachers, and
men of miscarriages, etc: as you are?

And you may see what disorder you are in, now that you begin (as you say) to
be awakened. It does appear you were asleep in security, or in the sleepie
dreaming condition desiling the flesh, which Jude speaks of, and in sin
unturned to God, Jude, 7.8. Isa. 59.2.3.4.5, 6.
like those the Prophet Isaiah speaks of, (that saw it not before) and did not
the Lord send his servants to awaken you, and complain against you for it, and
for your own disorderlinesse first before you confessed the same (which since
you covertly have done) but when will you amend and return? for as there is
untaught Teachers men of miscarriages, and growing worse, etc. so is there
untaught Children and Families also in other places under the same professed
Ministry of yours: Children, howling and yelling like young bruites, casting
stones and dirt at Christians in the streets, and parents looking on,
countenanceing the same; and some of those untaught Children confessing that
there was of the magistrates also that did encourage them in it, and likewise
some of the Teachers has been heard to say, when boys stoned, and abused the
servants of Jesus (which were sent to declare against their deceipts) Let the
boys alone with them and they will order them etc. when they were stoning and
abusing the Babes and Lambs of God? And is not these boys, and untaught
Children, and familyes (you speak of) encouraged in their miscarriages,
unmannerlinesse, and misbehaviour, etc. both by their parents, as well as
Priests their teachers, and also by some of the magistrates? and does not those
that are the molt untaught Children and families, who lives in unmannerlinesse,
disorder, misbehaviour, and miscarriage, like you their teachers that therein
grows worse, and runs further from God; the most act with club and fist
(stoning and reviling) for you the Parish Masters and untaught teachers; and
are they nor a great help to you, and such as are in union with deceit,
(unmannerlinesse, misbehaviour, and miscarriages) to help to support the
Kingdom of darkness, and to help to carry on the work of Antichrist? but when
will you teach them better? or indeed how should they do otherwise, whilst they
have (and follow for their example) such untaught teachers, and men of
miscarriages, etc. that are the chief actors themselves in persecution, and
lives in miscarriages, growing worse therein, and wronging Christ and them, as
you say you do, and therefore the Scripture is fulfilled upon you, where it
says, The leaders of the people cause them to err, and they that are led of
them are destroyed, Isa. 9.16. For there is like Priests, like people as says
the Prophet, Hosea. 4.9. therefore the Lord will have no joy in their young
men, neither will he have mercy on their Fatherless, and widows, for every one
(In the miscarriages wronging Christ and men, growing worse and running further
from God, etc.) is an hypocrite and an evil doer, Isa. 9.16.17. like you the
blind leaders of them, and evil examples that causes them to err, who your
selves are in the miscarriages (as you say) wronging Christ and them, etc. And
so it is manifest as your Agreement does declare as well as your fruits, who
your selves say, (instead of amending and turning to God) you grow worse, and
run yet further from him, therefore may it not be concluded that the Lord will
have no joy in you, nor mercy on you; whilst you do so, who are the hypocrites
and the evil doers?

And you say, when you come to visit the sick, you would feign speak a word of
comfort to their departing souls [but dare] not do it, page 29. of your
Agreement: but had it not been more honest for you to have dealt plainly, and
say when you go to visit the sick, you would speak comfort to them but
[cannot] do it, because you were never appointed for it; being in the
miscarriages, and growing worse, and wrongers both of them and of Christ. But
you say, you dare not do it because you find them so carnal and ignorant,
therefore I say they are most like unto your selves, naturally dead in sin as
you say, prone to do more evil, daily growing worse, and running yet further
from God. Therefore as the people are carnal, Isa. 9.15.16. Hos. 6.9. Hosea.
4.9.
and ignorant, so are the Priests, and like unto like; being of one evil
nature, and guided by a wrongful Spirit: likewise your people they may see,
that though they fight with club and fist for you, yet you cannot help them nor
speak any comfort to them, when they are on their death beds, (and stand most
in need of you, if you could do them any good, but cannot) who in that
miscarrying nature and Spirit, by which you wrong Christ and them, never were
appointed for it.

And as your ministry has not profited them in their life time, so it is as
useless to them on their death beds, and yet you would not dare to take Wages
and Tithes, etc, of those that were and are so carnal and ignorant which you
cannot speak a word of comfort to on their death beds, because you want it for
them: and therefore you make it manifest that instead of preaching for the good
and comfort of souls, you preach for Tithes, and your own ends; and if they
perish, so that you have but your own ends accomplished, and earthly gain
advanced what matter you? even nothing at all; for when they are on their death
bed you come off with a shuffle, or a shifting trick, saying you dare not speak
a word of comfort to them, when indeed you cannot: but when did you say, you
durst not take Tithes, and hundreds a year (because your people are carnal
and ignorant) but you dare take that, though jour ministry profit them nothing,
neither in their lifetime nor at their latter end. Therefore it is high time
for (them) to look about them, and cease from you, that they may forsake the
evil, and turn to God the teacher of his people, and wait upon him* for
instruction, the manifestation festation of whose Spirit is given (to such as
obey him) to profit withal 1 Cor. 12.7. though your ministry be uncomfortable
useless and unprofitable, yet his is useful, comfortable, and profitable, and
also free without sale, and to be had without money or mony-worth, Isa. 55. Mat.
10. And you say page the 9. it is undeniable, that the everlasting perdition of
multitudes is caused by their ignorance: and I say are not you (the untaught
teachers) the cause of their ignorance, and then are not you guilty of the
blood and loss of those under you, and the souls of those multitudes, that
through ignorance go into perdition? whose negligence [and wrong done to God
and them] is a great cause of that ignorance, etc. Therefore you say you are
brought to a deep consideration of men's ignorance through your neglects, and
now you say you apprehend you have wronged Christ and them, page 19* but what
are they mended by your confession, if they go into perdition? and wherein do
you amend since your confession? but seeing your preaching to be useless or
profit (little or) nothing, but to deceive souls, keep people in ignorance,
and wrong Christ and them, you pretend that you will use some personal and
familiar Instruction, as a means to prevent that killing ignorance, Page the
9. and that you call Catechism, setting the people to get the Creed, Lords
prayer, ten Commandments, or any Orthodox Catechism, with your expositers:
the same means which has been used by Bishops, Prelates, Episcopals, your
Forefathers, if not by the Pope, and yet the killing ignorance is left
unkilled amongst your hearers, and you the untaught teachers: and when they
have followed you in that, you will leave them where they are, and so the
ignorance (being unkilled amongst you and them) is left and does remain, etc.

To the People, etc: that are put upon it, to get the Lords Prayer, Western
Creed, and Ten Commandments, etc: and are yet in sin unturned to God in the
self separation, Jer. 4.25.27.28, 29, 30, 31. Isa. 9.14.15 16, 17, Isa.
59.2.3, 4, 5, 6.
MInd the light in your consciences that reproves for sin and evil, Joh. 1.9.
Math. 5.20 Job. 3, 3.5. Ephe. 5.11.12.13. Col. 3.5.6. Joh. 8.12.
and obey that, to be led out of deceit, and filthiness, for if you get all
the words your Priests requires of you, and do not come to forsake the evil,
and embrace the good, and so witness the crucifying of the old nature, and be
borne of God, it will little or nothing avail: therefore mind the light of
Christ in your consciences that discovers ignorance, error, and miscarriages
to you, to follow the light, that thereby the ignorance may be killed or works
of the Devil destroyed, and you by following the light end Counsel of Christ
may be led out of darkness, ignorance and miscarriages, into the light of
life, Joh. 8.12. And remember that the Ambassador of Christ (2. Cor. 5.20.) the
Councellor that declared the Counsel of God, Acts 20.27. in his message and
counsel co the Church said to them, Pray with the Spirit and with the
understanding, etc. 1 Cor. 14.12.13, 14, 15, therefore when you pray and say
our Father and be not begotten by, and borne of the Spirit of God, how can you
pray with the Spirit and true spiritual understanding? for some are bastards
and not sons ( Heb. 12.8.) therefore if the bastards pray to God as their
Father they are without the true understanding, 1 John 5.20. and without the
true Spirit guiding therein, and though your 42 Priests, Pastors, Rectors, [and
untaught teachers and in the miscarriages] let you to act in your own wills;
and bid you get these words to say over, and some other which they have
gathered together, promising you salvation thereupon, and they themselves
without pardon for their wrong done to Christ and to you as they themselves
say, yet let me tell you, that the Lord Jesus has said ( Math. 7.20.21.) that
the tree is known by its (evil) fruits? wherefore says he, By their fruits
you shall know them: Math. 7.15. etc: and to you I say that the Lord Jesus has
said, that it is not every one that says, Lord Lord that shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven,
so that you may get words, and yet be without the life, and not one jot nearer
Heaven, and it is at postible for you and hypocrites and evil doers to get
words to repeat without spirit and true spiritual understanding, and live
still in the killing Ignorance in you unkilled, as before: though you may get
all the words, and have them ready to say over, which your Priests, and
Pastors, in their miscarriages [untaught teachers or Popish Rectors] has
imposed upon you, and yet for all that remain hypocrites, Bastards, and be
Ignorant both of the new birth: and out of the way to salvation: and yet ye may
say Lord, Lord, and use the words: saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, when
your hearts are from him, Isa. 29.13, 14, 15, 16. And may also for all that be
Bastards, ( Heb. 12.8.) and neither sons servants, nor Children of God, but
like such as Christ said was of their Father the Devil, and be for
condemnation as it is said, John 8.44. Matthew. 23.33. Mark. 12.38, 39, 40. And
yet may use scripture words: and be [Proud, Covetous, Persecuting, Envious,
Mat. 6.5. Mark. 12.38, 39, 40.
and] Children of the Devil, John 8.44. 1 John 3.15. Math. 4.5, 6. For all
that not being born of God; and being out of the eternal life: and without the
true spirit and spiritual understanding and also may be under the wrath of
God; And in a stare of condemnation, and being unrighteous shall be shut out of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and so go into perdition: take notice of that 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. Rev. 21.8, 17. Job. 1.6.7, 8, 9, Jer. 23.1. Jer. 21.30. Joh. 8.40, 41,
42, 43.44, 45.47, 48.


And it is possible for the Devil to preach the letter of the Scripture, in
his disciples, Proud, Covetous, Persecuting, and Self-seeking, Priests,
Pastors, and Rectors, and set people in the evil nature to get the same: and
not change it by repeating them over in the Miscarrying, and wrongful nature:
and being in the old birth and under the curse untaught of God, and without the
true spiritual understanding, or the good spirit guiding them, and may be for
condemnation for all that? Did not the Devil preach Scripture to Christ, when
he came to tempt him, and say, As it is written, etc. Matthew. 4.5, 6? Yet Christ
rebuked him knowing his voice: and said, Get thee behind me, or Go hence Satan:
Matthew. 4.10, 11. So ought all Christians to say to the Satanicall Ministers,
knowing their voice, and their fruits to be from the Serpent: that lives in
Miscarriages doing wrong to God and Christ, [as yours say they do] witness
their own words in their Agreement, page 4.19. etc. But when Christ reproved
Satan, and denied him, then he fled from him: who came to have wronged him, 2
Cor. 6.17. Math. 7.23. Ephesians. 5.11. 2 John 9.10, 11 2 Pet. 2.3. Jude 11.
as your teachers do him and you, but your duty is to deny them and bid them
depart, because they are Satanical for all their colorable glosses, being in
the miscarriages: charging God with an Imperfect work, page 18.19. of their
Agreement wrongers of him, of men, and of Christ his Son, but they are seen and
made manifest, and woe will be your portion (that knowingly in their deceits
joins with them and does uphold them) and did not the chief Priests or the
Devil in them, and in the Scribes and Pharisees, preach the letter of the
Scriptures, Isa. 9.15, 16. Isa. 3.11. Hos. 6.9. Joh. 5.39, 40. Isa. 2.12. Luke
20.12.19, 20, 21, 23, 27, 28, 45, 46, 47. verses
(but wanted the life of them) as your Priests do, who are wrongers of Christ
and of you, (as they say) and made use of it to tempt Christ withal: but they
and such like were and are for the greater condemnation, as Christ has said,
Mark 12.38, 39, 40. And does not the Devil now in the chief Priests,
Persecuters, Proud, Covetous, Envious ones, and their disciples, preach the
letter of the Scripture; and are out of the life of them, seeking honor one of
another, as the enemies of Christ did, that had the letter but wanted the life,
Joh. 5.39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44? And do not they make use of the letter that are
out of the life: and make use of it to oppose the naked truth withal? Do not
Proud ones preach the letter of the Scripture, and yet live in Pride, and
Coveteousnesse, or in union with the life of the Devil who is the King of
Pride, and enemy of all unrighteousness, etc. And does not the Devil in Proud
and Covetous ones, as well as Envious, and persecuters, etc. teach them to
wrest the Scriptures for their own ends, and to plead for pride, etc? under
such covers, (which are not with the spirit of the Lord) though the woe from
God be against them denounced, Isa. 3.11. Isa. 20 Isa. 30. 2 Pet. 3.16.
Isa. 30.1. etc. And does not the Devil in Covetous ones teach them to break
the command of God, which forbids covetousness? And does not the Devil in
Covetous ones and self-seekers, etc. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. etc. now in these latter
days teach them for their own ends, to make use of and preach the letter of
the Scripture, when they are transgressors of the commands of God, and
persecuting [and killing] the Innocent, for he that (persecutes and) Envies the
righteous seed, he is a murderer and is out of the life of the Spirit of God;
as faith the Scriptures, 1 John 3.22, 15: And so in the lust of the Devil,
Joh. 8.44. And in union with the Image of Pride; in proud flesh, and bowing to
it with capp and knee, as well as worship an Imaginary, and false worship: and
transgresses the commands of God, and therefore must drink deep of his wrath,
Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. And if covetousness is Idolatry, then both Covetous,
Priests, and People, are Idolaters, and therefore are they and all false
worshippers, and bowers to the Image of Pride, one in another; who are
persecuters of the righteous seed, both transgressors of the commands of God,
and out of the new bath, new nature, and out of the new Covenant and life of
God, and in old envy, Wrath, Lust, Self-Love, pride, vain glory? and then are
they not still in union with the life of the Devil, which evil fruits flows
there from? and does not the Devil in Pope, Papist, as well as in prelates,
persecuting, self-seeking Priests, Pastors Vicars, Rectors, and Proud painted
Antichristian Ministers, make use of, and preach the Letter of the Scripture,
being without the life of truth, and in the nature of the Devil? and are not
you (that are wrongers of Christ and in Miscarriages, etc.) and they, guided by
an evil spirit, Joh. 8.39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.52. verses
and in union with that evil nature, as the Jews and chief Priests, and such
was, that persecuted Christ Jesus? yet they preached the letter, and spoke of
Moses and the prophets, for their own ends, by the Spirit of the Devil, Joh.
8.39. and would not receive the truth nor forsake their Sins, Pride,
Will Worship, Self-love, Covetousness, Self-righteousnesse, vain glory, and
honor of the world: but refused to deny self, take up the daily cross, and
come unto the life, and power of truth: so that Christ complained against them
Joh. 5.40. and (letting their visitation slip) he wept over them: Joh. 5.40,
41, 42, 43, 44.
and therefore that you may come to understand the truth, and learn to pray and
preach aright; mind, to be obedient to the Light of Christ in your consciences
which reproves in secret for evil, and does convince you of sin, self
righteousness, unbelief, Pride, Covetousness, Persecution, the love and
honor of the world, unrighteousness and your Miscarriages, and of the wrong
you do to Christ and men: and as your duty is to depart from iniquity, so you
are to yield unto the light, and follow the same, that you may come out of your
miscarriages, and cease doing wrong to Christ and men: and forsake the evil of
your ways (by the light) discovered; cease to do evil, and learn of that which
is good, for to do well; which reproves you for the evil, that you may come out
of the wrong way unto the right, and know the power of truth manifested, and
Christ at work in your hearts and souls, destroying the Pride, Lust,
Covetousness, Self-love, vain glory, unbelief, and so all unrighteousness as
it is discovered to you: and also beget you [obeying and following the light]
into righteousness, pure unfeigned love, and out of the Hypocrisy, into the
faith unfeigned, and true patience [perfecting his work that it may posses^ your
soules] and dispossess impatience and distrust, that your souls may come into
joy and peace, through the working of the power of God killing sin and
quickening you by his spirit, begetting and bringing forth that which is pure,
holy, just and good, to be your rule and guide: as in such it is, where the
birth is known that is of the spirit of Gods then might you call him Father by
divine right, and so in truth and righteousness [with the spirit and true
spiritual understanding] might you pray with such a right: as of Christ are
taught, and are guided by the Spirit of God, etc. to say,

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy name, and then would you
hallow, and so Sanctify (the name of) the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready
thereby (without your Miscarrying priests) to give an answer to every man that
shall ask you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meeknes and fear, 1
Pet. 3.15. having a good conscience as the Saints and Children of God the
Father has, and aforetime had, 1 Pet. 3.16. in which the mystery of faith is
held 1 Timothy 3.9. and not in your Miscarrying nature, or a piece of paper from
your untaught teachers, that know not God, nor his eternal Living word: but
are wrongers (as themselves confess) both of you and Christ; and because they
transgress and abide not in the doctrine of Christ they have not God, 2 John 9.
but are under condemnation: condemned by that which their dark mind cannot
comprehend, and whilst they and you wrong men and Christ, and so regard
iniquity in your hearts, God will not regard your prayers, Psalm. 66.18.

And let those that use the words and say, Our Father. etc. learn to know
whether or no, they yet be Children and Sons of God. For if liars and wicked
ones say, Our Father which art in Heaven, they are in the Miscarriages; and
speak without understanding: And if Enviers,. Drunkards, Proud, and Covetous
ones, such as are persecuters and in the old nature, not born again, say, our
Father which art in Heaven; do not they show their Ignorance of their Father
[who has begotten them into Pride, Covetousness, Drunkenness, Lying, and
Dissembleing, Isa. 28. Mal 4. Romans 1.18 28.29. verses
and into all unrighteousness, and the perfection of wickednesse] and do they
not pray without understanding? for says Christ to such Ye are of your Father
the Devil, take notice of that: also read, John. 8.44. And know you not that
the unrighteous ones are shut out of the Kingdom of God* 1 Cor. 6, 9.10. And
the unclean, abominable, and liars shall not in any wise enter, as you may
read, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Rev. 21.8, 27. And remember that the Devil who is the
King of pride, and Father of the unfaithful, such as are neglecters of the
work of God, and they that are wrongers of men and of Christ, such as are in
the Miscarriages, Persecuters, and unrighteous, and the Father of liars, he is
cast down out of Heaven. Therefore when you that are such, prays as you say,
to a Father in Heaven, do you not pray without, (knowledge of your Father,
Math. 25.41. to the end Psalm. 9.17.
and so without) understanding, for the Devil is the Father of persecuters,
seed of evil doers, and of liars; do you not know that he is in hell, and the
wicked, as well as all that forgett God must be turned in thither, Psalm. 9.17?

And when you say, Hallowed be thy Name: such as do not sanctify the Lord God
in their hearts, do not hallow his Name; for to hallow is to sanctify, but
liars, swearers, cursed speakers, stoners, revilers, persecuters of the
children of God, and all covetous and malicious ones, and such as are in the
miscariages, wrongers of Christ and of men, etc. that lives and acts in
ungodliness, deceit and filthiness, dishonours the Name of the Lord, and
therefore they do not hallow it: but as James says, they blaspheme the worthy
Name (who have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect or persons) and
being out of the truth and partial, Jam. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
become Judges of evil thoughts: who despise the poor and oppress the saints,
and servants of God, drawing them before the judgment seat, and blaspheming
that worthy name, by which they are called, as it is written, Jam. 2.7. And do
you not know that when the name of the Lord is polluted and blasphemed, that he
is highly dishonored, and sore offended: and Christ Jesus has said, that the
sin of blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, neither in
this world, nor that which is to come; therefore look to it all that are such,
and you that lives in persecutions and miscarriages, who are wrongers of Christ
and of men, etc.

And when you say, Thy kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is in
heaven; I say, such as are in the miscarrying nature, and without the true
Spirit, and spiritual understanding, and wrongers of the Lord Jesus, how should
you know it, when and where it is both come and preached? for it consists not
in pride and vain glory, persecution, miscarriages, wronging God and men, and
eating and drinking to satisfy the lust, nor in unrighteousness; for that is
the kingdom of the devil, which consists therein. See if you know not that
kingdom come, and set up in your hearts (though you be strangers to the other).
And how can you believe that seek honor one of another, and does not deny your
wills, and worldly honors, etc. to seek the honor that comes of God only and
do his will, Joh. 5.44? Who instead of seeking his kingdom, and doing his will,
are doing your own, and seeking the kingdom of the world, and the
unrighteousness thereof, and not the kingdom of God which consists in
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, and not in the miscarriages,
persecution, and wronging men and Christ, and growing worse, etc.

And when you pray that the will of God may be done, on earth as it is in
heaven, see that you do his will as it is of you required, and bear not false
witness against any (the Lord does forbid it) nor envy in your hearts, that is
a killing and murdering; and the Lord is against it, Matthew. 19.18, 1 Ioh.
3.12.15. and if you do the will of God, persecution and lying will cease
amongst you: and so will the issue of slander and deceit be stopped, and if you
do the will of God, swear not at all, Iam. 5.11. then will oaths be cut off:
for remember that the Lord Jesus repealed oaths, Matthew. 5.34. And such as
swear, by the Lord shall be cut off, Zepha. 1.4.5. And lie not one to another,
Col. 3.9. then will truth take place: Do not oppress, nor use any defraud, nor
deceit: but do that which is altogether just, for this is the will of God, 1
These. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.

And if you would have the will of God done, it is his will that you should
obey him and deny your selves, and see that you do his will as it is required
of you; for he says, Let every one that names the Name of the Lord depart from
iniquity [and that is his will] 2 Timothy 2.19. He has so determined it in
heaven, left upon record in scripture, and witnessed to with that in your
consciences, which calls for purity and equity, and reproves for your
miscarriages sin and iniquity: but you, and such as you are, are ready to plead
for iniquity, and say, they cannot depart from it here in this life, etc.
though God requires it, and command it. And such as so rebelliously refuse to
do the will of God are in danger of being guilty of the sin against the holy
Ghost, and their case is dangerous that sins wilfully after grace received: who
refuse to do the Will of God, Heb. 10.26, 27.

And if you or any say, Who has resisted the will of God? I say there is a
question asked: and it is answered, that such as resists the holy Ghost,
resists the will of God: but the uncircumcised in hearts and ears, always
resists the holy Ghost, Acts 7.51, 52. Therefore [they in that nature who wrong
Christ and men, and lives in miscarriages, knowing the same and gain-sayes the
Counsel of God, in refusing to deny their miscarriages, but only tell of them
and the wrong they do to Christ and men, refusing to deny the same, and to
amend and make restitution to whom they have wronged, and cease wronging any,
and refusing to forsake the evil and cease persecution, to turn unto God, they
refuse to deny their wills, that they might obey the will of God, and
therefore] such are resisters of the will of God, as your untaught teachers
are, and the Jews in nature like them was: whom Christ would often have
gathered and they would not, Matthew. 23.27. therefore says he [ye that depart
not from Iniquity, Pride, Coveteousnesse, Vain-talking, foolish Jesting
will-Worships, the love and honor of the world, persecution and miscarriages]
ye will not come to me that ye might have life, Joh. 5.40.44. and says he, Why
call ye me Lord, and do not the things that I say? Luke 6.46.

And whereas you say, Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our
debts or trespasses, as we forgive our debtors, or them that trespass against
us, etc. I say, that they that Christ teaches to pray, and them that he taught
that prayer, and did him obey; exhorted others to do so: but when your wills
are crossed, are you not ready to destroy and devour such as crosses your wills?
and yet you pray sort your forgivness upon that account, and so if you do not
forgive others, you pray for no forgivness, according to that account: and if
you would have God to forgive you as you forgive others, see that you do
forgive them that trespass against you, or else if you seek revenge
(persecute, etc.) and do not forgive them, if they do trespass against you: do
you not pray that God may take vengeance of you, and not forgive you, when you
trespass against him; because you do not forgive them that trespass against
you, and prays for your forgivness of God, as you forgive men, and so when
you do not forgive them, you pray that God may not forgive you, but do to you
as you would do to them that offend and trespass against you: and you that do
not cease your persecution, and also forgive them that trespass against you,
you do not act according to the will of God, nor regard your own words, and
vows made to God in Prayer, and if instead of forgiving those that trespass
against you, you rather seek their destruction, and ruin; do you not pray
that God may destroy and ruin you, and to do by you as you think to do to
them, and is not all this according to your Prayer? Consider well of it, and If
you do not forgive them that trespass against you, does it not appear that
you are not of Gods elect, that you have not yet learned the doctrine of the
Apostles and of Christ; for says Christ to such as he taught, if you forgive
men their trespasses your Heavenly Father will forgive you, your trespasses,
Math. 6.15. And if you would follow that you might cease persecution,
quarrelling, and jangling, and put on, as the elect did and do, bowels of
mercy, humbleness of mind, long suffering, forbeareance, forgiving one
another; and if any have a quarrel against any, even as Christ forgiveth,
learn of him, and do ye so, for the elect, and such as are taught of him, and
abides in his doctrine, does so Col. 3.12, 13, and exhorts others to do the
same, but it appears that you, or such as do not so, viz. forgive them that
trespass against you in obedience to the will of God, and doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, you show thereby that you resist the will of God, and are not
of the elect, but out of both the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and does
it not plainly appear, that you and persecuters that wrongs God and Christ,
and are not yet forgiven, and therefore you do not forgive nor regard what you
pray for, as to perform your vows, etc. Therefore does your hypocrisy more
appear, and so you make use of the Scriptures only to talk of, and garnish
your selves withal (as the Scribes and Pharisees did) that you may oppose the
truth, and paint your selves with the words as they did, but comes not to the
life of truth to walk in, but are shut out as they was, and now it is manifest
for the light is risen and sprung up in the hearts of many, praised be the
Lord, and your deceits and deeds of darkness must be found out, and laid open
the Lord has his fanners and he will fifth the Nations, and the day declares
every man's work of what sort it is: and now the Lord looks for fruits, for that
tree is cursed that makes a great show in leaves and brings forth no fruit unto
Christ, as the fig tree was: read and understand if you can; I desire of the
Lord for you that you may, and to your soul's profit: but let the Serpent be
famished, dust is his meat, but the Father Almighty feeds his Children, and
their souls does taste of his Manna, and knows the daily bread, and the
sacrifice which is offered up, and is the living sanctified soul's nourishment,
and daily food; for which he is not only prayed unto, but also praised for:
glory and honor be to him for evermore.

And when you say, Lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from evil, for
thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever, Amen,

Concerning Temptation, etc.
I say, God does not lead into Temptation, neither does he tempt any with
evil, Jam. 1.13. but he suffers Temptations to come, that he may try his,
Joh. 1.12. and blessed is he that endures Temptation, for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him: but you are hardly sensible of a Temptation, who are asleep in security,
and ignorance, that can scarce speak a word of sense in matters of salvation,
as your teachers say, and in carnality (deep in the iniquity) or in sin
unturned to God, etc. but such as are convinced with the light of Christ in
their consciences; and are awakened out of security, having their minds turned
with the light from darkness, and sin toward God, to wait upon him, who are
taught by Christ the true Teacher of his, they are by him supported and taught
from a true sense how to pray, and they know that he whose the Kingdoms true
power and glory is, Math. 11.27, 28. who gives them rest, does teach them to
watch and to pray, that they by his power may be kept for entering into
Temptation, as they take his Counsel and abide therein, Heb. 2.18. who himself
was Tempted, Luke 22.28.
but did overcome, and did not enter into the same, Math. 4. who is the way to
lead out such as him follow ( Joh. 14.6. Joh. 8.12) and obey, Heb. 5.8.9. and
it is no sin to be Tempted, but to enter into the Temptation, which the rich
fall into, and are snared, for the love of money is the root of all evil, and
whilst you are coveting after that you are in danger of peirceing your souls
through with many sorrows, and to fall into perdition, as such did that erred
from the faith, 1 Timothy 6.9.10. therefore beware (any one that have set their
faces Sion-ward, wherever you are) of that, and give not way to that which
enclines to the Temptation, for the enemy both knows what to work upon and
how, as well as he knows what will receive him, therefore with the light that
lets you see the Temptation, let your minds be gi^t up, and stand in the cross
to that inclination which would entertain the Temptation, and abide in the
measure and proportion of faith, Romans 12.3.6.
Romans 12.3.6. and stand steadfast without wavering in that which supplies the
faith, as well as discovers Temptations: and there is the gift known, and
power given to resist the Devil, and judge the evil, and the increase both of
faith and patience will through the Cross and Judgment which crucifyeth the
lust be at work in your souls, and be support to you in time of trial, that
you may stand and be kept, as you in the Counsel of the pure light of Christ
wait and abide, for he is faithful who will not suffer you to be Tempted
above your measure, as you therein stand, but does and will with the Temptation
make away to escape, 1 Cor. 10.13. who is the deliver, for many are the
troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all (as he
did Paul, etc:) 2 Timothy 3.10.11, 12. though the unrighteous, and persecuters,
evil men, and seducers be ignorant of it, yet we know and are sure, that as the
Lord delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, and
punished them, condemning them with an overthrow, making them an ensample unto
those (like you the wicked, and persecuters, seed of evil doers now, and such)
that after should live ungodly, but the Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of Temptations (and afflictions) and how to reserve persecuters, seed of
evil doers, wrongers of Christ, and of men, (be they Priests and their
followers that lives in such miscarriages) and all the unjust unto the day of
Judgment for to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.4, 5, 6 7, 8, 9. Therefore all that are
not hardened, and seared in sin and iniquity, give ear to the cry of the
just, and depart from the evil of your Priests and your selves, and wait to
receive the teachings of God, that you may profit, sear the living dreadful
Lord God; stand in awe of him, and sin not, for the Lord has set apart him
that is godly for himself, Psa. 4.3.4. but the transgressors, shall be
destroyed together, the end of the wicked shall be cut off, Psa. 37.38.

And you that are wrongers of God, and men, in your miscarriages unpardoned for
the same, that sets people to get that which you call the Creed, you say you
believe in God the Father Almighty; and in Jesus Christ his Son, who suffered
under Pontius Pilate etc.

I say, that such as beleives in him, loves him and does not him wrong, it was
Pilate and the Jews that did him wrong, who loved him nor, and are not you
found in their nature, persecuting him in his Saints as Pilate and Herod did,
that are in the miscarriages (as they was) wronging Christ and men, and
therefore it is manifest how little you believe in him, or love him, such as
are wrongers of him, and liers against him, are out of the love and faith
toward him, but you confess you are wrongers of him, and therefore out of the
love and the faith, he that loves him keeps his sayings; but you neglect and
keep them not, and therefore you love him not, that are as you say neglecters
of his work, and wrongers of him, in the miscarriages growing worse, and
therefore you are out of his faith, and doing the work of your Father as
Pilate and Herod did. And thou Richard Baxter, art a grevious slanderer of him
as before is proved, that says he detested (his own doctrine, viz. the
doctrine of sinlesse perfection, Math. 5.48.) blush with your deeds of
darkness made manifest, who are out of the faith and doctrine of Christ, and
turned persecuters of his, and wrongers of him, but it is given to us and them
in his faith (not to persecute his, and wrong him, as you and infidels do) to
suffer for his names-sake, as well as believe in his name, as the Saints and
faithful in Christ-Jesus did, Phil. 1.29.30. and are nothing terrified by you
and our adversaries, Phil. 1, 28. though we have the same conflict as our
brethren had (that suffered under Pilate, the Jews and chief Priests that
crucified the just) and as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation abounds by Christ, 1 Cor. 1.5. knowing also that such as (you
persecute and cause to) suffer for his namesake (whom you confess you wrong)
they shall partake of the consolation, as of the sufferings they have done, 2
Cor. 1.7. that are steadfast unto him, but woe unto the wicked and you painted
Tombs, and all the false worshippers as well as persecuters of his, and
wrongers of him, it shall go ill with you and them, Isa. 3.11. and all your
guilding, and painting flatteries, and Colorable glosses will not save you,
and such from the wrath of the Lamb, the cup is prepared [as you may read] for
all such, Reve. 14.9, 10.11. and great will be their torment, as well as yours,
who are out of his faith, in the old birth and miscarriages growing worse as
you say, who are persecuters of his and wrongers of him, but you are seen and
your design is known and are left naked and bare, that to the single eyed you
may appear, and that others may see your deceipts, and of them and you be
aware least they with you come under the same condemnation, they are warned,
and I am cleared, though by your generation falsely accused, to be Popishly
affected, but have left my Testimony against the Pope and his brood, and stands
to witness against that, and all other deceit, and has not the least
affection to it, but stands a witness through the strength of my God against
it, and therefore that accusation is proved false, and left co return from
whence it came till it return into the Popes breast, or where it first had its
rise. And though the author (being in outward bonds) have outward helps taken
from him, and kept from him, yet truth is not bound, but stands free, and
leaves against the deceit (from a servant of the Lord) this same testimony,
and returns praise to the Lord for the riches of his love, and remains
therein: A faithful witness against Pope and Papists, and all deceivers, but
a lover of all the honest hearted, such as are not wrongers, but lovers of the
Lord Jesus.

The 8th day of the 11th month, in the year 1655. Richard Farnsworth.

To the Catechism, etc. Set forth by the 42. Priests, etc.
ANd in your Catechism, you say you believe there is one only God in 3 persons.
I answer; That there is one God is true, and you are proved, and have confessed
that you are wrongers of his Son Christ Jesus, and then of him, for he and his
Father is one, Joh. 10.30. And there is three that bear witness in Heaven the
Father the word and the Spirit, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. but where
is those three persons you speak of (are you not liers therein) for he that
abides in the doctrine of Christ has both the Father and the Son, 2 John 9.
and the Holy Ghost remains within, in the Saints, Joh. 14.15, 16, 17. and
these three are one, and agree in the unity, 1 John 5.7, 8. and as Christ has
said, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, Joh.
17.23. and the unity stands in the eternity, which is shut out of the reach of
your carnality, that are out of the unity, and in the enmity and self
separation, wrongers of men and of Christ (as you say you are) therefore you
speak of things which you are not in the true knowledge of, and feeds peoples
fancies with your conceivings, and imaginations: you say also that God made man
for himself, but you are gone far from the end, for which you were made, that
are turned wrongers of him, in wronging people and his Son, and in running
further from him, as your selves confess, and so under the curse: for you say
that he gave a law, requireing perfect obedience upon pain of death: and if he
requires you perfectly to obey him, upon pain of death, are you not under that
penalty and liable to that pain and punishment, that instead of yiedling
perfect obedience denies it, in denying perfection, and so perfect obedience,
who live in miscarriages growing worse and worse, and running further from God,
and saying that the doctrine of God the Father and his Son, viz, the doctrine
of (Sinlesse) perfection, were bred by the Devil, and detested by Christ, and
never received by any that had grace, etc. When the same doctrine was preached
and commanded both by God and Christ, and both believed in, and received by
such as had grace, guiding them: and such as yield perfect obedience to the
divine will and law of God, them you revile, and are not ashamed to call them
heretics, and cast them into Prison, if they do but walk up into the same
things which you preach in words, and speak of, and seeing you out of the life
of the same tell you of it, though now you have confessed it, that you are of
what you set others to get instead of owning perfection, and yiedling perfect
obedience to the law and will of God, you persecute them that do, and lives
your selves in the disobedience to the divine law and will of God, (and are in
your covenant with sin and imperfection and in the miscarriages, and (as you
say) wronging both Christ and men, as thou Richard Baxter and you 42 has done,
but thou and you all are seen and your covers will not hide you, but leaves you
bare, who are out of the doctrine of Christ, and under condemnation, and in
danger of stverlasting pain and death due to the disobedient, except you
consider betime and truly repent, give over deceiving of souls, yield perfect
obedience (as you say) that you may come out of imperfection and persecution,
and forsake your miscarriages, and give over wronging Christ and men, make
restitution, and humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and make it
manifest [not by your flatteries and excuses serpent-like, and still continue
or grow worse and worse in the miscarriages and wronging God and men etc. but]
by ceaseing your persecution, and your preaching for hire, and beareing rule by
your means, etc. and turning to that of God which reproves in secret, for your
miscarriages, and forsake them and your lusts, and make your amendment and
return manifest by your fruits; and live not in your flatteries, but as you
have confessed your wrong to the people, and promised your amendment, make good
your word, and go make restitution for them for the same, and give over your
trade of d^ceit: there is many Scriptures which you have summed together, and
set people to get over, mixing your deceit and imaginations amongst them; and
has not the Pope and Bishops (as you do) garnished and painted themselves, (in
their mass books, Pulpits, and Catechisms, etc.) with the Saints words, when
they was as far from the Saints Spirit, life and practice as you are; and you
for all your painting and garnishing your selves, are as far from the Saints
life and practice as they were. And if the people get all your words to say
over, will that change their nature, which has not yet changed yours? and did
not your Forefathers use it before you, and yet left you where they was,
except more painted outwardly, and grown more subtle, but within full of
venom, cruelty, and persecution, and out of the life and power of truth, as is
made manifest: for you say in your third Answer* (where you speak your own
condition) that as men did wilfully sin and fall from God and happiness you
say in your 19 page, that you are wrongers of Christ and men, and in the
neglect of the work of God, and in miscarriages, etc: page 3.4. in your
Agreement; then are not you in that condition, entered (wilfully into them)
through Satan's temptation? and are not you in that condition, under the wrath,
in the fall under the curse? nay do I say any more herein then you have
confessed? for you say that man being tempted did wilfully sin (and I say, you
that are wrongers of Christ and of men, you have done the same) and so fell
from God, and happiness (into miscarriages persecution and wickedness) under
the wrath of God, and curse of the law, and the power of the Devil, (through
disobed^ence, as you are, so say you in your third answer) we are by nature
dead in sin, I say then you are not by grace yet quickened, (who are from the
divine life) and what can dead men act in that death and life of sin for God,
but against him? and is not that the cause that the killing ignorance you
speak or remains yet unkilled amongst you, and your people that are asleep as
you say in security, in sin unturned to God (ignorance of that which concerns
their salvation) and therefore does make it appear that you are strangers from
the life of Jesus, and the covenant of promise, and knows not the life of
truth nor the quickening of the soul, nor yet how to kill the killing
ignorance, that remains amongst you unkilled, and dead men (that are dead from
the divine life) set up dead Papers, and dead words without life, for dead
minds to feed on, which will neither kill sin, nor quicken the soul, and so
your dead Catechismes will work as little effect as your dead Sermons have
done, and that is so little (and as you say) that people are so ignorant that
they can scarce speak a word of sense abort matters of salvation: and how
should untaught teachers teach to perfect, who manifest you are not sent of
God, that are as you say in the third Answer of your Catechism (you say) you
are by nature dead in sin, and therefore not quickened by grace, for they that
are quickened are not dead, but you are not quickened, and so dead: but those
the Lord sends he quickens before he send them, but you are not quickened and
therefore not sent, who are Children of wrath and naturally are as you say (in
the present time) dead in sin: so servants to diverse lusts and pleasures, and
from thence proceeds miscarriages and persecution (wrong to Christ and men)
which are the fruits of wrath, and disobedience, and how should it be otherwise
(whilst you continue therein) seeing you are naturally dead in sin, and so the
natural men, who knows not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.14.15.
neither do you receive them because they are spiritually discerned, and that
is known after quickening for they that are quickened by grace discernes in the
gift: Ephesians 1.4, 5, 6. 1 John 5.20.
whereby they understand salvation and happiness; therefore says the Apostle
to such as were quickened and knew the salvation, By grace you has he
quickened who were dead in sin, and are raised up together and made to sit with
Christ Jesus in the heavenly places, who gave them an understanding to know the
same, that wore so quickened and knew the matters of salvation: which you and
your hearers are ignorant of, which things are known after quickening: but you
are not quickened, and therefore to you they are not known but as you say in
your third answer, you are not only dead in sin, but you are prone to do more
evil continually (and so are Children of wrath, and servants of diverse lusts
as is before said) and so growing worse: then where is your amendment, ye
flatterers and hypocrites that do not grow only worse and worse, but you say you
depart further from God also: And I say, that needs not to be; for you are far
enough from him already, that are dead in sin, wronging Christ and men, living
in Miscarriages promising amendment and yet says, you grow worse; and so are
of those that oppose themselves, saying and unsaying, confuting and
contradicting your own sayings, in your Agreement: and growing worse and
running further from God, Jer. 5.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Jer. 6.13, 14, 15.
you must needs be of those that turns the grace of God into lasciviousness,
Jude 4. and of them that runs further from Goodness into Miscarriages and
wickedness, Jer. 5.25.

And so dead men cannot quicken, and how should they that run from God, lead
unto God, but you run further from God as you say; and then how can you lead
unto God? And how should they that live in Miscarriages and grow worse lead
others out of them into the truth, to grow in grace, and so become better? but
you live in miscarriages and grow worse, as your selves confess, in your
Agreement: and your fruits make manifest, who are naturally dead in sin: etc.
And how should the blind and dead, lead others into the way of truth, and into
the life thereof, that are out of it themselves, as you are? and how should you
lead others from under the curse whilst you are in the fall, under the wrath,
etc. and how should you turn people from darkness, and from the power of
Satan, that are yet in and under the same: according to your third Answer? And
how should you be examples and leaders of others to come out of the
Miscarriages and evil, who your selves are in the miscarriages, and prone, you
say, to do more evil continually, and to grow worse, and depart yet further
from God; and then whilst you are doing that and departing from him you are not
amending not yet leading to him, and therefore you are very unfit to disciple
the undiscipled, and to be leaders of others from evil unto good, that are
your selves dead in sin, and not alive in grace: being in the self-separation,
and in Miscarriages, continually prone to do mere evil, and grow worse and
depart further from God; therefore you are very unfit to lead out of the evil
unto God, and that is the cause your people are so Ignorant (as you say) and in
sin unturned to God, because their teachers are so: and the Scripture fulfilled
which says, like Priest, like people: Hos. 4.9. Whose teachers instead of
turning to God, run further from him: and therefore you being untaught to come
out of Miscarriages, etc. and abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, are very
unfit to teach others the way of God, or lead into the covenant of lite: and as
you say you grow worse continually, it appears so, by your fruits daily; your
actions does declare it, as well as your words: but how should it be otherwise
whilst you continue therein; and run on in the same, seeing as you say, you yet
depart further from God, and so from grace and goodness, into persecution, and
your Miscarriages, etc. And are you not under that saying of the Prophet, like
such that are grievous revolters, Jer. 6.28, 30
walking with slanders, where lie says, Reprobate silver shall men call them:
because the Lord has rejected them, who trusted in lying words, and were given
to wickedness, and though they said, The temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord, they did not amend their ways, and their doings, but lived in
oppression, Wrath, Envy, and the, Miscarriages growing worse and worse; and ran
further from God, tor they neither obeyed the voice of the Lord nor received
correction: truth was perished and cut off, from their mouths, as appears by
the saying of the prophet Jer. 7. Chap. Jer. 7. Chap.
For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them, every one is given
to covetousness, and from the Prophet unto the Priest every one does falsely
Jer. 6.13. Like such as you who live in miscarriages growing worse and prone to
do more evil continually, and running further from God, as your Agreement does
witness against you: therefore thus says the Lord, I will lay stumbling
blocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall fall
upon them, and the neighbor and his friend shall perish, Jer. 6.20.

And in your fourth Answer you tell of Gods love, and giving his only son to
be a redeemer, etc. I answer; yea so he did, though you be Ignorant of it, that
are dead in sins, and not quickened (then not redeemed) yet such as are
quickened and taught by him to come out of Miscarriages, and out of the evil
and lusts of the Devil (which such continue in, who are dead in sin and
departed from God, yet ^ Pet. 1.18.22, 23.
notwithstanding) they that are quickened and by grace saved, they witness
Gods Love and redemption from the vain conversation (and from the Miscarriages
which you live in unredeemed from) and they that witness Gods Love in sending
his Son and redemption from the va^n conversation and Miscarriages, etc. they
also witness deliverance from the power of darkness, as they that write to
the Saints Col. 1.12, 13, 14.
at Collosse did; who were delivered from the power of the Devil, and were
translated (when they writ to the Saints that were at Colosse) into the kingdom
of the dear Son, by whom redemption came: and were then giving thanks unto God
the Father who had made them partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light as such are now giving thanks that are in the inheritance, and are
quickened as the writer to and the Saints at Ephesus was, that were made to sit
with Christ Jesus in Heavenly places, Ephesians. 5.8, 10, 12.
Ephesians. 2.1, 6. Who walked in the light, and reproved darkness after they were
quickened by grace, and called into it. But what is that to you that lives in
Miscarriages doing wrong to Christ and men, and are persecuters of the
redeemed, who witnessed the love of God in sending his Son to redeem them, for
whose sake they suffer: and walking in the light are made to reprove your deeds
of darkness, and you that say you are redeemed, and are not, but lives yet in
Miscarriages growing worse, and people as well as you in sin unturned to God:
your selves wronging them and Christ (in deceiving souls for your own ends and)
persecuting those that are redeemed, and witness against your deceits; and you
that are not redeemed but under the curse of the law, wrath of God, and the
power of the Devil, so that you are by nature dead in sin, and prone to do
more evil continually, and to grow worse and depart yet further from God, (as
you say you do) and therefore are neither redeemed nor turned to God, nor come
to repentance, which you say is a through turning from the Devil the world and
the flesh, unto God. And what have you to do to call your selves Saints and
Ministers of Christ, and tell of redemption, etc. who are not yet come to
repentance; then not to redemption? that are not yet quickened, then not saved,
sanctified, and sent, nor so much as yet turned to God: but instead of turning
to him, are running on in the broad way (and as you say) further from him, (and
do not the Papists and Heretics the same?) and what have you to do to talk of
the Scriptures to be your rule, that are out of the life of them, and in
Miscarriages growing worse, which the Scripture forbids? And what do you talk
of the new birth and Saints life for? that are out of their practice and your
selves dead in sin, and in the old birth? or does the new birth consist in
Miscarriages, death in sin, unquickened, in growing worse, and yet running
further from God, and wronging both Christ and men as you do: wherefore be
ashamed and blush, your deeds of darkness are now come to light.

And you say, in your Fifth Answer, that the Lord Jesus Christ has ordained
that all they that receive him by a true effectual faith, and by true
repentance, are obliged (or bound) to forsake the Devil, and the world, and
the flesh, and heartily turn from them unto God, that they may receive the
pardon of their sins, and become Sons of God, and heirs of everlasting life;
then it seems you grant that such as are to repentance come; who recieve Christ
by an effectual faith, and therein abide, who has forsaken the Devil and the
world, and the flesh, and are heartily turned out of them unto God (such you
account to be, and grant that they are) the Sons of God, and heirs of
everlasting life. And I say, Are not such in a state of perfection? or will not
you deny this again and persecute such as in spirit and truth witness the
same? But admit it to be so, and also as you therein say; yet what is that to
you, that are not turned from the Devil and out of the world, nor from the
flesh unto God, but are in the Miscarriages growing worse, and therefore in the
world, and not turned out: who are wrongers of Christ and men, and therefore in
the flesh bringing forth persecution and the fruits of the same, and are yet
dead in sin, (then not alive in the effectual faith; and being under the curse
of the law then not under the grace of the Gospel: and being under the wrath of
God, you are in the disobedience: therefore being in the disobedience, the
wrath is that which is your desert for the same: and being in the disobedience
and under the wrath (as in your third answer, etc.) then you are not in the new
covenant but out of the love of the pure God: and being o^t of his love in your
Miscarriages, and growing worse, you are not forsaking them to become better:
and therefore you grow not in grace, who are in Miscarriages and growing worse,
and so you do but dissemble and flatter, when you promise amendment and does
not amend, nor regard to perform what you have promised, but instead thereof,
are accusing your selves, where you say you wrong Christ and men, and are
growing worse as well as departing yet further from God: therefore you do not
receive the effectual faith nor come to repentance (which you say is a through
turning from the flesh and the world, etc unto God) neither do you forsake the
Devil (that labors for him in doing wrong to Christ and men, etc.) nor the
world and the flesh who continues in your Miscarriages, fruits of the same, who
are therein growing worse and worse (as you say) and you do not yet turn unto
God, who are opposite to him and running further from him, and therefore
according to your own words, fruits, and sayings, you that are such are not
Sons of God nor in the effectual faith: and being without repentance arid
remission, therefore you are not heirs of Salvation, but in danger of
damnation, according to your fifth Answer (but to this you add) etc.

And you say, they that sincerely Love the Lord Jesus, and obey him to the
death, they shall be glorified; and they that will not do all this (to wit)
forsake the Devil, the world, and the flesh, and (not faignedly but) heartily
turn from them unto God, and sincerely love and obey him to the death, they
that do not all this (you say) they shall be damned: here be you witnesses
against your selves, that you do not do it all, and as you say, that are
neglecters of the work or God, page 3. and in your former and present
Miscarriages unpardoned, page the 4. and people in sin unturned to God, who
scarce can speak a word of sense (as in your accusation against them you say)
about the matters of Salvation: and you are the wrongers of Christ and them,
page the 19. who ate dead in sin, and prone to do more evil continually,
(promising amendment, but instead of amending are accusing your selves) and
says you grow worse and depart yet further from God, (Answer the third, of
your Catechism): therefore you do not truly repent that does not heartily
return out of your Miscarriages, and from the flesh and the world unto God,
then you do not believe nor receive Christ by an effectual faith, who are
turned wrongers of him: and therefore in not loving the good, and forsaking the
evil to turn out of your Miscarriages and from the world unto God, you that are
wrongers of men and him, and lives in such disobedience, you are not doing all
that which your selves say, is to be done, the which being neglected and undone
is cause of damnation; then, are not you in that condition (consider of it)
that neglects the work of God and leaves it undone? and instead of doing it,
continues in your miscarriages, the works of the Devil, growing worse as you
say, and are running further from God, therefore you are not running for him,
nor doing his work: take notice of that.

And if your people get the words which you set them to get, will those sayings
bring them into the effectual faith, and out of their Miscarriages unto
repentance and thoroughly to forsake the Devil the World and the Flesh, and
heartily turn them therefrom unto God, etc? Or, may not an Hypocrite and a
dissembler get the words to say over; and, for all that, remain an Hypocrite
and a dissembler still, and so be a child of the Devil, and if you and they
get the words to repeat or say over, and tell of forsaking the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh, and of turning from them unto God: and do not (turn from
them unto him nor) come out of Miscarriages, but grow worse and doing wrong to
men and Christ as you do: who are also running further from God, etc. saying in
words and feigned flatteries, they will turn from the evil to the good, etc.
and do not forsake the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, Joh. 8.34. Math.
23.14, 16,
but refuses to turn from them unto God, are not such Hypocrites, and
Dissemblers, who are sayers, and not doers? And are not such, threefold more
the servants of sin and children of the Devil consider of it and deceive not
your selves with shows, and pretenses, flatteries and colorable glosses.

And do not you, both tell the tale, and give the answer? and must not the
people be bound by you to say as you say, and speak your condition, whether
they be so or no: for you speaking your own conditions, and saying you are dead
in sin, and continually prone to evil, growing worse, and yet running further
from God, you would have all others to (be or) say so, if they be not so: but
if they through the experience of grace and goodness received from God, make
reply and say, we are quickened by grace; and are growing in the same, having
received Christ by an effectual faith which purifieth our hearts: and therefore
we have forsaken the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and are unfainedly
turned from them unto God, and being born of God: 1 Pet. 1.22.23. and guided by
his Spirit; we are made the Sons of God, 1 John 3.1. and so are heirs of
Salvation, Romans 8.14.
and are made pertakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light, for which we
give thanks unto the Father who made us meet to be pertakers thereof Col. 1.14.
and are come to the Spirits of just men made perfect: and as we have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, so we walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and
stablished in the faith, as we have been taught: Heb. 12.22, 23. Col. 2.6, 7.
Col. 1.3, 9, 10. verses.
a-abounding therein with thanksgiving; in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge: for in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily: and the Saints are complete in him, who is the head of all principality
and powers as the Scripture witnesses: and if they say so, and say they
witness with them, would you not call such heretics, and say it were
delusion: or blasphemy, and the like, etc? And do not you in your Catechism
preach up the same in words; as the condition of the obedient, etc. and if any
witness the same condition, which you tell them of, and say, I am a Son of God,
and heir of Salvation, and grow in perfection, say, you are out of the life of
what you exhort to, but are as you confess wrongers of Christ, and neglecters
of his work: and therefore have not received him by the effectual faith,
neither have you forsaken the Devil, that lives in perfection; nor the flesh,
that are in Miscarriages; nor the world, that are prone to do evil, and growing
worse continually, neither are you heartily nor in the least me a sure turned
from them unto God, who are as you say running yet further from him; and
therefore, running from him, are not sent of him, and so cannot profit the
people at all, and in disobeying his law and wronging of him in wronging his
Son: and being still in the Miscarriages, and growing worse, etc. you are not
doing what you say is to be done upon pain of damnation: and therefore not
doing it, but, neglecting and leaving the same undone, (may it not be concluded
from your own words being found in the neglect, that you are for the damnation
you speak of in your Agreement) but would you not persecure them, which
witness the same in life and power, which you speak of, (as the condition of
the obedient who are Sons of God, etc.)and tell you that you are out of the
life of the same and are neither Sons nor Servants of God, but wrongers of him
and his; who are in your Miscarriages and growing worse, etc.

To speak Truth against deceit is no railing,
And this is but according to what your selves say (who are witnesses against
your selves and both accusing your selves and your people) in that called your
Agreement who have fully laid open your deceit, if you did but see it: but is
not the Serpent now as blind as ever he was, and Ignorant in the things of the
Spirit of God: Joh. 8.44.
and does not well know his Fathers work, and what he brings forth, who
assumed to call Abraham his Father, when Christ sharply reproved him for it,
and said to the Serpents seed You are of your Father the Devil, and his works
you will do; yet though he so said, he did neither rail not revile, neither
were his sayings un Gospel like, being thereunto guided by a Gospel Spirit: yet
you will be ready to call that railing, which is in reproof to your deceit,
(which you live in: and have confessed in your Agreement) and say, 1 John 2.4.
Math. 23.27. Math. 23.24. 1 John 1.18, 16. Phil. 3.2. Acts 10.29. Luke 3.7.
Math. 23.33.
it is Censorious, and un Gospel-like: yet notwithstanding the Spirit of truth,
and they that were guided by it, called the Serpents seed, by names proper to
their nature, as Liars, Hypocrites blind-guides, Seducers, and Antichrists, as
well as Dogs, Wolys, Foxes, Serpents, and Vipers: and if it were not un
Gospel-like in them so to do being thereunto guided by a Gospel Spirit, and how
comes it to be more un Gospel-like now, in them that are thereunto guided so to
say by the Gospel Spirit? or was not the Serpents seed then, as well as now,
offended at it, and raised persecution against them that witnessed by the
Spirit of truth against their deceits, as the Serpents seed now does: consider
of it, and Judge your selves, for the tree is known by its fruits.

And in your sixth answer, you are telling how Christ proved his doctrine: but
I say, you do not prove by your fruits that you are in the same, but out of it,
and confesses as well as proves that you are (none of his Ministers but)
wrongers of him, as your words and actions against you witnesses, and
therefore you should first by your fruits and practice have proved your selves
to have been following his example and the practice of the Gospel Ministers,
and then you had done something, for both he and his, to wit true Prophets and
Apostles, have sufficiently (thereby) proved theirs without you, whose lives
and the Spirit by which they were enspired, stands to witness against you,
Joh. 14.6. Heb. 7.25. Heb. 5.8, 9. 1 Timothy 3.15: Joh. 14.17. Job. 1.6. Gal. 4.6.
Romans 8.14. 1 John 2.14, 20, 27,
and such as are out of the way of truth, and running yet further from God: who
through ignorance sets up the letter, and your Catechism as the way into the
truth, and knows not that Christ is the way to the Father, and to salvation
(without you and wrongers of him, etc.) as the letter witnesses, and so is his
light, Joh. 8.12. and Spirit the way out of darkesse, and guide into all truth,
Joh. 16.13. (and is the standing rule in his Church the pillar and ground of
truth): and that the holy Spirit does enlighten men's hearts is true, but the
letter does not so, nor your Catechism as (in your 7th answer it seems) you
would have it, neither has it yet turned you from Satan unto God, who are in
miscarriages growing worse, and as you say continually prone to do evil, and
are running yet further from God, and therefore you are neither in the faith,
nor joined to Christ that are running from God and turned wrongers both of men
and of Christ; neither are you justified therein, but are unpardoned for the
same (as your selves confess)and so are not made the Sons of God, that are not
borne of him, nor quickened by grace, but dead in sin, and living in your
former and present miscarriages, growing worse and worse, and so are neither
sanctified nor that peculiar people you speak of: in Answer the seventh, in
that called your Catechism. For you say, The peculier people are made the Sons
of God, and sanctified unto him, overcoming the world, the flesh and the
Devil: and are Zealous of good works, serving God in holiness and
righteousness, etc. But I say, you make it manifest that you are not
sanctified nor justified, then according to your sayings you are not made the
Sons of God, nor that peculiar people (which are persecuted by you who live in
the miscarriages) growing worse and worse: your deeds proves your sayings
therein against you, that are yet running further from God, and turned wrongers
of Christ and of men: but his peculiar people that are justified and
sanctified, they do not so, but witnesses against those that live in
miscarriages that are wrongers of Christ and his: whose blind Zeal carries
them forth into persecution and unrighteousness and therefore are Zealous in
an evil work (like you as both your writeing, casting the innocent into
Prisons, and your actions, against you declare). And where you tell of the end
of the righteous and wicked, in Answer the eighth of your Catechism: In reply
thereunto, Let me tell you that you have sufficiently proved your selves to be
the wicked, and therefore expect their reward, or that which is due for the
same: for there is no respect of persons with God. who will render to every man
according to his deeds, even Indignation and wrath unto them that are
contentious, and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, as you do, that
live in Miscarriages and grow worse and worse, Romans 2.6, 8, 9, 10, 11. verses.
like such who after their hardness and Impenitent heart, are running further
from God, are treasureing up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, and as you may read: Romans 2.20,

And you say, in your Ninth answer of your Catechism, that Christ has
appointed that fit men should be Ordained his Ministers to disciple the
undiscipled: but I say you are out of that Royal ordination, and are not those
fit men, therefore are not appointed to be his Ministers: for those that are
chosen by Christ and so fitted and appointed, they are his friends, and do his
commands, and he has ordained that they should go and bring forth fruit, and
that their fruit should remain and because they are not of the world but chosen
out of the world to witness against the evil of it, Joh. 15.14, 15, 16, 19, 20.
Joh. 7.7:
therefore are they hated of the World, as Christ himself was: but instead of
being hated of the World, and suffering for Christ, and bringing forth fruit to
God, you are beloved of the World, and in your Miscarriages are growing worse,
and bringing forth fruit to the flesh, who are running yet further from God,
and turned persecuters also of his, who are wrongers of Christ and them; and
therefore you have made it manifest, that you are neither fitted nor appointed
of him, whom you so wrong, and run further from: and therefore are you unfit,
to disciple or teach others to walk in the right way your selves, being still
in the wrong, continuing therein, and are yet running further on, that are
running from God, and so run unsent, and therefore are out of the Royal
Ordination, and Gospel appointment; who are yet dead in sin, continually prone
to do evil, and therein growing worse, and so under a state of Condemnation;
your painting and garnishing your selves with the Saints words, and living out
of their practice in your continued Miscarriages, and growing therein worse,
makes it manifest; that you have not learned the lesson of self denial, to
come out of them: that you might follow Christ through the daily cross, and
Minister in the same: and so you have proved that you are very unfit to teach
others, who are not yet taught or have not submitted to the teachings of Christ
your selves: and your bare sayings that you are Ministers of Christ is not
sufficient to prove you to be so, when your fruits witness the contrary
against you, as well as your words, and self-accusations: who says, you are
wrongers of Christ and are growing worse, and running further from God, and as
you run further from God, you run further from grace, and goodness, into
persecution, wickedness, and your Miscarriages, which is by your fruits daily
made (and will be more and more) Manifest: There was no necessity that you
should have told us of it, for we knew it before, and the tree on which that
evil fruit grows, but seeing you have done so, and also accused and confuted
as well as contradicted your selves, your words will serve to witness to
succeeding ages against you with your fruits, as they are left upon record, etc:

And in your tenth answer of your Catechism: you tell of secret duties of
holiness, but you make it manifest that you are out of them, and so are sayers
and not doers: and therefore hypocrites, and they serve you to talk of, but
still lives and goes on in your miscarriages as well as in hardness of heart,
Pride, worldly mindedness, flesh-pleaseing, and hypocrisy, which you speak of
in that answer, and so have laid open some of your fruits therein, arising from
that evil nature, in which you grow worse, who are the flesh-pleases,
will-worshippers, and time servers. And where you tell of watching against
temptations; instead thereof, do you not for the love of money fall into
temptation? and so watch for large augmentations, and how to ensnare and
imprison such as are sent to tell you of your miscarriages which you now have
confessed, but are running yet further on in them, and thos^ private duties you
say is in your 11 Ans. that Masters and Parents must teach their Children and
Servants the word and fear of God and hinder them from sin: the which if they
could do, I say it were well, but before they do that, they must know another
spirit guiding to teacth, and hinder them from sin, who are yet without the
fear of God, that are yet asleep in security, and in sin unturned to God, and
untaught as you are, who lives in miscarriages therein growing worse, etc. And
how should they teach that (to wit, the word and fear of God) to others
whilst they are untaught yet themselves, as well as you their untaught
teachers. And in your last answer you tell of the necessary duties of
righteousness: but it appears that you are out of them, that are in
miscarriages, growing worse and therefore are servants of sin and
unrighteousness. 1 Timothy 6.9.10. ver. Romans 13.3, 4. Isa. 56.9, 10, 11. ver.
But you say, superiors must rule for God: so say I, and then they will fear
God and hate covetousness, as says the Scripture: Exodus 18.20, 21, 22. and
also be ready to relieve the oppressed, and punish evil doers, and then how
should you escape the punnishment that are in the miscarriages, and doing wrong
to others: and you say it is your duty to love your neighbor as your selves:
but I say such as are wrongers of them are not lovers of them (no more then for
their own ends) but you are wrongers of them according to your sayings as well
as your doings, and therefore it is manifest that instead of loving them, you
are wronging their soul's, and from your quarters are seeking your own ends and
earthly gains, as your brethren the false Prophets, the blind watchmen, and
greedy dumb dogs, as well as both the beasts of the field and the forest, that
came to devour, did and do wrong to others then in their times, as you do now
in yours, that are in the miscarriages wronging Christ and men, who neglects
that necessary duty you speak of, and therefore be conviced that you leave
undone that which you say is your duty as well as necessary and needful, and
ought for to be done; and so (according to your own sayings) you leave that
undone which you ought to do, and so you say it is your necessary duty to do as
you would be done by, then I say, if you did your duty which you say is
needful to be done, you would not perfecute, and cause the innocent
(causelessy) to be cast into Prisons and Dungeons; nor to suffer such hard
usage by your means, (as they do), for you would not be so done unto your
selves, and not doing to them and others as you would be done unto your selves,
you both transgress the royal law, and also neglects and leaves undone that
necessary duty you speak of, but it serves you to talk of, (hypocrit-like)
though you leave it undone, and regard not at all to perform the same as by
your fruits is now largely made m^nifest: and you say it is your duty to behave
your selves toward all men in lowliness, then I say you must forsake your
miscarriages, and lay aside envy, pride, and haughtiness, if you intend to
perform your s^yings, who also says, It is your duty soberly to behave your
selves in meekness, and harmelesly, not wronging any in their bodies, etc.
Then I say, you must come out of your suttlety if you come into
harmelessenesse; and you must come out of your wrath and passion, before you
learn meekness: and if it be your duty not to wrong any in their bodies, then
you leave it undone by filling of your Prisons, who instead of being lowly and
meek, are pro^de, covetous, and haughty, filled with envy and cruelty, as your
fruits does demonstrate; who instead of being harmless are wrongful, and
growing worse in the miscarriages, and instead of not wronging any in their
bodies, you both wrong their bodies (that without cause by your means are made
to suffer, in Holes, Prisons, and Dungeons, as well as to be beaten, stoned,
and abused in your streets, that in obedience to the Lord are sent to witness
against your deceipts, and as you cause wrong to be done to the Saints bodies,
(according to your sayings in your Agreement and (as you do wrong to them in
their bodies) so likewise do you wrong to the souls (you deceive) under your
unprofitable ministry, that says you are not wrongers of them only but of
Christ himself also: Therefore you leave undone that necessary duty, who
leaves that undone which you say you should do; and instead of doing that
necessary duty, you make it your business to wrong Christ and men, so doing
that which you ought not to do, according to your own sayings, and therefore do
you act against the Scripture as well as neglect your necessary duty you tell
of, making it your work to live in flatteries and miscarriages, growing worse
therein, as well as to run further from God, and do wrong to Christ and men as
your fruits with your words against you do witness, and also in a large
measure does show forth the same? Take notice thereof, and bear your own
burden, as well as cover your faces with shame.

How are the Parish Priests exalted in their Pride and their pay, and likewise
you!
IN your(pretended) warrant, where you are speaking in your own behalf, yon
say, The Priests lips should preserve knowledge: here you call your selves
Priests for your own ends, and yet are offended at others for calling you so:
but if you deny the name of Priests, do you not deny your own warrant, where
you call your selves so? whose lips instead of preserving true knowledge, is
uttering your confusion as well as your peoples ignorance, and your wrong done
to Christ and them, who are accusing your selves both of the same, and also of
your miscarriages, wherein you grow worse, and run further from God, and
therein you declare that you are not his messengers, who are in such
miscarriages, and instead of being those Priests whose lips should preserve
knowledge, are of those Priests that preach for hire, and bear rule by their
means, which the Lord by his Prophets complains of, Mica. 3.11. Jer. 5.30.31,
And you Parish Priests that preaches for hire, who receives 2. or 3. hundreds
of pounds by the year, etc? are you not highly exalted above your
Forefathers, or the Parish-Preists which were before you, Parish Priests and
their Pay. 36. Edw. 3 ch: 8.50. Edw. 3. Ch: 5. 2 H. 5. chap. 2.
which Priests and their Clarks with them, etc, were said to bear the sweet
body of their Lord Jesus Christ to sick people, with diverse other persons of
the holy Church so called, as appears by the statute made at Westminster the
50 year of King Edward the third, and it is contained in the statute made the
thirty sixth year of King Edward the third, that no Parish Priests nor yearly
Priests should take but 5 marks or 6. at the most, for their wages by the
year, but afterward (the Parish Priests) in the time of Henry the 5th, the
Parish-Preists would not serve under 10 or 12 marks by the year, which was
against the form of the said statute, to the great damage of the Kings
liege-people; therefore it was ordained and established by Henry the 5th, that
the Parish-Preists which then was and should be from thenceforth should not
take above 8. or 9. Marks for their whole wages by the year, but how are the
Parish-Preists exalted since, both in their pride and their pay, etc?

You Priests that are offended at the name of Priests, were you not so called
by your forefathers? Read, and see if you know your Succession, etc. 37. H. 8.
Chap. 21. and 24.

SUch Priests, that are made Priests by man, are you not called Priests in the
law of man: then why are you grown so Proud and high minded as to scorn to bear
the name of Priests, 27. H. 6. Cap. 6. Parish Priests, 2. H. stat. 2. Chap.
2.37. H. 8. Cap. the 24. 1 Mary. Chap. 3.27. H. 8, Cap. 20. and 21.5. and 6. of
Edw. 6. Chap. 1. Priests 1 Edw. 6. Chapter 14 marriage of Priests, etc: 2 Edw. 6.
Chap. 21. and 5. and 6. Edw. 6. chap. 12. Priests, etc. 13. Eliz. chap. ^6.
by which you are called, who are offended at those that calls you Pri^sts,
(Curates, and Clarks, etc.) Which names the law calls you, and which names
they gave you, that made you Priests, (Curates, and Clarks, etc.) and were you
not called to your places and benefices, by the name of Priests, Curates, and
Clarks, etc. If so: then in being offended at such as calls you Priests, etc.
are you not offended at the law which calls you so, and therefore if you deny
the names of Priests, (Curates, and Clarks, etc.) do you not deny the names by
which you are called, (that are so) to your Places and Benefits; and if you
deny your names why do you not deny your Benefits: and that which attends your
names, as you are called Priests, (Curates and Clarks, etc.)in and by the law
of man? and if you be offended at the name of Priests, or for being (your
selves) called by that name, are you not offended both at the law in which you
are so called, and also at them that made you Priests; and therein called you
so: and therefore being offended for being called Priests, (Curates and Clarks,
etc.) are you not offended at your call, and them that called you, and gave you
your means with your names: and if you change your names, must you not chance
your old nature and means: or when you ground an Action in Law for to sue for
(that which you call) your parochial rights, as Tithes, Easter-Reconings, and
Mids-Summer-dues, and. And can you sue for them in the name of the Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, or must you not sue for them in the name of
Priest, Curate, or Clark, etc. then if you deny them names, must you not deny
sueing for Tithes (and preach without them freely as the Apostles Ambassadors
and Ministers of Christ and the new covenant did): but rather then you will
part with your ornaments or that which attends your names, as Tithes,
Faster-Reconings Mid-Sumers Dues, etc. (as you call them) will yon not stick
to your old natures and names, (of Priests, etc.) and yet notwithstanding, is
not Pride so high in you, that you scorn at other times to be called by the
name of Priests, (Cu^ates, and Clarks, etc.) Except when you make use of them
for your own ends? And if you deny your names by which you were called at first
to your Benefits, and means, must you not deny your Benefits and means that
were given unto you, when and by whom you received such names: but will not you
deny some of your names (under a color) and yet hold your means; except you
fly to your old names, when you seek your own ends; therefore if you let the
one fall, let the other go with it: if you be offended for being called
Priests, Rectors, Curates, or Clarks, etc. (though professed Ministers of
Christ, etc.) why are you not offended at Tithes Easter Reconings, Mid-Summer
Dues, as you call them, and those means which you received or had stated upon
you under such denominations or names? will not the beast soon blush because of
the number of his names (which is as the number of a man) and the mark which
he receives in his hands, or rather cry down some of his names, and (under a
color) seek to hold up his other marks and him means, but in the end must
they not all down together? and though you Priests (Curates and Clarks, etc:)
that were so called to your places and benefices, seek to chainge your names
under a color, you still labor to uphold your old nature and means, and
instead of sueing under the names of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ for
your Tithes, Easter rcconings, etc. do you not sue under the names either of
Priests, (Rectors, Parsons, Vicars, Curates) or Clarks, etc: And yet after you
have taken upon you such names to compass your ends, would you not throw off
your names when your ends are accomplished: and if you be called by them, art
you not ready to be offended till you have need of them for your self ends,
and will you not then take them upon you again, rather then take up the daily
Cross therein to follow Christ, and both deny your Tithes, preaching for
hundreds a year, etc: and also deny for to be any more selfended, and as you
are and have been, and yet for your own ends and earthly gains though you be
offended at the name of Priests, etc: you will rather stick to your names, then
forsake your selfends (and earthly gains, Tithes, Easter-reconings, etc.) and
seeks to take upon you a cover from the Levitical Preist-hood, to hide you
under, saying: The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek
the law at his mouth for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mala. 2.7,
8, 9.

But I say, that such as are in miscarriages wronging Christ and men growing
worse, and yet run further from God, they are not those whose lips preserves
knowledge, neither are they those that the people should seek the law at, nor
they are not the messengers of him, and growing worse in miscarriages, and yet
are (as you say) running further from him: and they that run from God run not
for God, and such as are in the miscarriages, and neither amend nor yet come
out of them, and so are unfit to be the Lords messengers, but you are in
miscarriages growing worse you say, and so you make it manifest that you do not
amend nor come out of them, that r^ns on in them and growing worse therefore
are you unfit to be the Lords Messengers, and such as are in miscarriages,
growing worle and run further from God, they run from grace, goodness, and
from the law, and preservation of true wisdom and knowledge, and such are not
to be enquired at, neither does their lips preserve knowledge nor keep the law
of the Lord, who is to be enquired at, and obeyed, but they living (as you do)
in miscarriages growing worse, and yet running further from God: such are out
of the way (as you are) and also corrupters of the covenant as well as
transgressors of the law of God, and therefore their lips does not preserve
true knowledge, neither keep they the law, therefore unfit to teach others in
it, no more then you are that cast it behind your backs to run into
miscarriages and grow worse, and still run further from God, such was those
that the Lord sent his Prophets to cry out against. And in the leviticall
Preisthood, God did ordain Priests under the law by which they were then made,
and were set apart for the service of God, under that dispensation and the Lord
had a covenant of life and peace with them, the law of truth was in his, ( viz,
Priests Levi's) mouth whilst he walked herein, iniquity was not sound in his
lips, but he walked with the Lord in peace, and equity, and did turn many away
from iniquity, and then the Priests lips (that with God did walk and abide in
that covenant or life and peace, in whose mouth the law of truth was) did
preserve knowledge, and the people sought the law (not the Gospel) at his
mouth, under that legal dispensation, abiding in Covenant according to
ordination, etc. he was the messenger of the Lord of hosts, Mal. 2.5.6.7 but
you are not such Priests, (and yet pretends to preach the Gospel) not the law,
but lives in your miscarriages and Legal transgressions, growing worse and
running yet further from God, you do not go on in iniquity only, but leads
others therein, and teaches them to plead for sin, term of life? then you do
not turn others from iniquity, but runs further into it that runs into your
miscarriages and grows worse, neither do you walk with God that runs (as you
say) further from him: therefore you are not his messengers, neither are you
those Priests whose lips preserves the true knowledge, and at whose mouth the
people sought the law in that Legal dispensation and administration, for they
walked with God in a Covenant of life and peace, and the law of truth was in
their mouths, so was the fear of God in their hearts, and turned many from
their iniquities, but such as transgressed the Covenant and went from the life
thereof, and from the law and the truth they went into miscarriages, and grew
worse, and run further from God, preached for hire, bare rule by their means,
caused many to stumble, and corrupted the covenant (as you do) and such the
Lord was against and he is against you, Jer 5.25.27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
and their lips did not preserve true knowledge, though they was Priests and
Preached for hire, Mica. 3.11. and bare rule by their means, and lived in
miscarriages, Jer. 5. as you do, neither does your lips preserve true
knowledge, though you be Priests and preach for hire, and bear ^ule by your
means, and lives in miscarriages (as you say) and as they did that corrupted
the covenant: and so you may see where you are; you would bear the name of
Priests for your own ends and yet both be offended at them which call you so,
and tell you of your miscarriages which you now confess, but instead of
forsaking run further in them, in running from God, therefore your mouths
instead of preserving true knowledge, utters your confusion, and your peoples
ignorance, and sleepie security, that are as you say so carnal and ignorant,
that they can scarce speak a word of sense in matters of salvation, and so it
is manifest by their and your fruits, cruelty, end persecution, that you are
ignorant of the Gospel, and knows not the way to salvation.

ANd unto you 42. Priests, who are found in this state of separation from God
and in those works upon which his curse remains, from the Lord I-say unto you
(and to all your generation who are found in the same state, and working the
same works with you) Return and repent; and seeing you have confessed the
same, viz. your miscarriages and wrong done to God to Christ and to men, it is
your duty to amend and come out of the same: make it manifest by your return,
not in flatteries and feigned hypocrisy, but by ceasing persecution, and
cruelty; give over preaching for hire, and beareing rule by your means;
forsake your covetousness, Pride, Pomp, and vain glory; and cease seeking
your own ends, and make not a prey upon the innocent and harmless, but give
over your wronging Christ and men, and learn to fear him, do not go about to
make pleas for sin, and covers for your miscarriages, but deal honestly and
come out of them, for it is hard for the Camel, the rich man's figure, to enter
the eye of a needle, except he be broken and bruised, etc: so is it as hard for
the rich man to enter the Kingdom, except he be stripped of his riches, Pride,
Pomp and Vainglory, and be thereunto fitted to enter, by being made poor in
Spirit, and so it is said, Blessed are the poor in Spirit for theirs is the
Kingdom of God: therefore before you enter the Kingdom you must be stripped of
self righteousness, and come out of your miscarriages, Math. 5.3. Math. 5.20.
cease wronging Christ and men, and be borne again before you can enter the
same, Joh. 3.3.5. Joh. 3.9.10.
therefore do not seek to cover your selves, and hide your miscarriages, now
that you have confessed them, but come forth and forsake them; for he that
hides his sin shall not prosper: and it is not sufficient for you to confess
your miscarriages, and run on in them, but after confession to forsake: for he
that confesses and forsakes, shall find merry, but so shall it not be with
them that only confess and grow worse, who do not forsake them but run further
on in them: therefore consider and let truth and equity enter, and do not
account and reckon your selves to be dead unto sin, and alive unto God, whilst
you are naturally dead in sin, and alive in persecution, lust and miscarriages,
therein growing worse, who are running yet f^rther from God, least you make a
wrong account and reckon amiss: and though the man be blessed to whom the Lord
does not impute sin what is that to you, to whom sin is imputed, who are
bewailing your negligence, miscarriages, and peoples ignorance, who are growing
worse and r^nning further from God? except you forsake your miscarriages, and
obey that which convinces you of them, that you may be led out of sin and
turned to God; and do not account the righteousness of Christ to be yours,
whilst you are holding the truth in unrighteousness, which the wrath from God
is revealed against: for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness? therefore turn
to the light which shows you your darkness, sin and miscarriages, and come out
of fellowship with sin and unrighteousness, as well as forsake your
miscarriages, and wait upon the light to know the righteousness revealed from
faith to faith: Romans 1.18. 2 Cor. 6.14. 2 Co^. 4, 5, 6, Romans 16.17. Coll. 3.
Romans 5.^7. Isa. 55.6, 7.
for you must put off the old man with his deeds and come out of
unrighteousness; and put on the new man which after God is Created, if you
intend to be made partakers of his holiness, and the righteousness which is
the gift of God: therefore let the wicked forsake his ways, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts and turn to the Lord and he will have mercy on
them; but if you run on in your miscarriages, and grow worse, you run on in
unrighteousness and forsake the mercy, who instead of turning to God runs
further from him: therefore do not seek to hide your sins any longer but come
out of them, and forsake them, and think not to hide your selves, and to make
a cover for your miscarriages that you may grow worse and continue therein,
with saying, Peter denied his Master, and after found mercy: but remember that
when the Cock crew to put Peter in remembrace of what he had done, he wept
bitterly, and made his return manifest by coming out of his sin, who did not
afterward run on in the same, nor any more deny Christ as he had done therefore
if you take Peter for your example, mind to follow his practice now that you
are made sensible of your miscarriages, weep bitterly as Peter did; humble
your selves under the mighty hand of God, be separate from your sins, and touch
not the unclean thing, make your return manifest as Peter did, and cease
doing wrong any more to Christ and men, and instead of running from God, turn
to him that you may stand in awe and not sin, and this is love to your souls,
if you can receive it.

The Vizard and Cover plucked off from the Wolves back, under which he deceived
and spoiled the sheep; so that his envy and fury appears: or, The tree is
clearly known by the fruit which it bears, etc.
You gilded Tombs, and whited walls who have heaped up all the imaginations,
of all the generations of disobedience, that have gone before, who exceed in
Arts and Notions and changeable religions, who in your Towns have set up your
several likenesses, so that of Images you have choice, which you contend
about, and fight for, and some of them you have set very high, above the Gods
of your Fathers, their Surplesses, Tippits, and Alters, Math. 7.15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20.
etc. But when will you behold what you have brought forth more then another
form and likeness in the same power? is this all that you have been doing all
this while, to throw down one Image and set up diverse in the stead, but no
more life? if theirs had less show, and as much life, shall not they be your
Judges? when will you begin to judge the tree by its fruit, Jer. 23.10, 11.12.
Isa. 3.15. Jer. 5.1, 2. Jer. 5.25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.
and manifest your God in power, and not in words only, when shall it appear
that your God is not an Image? that he has power in you, over your wills, and
perverse ways, your lusts and pleasures, and cursed covetous practices, that
the land may no longer mourn because of oaths, not the poor groan because
of oppression, that the works of God may praise him through you in the streets,
and that it may he once said again intruth, The Lord lives even the Lord our
righteousness, Immanuell who works all our works in us and for us, and not
your practices to testify against you to your faces.

And you Teachers of all sorts who are trying one another in your selfish
natures, when will you try your own hearts, Isa. 56, 9, 10, 11.
and Judge and suffer the light of Christ to lay open your abominations to your
faces that you may see and forsake that for which you have been so often
reproved, Mica 3.11. Jer. 29. Ezekiel. 34. Math. 23.
and for which you are so much offended to hear of: you that pretend to be in
place to reprove others, do you not reprove your own selves, who are in the
steps of the false Prophets, Scribes and pharisees. Is it no sin to be called of
men Masters? nor to seek for your gain from your quarter, to bear rule by
your means, to preach for hire and p ophesie for money? will you live in these
things which did ever burden the Spirit of God? And is this all your
confession and amendment, to call them railers who tell you of it? Are these
ways less horrible since the Scriptures did witness against them, then they
were in your forefathers which had none or is it more raling now then it was
before the Scriptures were written? can you stop the cry of God against you
with these words? or do his messengers delight more in these words in repeating
these abominations then formerly? Or which of the Prophets, Christ, or the
Apostles that could be silent in the sight of such wickedness? Mica 3.5, 11.
Hos. 6.9.
and will this excuse you to say you love not these things, and yet live in
them, and contend for them and imprison your brethren (as you have called them)
and spoiled their goods, if you have them not? are ye seeking their souled
while you are casting them into Prisons? Had Christ ever such a ministry? and
yet your hearts be filled with rage and madness that you cannot bear it to be
told of it, Joh. 15.18, 19, 20. Math. 6.24, 25. etc. John. 16.1, 2, 3. Heb.
11.36, 37.38. 1 Cor. 9.16.17, 18, 19. 2 Cor. 1.4.5.6. 2 Timothy 3.10.11 1 Pet.
3.18, 19 1 Pet. 4.
by such as seek your return, and not your destruction: And all the return
you make, is to complain to the magistrates that you are disturbed, and that
they must protect you in your peace (which is not in the doctrine of Christ nor
way of his Ministers) but if any of you be Christ's Ministers come forth in his
life and power, and do his work, and receive of him what is meet, and not
from the world, and so make proof of Christ in you by his fruits, and then let
him be accursed that railes against you: come out of your stately houses, your
tithes and great parsonages, and with Christ and his Ministers wander in the
desolate places of the Nations, and preach to the people that sit in darkness,
who have souls but no parsonage: leave your master-ships and come to be
servants to such for Christ's sake; cease bearing rule by your means and rule by
the spirit of the lamb; seek the souls and not the gain, cloth your selves
with Christ's suffering and not with the wool; cease to hale their bodies into
Prison, and minister to the souls in Prison, to the opening that eye your
Fathers have blinded with their daubing, and to the quickening that which they
have quenched and slain, that you may present them living to God, Ephe. 5.4.5,
6. and 12. 1 Pet. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Act. 17.16, 17, etc. Act 17.24, 25. Act.
7.47, 48, 49. Math. 6.25, 26.
spiritual men and women, that you may become makers up of the breach, that is
made by the lying divinations of those that went before you, let us see you in
the streets of your Towns and Cities declaring against wickedness, who are
not ashamed to act abominations, before the Sun: come out to witness against
your stage plays, and curious arts which you call pastimes and recreation, the
Devils invention to steal away the minds of people from their God; come into
your markets and concourse of people and witness against all sweareing, lyin^,
idle words, and foolish jesting, which to hear does vex the soul of the
righteous; and all that know the condemnation that must come upon such things:
this was the Ministry of Christ in Prophets and Apostles, which if you were
called to, and faithful in, you would cease to lay snares for him that does
reprove sin in the gate, nor will you then coun^^^ breaking the peace; cease
casting one another out of your livings to put your friends or some of your
form in their stead, and go forth and declare against all the Idols worship
performed in the Idols Temple, and all forms crept in by the man of sin, since
the Apostles; and lead to the same form and foundation without adding
diminishing or wresting that the Saints were, who were led out of the Idols
Temple to cry out against them and the hirelings therein, then will you cease
to beat in your Synagogues, and hale before rulers and partake with them that
are so used: then the Scriptures will justify your practice and preaching
without meanings, and the life will answer the words which came from it; and
when the sheeps clothing is on the sheeps back, and the nature of the sheep
guiding in the inward parts, then such as call you wolves, your practice will
prove them liers, and the Scriptures will to you witness, and you to them
without meanings: then may you lay by your (Heathenish) expositers, and
commentators and imitaters too, when with the same Spirit you are acted in the
same way and so become examples to the people in something of self-denial
besides your words: you have long told your hearers of your faith, and
beleiving God for your souls, but let them see how far you have learned to
trust God for your bellies, and that you have some faith at present and not all
in another world, for that faith which leads not to cast all care upon God
for the body, ill but do little good for the soul, in time of need, for the
body is more then raiment, and the life more then meat, Math. 6.25, 26
so that which will not carry above the carnal will never bring you to the
eternal, and little do they know of faith who take that for it: and now let
your faith be tried in the life, before the world to whom you preach, for the
truth is come and tried you must be, and that faith which will not over balance
the world will be found too light in the sealed balance, and so will that
practice that will not hold with the Scriptures without wresting, for the evil
tree cannot bring forth the good fruit, Math. 7.15.16.17, 18.
nor will that which was spoken by the Spirit of Christ bear witness to the
ways, worships and works of Antichrist, and herewith are you tried, all you
Parish (Masters) Teachers of the Nation, your doctrines your meanings, your
means, your maintenance, your preaching and profiting of the people, and how
the Scriptures is your standing rule to walk by, and whether you be of the
unchangeable Preist-hood, that changes not as the times change according to
the preferment and estates politic, or you be of those who have no other rule
for your way of worship, then people have for the form of their habit: and so
you are rightly called national Ministers, as every Nation has its several
kind so this also, and all pretend Scripture, and by wresting it can make them
all lawful, (in their account) and count all heretics that speaks against
them, so long as the eatthly powers takes their part; but when they change, the
face of that Ministry falls: and thus it is with all sorts whose Ministry the
Scriptures will not own both in matter and form, and maintenance, without the
least adding diminishing or w^esting, Reve. 22.18.19.
for the Ministry of the Gospel changes not, and whosoever God appoints to
rule in the Nations, or what laws ever they set up, the law of Christ stands
in his servants, who have received the law giver in Spirit, so when the wicked
reign such rather suffer then change from the truth, who worship and serve the
Creator, more then the Creature, and these were never ordained by the world,
but by their own Master Christ Jesus by whom the world was made, who agrees
with his servants about what he sees meet, but never made use of the hireling,
who takes his wages from the world for it is not like that the world who loves
their evil deeds, should uphold that Ministry which brings them to light, so
with the light you are seen, and what you have been doing these many years,
and what you are now doing: and your works and your fruits are come to light,
you Parish masters who have given your servants which attend you your liveries,
who serve and worship and bow to you, and they are: Joh. 8.3.4. 2 Pet. 3.3.
Act. 17.5.6.
worn in your streets, and by them it is known whose servants they are, they
are your servants, who are now found scoffing and scorning, and dirting the
simple, innocent, harmless Lambs of Christ, punnishing beating and haling in
your synagogues, and haling before rulers, and swearing against, and false
accusing, to add to the afflictions of the afflicted, and strengthen their
bonds, whereby the Scriptures is fulfilled upon you and them, the sweareing,
lying, filthy communications, and drunkenness that is seen in your streets,
Romans 1.28, 29. etc.
the stage plays, and foolish sports, invented for no other end but to fulfill
the lust, and draw the minds of people from their God, which you have invented
fine names for, calling them pastimes, and recreations which the Saints never
did, nor lived in; the vanity pride and oppression that abounds in your Towns;
couzening, fighting, and suing, and all abominations is found in your servants,
and you are their Masters, which they who have no master but Christ abhors to
live in: so your livery is worn, and your mark is received, and known you are
in the light; and read your names and the number of them, your servants and
service with the work they are found in, which you must own, though you rage
when you are told of it, yet all these belong to some of you, Reve. 13.18.
Reve. 12.7. Reve. 12.7.8, 9, 12, 13.
and by this thus gotten are you maintained, and you own them and their
Prophets, their service and worship, and the servants of Christ they are seen,
who cannot worship any but him, and so they suffer with him all those things to
be done unto them as was done unto him, and in the light they are known, and
the enmity is begun, and is great between the seed of the woman, and the seed
of the Dragon, and there is no more hiding place for the Serpent, nor in Heaven
have they any place; so to the earth they are cast, and there they are rageing
disquieting the inhabitants thereof, and stirring up the powers thereof,
against the lamb to battle, and many are gathered and gathering, and the
numberless number is making up, to go out against a scorned and contemptible
weak and foolish people, with envy and in great rage, with all manner of lying
divinations, that they may beset them round, and smite them on every side, and
the masters, and their servants are all at work: some, they are laying snares,
and setting gins for the innocent, who is set by the Lord to reprove sin,
openly in the gate, and they are ready to swear against them that they are
peace-breakers and turbulent pestilent fellows, when they have almost murdered
them in the streets, all blood and bruised, dirted, and stoned yet they to
prison must for offenders for the words they have spoken: and if any be moved
to go to the Idols Temple amongst them you call the Churches, to speak a word;
or if they speak not a word, Act. 17.5, 6, 7, 8. Act. 21.28.30.31 ver. Act
24.5.6. Joh. 15.18, 19, 20. Joh. 16.1, 2, 3.
if they be but known to be of that seed which will not bow in the house of
rimmon, there they are haled, and beat, and teared, and pulled by the hair,
and beat with their Bibles, and struck down, so that your Churches are more
cru^ll then your markets; as they are further from God, so they are further
from mercy justice and Judgment, not one of you once to consider, that for this
very thing it was that the servants of God, Prophets and Apostles did formerly
suffer beating, whipping, imprisonment, bonds and death, but as though all this
was nothing to you, who are the Masters of this work; you still cry out (like
men stark drunk with blood) to the rulers for greater punnishment to be
infflicted upon those who have none on earth to plead their cause: So that
having prevailed to the filling of most of the Prisons in the Nation, more then
ever your Forefathers the Bishops did, so that such a list may be given of
your inprisoning, stocking, beating, whipping, and blooding, in these three
last years, since the Nation had outward peace, as will not be produced in
three score years of your Forefathers, and further to blood you are hasting
as fast as you can prevail with the Magistrates to fulfill your thirst; how
many petitions have been formed by you Parish masters, to the Magistrates,
against the despised people under the names of heresies and errors, and
blasphemies, and as envious names as your envy cold invent, to incense people
and powers against them, but never yet could convince us to our faces thereof
by the Scriptures, and the Saints lives without wrestings; neither did you ever
deal so Christian like as to desire, that your practice and ours may be
brought face to face before the magistrates, and the Scriptures to stand as
judge betwixt us and you; as it is a declaration, against heresies, error and
blasphemy, but if you may not be our Judges and your own and the Scriptures
too, you cry out of heresy, and fall a rageing, and false accuseing, showing
your selves to be of the generation of backbitters. who will not come to the
light to convince nor be convinced, but cry out to the Magistrates that they
must prepare greater punnishments against us, showing to all, that you seek
more to destroy the bodies then save the souls, crying out to men to Judge us
and censure us, but will not bring us to be tried by the Saints lives and
practice: how many of us have been censured by drunkards and swearers, and
carnal men by your means? but did you ever bring the Scriptures to lay before
us, and out and of that censure and Judge us, as it is without your meaning
added to it? but this you know would fall upon your own backs and condemn your
own practice: if we be such heretics as you call us; why are we not convinced
before authority by the Saints practice and judgment? can any law judge of
heresy but the law of God, and is that which we do now more heresy then
formerly, being the same both in pure life and judgment: you use to accuse us
falsely, saying we deny the Scriptures, yet are we denied the benefit to be
proved and judged thereby and because you say (we are) so, that is sufficient
in your account whereon to pass sentence, and upon this account has Christ
suffered all along, by your generation, and does at this day, who have erred
after the error of Balaam, for gists and rewards, and go after the way of
Caine in envy and murder, and both these are one Spirit, the covetous, the
murderer, seducer are one against the light, which shows your evil deeds, and
the ground of your envy is the same; wherefore did Cain hate Ids brother,
because his deeds were evil, and his brothers good? so for declareing freely
the way of truth, for reproving sin in Priests and people, high and low as we
are moved, now we bear the envy of all whose deeds are evil and cannot endure
reproof.

For them whom the world reproacheth under the name of Quakers who are hated
and persecuted for the Testimony of Jesus.

