VVITCHCRAFT Cast out from the Religious Seed and Israel of God. AND THE BLACK
ART, Or, Nicromancery Enchantments, Sorcerers, Wizards, lying Divination,
Conjuration, and Witchcraft, discovered, with the Ground, fruits, and effects
thereof: as it is proved to be acted in the Mystery of Iniquity, by the power
of darkness, and witnessed against by Scripture, and declared against also,
From, and By them that the world scornfully calls Quakers.

Showing, the danger thereof, that it may be avoided, by all that fear God, as
they will answer it in the Great and Terrible day of the Lord, for he is
utterly against those abominations and wicked practices, and those that hold
them up, are upholders of the Devil's Kingdom, therefore a warning to you all
for going to wizards for Counsel, for you go from God, to the Devil, that go
to take Counsel of a wizard.

Therefore thus says the Lord, See that there be no Witchcrafts amongst you,
There shall not he found amongst you any that uses Divinations, nor any
observer of times, or an Inchanter, Nor a Witch, Nor a Charmer, Nor a Consulter
with familiar spirits, Nor a Wizard, Nor a Necromancer, for all that do those
things are an abomination unto me says the Lord: Deuteronomy. 18. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. ver. Regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither seek after
Wizards, to he defiled by them, for that which defiles or works abomination
shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven: Read Levit. 19. 31. Rev.
21. 27. v. Also, some things to clear the truth from Reproaches, Lies and
slanders, and false accusations, occasioned by Daniel Bott and his
slander-carriers, which Daniel is a member to the water baptized people, of
which accusations cast upon the truth by him and his slander-carriers, truth
has cleared it self and cast out the slanders and false accusations, amongst
them from whence they came, there they do remain, one truth stands clear as by
this farther do appear: read and understand.

Written in Warwickshire, the ninth month, 1654. As a Judgment upon
Witchcraft, and a denial, testimony and declaration against Witchcraft, from
those that the world reproachfully calls Quakers.

London, Printed for Giles. Calvert at the Black spread-Eagle at the West end
of Paul's. 1655

To the READERS and HEARERS of this.
ALl people every where, take head of going to wizards for Counsel, now that
you are forewarned, and the mystery of it is to you in brief laid open and
discovered, as you may read in this ensuing treatise: And all you that have
gone to any wizards, in your life time past, go to the market Crosses, and
declare there openly against them, and their Craft, that you may cast off the
Guilt of the heinous sin, least it remain upon you for ever, and you perish and
dye in that wickedness, unrepented of, and so be cast into the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, prepared for sorcerers and wicked ones, Isai.
30. 33. Mat. 25. 41. Rev. 21. 8. Rev. 20. 9, 10, 15.

And all you that have been to enquire at wizards, you are gone out of the
Counsel of God, and the way to turn in again is to declare against that craft
openly, to be of the Devil, which wizards live in, and utterly to abhor it
for ever; and if you do so: you cast off the Guilt, which otherways you may be
cast off from God, that do not repent of it, and turn from it, and declare
against it, that other, may hear and fear, and take warning also, least you and
they perish, and go down into the pit: To the light of God in all your
Consciences, I speak that which checks and reproves you in secret for the evil
of your doings, that with it your memories may be quickened, and see if it did
not question you secretly in your Conscience, before you went to enquire at a
wizard, and would not have had you to have gone, and after any of you had been,
for Counsel at a wizard, The light of God in your Consciences would check and
reprove you in your Consciences afterward for it, and tell you that you had
been from God, to take Counsel of the Devil in a wizard, and the light in
your Consciences will still accuse you for it, except you go, and declare
against it, and cast it off, you will be in danger to perish. And all now that
you are warned, take heed of sinning wilfully against light or grace received,
if you do read your Reward. Heb. 10. 26, 27.

R. F.

THE BLACK ART, Or, Nicromancery Enchantments, Sorcerers, lying Divinations,
Wizards, and Conjurations, Magicians, and Witchcrafts discovered, to be of the
Devil, and to be acted out of the power of darkness, in the mystery of
iniquity, according to the workings of the prince of darkness, the prince of
the power of the air, the spirit that rules in the children of disobedience,
the familiar spirit, that acts in the Devils Instruments according as it is
written, and proved by Scripture, etc.
THe Witchcrafts is acted in that nature which is accursed from God, and in the
seat of darkness, is wickedness and mischief invented: and the witches and
sorcerers, Inchanters, and devisers of lies, and wizards were in that seed,
that was cast out and accursed from God, and they were of the power of
darkness, and were acted by the spirit of the Devil, according to the working
of the prince of darkness, and king of the bottomless pit, in the working of
the mystery of iniquity, with signs and lying wonders, and all deceiveablenesse
of unrighteousness, in the sorcery, witchcraft, and the abominations which God
was and is against, and all those that act in those sorceries and abominations
shall not enter into the kingdom of God, but be cast into the lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Rev.
22. 15. Rev. 20. 10, 15. Rev. 21. 8, 27.

At the meeting at Tamworth, upon the 2. day of the ninth month. 1654. one
Nicholas Greaton, which came to resist the truth, with much violence that day,
and once before, who takes upon him to be a teacher of a company of people
toward Lichfeild side, was proved to be one that tells destinies, and uses
lying divinations for money, and took their money for telling them lies, about
goods that were gone, and thy divinations were false, they came not to pass,
according to the Enchantments Greaton, and several witnessed against thee
openly that day for it, when the power of darkness was discovered, with thy
lying wonders, also, at which discovery, the Devil in thee was in great rage,
who set thee in wilful opposition against the truth at two several meetings,
to oppose the truth that discovered deceits, and thy deeds of darkness, and
deceiveableness of unrighteousness, with thy lying wonders, and false
prophesies, that were acted and declared, and devived for money, and were false,
in that thou said, as it were proved against thee, and thy sorceries, and lying
divinations, by several that day, wherein thou wast discovered, and the power
of darkness, by which thou art acted: and thou labouredst by the power of
darkness, to have cast out the truth, that opposed thy deceits: but truth being
raised up in the power of the holy Ghost, thou could not, but were further
laid open, and discovered by it, that the Scriptures thereby might be
fulfilled, for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, or what
union has light with darkness, 2. Cor. 6. 14, 15. which darkness acted thee
forth in violence against the truth to resist it, as Sorcerers, Diviners,
Magicians, Astrologers, and Star-gazers aforetime in all ages, because truth
declares against the deeds of darkness, and lying divinations, as it did that
day at Tamworth, against thine Greaton, who like Jannes and Jambres, and also
the Inchanters and Sorcerers, and Diviners, and Conjurers, Wizards and
Magicians of Pharaoh withstood Moses, when he went hy the true power of the
Lord into Egypt for the accomplishing the work that God was about; then the
Devils instruments, Sorcerers, Inchanters and Wizards, that were acted by the
power of darkness, and used witchcraft and lying wonders, they withstood Moses,
and Pharaohs heart was hardened against him, because he hearkened not to the
messengers of God, that were in the light, and endued with the power of God,
but he took counsel of the Wizards, black Artists, and Magicians of Egypt,
that wrought signs and lying wonders, by the power of darkness, to deceive
withal, as it is written, and when Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded
them by his power, the Magicians and Wizards by their sorceries, cast a mist to
blind the eyes of people withal, that were in darkness, as they were, and by
their witchcrafts wrought their lying wonders, to deceive withal, and resisted
the truth of God, and the power of God acted, by his servants. Exodus 7. 19, 20,
21, 22.

And that wicked spirit in thee Nicholas Greaton, sought to harden the peoples
heart against the truth, at Tamworth, who was there discovered to be a fortune
teller, or an Inchanter, a Wizard that tells people lies for money, when their
goods are wanting, and other things in thy Enchantments and lying divinations,
which did not prove true, as several did witness against thee, and thy lying
divinations that day, after that thou stoodst up a while to have maintained thy
craft, sorcery, or lying divination by Scripture, till truth cut thee out of
them, and thy folly was laid open, and that Scripture was fulfilled by thee,
that day, who came of set purpose, to resist the truth: and withstood it, as
Janne, and Jambres withstood Moses, but thy folly was made manifest to men, as
theirs was, that withstood the truth that day at Tamworth, till thy folly was
made manifest, as theirs was made manifest, as it is written, and witnessed
also. Read 2. Tim. 3. 8, 9.

And when thy sotcery, and lying divinations, and witchcrafts were discovered
that day, thou would have justified it by Scripture, but could not, for
they that spoke forth the Scriptures, were not Sorcerers nor Inchanters, (nor
diuiners of lies like thee,) but declared and witnessed against such practices,
and the plagues is due to all Witches and Wizards, and diviners of lies, and
those that join with them, as it was with them that joined to Baal Peor, to
serve other Gods, Numb. 15. 1. to the 10. And the Lord drove out the nations,
that did use such Enchantments, Sorceries, and Witchcrafts, and it was and is
an abomination to the Lord, and they that do such things, shall in no wise
enter into the kingdom of God, but be cast into the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, as it is written and witnessed. Gal. 5. 19, 20. 21 Rev. 22. 15.
Rev. 20. 10, 15. Rev. 21. 8, 27.

Thou broughrst in a place of Scripture to have proved thy sorceries and lying
divinations, which was this: And God said, let there be lights in the firmament
of heaven, to divide the night from the day, and let them be for signs and for
seasons, and for days and years. Genesis 1. 24.

That was nothing at all to prove Sorcery and Enchantments (thou Beast) God did
never say that by them they should use Enchantments, and lying divinations, and
cast figures, and tell fortunes, as Sorcerers and Witches, and black Artists,
Nicromancers, Wizards, that do divine lies, which thing God abhorres; and all
liars and diviners for money, like thee. Read Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. But God set the
Stars in the firmament of heaven, to praise him, and to be for lights upon the
earth, and God made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and
the lesser light to rule the night, he made the Stars also, and God set them in
the firmament of heaven, to give light upon the earth, and not for Witches to
cast figures, and Iyars to divine for money by them, but he set them to rule
over the day, and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness,
and God saw that it was good, as it is written and witnessed. Genesis 1. 15, 16,
17, 18.

Secondly, the Sun, Moon and Stars were set in the firmament of heaven, to know
the regiment or government thereof, and to hold forth the wisdom of God, to
praise him in the host of heaven, in his wondrous works, above the earth, and
not for fortune tellers and Inchanters to divine for money by them, as Wizards,
(and thou diviner of lies,) would have them: let the Scriptures be witness
against thee, and the Star-gazers, Wizards, and all that divine for money
thereby: who would have the Scriptures to bear thee out in that which they
witness against thee, for acting contrary to them.

Thirdly, the Stars were not set in the firmament for such as thou art, to tell
destinies or fortunes by, nor to divine lies for money by, nor to cast figures
by, to cast a mist before peoples eyes, to deceive them by Witchcrafts as
Wizards do, that take peoples money for false dreams, and lying divinations: and
as thou sorcerer and perverter of the Scripture would have them, but the
Stars were set, to give light, and to know the noble works of God in them, and
by them in their covenant, as they stand and keep their course, and to hold
forth the wisdom of God in the firmament of heaven, and also that man might
praise him for his noble acts, and as it is written in the book of Psalms, Oh,
give thanks unto the Lord of Lords, for his mercy endures forever, (to his own
host) Oh, give thanks to him that by wisdom made the heavens, for his mercy
endures for ever; Oh, give thanks to him that made the great lights, for his
mercy (to his) endures for ever, the Sun to rule the day, and the Moon and the
Stars to rule the night, for his mercy endures for ever, and they were not set
to divine lies by, and cast figures, to tell fortunes, so called, and speak
lying divinations by, as thou (sorcerer and diviner of lies) would have them;
the Scriptures witness against thee and all Wizards, and all that truly fears
God will witness with me and the Scriptures, against thee and all diviners of
lies, such as thou art, that perverts the Scriptures. Psalm. 136. 1, 2, 3. to
the 10. 2. Pet. 3.

Again, the Stars were not set in the firmament to inchant and divine lies to
get money by, to make a trade of them, by using divinations as thou (Star gazer
and Wizard) would have them, who thy self art a perverter of Scripture to thy
own destruction, 2. Pet. 3, 16. But they were set there for the praise of God,
and to hold forth his wisdom in the firmament of heaven, to cause men to
praise the Lord, as it is written, praise the Lord, praise ye the Lord from the
heavens, praise him in the highest, praise ye him all his Angels, and praise ye
him all his hosts, praise him Sun and Moon, praise him all ye Stars of light.
Psalm. 147. 1, 2, 3.

It is not said inchant, by the Stars, cast figures by the Stars, nor tell
destinies or fortunes by the Stars, neither is it said, when goods are stolen
or strayed, go to Wizards, they shall tell you of them by the Stars, as thou
would have it, that art an Inchanter, that usest lying wonders, and divine
lies for money, and tell people of those things which never come to pass, and
takes their money for thy lying divinations, as it was proved against thee that
day at Tamworth, thou Inchanter, Star-gazer, and diviner of lies, whose rage
was great after thy deceit was discovered, and thy evil practice declared
against, which the Devil in thee would have alleged for by Scripture, when
the Scriptures turn edge against thee, and cut the off thereby, as David cut
off Goliah's head with his own sword, that defied the armies of the living God,
as thou were in enmity against the truth, and cried fie upon the servant of the
only true God. Therefore thus says the Lord my God, and the redeemer of Israel
his chosen, he that formed him from the womb, I, says he, am the Lord, that
makes all things, that stretches forth the heavens alone, that spreads
abroad the earth by my power, that frustrateth the tokens of liars and makes
diviners mad, (like thee Greaton) read Isai. 44. 24, 25. also to be witness
against thee, and such as thou art, and see what shall come upon all Inchanters
and Sorcerers like thee, read Isai. 47. 9. For Inchanters and Sorcerers trust
in their wickednesses as thou do; and says, none sees them, thy wisdom
which is earthly, sensual and divelish. It has perverted thee, as it did
those that turned after Sorceries, that went from the Lord, and turned into the
power of darkness, as thou have done, that professest God in words, and serves
the Devil in thy actions, and art ready to say in thy heart, I am, and none
else, besides me, as such in thy nature did: read, Isai. 47. 11.

Stand now with thy Enchantments, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries,
wherein thou have labored and all that are deceived by thee, or any such. Let
now the Astrologers, the Star-gazers, (like thee) stand up, and see if they can
save them from those things that shall come upon them; I lament for those that
are turned to Wizards, Astrologers, Star-gazers, and to a diviner of lies, like
thee for counsel; Thus says the Lord by Isaiah the Prophet, and I witness
with him, where he says, you shall be as stubble Inchanters, Sorcerers, and
Star-gazers, and all that trust in you, and take counsel of you; the fire
shall burn you, and you shall not deliver your selves from the power of the
flame, read Isai. 47. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Pharaoh, he had his Magicians (or the Divel's Wise men or Wizards) that were
in familiarity with the Devil, and black Artists to enquire of, when he was
troubled in Spirit, but they could not tell him of the things that God was
about to do, as it is in Genesis the 41. And it came to pass, that in the morning
after Pharaoh had dreamed, that his Spirit was troubled, and he sent and called
for all the Magicians of Egypt, (and all the Divel's Wise men) or Wizards
thereof, black Artists or Necromancers, that were in the Witchcrafts,
Enchantments or Sorceries, and Pharaoh told them* his dream, but there was none
of the black Artists, Magicians, or Wizards that could interpret it, because
it was concerning the things of God and stood in the counsel of the only true
God. Take notice of this; therefore all that are black Artists, the Divel's
Wise men, Witches or Wizards, you are but in Nicromancery, or the Devil's
counsel and familiarity only, and knows not the counsel of God, nor the
things that stands in his counsel, no more then Pharaoh's Magicians, Witches,
Nicromancers or black Artists, Inchanters, Charmers, Consulters with familiar
Spirits, Sorcerers or Wizards did, that were (and all such are) in the Divel's
familiarity and counsel only, and not in the counsel of the living God, and
woe to them that (are in the light, and) go out to take counsel of the Prince
of darkness, and woe, woe, woe to all that go to Wizards, to take counsel,
and woe to the rebellious children, that take counsel, but not of me says the
Lord: vengence is the reward of such that do it knowingly, such are rebellious
children, and in unity with the Prince of darkness, and the King of the
bottomless pit, and guided by the Divel's Spirit, that go to take counsel of
the black Artists* Nicromancers, or the Devil 's Wise men, Inchanters, Wizards,
Sorcerers, and Witches, that are in the lying divinations, and in the mystery
of iniquity, and know the Devil 's counsel only, as Pharaoh's Magicians and
Wizards did, (and not the counsel of God,) and woe to all that go to Wizards,
or the Devil for counsel, for the things of God that stands in his counsel
are hid from them, and all Witches and Wizards as they were hid from Pharaoh's
Magicians, who knew the Devil 's counsel only, and not the counsel of God.
Gen, 41. from the 1. to the 9 Read Isai 30. 1. etc. Rev. 9. 1. 2, to the 13
Rev. 9. 20, 21. Rev. 21. 8, 27. Rev. 10. 1, 2, 3. and 7. 8, 9, 10. etc. Jud. 6,
7. 2. Pet. 2. ^, 2, etc. Rev. 22. 14, 15.

And Joseph's interpretations of Pharaoh's dreams is no ground for Sorcerers,
Inchanters, and black Artists or Nicromancers, and Wizards to divine for money
by; Joseph was not in the power of darkness, but in the power of God, and he
did not inchant nor cast figures as Wizards do but Joseph he knew the counsel
of God by revelation, and nor by divination, for God is against that, and
against those that divine for money, and cause the people to err by their lies,
and lying divinations, as thou Greaton did, and were openly witnessed against
for it, woe to thee and all such, for the Lord will frustrate the tokens of
liars like thee, and make Diviners mad, such as thou art, read Jer. 23. 19, 20.
Mic. 3. 11. Mic. 5. 12, 15. Isai. 44 24, 25.

Joseph said that it was God that should give Pharaoh his answer, and he did
not cast a figure, nor enter into the enchantments as (Star-gazers, and)
Wizards, that divine lies for money, but Joseph he spoke by revelation of God in
him, to him, and by him, and not by lying divination or Witchcraft, God does
utterly abhor that, and he is against it, and against all Diviners or
Conjurers, and will make them mad, as he has said. Therefore Joseph's
interpretation of Pharaoh's dream by revelation without Enchantment, or casting
figures, is no ground for Star-gazers to cast figures, nor for Nicromancers to
conjure and use Witchcraft, and raise up the forms of living things by
Witchcraft, as Pharaoh's Magicians, Sorcerers, Wizards did, to deceive by their
lying wonders, as the Divel's instruments do, neither was Joseph's
interpretation of Pharaoh's dreams any ground for the Divel's Wise men or
Wizards, to tell destinies or fortunes by, as they call it in darkness: for the
Magicians, Sorcerers and Wizards could not tell Pharaoh what God was about to
do by all their Enchantments which was revealed by the Lord to Joseph, without
casting figures, and without Enchantments that are acted by the power of
darkness, in the mystery of iniquity. Therefore silent Wizards, consulters with
familiar Spirits, Charmers, black Artists or Nicromancers, that are in the
Divel's counsel, and all diviners of lies, silent Witchcraft, the Lord is
against it, and you that act in the mystery of iniquity, (by the power of
darkness) God will be avenged of you; take not the Scriptures for your cloak or
cover, that acts in such wickedness, you Wizards and diviner of lies, God is
against you, and all that take counsel of you: woe, woe, woe to you all, and your
partakers: Genesis 41. Exodus 7. 12, 22. Rev. 9. Isai. 44. 24, 25. Isai. 30. Deuteronomy.
18. 10, 11, 12. etc. Rev. 20. 10, 15.

Samuel's telling of Saul of the asses that were gone astray, for which thing
God caused Saul to come to Samuel, for the fulfilling of his word that he had
spoken to Samuel, concerning the kingdom which was true, and fulfilled
according to the word of the Lord, is no ground for that wicked Spirit in thee
Nich. Greaton, to use Enchantment and Sorcery, to divine lies, and tell people
of goods that are stolen by the Divel's servants, for theft is of the Devil
and Witchcraft, and Sorcery, and Whoredom and lying divinations, and they that
do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God* Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Rev.
20. And thou (Sorcerer) tookst peoples money for thy lying divinations, and thy
sayings proved false, as it was witnessed against thee at that meeting at
Tamworth that day, and thou would have made this of Readiness coming to Samuel
thy cloak or cover for thy Sorcery and lying divinations, which will be
witness against thee (and all Wizards, Inchanters,) and diviners of lies, as
thou art, woe, plagues and vengence from the Lord is your reward. Thus says the
Lord, ah, I will ease me of mine enemies, and avenge me of mine adversaries.
Isai. 1. 24.

The Lord had told Samuel all the things concerning Saul, and it came to pass,
and was fulfilled according to the word of the Lord. (But Samuel did not cast
figures, and inchant, and divine lies for money as Wizards do) but it was
revealed to Samuel by the word of the Lord, that which he told Saul, and was
fulfilled according to the word of the Lord: and no ground (for you Wizards) to
divine lies by for money, as thou Greaton would have it, but thou art
discovered, and found to be out of the counsel of God, and in the counsel of
the Devil, and the mystery of Iniquity (as all Wizards) and diviners of lies
and liars are. Joh. 8. 44. 2. These. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. And art for the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, and all Sorcerers. Rev. 21. 8. that divine
lies for money, and are in their Enchantments, and lying divinations, and
would have had that of Samuel for thy cloak, which does uncover thee, and
leaves the bare, and witnesses against thee, and such as thou art, and against
all Wizards, and diviners of lies for money. Now the Lord had told Samuel a day
before Saul came, saying, to morrow I will send thee a man, and thou shall
anoint him to be Captain over my people: and the Lord told Samuel those thing
that he told Saul, and he did not cast figures, nor inchant to know them, as
Wizards do cast figures, and inchant to divine lies for money (and all things
came to pass) as Samuel told Saul, according to the word of the Lord. 1. Sam.
9. 15. to the end 1. Sam. 10 chap.

Therefore silence Witches, Sorcerers, Inchanters, black Artists or
Nicromancers, Charmers, and consulters with familiar Spirits, and Wizards that
are acted and guided by the Spirit of the Devil, and are in the power of
darkness, mystery of iniquity, and Witchcrafts. Let the Scriptures alone, and
pervert them not with your mucky, dirty, fill thy minds: plagues upon you all
that are in Witchcrafts, the burning lake is prepared for you, who are under
the king of the bottomless pit, vengence upon you all; you shall curse your
King and your God, and look upward and be driven to darkness, and be fuel for
the fire, Rev. 9. Rev. 20. Mal. 4. 1. Isa. 8. 19, 20, 21. Rev. 16. You shall
gnaw your tongues for pain, as the vialls of wrath are poured forth, vengence
is your reward, read Rev. 16. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Rev. 20. 10. And thou Greaton
that art in the Sorceries and lying divinations, as it was proved against thee
at Tamworth, who art also a Teacher to a company of seduced people about
Liechfield, or in those parts; let the Scriptures alone, I warn thee and charge
thee in the presence of the Lord, and make not them thy cloak for thy
Enchantments, Sorceries, and lying divinations, plagues upon the wicked in
flames of fire, that trust in lying vanities also, as well as thee: (Silence
all Wizards, let the Scriptures alone, and make not them your covers for
Sorcery) you have no part in any thing spoken of in them, but the plagues and
the burning lake. Reu. 21. 8. Let the Scriptures alone, Wizards and Inchanters,
I warn you and charge you in the presence of the Lord, vengence is your reward
in flames of fire, and woe to all that are seduced (by you) and that go to take
counsel of a Wizard, and an Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a
consulter with familiar Spirits, or a black Artist, or Nicromancer: the living,
dreadful, powerful, mighty God of heaven and earth, he is utterly against
that Nicromancy, or black Art, plagues upon it all, woe and vengence upon all
that hold it up, and that go to take counsel of it, and Wizards, the law of
the dreadful God forbids it, and the almighty God does utterly abhor it, and
it is commanded to be avoided by the Israel of God, for such Witchcrafts were
practiced amongst those nations that knew not God, and it was and is an
abomination unto the Lord: therefore the Lord spoke to Moses to speak to the
children of Israel, to command them to avoid it; And says he, when thou art
come into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not learn to
do after those abominations of those nations: there shall not be found amongst
you any that uses divinations, which thou Greaton do, that divinest lies for
money (as Wizards do) plagues upon thee, thou art to be holden accursed, that
art in the abominations, and out of the doctrine of God and of Christ. Gal. 1.
8, 9. 1. Cor. 16. 22. And again says the Lord by Moses to Israel, in the
command to avoid Nicromancy, or black Art, or Witchcraft, says he there shall
not be found amongst you an Inchanter nor Witch, plagues in flames of fire upon
such. 2. These. 2. 12. Rev. 16. 9, 10, etc. Neither shall there be amongst you
says the Lord a Charmer, nor a consulter with familiar Spirits, nor a Wizard,
nor a Nicromancer, for all that do these things are an abomination unto me
says the Lord, and because of those abominations the Lord drove out the
nations that used those things: for says the Lord unto Israel, those nations
which thou shall possess, hearkened unto observers of times, and unto
diviners, and Wizards, and such like, but as for thee, the Lord thy God has
not suffered thee so to do, and thou shall not suffer a Witch to live, but thou
shall walk before me, and be perfect (speaking to his own people, that were in
covenant with him) for says he I am the Lord thy God, as may be read. Deuteronomy.
18. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Also read, Exodus 22. 18 Mic. 5. 12. etc.

Nebuchadnezzar, Pharaoh, and the heathen, that knew not the only true God, had
their Magicians, Sorceries, Inchanters, or Wizards, to enquire at, and plagues
was the portion of such: woe unto all you that go to Wizards or Charmers, or
consulters with familiar Spirits, or Diviners, and Inchanters, or Sorcerers, or
Conjurers, or Witches, or (the Devils Wise men) Wizards to take counsel, you
are one with them, in the upholding of them, you ought to have no fellowship
with unfruitful works of darkness, but rather to reprove them, and declare
against them: for it is light that discovers darkness: and the children of
light are commanded to declare against the works of darkness: read Ephesians. 5.
11, 12, 13. You that go to Wizards, you hold them up, and so are upholders of
the Devils kingdom (and except you come out from them, and declare against
them, you shall partake of the plagues with them) you that go to take counsel
of Wizards, you go from God to the Devil, and the light of God in your
consciences will tell you the same, and reprove you for it in secret, and woe to
all that do so, read, Isa. 30. etc. Pharaoh he had his Magicians, Sorcerers,
Inchanters, or Wizards, to take counsel of and by their black Art, or the
power of darkness, and Nicromancy, or Witchcraft, they could by their
Enchantments or Conjurations raise up the forms of living things, and they
were in the Enchantments and in the Witchcrafts, of whom Pharaoh took counsel,
and so of the Devil, and plagues was his portion, and vengence from God and
utter destruction. Exodus* 7. 11, 22. Exodus 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 chap.

And Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his
sleep brake from him, and he commanded to call the Magicians, and the
Astrologers, and the Sorcerers (and Wizards) which he had to take counsel of,
Dan. 2. 1, 2.

But because the thing stood in the counsel of God, they could not tell him of
it, that were but in the Devils counsel only, as Sorcerers (and Wizards) are,
for which he was wrath with them. Dan. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

And Daniels interpretations of the dreams, and reading and interpreting the
writing by the Spirit of the Lord. Dan. 2. 19, 20. to the 24. Dan. 4. which was
hid from the black Artists and Astrologers, Star-gazers, and Wizards,
Sorcerers, and Inchanters, and Diviners of lies (like thee) that tells people of
things which are wanting, and destinies, and such like, and take their money for
it, and were lying divinations, woe to such (Wizards and diviners of lies as
thou art) that would have the Scriptures for thy cloak, silent deceit, Daniels
Interpretations by Revelation is no ground for Nicromancy, plagues upon all
Nicromancers, black Artists, Witches, Sorcerers, Inchanters and Wizards, and
diviners of lies; the Devil and his angels are for the lake; go ye cursed
into hell, and all that forget God, to take counsel of you, Psalm. 9. 17. Isai.
30, 33. Math. 25. 41. Rev. 20. 10.

Then thou Greaton and diviner of lies, thou seemedst to have had that prophecy
of Christ for thy cover, and to prove thy Art, till I cut thee out of that,
where he prophesied and said, Imediately after those days, the Sun shall be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars of heaven shall
fall, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken, which is as I said, a prophecy
of the coming of Christ to gather his elect from the four winds, Mat. 24. 29,
30, 31. which thou know nothing of, by thy Sorceries and lying divinations,
that art in the reprobation, professing, God in words, but to every good work
abominable and reprobate, who art an Inventour of evil things, and filled with
wickedness in the reprobation. Tit. 1. 16. Romans 1. 28. to the end, and that of
Joel, the 2. 30, 31, 32. is also no cover for thee, but a Witness against
thee, which is a prophecy of the great day of the Lord, wherein thou and all
such shall cry bitterly. Zeph. 1. 14. etc. and shall be rewarded with flames of
fire. 2. These. 1. 8, 9. Thou Sorcerer and perverter of Scripture, and as Elimas
the Sorcerer was, thou full of all subtilty, and child of the Devil, and enemy
of all righteousness, that perverts the right ways of the Lord, as he did.
Act 13. 6. 7, 8, 9, 10. 2. These. 1. 12.

Woe to thee thou Sorcerer and perverter of the right ways of the Lord, thou
false prophet, that divines (or conjures) for money, and art found amongst the
Inchanters (or Wizards and Star-gazers) that tells destinies and fortunes, (and
casts figures,) and thou tellest of things that are gone, and such like
practices, by a spirit of divination, that brings thee in gain, and thou wast
witnessed against for it, at thee meeting at Tamworth, and proved to be a
diviner of lies for money, and those things came not to pass according to thy
Enchantments neither, but proved lying divinations, and when thou could not
maintain by Scripture, which thou labouredst to have done, thou said thou
would give him his money, again (thou Beast and Wizard) thou art naked and
bare, thy covers will not hide thee, woe to thee, and woe to all Wizards, and
(such as thou art) plagues is your portion, truth clears it self of you) and of
thee, who said thou would follow the servants of the Lord, and weary them
out, etc. But thy lying divinations fails thee, who art of thy father the
Devil, as those were, spoken of in John, 8. 44. And the lake is prepared for
such. Read, Rev. 21. 8. And all liars and Sorcerers are for the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: with the light
which changes not art thou seen and discovered, and comprehended, and from God
and from Christ condemned, and all Witches, Sorcerers, Inchanters, Charmers,
Black Artists, or Nicromancers, evil Inventours, Conjurers, and Wizards, that
are in the power of Witchcrafts, and in the mystery of Iniquity, the Beast and
the false prophet also, and the Devil that deceived them are all for the lake;
howl, howl Witches, Wizards, that peep and mutter plagues upon all such in
flames of fire for ever and ever, and the Devil that deceived them, where the
Beast and the false prophet are, thither must they go, into the lake of fire
and brimstone, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever: woe, woe,
woe to all such, read Rev. 20. 9, 10.

All people every where, that desires to fear the living God, and serve him,
take heed of that wicked spirit in Nicholas Greaton, (and all Wizards) I warn
you and charge you in the presence of the Lord, as you will answer it before
the judgment seat of Christ, in the terrible day of the Lord, read Joel, 2.
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and Zeph. 1. 14, 15. read also Levit. 20 26, 27. and
take heed of going to those that have familiar spirits, or to those that are
Wizards, as you will answer it before the Lord: now you are warned also, read
18. 10, 11, 12. Thus says the Lord, regard not them that have familiar spirit,
neither seek after Wizards, to be defiled by them, I am the Lord, read Levit.
19. 31. You that seek after Wizards disobey the Lord, and turn from him, to
enter into fellowship with the Devil, and take counsel of him in a Wizard,
and are defiled thereby, and the woe is to such that regard not the counsel of
God, where he forbids going to Wizards.

Therefore a warning to you all from the Lord, for hearkening to Wizards, least
you be slain, and dye not the common death of men, and least the plagues come
upon you, for joining with them, as they came upon those that joined to Baal
Peor, (and the Wizards were amongst those cursed people, whom thy Lord drove
out) Deuteronomy. 18. 11, 12. And those that went out of the counsel of God, joined
to Baal Peor, and the anger of the Lord was kindled against them for it, and
the Lord said unto Moses, take all the heads of the people that joined to Baal
Peor, that serve other Gods, and hang them up before the Lord against the Sun,
that the fie^ce anger of the Lord may be turned away from Israel, then Moses
gave a command to the judges of Israel to slay the men that joined to Baal
Peor, and they that went out of the counsel of God, that joined to Baal Peor,
were cut off from amongst the Israel of God, and those that dyed in the plague
before it was stayed, for joining unto Baal Peor, were twenty and four
thousand, as may be read in Numb. the 15. from the 1. to the 10. And those that
rebelled, and took not counsel of the Lord, the earth opened her mouth and
swallowed them up quick, and their houses, and all their goods, they and all
that appertained unto them went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed
upon them, and they perished from amongst the Congregation, and their cry was
great when they went down quick into the pit, for their rebellion against the
Lord, and there came a fire from the Lord, and consumed 200. and 50. men, for
offering incense, that were disobedient to the word of the Lord, and there was
14. thousand and 700 dyed of the plague for their rebellion, Numb. 16. which
were sinners against the Lord, and also against their own souls. Now that you
are warned, if you go to Wizards, take what follows, for you sin wilfully
against the Lord, and also against your own souls, and the light of God in all
your consciences will witness with me, and the Scriptures, if you go any more
to Witches or Wizards you are in danger of loosing soul and body goods, and
all, by the righteous judgments and plagues that may follow you for your
rebellion, as those examples that are instanced before you; read also Jude. 5,
6, 7. 2. Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. And when any shall counsel you contrary to the
counsel of God that says regard not them that have familiar spirits, neither
seek after Wizards, least ye be defiled by them. Levit. 19. 31. If any say unto
you, seek unto them that have familiar spirits, and unto Wizads that peep and
mutter, take not their counsel that would have you to do so, as you will
answer it, for should not a people seek unto their God; and woe to them that
take counsel, but not of me says the Lord, therefore a warning to all that go
from God to the Devil, by seeking after Wizards for counsel, also read, Isa.
8. 19. Isa. 30. 1.

When God was departed from Saul, he went to the Devil (in the Witch of Endor)
for counsel, and then was conjuration used to raise the dead, Sam. 28. And
Saul died not the common death of men, for he slew himself upon his own sword.
1. Sam. 31. Woe, woe, woe to the Wizards, and all that go to take counsel at
them, for they go from God to take counsel of the Devil, and of Sorcerers,
Witches, that are in the power of darkness and Witchcraft, and in the mystery
of iniquity, and those who are under the command of the prince of the power of
the air, and the king of the bottomless pit, read Rev. 9. even of him whose
coming is after the workings of Satan, (with all the power of darkness) and
with signs and lying wonders, and with all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness
in them that perish, that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. 2. These. 29. 10, 11, 12.

All you that turn from the light of Christ Jesus in your consciences, which
shows you sin and evil, you turn from the counsel of God, and from the holy
command, as Cain did, and erred from the spirit of truth, and turned into the
seat of darkness, where Witchcraft is hatched, and all evil is invented, and
so you entering into union with the prince of darkness, the spirit that rules
in the children of disobedience, that turn from the light, into the sear of
darkness, you become inventours of evil things, and follow that which is evil,
and are filled with wickedness, some with Enchantments and Sorceries and
theft, and some with whoredom and drunkenesse, and some with Witchcraft and
lying divinations (and lies and Sorceries arise) and Witchcraft is of the
Devil, acted by the seed of the serpent that is in union with the Devil, and
is given over to work wickednesses, and those creatures also, that are in
familiarity with the seed of the serpent, and so captivated by the Devil,
(that old Sorcerer and Witch) at his will, and see the cause how it enters, and
you into the mystery of iniquity, whereby you become inventours of evil
things, by disobeying the light of God in your consciences, is the cause of
entering into wickedness and Witchcraft, and because they did not like to
retain God in their knowledge, therefore he gave them over to a reprobate mind,
whereby they become evil inventours, and are filled with deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness and Wickedness, working uncleanesse with greadinesse. Romans,
1. 28, 29, 30. etc.

For this cause the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, for disobedience, and
against all unrighteousness, and the unrighteous ones, who hold the truth in
unrighteousness, and against all ungodliness of men, because that which may
be known of God is manifest in them; for God has showed it unto them. Romans 1.
18, 19. And they received not the counsel of it, after manifestation therefore
follows their condemnation, and the condemnation of the world, Joh. 3. 19,
20, 21. And the condemnation of all that love the deeds of darkness, rather
then the light, which light is the condemnation of all that hate it, and act
contrary to it, and the condemnation of all the wicked, and all that are seated
in the power of darkness, and in the mystery of iniquity, and it is also the
condemnation of all Sorcerers, and Inchanters, and Conjurers, Witches, Wizards,
Black Artists, and Nicromancers, false prophets, Seducers, and Antechrists,
that are in the Witchcrafts, and in the abominations, Howl all Witches, the
fire and the lake is prepared for you, and all in your craft, Howl, vengence
upon you all that are Wizards, the fire and the lake is for you all, and woe to
all that take counsel at you, and at Wizards, with the light that changes not
are you all seen, to be in the power of darkness, Witchcrafts, mystery of
iniquity, with the light that comprehends all the world are you comprehended,
and from God, and from Christ are you condemned, the sword is drawn, the fire
burns, you are all compassed, and the chain is upon your necks, reserved for
the judgment of the great day: and for the burning fire, that burns for ever
and ever, Rev. 9. 1, 2. to the 13. Rev, 22. 15. Rev. 21. 8. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Rev. 20. 9, 10.

Some of thy lying divinations that proved false, which thou tookst money for,
thou diviner of lies. and perverter of the right ways of the Lord, as is
proved by Scripture, and now follows more proof against thee by witness,
against thy wicked practice.

First, that William Newway of Tamworth went to Nicholas Greaton, to know where
he might buy some wood for his trade, and he told him he might have some
Southward, in Warwickshire, about Hounby, and the said William Newway sent John
Greenwood to the place where Greaton told Newway he might have some, but when
Greenwood came at the place he was sent to for that purpose, there was none to
be had, and this proved a lying divination, for which the said Greaton took
Newways money: this John Greenwood of Tamworth witness against thee, thou
Inchanter and diviner of lies; John Greenwood

The second lying divination witnessed against is this: Thomas Tailor of
Austrey went to the said Nicholas Greaton, abont a mare that was stolen from his
father, and Greaton said it was impossible for him to have her again, and one
of Tho. Tailors of Austrey neighbors had a mare stolen the same night, and
Greaton said, it was impossible for them to have them again, for he said they
were gone Notthward, but that proved false, for they were gone Westward, and
they had them both again, and when Tailor went to Greaton about them, he
demanded 12 a Piece, because they were 2 several things: but afterward he
would have taken 18 but he would not given him so much, therefore Greaton was
very angry with him, because the said Tho-Taylor that went to him to enquire
about the mares that were stolen, would give him no more, and Greaton flung it
away, and the man took it up, and (the man,) told him he should get it before
he had it, and this John Greenwood can witness from Thomas Tailors mouth: and
also Rice Healey of Tamworth, he can witness this business of Thomas Tailors,
for he was by at that time: John Greenwood Rice Healey witnesses.



The third lying divination is this; Robert Healey of Grindon, did send Rice
Healey to the said Greaton, to know whether he should have some goods again
that were stolen, or no; and he said he should and withal, Greaton told him
that the thieves house stood Southward from the man's house that did send to
enquire, and the doors opened not into a Lane, but into a Backside, Northward:
And he took money for that, and (...) he should have his goods again; but he
had not, and that proved a lying divination also. This is witnessed against by
Rice Healey and Robert Healey.


More lying divinations witnessed against, for which the said Nicholas Greaton
took money for his deceiveableness of unrighteousness; John Farmer having
great use for money, and having kindred in the North Wales, that had much spare
money; he went to Nicholas Greaton, to know whether he should borrow any of
them, and he told him that he might, upon which account he went: It was above
one hundred miles and he spent above twenty shillings, and could borrow none.

Also two Maids, sisters to the said John Farmer declared, that Nicholas
Greaton had told them several things, for which he took money of them, and
they complained of him to John Farmer, that they were all lies: And the said
John Farmer asked him several other questions, for which he demanded four
shillings, and railed against him because he had not so much to give him;
saying, that he was so badly paid by those that professed themselves friends,
that he thought he should be undone, unless that he left that Art: but John
Farmer gave him two shillings. These lying wonders, and false practices, and
lying divinations, are witnessed against, by John Farmer.


Written from the Spirit of the Lord, by a servant of the Lord; known and
beloved of the Lord, yet hated of the World as unknown, yet well known; as
dying, and yet behold I live; as chastened, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing; as poot, yet making many rich; (...) as having nothing, and
yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. ^ chap.

The New Man, the new name; yet known to the world by one, whom they in scorn
call Quaker, but of the Divine Nature made partaker. Behold, what manner of
love is this, that the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the
Sons of God, and now we are the Sons of God, Therefore the World knows us
not, because it knew him not: as it is written, 1 John 3. 1. [According as his
Divine Power has given unto us all things that pertain unto Life and
Godlyness, through the knowledge of him that has called us to Glory and
Virtue, whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises.]
Therefore can we have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but openly declare against them, as it is required and done in Obedience to the
Command of the Spirit of Truth, 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Ephesians. 5. 11, 12, 13. verses.

Witchcraft, declared, against (jndged) and utterly denied, by those whom the
world scornfnlly calls Quakers, and by this let all that accuse (any of) them
of the same, stop their mouth, and be ashamed, for that thing is utterly
abhorred (by the Lord) and by us who are the Lords, whom the world scornfnlly
and reproachfully calls Quakers,
Truth clearing it self of reproaches, lies and slanders, and casts out some
false accusations, turning them both from whence they came, into the
reproachful and lying generation again, that (in it, and) amougst them, the
reproachers, liers, slanderers, truce breakers, slander-carriers, (and upon the
heads of false accusers) they may remain, which were occasioned by Daniel Bott
of Armitadge near Polsworth in Warwickshire, one of the water baptized members,
that belonged to that company which used to meet at Shittington, in the said
Warwickshire. etc.
Whereas that Daniel Bot as abovesaid, came to a meeting (of the Lords people)
at Troycrosse in Licestershire, and other of the water baptized people with him
to the said meeting as aforesaid (some of them received the truth in much love)
and at that time the said Daniel was much tendered (and several of the baptized
people) who desired and with his consent also: entreated and earnestly desired
those men that the world reproachfully calls Quakers, whom the Lord sent into
these parts, that they would on the first day of the week, next after that:
meet with them (the water baptized people) at Shittington, which was then
agreed and concluded of, provided that the meeting (for the men called Quakers
as abovesaid) might be appointed at another house in Shittington (and not where
it used to be) that those of that meeting of the water baptized people that
(met there as many of them as) would come to hear them might, and those that
were not free to hear them, might keep their own meeting, because they were
tender of them. etc. It was so concluded of at Troycrosse that time, and after
that, notice being given of it, there was a pretty company came together, and
all met together at that house where the meeting was appointed for the men by
the world called Quakers to be at, which were at the meeting that first day at
Shittington according to promise, and appointment according to the ordering and
disposing of by the spirit and wisdom of the Lord, who stood in his counsel,
and to be acted forth and ordered according to his divine power, and the good
pleasure of his will, and at the said meeting at Shittington the truth was
declared that day (in much power, to the praise of the Lord, and to the glory
of his grace) and it wrought upon the spirits of many as they then witnessed,
and one came from Burton upon treat as it was said, an Elder also of the
baptized people (of purpose) to oppose the truth that day, whose folly was made
manifest according to that saying in Scripture. 2. Tim. 3. 8, 9. but the people
received the truth in so much love (some of them, that they and the man of the
house spoke unto him, and withal to depart out of the house, which he did
(though he was an elder of the baptized people) and at that time the said
Daniel Bott, stood up for to plead for the truth, and against the opposer, to
wit the Elder of the water baptized people that came from Burton as aforesaid,
and Daniel confessed that day, that he never saw so much into himself (and his
own heart) as he had and then did since he met with those men (whom the world
calls Quakers) and there was another meeting the next day at Troycrosse
again, at which meeting Daniel Bott was much broken into tenderness and wept
that tears ran down his cheeks, as several can witness, therefore Daniel,
that which gave thee a sight of thy sins, and convinced thee of thy evil deeds,
and caused thee to confess with tenderness that thou never saw so much
into thy self, as thou did since thou saw us, and heardst the truth
declared by us, (whom the world calls Quakers) and that which at that present
let thee see thy stubborn will, and bridled that rash wild heady nature in
thee, and did eternally convince thee, that I own and it shall against thee
answer for me and the truth) which is thy condemnation, the light which thou
have erred from, and an enemy unto the light in thy conscience is my answer,
and a witness still against thee and thy deceit, go where thou will, and God
almighty is judge, to which that in thy conscience shall witness, and in thy
condemnation, answer (upon thee) his judgments to be just. also read Mal. 3.
5. Mal. 4. 1. The same week that the meeting was at Troycrosse as aforesaid,
there was a meeting (of the Lords people) at Harliston in (the county)
Staffordshire, and Daniel Bott came thither also, and said to one of the men
(called Quakers) that he was his spiritual father in Christ (and had begotten
him again in the gospel) and said there was many instructors, but there was but
few fathers, and said the spirits of the Prophets were subject to the Prophets,
and after the friend by the spirit of the Lord had spoken something to him in
exhostation, and his spirit was much subjected, and tender he was then also, as
many can witness, and the servant of the Lord ing the danger that Daniel might
fall into if he gave way to the tempter, being convinced and having some
opening in his mind, therefore the servant of the Lord did exhort Daniel to
watchfulness, (as Christ Jesus exhorted to watch and pray, least there should
be an entering into temptation. Math. 26, 41. but afterward Daniel not abiding
in that which did convince him of the evil of his heart he gave way to his will
and the deceit, and so ran out into extremes rashly and unadvisedly (without
the true wisdom) and entering into the temptation, did evil, and also opened the
mouths of evil doers, to speak evil of the truth, and though he did so, and
fell of into delusions, error, treachery and deceit, so did Judas when he
turned from the light, but destruction was his end, and all who turn from the
light which comes from the Lord Jesus, Judas is the way to perdition and
destruction, Daniel Bott, the light of Christ in thy conscience, which did
convince thee of the evil of thy heart, and did cause thee to confess the
same, that light is my witness for the truth against thy deceit, and in thy
condemnation remember that in thy life time thou wast warned, who received not
the truth with the love of it, as to continue therein, but takes plagues in
thy unrighteousness, as such did which were enemies to the truth as thou art,
therefore great is thy condemnation as theirs was* 2. These. 2. 12. offenses
must come as it is written in Scripture, but woe to thee and them, by whom ye do
come, it were better that a millstone were hanged about the necks and be cast
into the sea, then to offend one that believes in the Lord Jesus, as thou and
such may read. Math. 18. 6, 7. to the truth of this against the deceit that in
the conscience shall witness, in the terrible day of the Lords fierce wrath,
revealed from heaven in flames of fire, upon the children of disobedience, who
are enemies to the truth of the Lord Jesus, as thou have read thy condition, 2.
These. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9. answered with that in thy conscience which thou have
back-slided from, and disobedient to, but the light is the same that it was,
and though thou be backslided from it, yet it stands a witness against thee,
who have erred from the truth, and would have overthrown the faith of some,
as Hymeneus and Philetus did, but the spirit of truth witnesses against thee,
as it did against them by such as live in the faith of the son of God, as he
did which said, none the least he foreknoweth them that are his, and let every
one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity. Gal. 2. 20. 2. Tim. 2.
17, 18, 19. but thou and all such as depart from the light, turns into the
iniquity, who art found in that mystery the workers of iniquity, and says
Christ, though ye have prophesied in my Name, and be found in the work of
iniquity, I will say, I know you not, depart from me you that be workers of
iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2. to the 13. verse. Matthew. 7. 12. 23. Therefore, Go
ye cursed into Hell, prepared for the Devil and his angels: for the wicked and
ye that forget God, shall be turned into Hell: therefore Woe to thee, and all
such, Esa. 3. 11. Psalm 9. 17. Matthew 25. 41. to the end.

Therefore, all whose minds are turned with the light toward the Lord Jesus,
from whence the Light comes; upon it wait, and in it abide, that ye may be
preserved in the grace, and be kept for turning into error and deceit: and as
Daniel has done, who has turned from the light as Judas did, and so is an
enemy to the Truth as he was: but though he have so done, who now turns the
grace of God into wantonness and lasciviousness: Woe from God is his reward and
the reward of all such: And though Truth have many enemies now, as it ever had,
yet Truth is the same that it ever was. And though the said Daniel, by turning
from the Light, makes shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience, as Himeneus
and Alexander did that were given over to Satan, (as he is) yet some held fast,
and does hold fast Faith and a good Conscience, in which the mystery of Faith
is held, praised be the Lord, and Truth is the same still, 1 Timothy 1. 19. 20. 1
Colos. 1. 27. and 1 Timothy 3. 9. And though many that had for a time walked with
Christ, and because ye though it hard To eat his flesh and drink his blood:
and (whereupon) ye forsook him, (to wit Christ) and walked no more with him,
John 6. to the 6-7. yet the Truth was the same, though ye did back-slide, and
ye that knew the word of eternal Life, abode then, and so do ye now, John 6.
6. 7. to the end.

And whereas many slanders has been cast upon the Truth occasioned by Daniel
Bott, upon him and his slander-cariers, they are cast, and with them does
remains (Truth is cleared, and has cleared it self of them all) and Daniel the
light in thy conscience, which did convince thee, and tend thee for a time, and
let thee see the evil that thou had done thee; I desire but the light I own,
which thou art back-slided from, and an enemy unto; yet the light changes not,
but is the same; (and in thy condemnation, Remember thee it will of what
against the Truth thou have done, and as was said in that Epistle which after
was red at thy house amongst them then met, appears upon Record to witness
further for the Truth, and against thee and thy deceit.

Written from and witnessed by and with the Spirit of the Lord in his children
and servants that are guided thereby; though unknown, yet well known, and as it
was, it is, in the life which the Scripture witnesses to; and against all
ungodlyness, and unrighteousness of men, which hold the Truth in
unrighteousness as thou do, who by us art witnessed against, Romans 1. 18.
19. 28. 29. Romans 8. 14. 15, 16. Gal. 4. 6. 7. 1 John 3 1. 2. 2 Cor. 6. 1. 2.
to the 15. John 1. 12. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 22. 23. Ephesians. 5. 11. Romans 2. 5. and 6.

And the several passages and particulars by several witnesses, some in one
particular and some in another, for the Truth, and against the deceit of Daniel
Bott, and also here witnessed by several friends and known neighbors near
about where he livethin the outward.

I John Farmer, and Anthony Bickley, and William Stowrey, and Thomas Teler, and
John Smith, and Hugh Read, Thomas Do, and Thomas Orton, and others, can
witness to (the Truth) and against the deceit as aforesaid, concerning Daniel
Bott. FINIS.

