The Pure LANGUAGE Of the Spirit of Truth, Set forth for the confounding false
Languages, acted out of pride, ambition, and deceit.
OR Thee and Thou, In its place is the proper Language to any single person
whatsoever.
Proved by several Examples, that is herein laid down by plain Scripture, for
the convinceing, and stopping the mouths of gainsayers: many more Examples
might have been laid down, but what is herein mentioned and proved by
Scriptures are sufficient for the same.
THe Word of the Lord God, to all you who cannot bear the pure language of the
Scriptures, and to all who are in the Spirit, and the language they were in
that gave forth the Scriptures.

First, Ye that have professed the Scriptures to be your rule, Priests, People,
Judges, Nobles, and Kings, Fathers, Professors and Rulers, who, thee and thou
the Lord God, and Christ in your prayers, and when any thee and thou you as
aforesaid, you are them who are ready to murder, here you do manifest to be
them that are out of the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and such as seeks
honors one of another, John 5.44. and you are such who exalts your selves
above all that is called God, 2 These. 2, 4. who your selves Thee and Thou God,
and cannot take that your selves, which you give unto God, and Christ, here
that which must be abased is exalted, which the hand of the Lord is against.
God said Thee and Thou to Adam, and Adam said Thee and Thou to God again, and
God said Thee and Thou to Moses, and Moses said Thee and Thou to God again:
Jacob said Thee and Thou to Laban, and Laban said Thee and Thou to Jacob again,
Thee and Thou is the proper language throughout the Scripture to any single
person of what degree or account soever, search and see.

Secondly, You who profess the Scriptures to be your rule, all who are
offended at the proper, and also the plain language of the Spirit of truth: and
Thee and Thou, to any single person whatsoever, either King, Lord, Duke, Judge,
Captain or Officer, you are ignorant of the life of the Scripture, and also
ignorant of the language of the Spirit of truth, and knows not the life of the
holy men of God; that said, Thee, and Thou to all sorts of people in the single
person, where and whatsoever, as you may read at large in the books of Moses,
Samuel, and the books of Kings, Chronicles, and the writings of the Prophets
and holy Apostles: they all, upon any occasion whatsoever, spoke Thee and Thou,
the words in their place are proper to any single person, as the Scripture
largely witnesses.

I instance some examples for the better information of the simple ones sake,
who desire to walk blamelesly before the Lord, and also to stop the mouth of
the deceit therein: silence all flesh, and stand still subtilty.

First Example. In the beginning God spoke to Adam in paradise, and said Thou
to him there, as you may read Genesis 2.7, 8. and 16, 17. Verses: and Adam in the
paradise there said Thou to God again, read Genesis 3.9, 10, 11, to the end of the
chapter.

The second Example. The Lord God of heaven and earth, Creator and Governor
thereof, he spoke to his servant Moses, as a man speaks to his friend, and in
his word said Thee and Thou to him, and Moses the servant of the Lord spoke of
God again, and said Thee and Thou to him, and God was not offended at him for
it, neither did he say it was unmannerly or uncivil, as proud flesh does now,
neither did he say, take him away, I am in authority, and what a base word is
this to Thou me, as exalted proud flesh does in these days: Gods presence,
power and authority has union with Thee and Thou, then that power and
authority that cannot bear Thee and Thou is not of God, but judged with the
highest power, even that which is of God, When Moses did thou the powerful
God, and in his presence when he spoke face to face with him, as a man speaks
to his friend, God was not offended at him for it, but loved him dearly, and
said, his presence should go with him, and his goodness should pass before
him. Read ye the sweet and pure language between God and Moses, who friendly
did Thee and Thou each other, and the love stood firm; and with God and his
friends it is the same same now as it was, Exodus 33.11, 12, 13, 14. to the end
of the chapter. But they that are the servants of the Devil cannot bear the
language betwixt God and his servants, but shows another language, and so
manifests whose servants they be, of the Devil.

The third Example. When God spoke to Jacob, he said Thee and Thou to him, and
Jacob at that time when he spoke with God and saw his face, he then in the
presence of the Lord did say Thee and Thou to him again, and the Lord God was
not offended at Jacob, for saying thou to him, as proud flesh and the servants
of the Devil are offended at the word Thou, spoken by the servants of the Lord
in this generation, the living God, he was so well pleased with Jacob, who said
Thou, to him, that he blessed him, and gave him power, and said, As a Prince
have thou power with God, and with men, and have prevailed, Genesis 32.26, 27, 28.
read that sweet language betwixt God and Jacob, which is now betwixt God and
his seed, which language is called uncivil or unmannerly now with the Serpent
and his seed, to say Thee and Thou, but God did not tell Jacob that it was
uncivil, neither did he say it was unmannerly, to say Thou to him. And in his
presence, when he saw Gods face, and was preserved, and received the blessing
from the Lord, Genesis 32.28, 29, 30.

A fourth Example. Between godly parents and their children. For, godly parents
did Thou their children, and children did Thou their parents again, and they
were not offended at them for it (as pride is now) when Jacobs Sons did Thou
their godly father, Genesis 43.1, 2, 3, etc. Genesis 47.29, 30
Jacob did not say to his sons that it was an uncivil and unmannerly word, (as
proud and ungodgodly parents are ready to say now to such children as fear and
obey the Lord) but read the passages betwixt Jacob and his sons, who said thee
and thou to each other; as words came in their places; and let their practice
judge your pride and deceit, who are of the Serpent and his seed, that are at
enmity with the seed of God, and are offended at thee and thou, which they were
not, nor are not now who are of Jacob and his seed, blessed for ever, but the
Serpent and his seed are accursed, and cast out from God, therefore are they
offended at the children of God, for speaking the language of the Spirit of
truth, witnessed before amongst the holy men of God. Read Genesis 43.1, 3, 4, 5.
Genesis 47.29, 30. and Genesis the 48. and 49. chapters.

The fifth Example. Jeptha, who was a Judge in Israel, he did thee and thou his
daughter; and the Judges daughter did thee and thou the Judge her Father again;
and though he were a Judge, he was not offended at his daughter for saying,
Thou to him, being one that feared God, Judge. 11.34, 35, etc.
and served him, neither did he call it uncivil or unmanerly: as proud flesh
does now, and such parents as are untaught the fear and obedience to the Lord,
which cannot bear the language of the Spirit of truth, either from their
children or others that are in the truth, witnessed in the holy Scriptures, for
that example Read Judges 11.34.35.36. Verses.

The sixth Example. Naomi did Thou Ruth her daughter in Law, and Ruth did Thou
Naomi her mother in Law again, Ruth 1.16.17. etc.
and it were neither uncivil nor unmannerly, as pride and ambition says it is
now, that is offended at the pure proper language, who cannot bear thee and
thou, read that example of Ruth and Naomi, to judge your pride who are out of
their practice, and offended at plainness of speech, Ruth 1.16. etc. Ruth
3.5.6.

The seventh Example. Between masters and servants: Masters did thee and thou
their servants, and servants did thee and thou their Masters again, and were
not offended at them for it. Abraham did thee and thou his servant, Genesis 14.2.
and 4. and Abraham's servant did thee and thou his master again, and he were not
offended at him for it, Genesis 24.5.6, etc. though he was great and rich, Genesis
24.34.35.36. to the 43. etc. he were not offended at his eldest servant for
saying thou to him and to his kindred, Genesis 24.1.2.3.4.
as proud flesh, and such as are great and rich, who are of the serpents seed,
are offended now at thee and thou, either from their servants, or such as truly
fear the Lord and serve him, therefore do they not follow Abraham the father of
the faithful, judge your selves with the life of his words; and for your
better information in that, read the 24. chapter of Genesis.

The eighth Example. Read those other Seripures also, where servants did thou
their masters, though great and rich, even Kings, etc. 1. Sam. 29.8.9.10. 1.
Sam. 16.15.16.17. verses. 1 Kings 20.31.32.33.34.

The nineth Example. Abraham's servant did thou the damsel, Genesis 24.47.
Rebecha, when he went to take her to be his masters sons wife, he did thou the
damsel Rebecha and her parents, and they were not offended at him for it, but
Rebecha's brother showed great kindness to him, as the rest did, and he called
him the blessed of the Lord, Genesis 24.31. etc.

The tenth Example. When Daniel and the three Children were examined before the
King, they said thou to him, even to the King, in answer to their examination
before him, Dan. 3.16.17.18.

The eleventh Example. The Chaldeans did thou the King, and he were not
offended at them for it, read Dan. 3.8.9.10.

The twelfth Example. Jeremiah the true Prophet of the Lord did thou the Priest
and the Governor, when the Priest smote Jeremiah on the face, out of the pride
of his wicked heart, and caused the servant of the Lord to be set in the stocks
in the high gate of Benjamin: Read Ier. 20.1.2.3. to the 9. verse.

The thirteenth Example. Christ Jesus the dear Son of God, in answer to his
examination before the judgment seat did thou the Judge, as in his examination
and answer may be seen more fully. Read the Scriptures for proof to that
Example, John 18.21.22.23. Matthew. 26.60.61.62.63.64.65. Matthew. 27, 11. Mark
15.1.2. John 1^ 31.32.33.34.

The 14. Example. When Paul was before the King, and Governors, and Officers,
he did Thou the King, and Thou the chief Priest, and thou the Governors, and
Officers, when he spoke to any one in particular, in answer to his examination
before them, or otherwise, as he was moved to speak to any one of them in the
particular, and he was not put in prison for saying thou to the King, though
the high Priest smote him on the face, as Priest Pashur smote Jeremiah, showing
forth the pride and wickedness of their hearts, and here the Priests and proud
flesh may read their figures and such as are like Priests like people. Hosea
4.9. Hosea 6.9. Silence proud flesh, of what sort soever, that cannot bear thou
the word of the Lord, from his servants that do his Commands also: Read the
example of Paul in answer to his examination before the Judgment Seat, who did
thou the King, and thou the Judge, Acts 6.1.2.3. etc.
and thou the Governors and Officers that he had to speak to, and with them
one by one or in partitulars, for proof of that example see Acts 24.10.11. etc.
Acts 25.9.10. etc. at large, Acts 23.24.25, 26. Chapters.

I is a particular, thee is a particular, and Thou is a particular, Single pure
proper and plain unto one.

We is many, Ye is many, they is many, and You more then one. That which
cannot bear thee and thou, to a single person what sort soever, is exalted
proud flesh and is accursed with a curse, and cast out from God, but such are
the serpent and his seed, therefore silence deceit, pride and ambition, who
art of that seed and under that curse stop thy mouth, who professes the
Scriptures to be thy rule, and takes them to talk of as the Serpent did, Matthew.
23.33. but works contrary to them as such ever did, and when any says thee or
thou to thee, thou snuffs like the wild Ass: Read thy self, Jer. 2.23.24.
with the life of the Scriptures art thou judged, 1 Cor. 2.15. And with the
Scripture art thou also cast out from the people of God, who has not yet
learned their Language, who lives in the lust, hypocrisy, pride and ambition,
Matthew. 23.27.28, 29. to the 34.
who have professed the Scripture to be thy rule, but now thy hypocrisy is
discovered, who cannot endure the language and life that gave forth the
Scripture, therefore art thou manifest to be the Serpent, and the painted
harlot, which was ever judged with the Sprit of truth, in which is the pure
language, which is the Judge of all false languages, and the Judge of unclean
spirits, which unclean sprits now themselves do manifest, which gnaw their
tongues, and gnash their teeth, Rev. 16.10.11. Isa. 8.21.22.
fret themselves at the pure language of the Spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures. Matthew. 23.31.32.33. Zeph. 3.8.9. etc.

R. F.
Many other examples might be instanced, but these are sufficient to convince
and stop the mouths of gainsayers, about that which in the Examples before
mentioned.

Written from us, whom the world calls Quakers; who witness and practice the
pure, proper, and single plain Language, as the holy men and people of God of
old time did, which the Scriptures bears testimony unto, etc.

Written in Leichestershire the beginning of the 11. month by one known to the
world by R. Forneworth.



Nakedness a sign or figure.
When the Lord spoke to Isay, in the year that Tartan came to Ashdod, at the
same time spoke the Lord by Isay the son of Amos, saying, go and loose thy
sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoes from off thy feet: And he
did so, walking naked and barefoot, and the Lord said, like as my servant Isay
has walked, naked and barefoot three years for a sign and a wonder upon Egypt
and Ethiopia, Isay. 20.1.2.3. So shall the King of Assyria lead away the
Egyptians prisoners, and the Ethiopians Captives, young and old, naked and
barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt, and they
shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their expectation, and of Egypt their
glory, 4, 5. Verses.

Now if the Lord in this generation speak to any to put off their gaudy attire,
and to go in sackcloth, and to be a figure to the people, that so should all
the pride and glory of the world and of the pomp and Egyptian craft be cast off
and laid aside:

That would be a wonder to this generation, to them that trust in flesh and go
down to Egypt for help, and if the Lord should in this generation cause one to
put off his garments and his shoes, and go naked and barefoot, three days, to
show to all, that as he is naked and barefoot three days before them, without
covering, so must they be all uncovered, and their shame and nakedness appear
before the Lord, and before all, it would make them startle, and they would
wonder at it, in this Egyptian proud lustful generation, as they wondered at
Esaias, when he went naked and barefoot 3. years for a sign. The Lord says,
strip, go make you bare, cast off all your clothes of dishonesty, and do not
cover you with a profession, and pretense of godliness, and still walk in
craftiness, guile and deccit, for your shame shall appear, and all your covers
will be too narrow to hide you, for the vail is renting away that has been
spread over all nations, Woe to the crown of pride, behold ye despisers, wonder
and perish, for I will work a work in your days, which you will in no wise
believe, though a man declare it to you, beware least that come upon you which
is spoken of in the Prophets.

Read and understand, shame and confusion is coming upon all Egypt, Ethiopia
and Idumea, and the people of Gods curse, one woe is past and behold a second
woe is coming.

Dwell in the light, which is the condemnation of the ungodly, for all they
that are contrary to the light, are without the clothing of God, among such
does the Lord send some of his Children, to go naked and put off their clothes;
a figure and a sign of their nakedness, who are naked from god, and clothed
with the filthy garments, so ye all dwelling in the light, which never
changes, ye stumble not but are led out of darkness, and from among the
unbeleivers, where the signs are sent, and such as are from God, which light
leads up to God, in which is the unity, so in the light all dwell.

FINIS.
Printed for Giles Calvert at the black spread Eagle near the West end of
Paul's. 1655.


