DEATH in a New DRESS: OR Sportive Funeral ELEGIES.

Commemorating the renowned Lives and lamented Deaths of these Eminent
Personages, Robbin the Annyseed-water Seller. Martin Parker the famous Poet.
Archee the late Kings Jester. The Gentlewoman that so often travailed up
Holborn-Hill upon her Bum, etc.


WITH Healths) hitherto not in fashion: And other Drollerical Crotchets, very
delightful.

By S. F.

LONDON, Printed for ISAAC PRIDMORE at the Sign of the Falcon near the New
Exchange, 1656.

DEATH in a new DRESS: OR Sportive Funeral ELEGIES: Commemorating the Renowned
Lives, and Lamented Deaths of these Eminent Personages, Robbin the
Annyseed-water Seller. Martin Parker the famous Poet. Archee the late Kings
Jester. And the Gentlewoman that so often travailed up Holborn-Hill upon her
Bum, etc.

With other pleasant Crotchets.
On the Death of Annyseed-water Robbin.
AN ELEGY.
HAve I not waited long enough; five years,
And yet no Heliconian Quack appears
In print, to manifest his mighty skill?
This Theme would seat him on the Muses Hill
Higher then Phoebus self; Ye glorious Samuel Smithson. Humphrey Crowch.
Lawrence Price.
three
Who grasp the Poles of Star-crown'd Poesy;
Has some Cask-piercing Drawer Smalbeer.
Youth poisoned your wine
With wicked Laethe? Did you ever dine
On Turnep-tops, without or Salt, or Butter,
That amongst all your Canzonets, or clutter
You failed to mention this deceased Robbin,
It seems you ne'r-quaft Nectar in his Noggin,
As I have done; then may my Verse be mighty
Spirited by his potent Aqua-vitae:
Was not thy voice (dear Robbin) very sweet?
Were thou not wondered at in every Street?
Anyseed-water,
Water fine;
Water that passes
Ale or Wine.
Thy tongue took every man (for 'twas a charm)
But then that wooden Vessel on thy Arm
Was more magnetic, 'twas a Pest'lence Can
Could put the Staggers on the Puritan;
Yet Ananias Goggle-eyes would swear it,
By Yea and Nay, Brother I cannot forbear it;
This is some Son of Belial, (and his Punk)
Who has in charge to make the godly drunk:
How many whim-crown'd She Is (the chaste, chaste Wives
Of witty Citizens) did owe their lives
To thy Spagirick Water, when the Fits of the Mother.
Qualm
Could not be laid by Spell, or Hopkins Psalm,
Drench her but with a Cup of Robbin's Nectar,
And next Morn send her to St. Anthlin's Lecture,
She shall do well; How many aged Sybils
Tasting thy Stream, would have their Quirks and Quibbles,
Dancing devoutly, who some hours before
Sat like Stone Statues ore a Portal door;
Nor were thou framed (as I my self can tell)
Without the Adjunct of a miracle;
Problem of Sexes; Natures Jumble; Adam
And Eve conglutinated; Sir, or Madam;
Harry, or Madge; a Knight and Lady Errant,
With Rem in Re, and double Badge for warrant;
A Philip and Mary; thou could do
The office of the Man and Woman too:
Rare Enigmatick Robbin, when grown great
With-child thy self, thou could perform the feat;
Which gives the world Inhabitants, so we
(We must confess) are doubly bound to thee:
But this (though great) is not the chiefest matter,
Where, now, shall we attain such heavenly water;
(Such Chemical Nepenthe) that has made
More haughty Beggars of the Ryming trade
Then Helicon it self; while thou did give
Thy Vessel vent, John Looks himself did live,
And learned Tailor played upon his Lyre,
(With happy Ale and Wildings) by the fire:
Weep then (with me) all you that had the hap
To taste of that which flowed from Robbin's Tap:
O partial Fate! that which did others save,
Could not protect our Robbin from the Grave.
HEALTHS.
Here Is a Health to that Serving-man never had's head-bare,
And a Health to that Poet, whose cloak was never thredbare.
Here Is a Health to that Punk, never took Money,
Though proffered it for the use of her --
Here Is a Health to that Cook, that never likt his fingers,
To the late Cost-wold-Games, and the Clerkenwel Ringers.
Here Is a Health to that Player that never was proud,
And to a Billinsgate Scold that never talked loud.
Here Is a Health to that Letcher that never was lustful,
And to that Grandee of State that never was distrustful.
Here Is a Health to that Host that loves to be Scoring,
And to that Royster that never loved Roaring.
Here Is a Health to that Captain that never drew Sword,
And a Catch-pole that is honest in's deed and his word.
On the Death of the most Renowned Poet, Mr. Martin Parker.
An ELEGY.
HOw has it happened (speak ye tardy Nine)
That glorious Parker (he whose every line
Deserves a Panegyre) has all this while
Slept like a Slave, beneath his Funeral Pile,
And no new Johnson, Dun, or learned Gill,
To Dub the distillations of his Quill,
To Canonize his Canzonets, which are
Yet extant on each Market Day, or Fair.
Spirit of Orpheus; Archimedes skill
Would fail (should he bring in his tedious Bill)
To number all thy curious Canticles,
Thy Octaves, Epiceds, and Madrigals,
Which (as was used of old) did kindly greet
The peoples ears, as they did pass the street;
Sung to the pleasant Treble and the Base,
The Small or Great, the Sharp or Flat, to grace
Thy sublime Sonnets; was not every Song
Of thine applauded by the thirsty throng,
So (as to Thracian Orpheus) Trees did nod
When thou were worried by the Delphick god;
And Stones did move; nay, gave a vocal sound,
Till with loud laughter every verse was crowned.
Here thou were Pindar, Alceus, Moschus, Bion
Apollos loved one, and the Muses Lion:
But these were but thy sports; some minutes spent
In Mimmick state, to palliate meriment:
Let us behold thee in thy German Story,
There thou art Lucan, while thy Muse (all glory)
Does sing the Austrian Ruins in a tone
More strong then Stentors, with O hone! O hone!
Say thou so Silius; here are other things,
The Deeds of Pacolet, and Pagan Kings:
Oh! in what stately Verse thou did discourse on
The Doughty deeds of Valentine and Orson;
Dull Prose before, and fit for Boys and Girls,
Thine for the solace of great Lords and Earls.
Speak ye nine Sisters, for ye only know
Whence did this sprightly sparkling Torrent flow;
How has our Parker above all inspired
His Lines so much cried up, so much desired?
I have't; He always bathed his Beak in Ale,
Toping whole Tubs off, like some thirsty Whale;
Phoebus and Hermes gave their joint consent
Their Priest should keep a Tippling Tenement:
Martin might well do more then Goffe or Graunger,
Who (like a Horse) fed at the Muses Manger.
Hyperion's Host is sunk beneath his Barrels,
Ceas then your hom-bred Feuds, and stint your quarrels
Ye that pretend to be his Heirs; in Sooth-la
Ye do dishonor the deceased Youth-la;
All that ye ought to mind are Sighs and Tears,
Deathbeds and Funerals, and Scriveners ears;
VVeep, weep, until the floud-gates of your eyes
Do drown the world for Parker's Obsequies.
EXECRATIONS.
A Curse on that Coxcomb that never spends penny,
But he inwardly weeps for the loss of his money;
So, a curse on that Courtesan never is merry,
But when she is feasted with Pheasant and Sherrie:
And the same curse attend him refuses to pledge it,
When the Health deserves honor, and Truth does allege it.
A curse on that Cockatrice, and her hot Rump,
That at one single vie gives a clap and a Thump.
A Pox of that Poet never tipples Canary,
His Purse over full, and his Pate over wary:
With forty five curses on him that denies
A fair Ladies Option, when longing she lies.
On the Death of Archee the late Kings JESTER.
An ELEGY.
GIve room ye Ghosts of Tarlton, Scoggin, Summers,
Minerva's Masquers, and the Muses Mummers;
Puppets for Potent Kings to play withal,
(Part Orthodox, and part Apochryphall;)
Great ARCHEE comes (with Hobbyhorse and Tabor)
To crack a merry Jest with Sir John Swabber:
We that were made only to eat up Corn,
And till we die, never know why we were born,
Are our own Zanies, we can sing Ho, Ho,
And slaver like to Fools in Follo;
Outdo Jack Adams in his frantic fits,
And seem most solid when we want our Wits.
But Kings are vexed with real cares; each day
As it dilates the height of Sovereign sway,
So it Augments the horror; ARCHEES Coat
And Cap will tell ye he is a man of Note:
Great Charles (whose wisdom all the world admires)
Would warm himself by ARCHEE'S witty fire:
How then has thy great name slept all this while,
And no Virgilian Quill, in haughty style
Seating thy Fame on Stilts (with golden Pen)
And thou walked ore the heads of other men?
Let not thy Manes mourn, that I dare venture
To stretch thy strong-nerv'd Fame upon the Tenter,
And tell the world how much thy Jests do merit,
Read but thy Book; they will find thy glorious spirit
Did soar as far above the wit of Scoggin
As a Horse-hoof does differ from a Noggin:
That Medley of the men of Gotam (surely
For matter and for manner penned most purely)
Is but a spurious Sprig; but thine a Tree
Of Knowledge; we may pluck and taste of thee,
And never know our nakedness; thy crime
Most learned Laud, must brook the Jerk of Time
For bringing our dear ARCHEE in disgrace,
Who rent'st his Coat off, outing him his place
With dreadful Obloquie (for kicks are things
Are hardly brookt by Jesters and by Kings)
How like a Martyr did thou bear these wrongs,
The frowns of Courtiers, and the forked tongues
Of Antler'd Citizens? If Patience be
A sublime Virtue, there belongs to thee
A Triple-crown of glory, thou do rest
For some few years, for (sure) thou dy'dst in Jest;
And we (no doubt) shall know thee once again
When ere we have a King to Rule and Reign.
HEALTHS.
Here Is a Health to 'that Tapster that never froath'd Can,
To that Virgin that marries, but not to know man:
To that Pimp and that Bawd that never took Fee,
To that Usuring Miser that loves to be free:
To that Priest that in Pulpit never told lie
(If a Presbyter Jack, or an American Spy:)
A Health to that Farmer that sighs when Corn's dear,
To that Pryn and that Bastwick that never lost Ear:
To that Houns-ditch Broaker that hates to be Knavish;
To him that haunts Whores, yet loathes to be lavish.
On the Gentlewoman that so often travailed up Holborn-Hill upon her Bum.
AN ELEGY.
THis is a Task indeed, and will require
A large Torch lighted with Phaebean fire,
To fing thy worth (rare Woman) who were once-one
Fit for the Muse of Fletcher, Dun, or Johnson:
How then shall I sufficiently express
Thy fulgent figure in its native Dress,
Who were thy Sexes miracle? They Jump
On Cork-heel'd Stilts, but thou on Hand and Rump
Did travail 'bout the Town, each leap of thine
Would puzzle Spencer (though inspired with wine)
Thy Hands were armed with wood, thy Bum with leather
That might defy the dint of dirty weather;
A Vaulting Sybill; when thou would dispense
With time, how heavenly was thy Eloquence?
What moving Oratorie, that would pull
Pity from Thieves, make Misers merciful?
A general gravity thou still did fling
About thee, to our general wondering.
So (to the honor of the Commonwealth)
We never were merry till we drank thy Health,
Which when gone round (with strictest celebration,
Being Olympic in its operation)
Caused the Boon Delphick God himself appear,
Vowing to keep his Bacchanalias there:
Thou never were named but with a general hum,
Mention the Lady, that upon her Bum
Jigg'd it up Holborn-Hill, each head was bare,
Though thatcht with Beaver, Periwigg'd with hair
New purchased; and as much Devotion seen
As they had memoriz'd some Eastern Queen:
Shall we then suffer such a Saint to fall,
And not erect some rich Aescuriall?
Though thou were not embalmed (like other Slurs)
But were interred (in private) with thy Guts,
Did want a Hearse (by sable Steeds drawn on)
A Herald, and a gilt Escocheon
Thou shall not miss that Fame that has been common
(Thank biased Fate) to many a worser woman:
And while the world lasts, thou shall sit like Puss
In Majesty; thy name adored by us.
EXECRATIONS.
LEt the Fiend ceaze him that steals away
Just when he knows the Reckoning's to pay;
So him that makes it his pride and delight
To Fautorize Feuds, but dares not to fight:
The same curse on him never speaks as he thinks,
That cherishes Coxcombs, and talks as he drinks:
So him that will censure before 'a does know it,
Or that may have a Fortune, and yet will forgo it.
A halter take him that hates to hear sense,
Or that numbers his friends, as 'a tells ore his pence.
Hell ceaze her (or else some place that is worse)
That loves a man merely for's Back and his Purse:
The like hap to him (who dreading no crimes)
Will be any thing that shall pleasure the Times.
FINIS

