The Oppressed Close Prisoner In WINDSOR-Castle, HIS DEFIANCE TO The Father of
Lies, In the strength of The God of Truth.

Occasioned by some late, scandalous and slanderous Reports, raised and
dispersed to the Dishonor of that noble Cause, wherein He (with others of the
Lords servants) is so deeply engaged.

AS ALSO, A Seasonable Word, concerning the Higher Powers: concerning the
payment of Taxes and Tribute-money by the Saints to those Powers: And how far a
Minister of the Gospel may intermeddle in State Affairs without sin.

By CHR. FEAKE, in his Prison-Watch-tower.

Prove. 25.18, 19. A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is a
M^ul, and a Sword, and a sharp Arrow. Confidence in an Unfaithful man in time
of trouble, is like a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.

(...). Zor. coram Dario.

London, Printed for L. Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-alley. 165^.

The Preface.
THat space of time, which remains to that old Serpent, the Devil and Satan,
before the beginning of the thousand years, being but short Which according to
my computation will expire within less then 50 years from this year 1654:
; It is no marvel that he is so much enraged at the Woman, and that he
continues to go forth to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

My expectations also are abundantly confirmed, that the poor Nations will be
most sadly deceived by him, for the forementioned space of time; insomuch that
whilst the power of his Sophistry and Seduction is upon them, they will freely
expose themselves and all that is dear unto them, to extreme hazards for his
service. The certain and particular knowledge of these things, does much affect
my heart with pity; and I would gladly be at work with others, to give forth
Antidotes among the children of men.

But behold, he has (by divine permission) cast me, and some other Brethren
into Prison, that we might be tried; and I have had tribulation near ten months
of days, a great part of which time, I have also been shut up in a very narrow
compass from the common air, and (which is far worse) from the sweet society of
the Saints. But my dear Lord bids me be of good cheer, and exhorts me most
lovingly to be faithful to the DEATH, and he will give me a CROWN OF LIFE.

Those most encouraging communications from Heaven, whereof my soul has had
more sweet and plentiful experience, then in any condition formerly, will have,
I am persuaded, a very effectual influence upon my spirit, to cause it to bear
up against all the (...).
Devices, and Wiles or Methods of that wicked one, yea, through Christ
strengthening me, having taken the shield of faith, I shall be able to quench
all those fiery darts (...).
which are shot against me, to cause me to fall or quit the field, and so
desert that most noble Interest, wherein I have (with my fellow-workers unto
the Kingdom of God) been so long, and so publicly engaged, against the Kings,
and other Supreme Powers of the Earth.

The cunning craftiness of this God of this world, and of his Pursevants, (for
the Devil also has his Pursevants or Messengers, deceitful Workers (...), 2
Cor. 11.13.
) has raised and spread false reports and slanderous reproachful rumors, as
if I also had recanted, as if I had renounced my Principles, and that now I
begin to droop: these lies have begotten strange effects in the minds and
affections of the simple, who are apt to believe every word; and of the
adversaries, who would greatly rejoice if it might be found a Truth.

Assuredly, it is matter of some importance in this conjuncture of time, for
every one of the faithful followers of the Lamb, to be fellow-helpers to the
Truth, (...), 3 John 8.
and to the cause and work of Christ, which ere long shall have a most glorious
resurrection; although so many (like the soldiers and Priests of old, when the
Lord of glory was dead and buried) desire they may lie in the grave of
oblivion, so as never to rise again.

If it were only a personal reproach, particularly intended against me, and
reflecting upon me alone, a poor inconsiderable instrument in the Lords hand, I
could through grace have borne it patiently without answering again, according
as I have endured a thousand, for near this ten years, both in City and
Country: but this reaches to the heavens Captutinter nubila condit.
; and, rides p^st through the Nations, to the dishonor of my Lord and Master,
the Lord Jesus Christ, whose I am, and whom I serve; and to the further
disparagement of that known great affair of His, which has been so slighted of
late years, by the quondam zealous assertors of it.

Wherefore if I should altogether hold my peace at this time, as Mordecai said
to Hester, (and in this matter) how could I give an account with comfort to my
Lord the King of Saints, when he shall make enquiry after the service he
expects should be done by me in my day, for his Name and his Kingdom, according
to the trust he reposed in me, when he did first choose and call me forth to
suffer for his sake?

But before I proceed to the business intended by me, I shall declare, so far
as I have attained true intelligence in the general, the first and last
occasion of all this noise, both among the Churches and elsewhere, and then
subjoyne a plain-hearted explication of those Truths (concerning the matter in
controversy) which have sweetly wooed and won my understanding and judgment,
(such as they are) to entertain and to improve them, as God shall
providentially administer opportunity by the teachings of his Spirit.

But if in any circumstance, I should miss the white at which I aim; it must be
imputed to my present incapacity of obtaining a full Relation, partly because I
am still a close Prisoner (notwithstanding my present breathing in the open
air) and so cannot converse with such as would give me a more perfect and
punctual Narrative in matter of fact; as also, because there has been, (as it
was always in the like cases) a monstrous multiplication of new misshapen births
even every day.

That Congregation which I am over in the Lord, sent not many weeks since, an
Epistle to me, testifying their love in the Lord, and that brotherly sympathy
with me in my sufferings, which is meet; withal, signifying, they should
rejoice to be serviceable to Christ and me in obtaining my enlargement, if they
did but once understand what means to use in order thereunto: but they could
not do what their souls desired to do, without owning the Powers in being; the
doing of which, said they, is accounted a bowing of the knee to the Image of
the Beast.

This last mentioned passage, gave me just occasion, according to my Office, as
their shepherd, to feed them with knowledge and understanding in this point,
and therefore accordingly I spent some time in clearing it up unto the
Congregation, in a second Epistle written in answer unto theirs.

It seems some of them through anacquaintedness with Scripture-distinctions in
this doctrine, and otherwise, did not make a right interpretation of the Truths
therein expressed; but mistook my mind and meaning, and so, whether weakly or
willingly, divulged, or suffered to be divulged abroad, some passages in the
Letter, which ought not to have been done, considering the Letter was intended
for their use and edifying only, and not for open publication.

I had some hint of this in a short time; but not being conscious to my self,
of any alteration in the least, no not in thought and purpose of heart, toward
a compliance; and well knowing that no part of the Letter could signify any
such thing, if rightly understood, I neglected the rumor, as only one of the
petty stratagems of the devil, whereby to do me some mischief.

But afterward, finding that that secret whisper and murmur was ripened
suddenly into an infamous report; Letter after Letter also representing this,
as of very sad consequence to that Name and Cause for which I am bound with
this Chain: I was brought under a necessity of presenting to public view the
Epistle it self, so far as it concerns this Cause;

Especially, when I find it certified, that one (well known to all sorts of
people in the City) coming where several were together in company, did in a
laughing and scoffing manner draw forth a paper, and say, There was my
Recantation, pretending it was mine own Letter, or a Copy of it, wherein I
wrote, That I was now satisfied, that the Government was a lawful authority,
etc.

It appears to me, that the envious One and his Emissaries are altogether in
extremes, in their suggestions against my Good Name; sometimes the world must
be made believe, yea, and the Elect also, that I am against Magistracy and
Ministry, that I am an enemy to Government, a most dangerous man in my
Principles that way, etc.

Again, sometimes it is for his advantage, to persuade such as would have it
so, that I am come over to my Adversaries and Oppressors of mine own accord,
and that suddenly too, without any Overtures made, or Arguments used to draw me
to a compliance or conformity. But how improbable and irrational a practice
such an hasty return would appear to solid Christians to be, I refer it to
themselves to say, and judge.

No, blessed be the Lord, I shall not so far be forsaken by him, or left to my
self, as to gratify the foes, and grieve the friends of my dear Redeemer, by
turning Apostate after all my sufferings in so good a Cause; HIS GRACE IS
SUFFICIENT FOR HIS SERVANT: yea, let all my Friends and Enemies also, know
assuredly, that I stand my ground by divine assistance; yea, I get ground, and
am abundantly confirmed, that I am out of the reach of the earthly powers,
insomuch, that if they should slay me, they could not hurt me. Let God in all
things be glorified by Jesus Christ, to whom also be glory for ever, Amen.

The Epistle follows, together with a further manifestation of the Truth.
This following, is a true Copy of the Epistle, so far as concerns the matter
in hand; which I have divided into Sections, for methods sake, in the
explanation of my meaning.

Grace, mercy and peace, from the ever-over-flowing Fountain, to every son and
daughter of the living God.



and whether you mean some of your Number, or of other Congregations, I cannot
tell; if I had particularly known, I should have given a particular Answer; for
as for my self, I do own the Powers in Being, according as God himself has
commanded, and have done all along: I have and do render to all their Dues;
Tribute, to whom Tribute is due; Custom, to whom Custom; Fear, to whom Fear;
Honor to whom Honor.



By the Powers in Being, I understand the Army as Supreme, and all those who
join with them to carry on the work of justice, and of mercy, according to the
indubitable principles of right reason and equity; for Rulers, says the
Apostle, are not a terror to good works, but to the evil; and so far as the
Powers answer those principles, they are Powers, and the Ordinance of God, and
there is no more reason to resist them, then there is to resist righteousness
and truth, whilst, and so long as they answer the ends for which they were
ordained; and you know, I never taught you to rise up against them in the least.

there substance, etc. where as the Court-Chaplains, the Parish-Clergie, and the
Apostate Independents take a very wise course in their own conceits, to keep
out of all danger, saying in effect, and with a louder voice then of a Trumpet;
Let the Powers do what they please, etc. so we may get and keep Ecclesiastical
promotions under them, and the protection and shadow of their wings; so we may
have dispensations to be, and to continue Pluralists, Non residents, To^quots,
etc. and so the Magistrates and Ministers, (as they count themselves) are
agreed to connive at each others wickedness.



They ruled like men, when they made, and executed, Laws agreeable to the
Remainder of the image of God in mankind; when they executed judgment and
justice; when they relieved the oppressed and refreshed the bowels of the poor
and the fatherless, and when they made the desolate widows hearts to sing for
joy: and many of the Heathen Kings and Rulers, will rise up in judgment against
those, many of them, who assume the glorious titles of Christian Kings and
Princes.

They ruled like wild Beasts, when, and so far as, they were Hunters like
Nimrod before the Lord; when they did carry matters by force and violence, by
fire and sword to satisfy their own lusts; when they degenerated into cruel
Tyrants; (which are monsters in Government) And so, their Wills gave Law to
millions of people better and more righteous then themselves.

The holy Spirit does more then intimate this distinction in Daniel very
excellently, by comparing the four Monarchies, or Supreme Powers, to the image
of a man, Dan. 2. and then afterward the self-same Monarchies, every one of
them to a cruel wild Beast, Dan. 7. from whence I gather, that they did and
would be found to govern the Nations in some respects like men, that is,
according to the principles of right reason and righteousness. And thus far
they had the superscription and image of God upon them, and were to be
submitted to, as the Ordinance of God. But in other respects, and at other
times, they did live like so many wild Beasts, and so the Spirit of God calls
them Lions, and Bears, and ravening Wolves, etc. Their Courts being filled with
the spoil of the people, to maintain them in their pomp, pride and luxury;
their wanton and beastly Courts, I say, were, and are supported, and maintained
out of those unreasonable Taxes, which by illegal ways and means they did and
do still tear out of the bowels of the oppressed people.

Dan. 2. by one only image of a man: He does in Dan. 7. represent the four
Monarchies apart by four several cruel Beasts; which to me signifies thus much,
that in the chief Rulers and Governors of this world, there would be found at
the least four times as much and more, of the nature and spirit of wild
beasts, then of the nature and spirit of mankind, or the reasonable creature.
And indeed this is not only signified in this prophecy, but it is plainly
manifested in the Histories of all Ages, and of all Nations, from Daniel's time
unto this day. And for this Nation, I dare venture to make it good with the
utmost peril of my life, that the spirit of the fourth Beast is yet living and
acting its part in England, contrary to the Principles, Rules, and Presidents
of common honesty, of the light of nature, and of the Laws of all Nations,
which are not brutish and barbarous.

And against this spirit I am engaged more and more, not against the man in
man; for that is to engage against God and his Ordinance; but against the Beast
and his image in man: and in this enterprise, the Lord will stand by me,
against all the Kings of the earth, if I could come at them to preach against
their beastly abominations, etc.

end; I have this only to say, that when I did read this passage, three or
four ways came into my mind, wherein it was honorable for you to appear,
without any danger of bowing the knee to the image of the beast; but yet I
would not have you expect, that I should show you any one of them; for I hope
the Lord will help me, to cut off occasion from them that seek occasion. I have
my end which I propounded in this matter, and shall wait on the Lord: for, I
assure you here before him, in the midst of you, I do not yet begin to be weary
of mine Imprisonment, nor yet to yield; although some of the Lords people are
more apt to think and say so, then there is ground so to think or say. And my
Message, as you call it, did not signify any thing of that nature, but had
another meaning.



And as Christ said to the mourning Women, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
me, but weep for your selves, and for your children: so I say in the same
spirit, Were I now going to the scaffold, be not sad for me, ye sons and
daughters of Sion, but be sad for your selves and for your families, for great
distress is coming toward you; and yet to others, I may say, Look up and lift
up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. And great shall their comfort
be, who can find in their heart to deny themselves, and to forsake all, for
the Lord Jesus. But such Disciples are very rare; and time will give us yet a
more plentiful demonstration thereof.

12, 13. of the 8 month, 1654. Yours in the Lord, Chr. Feak.

The precedent Epistle explained, for a more complete Manifestation of the
Truth.
Sect. 1.
WHereas, in the beginning of the Epistle, it is written, that my intent and
purpose concerning my Bonds and Imprisonment, was declared by me in a former
Letter to them, I shall for the Truths sake (and that all things relating to
this business may be naked and open, before all sorts of Readers) annex a Copy
of so much of that Letter also, as is needful, if I can obtain it from the
Brethren in due season.

And therefore without any circumlocutions, shall pass from this to the next
Section, which being a part of the introduction to the principal Heads of that
Doctrine which I explained briefly to them, will occasion some inquiry into the
Reasons of my so writing to them.

Sect. 2.
Whereas I there do testify that it was a dark and doubtful matter, which I
was now about to treat of, viz. concerning the Powers in being, and the Image
of the Beast, etc. and their owning and bowing the knee to the one, or to the
other:

Healing and Settlement, as the Lord General did lately plead and inculcate in
the PAINTED CHAMBER; considering also (and experience proves it) that it was
not understood by those for whom it was prepared; and besides, other Doctrine
might have been sent, tending more to the use of edifying.

Jer. 3. will sufficiently satisfy every Honest Heart; where Jehovah says,
Jer. 3.15.
And I will give you Pastors according to m^ne own heart, which shall feed you
with knowledge and with understanding; namely, Ephesians. 5.17. Colos. 4.12.
that you may understand what the will of the Lord is, and that you may stand
perfect and complete, ((...)) in all the will of God, as Paul expresses it to
the Ephesians and Colossians.

Moreover; Romans 15.1. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Heb. 5.13, 14. 1 John 2.13.
we find the Churches of the Saints to consist of strong, and of weak, of
habes in Christ, and of such as are of ripe age, of young men, and of fathers;
now strong meat is to be administered by every faithful steward of the mysteries
of God, to them who are of full age, even such as by reason of use, have their
sen^es exercised to discern both good and evil, for it belongs unto them, as it
is written, St^ong m^at belongs to them who are of full age.
(...); And therefore though babes cannot feed upon such Doctrine (for milk
belongs to them, and accordingly it is provided) yet others who are come to
some maturity, and would willingly know the work of their day and age, will by
this means go onward to perfection.

Which Gospel-perrection, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
was one great end of Christ his giving the gifts of the Spirit unto his
Churches.

Wherefore I being (as Paul in his, Romans 1.14.
so I in my Line) a debtor to the wise and to the unwise, it is not meet I
should be blamed for paying the due debt of my Office, which I owe to the whole
flock of Christ (whereof I am made the Overseer) by manifold obligations.

But to put a period to this Section; I answer further, that I had a particular
call to speak largely to this point about the Governments, because I perceived
the Church or some particular persons to be under a great mistake, even near of
kin to a gross absurdity, (and one absurdity being granted, a thousand will
follow.) Now it is required and expected by the Lord Jesus and his people, that
I should endeavor at least to guide their feet into the way of truth, when I
perceive them but begin to go astray. And as for the unseasonableness of
handling such kind of doctrine, considering, as is urged, there is so great
need of healing, and of silencing all debates about Powers; and Government,
etc. I answer further, It was never the custom of the faithful Ministers of
Christ, nor of the Prophets before them, to inquire which way the wind did
blow at the Kings Court, but to promote and to perfect their Lord's work, which
he had given them to do, while it was called to Day: for when the night comes,
no man can work.

That also of Solomon is suitable to this purpose: Eccles. 11.4.
He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds
shall not reap. Eccles. 9.10.
And, whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with all thy might: for there
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge in the grave whither thou go.

And to speak the Truth to the glory of my Lord, my not regarding any man's
Person or Power when I am about his business, and my not taking care at any
time for this twenty years to please men, but only God, which tries the
hearts, has been to me of very refreshing consideration and remembrance upon
all pertinent occasions, ever since I was bound with this chain; as it is also
at the writing hereof, as I am here sitting before the Lord, to plead for truth
with paper and ink, seeing I cannot, to this day, hear any tidings of meeting
with my Accusers face to face.

Sect. 3.
Whereas upon that clause in the Churches Letter to me, viz. The owning of the
Powers in being, is accounted a bowing of the knee to the image of the Beast; I
answered them, that I did not know by whom it was so accounted, and that it was
never mine opinion, nor was it likely so to be, etc. as is before set down: It
is very true, I did not know, neither could I know by those words, It is
accounted, (none, who so accounted, being named) whereupon it being darkly
expressed by them, I thought it was meet, it should be plainly expressed by me,
as in the Letter you may find, adding moreover these following words: For as
for my self, I do own the powers in being, and have done all along. Now it is
probable, these words might be construed, as signifying something, that had
somewhat like a compliance, or recantation; and so being abstracted from their
neighbors and fellows, viz. according as God has commanded, etc. as you may
see in the Epistle, (It is true) ENVY and ILL WILL might endeavor to draw such
a conclusion from those premises; but that passion, is not a competent Judge,
nor an equal Interpreter of words or actions.

But now, Oh all ye who are friends but to common sense and reason (suppose
conscience should suspend its operations for a time) come, and be Judges
betwixt me and my adversaries, who have acted the devils part, Mat. 4.6. com.
with Psalm. 90.11.
in quoting one part of the words which were written, and suppressing the
other, the better to compass his diabolical design against Jesus Christ his
Lord.

Thus I plead my cause against the falsehood and most unrighteous dealing of
such slanderers.

1. First, Is it not a most absurd and irrational method of proceeding against
our neighbor, to tear asunder those words and sentences, which the writer had
put together, and so to undermine his good Name among his friends, and to
render him the byword of his foes? and, which is worse then both the other, to
trample upon that noble Cause which God himself has called forth the Author to
maintain and bear witness to before the world? The Heathens would abhor such
spirits and such practices, when brought before them.

2. In case those passages had been written darkly and doubtfully, was it not
the duty of the Reader or Reporter, or both, to make the best interpretation,
(now, let conscience do its office) which Christian love could give, and most
suitable to the declared and known principles of the Author of those words?
unless he had certain information, or other testimony of his open apostasy from
his profession and constant conversation in time past unto that day.

Wherefore thirdly, Let the whole clause be considered with an honest and
impartial mind, and you will find such cautelous qualifications superadded,
as if I had foreseen the Devils design against the Cause and the Person both.
Whereas I writing in simplicity of heart, as in the sight of God, without any
thoughts of Declining or Drawing back (...), Heb. 10.39.
; could not once suspect that such constructions and consequences would have
been formed and dispersed thereupon.

The first Qualification of my Words, was this: ACCORDING AS GOD HIMSELF HAS
COMMANDED, I do own the Powers in being, and have done all along: but otherwise
I never did, nor shall, own the present Powers, or their successors.

The second Qualification of those Words of mine, which I added in the close of
this third Section, is expressed in the words of the Apostle, Rendering to all
their Dues, tribute to whom tribute, etc. as you read it, in Romans 13.7.

And thus far in this third Section, and no further, have I endeavored to
state the case, and to plead against the unconscionable carriage of that
person, or those persons, who have given liberty to their tongues, to speak
reproachfully against their neighbor without cause, Psalm. 15.3. 2 Timothy 2.25.
the Lord give them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, and to the
bridling of that member, which though little, is so very unruly, James 3. the
10. first verses.
as it is written, THE TONGUE CAN NO MAN TAME, AN UNRULY EVIL, FULL OF DEADLY
POISON. It seems it is the only work of God to tame it, it is not man's work;
especially when it is set on fire from Hell, as too too often it comes to pass.
But to proceed.

Now further, to declare ingenuously my judgment and apprehensions in this
point, thus I say:

Either I must own the Powers in Being, or that Are, (for we will not argue
about expressions, when they are well understood, though they may not be very
proper,) I say, either I must own the present Powers, or I must own Anarchy.
For Powers to be hereafter, or which may appear in time to come, I know not how
to own in such a sense as I intended; (for de non apparentibus and non
existentibus eadem est ratio,) If the Powers do not appear, and existere extra
causas, as we say, it is all one to us, as if they were not in rerum natura, as
indeed they are not actually, till they are formed; (for forma dat nomen and
esse) and so exist from the concurrence of the several efficient causes also,
respectively.

Now as for Anarchy or no Government; for a people to have no Powers in being,
it is Confusion, it is Desolation, it is the Abomination of Desolation, or that
makes Desolate. It always was, it is, it will ever be the Abomination of my
soul.

Tyranny it self is not so ugly a monster by many Degrees, in mine eyes, as is
I understand Anarchy not in notion, but in operation; Anarchy Rampant.
Anarchy. But let no man imagine, that I ever was, or now am, a friend in the
least to former or present Tyranny, though I thus speak: for Tyranny is High
Treason against Mankind, and against the Image of God in the world, and shall
be turned headlong off from the stage again, when it has acted its part, for
the accomplishment of the Counsels of the Almighty; which will not be, until
the words of God shall be fulfilled, as it is written in the Scriptures of
Truth.

From what has been said, the Saints and the World may see, what reason I had,
and have, to declare that I DO OWN THE POWERS IN BEING; for, to own the Powers
that are to be hereafter, (but are not yet extant) I cannot do it, viz. in that
sense before expressed; and own Anarchy, or non-Government, that I will not do
upon any terms, while by the grace of God I continue in my right mind, and
enjoy any remainders of sense and reason. So that we are constrained by right
reason to own the present Powers.

But then withal, my two Limitations, Restrictions, or Correctives, (call them
what you please) must be admitted and remembered carefully, for otherwise I
shall suffer apparent injury, as lately I have felt.

First, in general, I told the Congregation, I owned them according to God, or
as God himself has commanded.

Secondly, I did particularly declare, how, and how far I owned the Powers in
being, in saying, I gave tribute, custom, fear and honor, where each of these
were due: BUT WHAT, AND WHO THOSE POWERS ARE, IN MY OPINION, IS ANOTHER
QUESTION, AND SHALL BE HANDLED IN ITS PLACE.

Concerning the first of these two Restrictions, I explain my meaning thus. I
may as well throw away the Old and New Testament, those blessed Oracles (which
are sweeter to me (especially since I came into prison, and, yet more
especially, since I was shut up in Close-Imprisonment,) then the honey or the
honey-combe) as deny, or refuse to own the Powers in Being, it being so Just
and so Good a Law of God That there should be Higher Powers in the world, is a
good law: the law may be formed thus, Potestates in mundo super-eminentes
semper sunto. 1 Pet. 2.13.
, the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth.

The Command is full and plain: Peter writing to the Believing Jews, says
expressly, Submit to every Ordinance of Man, (or Humane Creation (...). Tit.
3.1.
) for the Lords sake, whether to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as
sent by him. Paul to Titus does confirm this Doctrine, and this Statute Law;
Put them in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey
Magistrates (...).
: so Romans 13.1, 2, etc.

But moreover, let us not interpret this subjection and obedience, this owning
of them, to be Absolute and Unlimited, as if without all Restrictions and
Distinctions; for that were unreasonable; as has been argued and urged against
the late King.

Yea furthermore, these things are enjoined to particular Christians, and
private persons, who are altogether under Authority; for otherwise, one Higher
power, may refuse obedience to another Higher power, yea, and take their
Authority away from them utterly, and for ever, in many cases, as I shall show
afterward.

But to give the world an Account of my Principles and Practices in this point.
Yet more particularly,

I am bound to own them so, as not to forget that I am a Disciple of Christ,
and that the Gospel and the Doctrine thereof is to guide and regulate me in the
thing under consideration; for though they are the Higher Powers, yet not the
Highest, FOR THERE ARE HIGHER THEN THEY. Eccles. 5.8.
And if at any time they command ought, that is inconsistent with the Commands
of Christ, Mat. 28.18.
who has all power in heaven and earth, and with that duty and Evangelical
Allegiance which I owe and bear to him, I shall disown them so far, and their
commands also, before their faces and behind their backs, (as the phrase used
by the New-Court-flatterers does express it) and yet ask no question for
conscience sake, there being no scruples upon my spirit in this matter, as
afterward I shall show.

I also humbly conceive, that those Christians who submir, and suffer patiently
under the penalties which are imposed on them for choosing to obey God, rather
then man, (as it is my present Case) do as really own the powers, as any of
those who yield active Obedience to what is enjoined them to do: for they
fulfill and answer the Law herein, whether it be the Law of the Land, that
imposes such a penalty in case of disobedience (as the world calls it) or the
Law of their own wills and Lusts only, who are the Supreme Powers at that time.

For the understanding hereof, we are to know, that every Command whatsoever
among men, (whether it proceed from rational and just power, or from arbitrary
power, and a wilful will void of reason) does consist of two parts, the
preceptive part, and the punitive part; for I dare affirm, Precepts and
Penalties are the proper ingredients of all Laws.
that no Lawmakers, will give out Commands or Laws, and then leave it to the
people, whether to obey or not obey; in reason, a penalty is to be annexed and
executed, in case of refusal to give due observance; and every one must either
do what is enjoined in the preceptive part of the Law, or else suffer what
shall be inflicted: I speak of particular persons, and under Authority.

Now those Saints who, for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. 1 Pet. 2.13.
and for the Lords sake, do willingly and out of choice suffer Imprisonment,
Confiscation of Goods, Banishment, or Death, rather then sin against Christ,
may be properly said to own the Powers in Being, as really, and more honestly,
and acceptably before God, then those who are most forward to yield active
obedience at the same time, to the same law.

But because familiar examples will help to illighten the ordinary Reader, for
others need them not, I shall illustrate this doctrine and my practice, in
owning the higher powers, by one famous example in the word of Truth.

It is that of the third of Daniel, Dan. 3.4, 5, 6.
a most excellent History of three of the Old Testament-worthies, and their
sufferings. The Higher Power in being makes a Law, (or a thing like a Law,) TO
YOU IT IS COMMANDED, O PEOPLE, NATIONS, AND LANGUAGES, AT SUCH AN INSTANT OF
TIME, TO FALL DOWN AND WORSHIP THE GOLDEN IMAGE WHICH THE KING OR EMPEROR HAS
SET UP. This is the sum of the first part of the Law.

The second part is to this effect: WHOSOEVER WILL NOT FALL DOWN AND WORSHIP,
SHALL THE SAME HOUR, WHEN HE REFUSES, BE TORMENTED BY FIRE, AND BURNT TO DEATH.

Now to me it appears plainly, that Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego patiently
submitting to the Kings pleasure, and the proclaimed penalty, without any
resistance, did fulfill the Law aforesaid in the later part of it, as really as
the Nations and Languages did fulfill or perform the first part of it; and
consequently did therein own the Powers in Being, as aforesaid.

This plain Syllogism, will put it out of controversy.

Those who willingly submit to the Laws of the Higher Powers which are in their
days, may truly be said to own those Powers. But Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego did willingly submit to the Laws of the Higher Powers in their days:
Ergo, it may truly be said of them, they did own those Powers, etc.
That the three children were willingly subject and obedient unto
Nebuchadnezzars Law and Command, I suppose none will deny; and the Proposition
they cannot deny with reason; for what more effectual owning of Powers can be
expected or desired, then obedience to their Laws?

These things I have transferred in a figure, 1 Cor. 4.6. (...).
to the three children, for their sakes who are full of prejudice against me,
as if I ought not to be accounted subject to the powers in Being, because I am
a Nonconformist to those Orders and Ordinances, and some plausible
insinuations, which by insensible degrees have caused the Army and Nations, (by
means of that Spirit which works effectually in them) TO RETURN TO THEIR
VOMIT; I mean, 2 Pet. 2.22. (...).
to set and keep up old Monarchy under a new name or notion, but not so current
and authentic as the New Courtiers do imagine.

There are many other instances in Scripture of the Saints, their owning the
powers in being, and yet at the same time refusing to fulfill the preceptive
part of their Laws and Statutes in many particulars, choosing to suffer under
the earthly Powers, (...). 1 Pet. 2.14.
rather then to sin against the most High; as Christ himself submitted to
Caesar, as the Supreme, and to Pontius Pilate, as sent by him, according to the
distinction given by the Apostle.

So Peter and John, Paul and Silas, with the rest, Read Act. 4. and the 5. Chap.
these all owned the Powers in being, but would not actively obey their
commands, many of them, for they disputed against them, and denied compliance
with them.

And I am resolved, by the Lords help, 1 Cor. 11.1.
to be a follower of them, as they were of Christ in this particular.

I confess the Higher Powers have not used to account passive subjection worthy
the name of obedience, neither are they apt to esteem it an owning of their
Power, when they have humbly and soberly refused to do after their
Commandments: for they being generally of very high Spirits, who are in high
places, they think it a great dishonor to them, to have their Justice, Wisdom,
Authority called in question, arraigned and condemned by silly Sectaries.

When the High Priest and his Kindred had called for Peter and John, and set
them in the midst, Act. 4 6.
at length upon deliberation they commanded and charged them with threatenings
intermixed, not to preach that Doctrine any more: the Apostles declared they
could not forbear to speak the things which they had seen and heard, Act. 4.20,
21.
for they were filled with the Holy Ghost indeed, and must speak; and
accordingly proceeded to preach, notwithstanding their Order, Act. 5.33.
in direct contradiction to them. But how were they cut to the heart, and took
counsel to slay them? Blessed be the Lord, this is my case assuredly; I was
forbidden to preach, what I had seen and heard from THE GREAT PROPHET,
concerning his Kingdom, Dan. 2.44.
and the breaking in pieces of all other Kingdoms, and concerning the Apostasy
of all sorts from their declared Engagements for the Interest of our Lord: but
I was and am so far from promising conforming to such prohibitions, as that I
am made more fervent in spirit against the abominations of these men, from the
Highest to the Lowest; and for the promoting the Interest of my Lord, against
the Court-Interest lately set up, in contradiction to their own solemn
Declarations in the sight of God, Angels and Men, not many years ago.

It is co^^^rtable to consider, That true spiritual Christians have an unction
which teaches them of all things, ^ Joh. 2.20, 27.
and they accordingly from that unction, have learned to distinguish betwixt
the Power and the Weakness of the Rulers, betwixt the Ordinances of God and of
Men; for by the light of the word of truth they know that righteous Laws are
the strength of the Higher Powers, and that Tyranny, and the Results and
Consequences of Arbitrariness in Government, are their weakness and their
folly: and not only so; (for the knowledge hereof, may in some degrees be
attained by such as know not Christ) but they are able in the power of a higher
Spirit, then that of the proudest Monarchs, to tell them, THIS IS A TYRANNICAL
WAY OF RULING, AND THAT IS A PLAIN CONTRADICTION TO THE LAW OF CHRIST, and
shall be broken and destroyed, though all the Kings of the earth should join
their Power and Policy to uphold it. It is one thing to know wherein Rulers do
commit open Abominations; and it is another thing to testify openly against
those public wickednesses, without respect of persons. But more of this
afterward in its proper place, for here it is a Digression, from the point in
hand.

I have many things to bring out of that treasury which the Lord has put into
this earthen vessel, and should rejoice to have an opportunity to exemplify
those Truths by lively voice, which have been set upon my spirit in this
prison, where I have remained this nine months and more; for I find it very
difficult to express my mind by writing; but this I have to encourage me, The
Lord is able to bless my Endeavors this way, for the present, seeing I am so
unrighteously hindered from preaching the Gospel by the Powers now in Being.

Having spoken thus much to the first general Qualification, That I do own the
Powers that are, but how? ACCORDING TO GOD, or ACCORDING AS GOD HIMSELF HAS
COMMANDED, and having particularly explained my meaning, to own them, by
submitting to their Laws, whether Arbitrary or Rational, according as may
consist with our Allegiance to Christ, and the direction of his word and
spirit, which, in, very many cases, directs us to obey passively, but to die
rather then to fulfill their Law by active obedience; I shall now go on to the
next limitation, which is to own them in paying tribute, and custom, and honor
and fear, as I have expressed in the forementioned Epistle.

I shall now go on to the next Limitation, which is, to pay them Tribute and
Custom, Honor and Fear, as I have expressed in the forementioned Epistle.

And because I do own the Higher Powers in this particular also, I shall
explain my self herein likewise, A Discourse concerning Taxations from Scripture
according as I intended, when I wrote, though then I had not any thoughts that
I should be brought upon the Stage, to give so public an account of my
Principles, and Practice, in the payment of those Taxes, which I, and others of
my Brethren are still burdened withal, though some Abatement is now spoken of.

But first, for the better, and more effectual satisfaction of the people of
God, I shall communicate what I have met with in the good word of God
concerning this thing; for it is suitable to my Office, and may be useful to
the Saints to understand something concerning the first practice of this
Oppression, and (which will be more welcome) when their Taxations will be
removed, and have an end.

It is to be remembered, That one of the Higher Powers, is described very
briefly and emphatically thus, Heb. One that causes an Exactor to pass over.
He did suddenly stand up, and was as suddenly pulled down. Whether Moses,
Joshua, and the first Judges which preceded Monarchy, were Raisers of Taxes.
Dan. 11.20. There shall stand up a RAISER of TAXES, etc. but within few days
he shall be destroyed, neither in Anger, nor in Battle. It is worth our
observation, That the Spirit of God gives him no other Title, as if this Taxing
of the people were the Beginning and the End of his Reign.

Before I speak of particular Instances, I desire the Reader to search the
Scriptures, that so he may be able to satisfy himself in this Question, viz.
Whether Moses, Joshua, or the Judges, did practice the way of Assesments and
Impositions upon their Brethren, which now are so current, and have been so
much in use in the Nations round about, as well as here at home, so that it is,
as it were, another nature; as it happens to those Porters, who carry Burdens,
custom makes that to seem but light to them, which to another (not conversant
in such Employment) would be found a Burden too heavy for him to bear.

The children of Israel were made a FREE PEOPLE by God, when he took them out
of the House of Bondage, and so might have continued under their Judges,
Jehovah being their King and Lawgiver, If they had not set up a King after the
manner of the IDOLATROUS NATIONS round about them.

There is not a more broad black badge of absolute slavery under absolute
Sovereignty, than for a people once made free by Gods especial Providence, to
be contented to be Taxed and Assessed by the Arbitrary power of a Sovereign
Lord afterward.

I shall begin this Epitome of the HISTORY of TAXES, Monarchy and Taxes born
and brought forth among Gods people in Samuels time.
with the History of Monarchy set up in the midst of Israel, rashly and
unadvisedly by themselves (when they were blessed with Samuel, one of the best
Governors that ever the people of God enjoyed) for it appears to me, that
these Burdens upon the Lords people, came in with Kingship, or at least, the
way was prepared for Bondage to return upon them, when nothing but a King would
serve their turn.

For when the Lord bid Samuel protest solemnly unto them, It is the manner of
Kings to take the peoples goods in part, or in whole. 1 Samuel 8.14, 15. 16, 17.
verses.
and show them the manner of the King that shall reign over them, Among other
heads of Arbitrary power, which he reckoned up before them, he tells them
plainly, THAT THEIR KING WOVLDTAKE THEIR FIELDS, AND THEIR VINEYARDS, AND THEIR
OLIVEYARDS, even the best of them, and give them to his servants; And he will
TAKE (says Samuel) THE TENTH OF YOUR SEED, AND OF YOUR VINEYARDS, and give to
his Eunuchs, and to his servants; He will TAKE THE TENTH OF YOUR SHEEP, and ye
shall be his servants, etc.

Now, although the total sum of the charge (besides their bondage otherwise)
for the mantainance of a Monarch, was computed to rise so high, so that it
would make them at length cry unto the Lord, because of their King (And indeed
Kings and Sovereign Lords, or what ever Titles they are known by, are COSTLY
CREATVRES 1 Samuel 8.18, 19, and 20 verses
, and will make the people sigh, and cry too, within a little while after they
are gotten into the Saddle) I say, notwithstanding all this, they said, Nay,
but there shall be a King over us, a King shall reign over us, that we also may
be like all the Nations As if they should say, Seeing slavery is in fashion in
other Nations, we will be slaves also; Tyranny being the Mode in all Countries
round about us, we will have a Tyrant too, though God himself say Nay; we say,
Yea. Rom 15.4.
. And when they had gotten him, they all shouted, God save the King; they had
not known by experience the Burthensomnesse of Taxes and Tribute, of Tenths and
Fifteenths, one time after another, for they that ruled them aforetime under
(...) being Judges raised up in needful seasons, were Sav^^^rs and Deliverers,
and not Raisers of Taxes, and so while they walked as his people, there was not
a freer people upon the face of the earth than they.

But now, let him that reads, and those that hear the words of this History
collected out of the Oracles of God, observe exactly what followed hereupon;
for whatsoever things were written aforetime (either Prophetically or
Historically concerning Kings, and their Arbitrary power, concerning Tax and
Tribute-money, as well as other matters) were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. And indeed
I write in hope, and not in despair; as he that sows, sows in hope that
some good fruit will follow, though diverse sharp storms may intervene.

At the first entrance to this New Honor, Saul behaved himself, as if Samuels
words would want a verification. Good Man! He could not be found, he had hid
himself among the stuff 1 Samuel 10.21
; he had rather have lived in a Cottage all days of his life, (people might
think by this symptom of Self-denial) than live in a Royal Palace, and be
attended and honored like a King.

Besides, there was no probability he would ever oppress the people, by
taking their Vineyards, etc. from them: For whereas some brought no presents to
their New King, as did others, but despised him, saying, How shall this man
save us? He held his peace 1 Samuel 10.27. (...) LXX. Plane conticuit, Tree.
fuit, ut obmutescens.
, he passed it by, as if he did not understand any thing of those Mysteries:
He was altogether unlike a Raiser of Taxes upon his Brethren, for he did not
care, one would think, for presents: He made a fair show in the flesh (...).
, (being a Member of the Church of God) in matters of Religion and Godliness
also. For when one of the disaffected party, who would not have him to be
King, was called for to be put to death, as a Traitor to his new Crown and
Dignity, The Ki^^^aid, 1 Samuel 11.12, 13.
There shall not a man be put to death this day, for to (...) lord has wrought
salvation in Israel. Did not this Ki^^ ^peak like a very godly man? Did he
speak as if he would be Arbitrarie in his Government, 1 Samuel 9, 7, 21 1 Samuel 10
6.10, 11. cap. 11. v. 13, 15. c. 14.18. and from 34. to 44.
and take their goods, as Samuel said, without, and against all Law and Equity?
See the Scriptures in the Margin, if you would understand what a Professor Saul
was, while yet he was an ordinary private man, and after he came to the honor
of Kingship also for a good space of time. But at length, when he was told 1 Samuel 15.23, 26, 28.
The Kingdom should be rent from him, and given to his neighbor, that he
should Verse 30.
lose his honor before the Elders and the People, then he begun to appear in
his proper colors.

First, Samuel, that had been so instrumental to set him up, was fearful his
Tyranny would break forth against him to his destruction, and slaying is worse
than taxing, see 1 Samuel 16.2. If Saul hear it, says he, that I go to anoint
another to be King, he will kill me.

The next apparent Symptom of his Tyranny we find to be against David, these
were two of the choicest men in the whole Nation; The young man had no lands,
it seems, for he calls himself a poor man, 1 Samuel 18.23. but Saul finds out a
way of taxing him at an hundred foreskins of the Philistims A strange Tax laid
upon David by K. Saul.
, but his end was to get his life, nevertheless David pays his Tax, and saves
his own life, the Lord being with him in that desperate Design, he brings two
hundred Fore-skins, and they gave them in full tale (like so much money told
out) unto the King, That Tare levied, and paid by David.
verse. 27.

Moreover, The Spirit of God makes it plain, that Samuel was a true Prophet
concerning the point in hand; for in the 1 Samuel 22.7. he makes this speech,
Will the son of Jesse give you every one Fields and Vineyards? etc. Where I
gather, Saul could do it, namely at this time. Indeed time was, when he could
not speak at that rate, but now being King and Sovereign Ruler, he could send
for any man's estate, in part or in whole, as the Prophet said; He could by his
private Council vote men Traitors, as he did; and he that makes no conscience
of takin(...) men's lives for pretended Treason, will make as lit(...) aching
away their estates: And so he might quickly (...) ^ields and Vineyards good
store (though not well gotten) to give his Eunuchs and servants that knew well
how to please his humor, and serve his lusts.

Thus he dealt with the Priests, He slew at once by a verbal order, Saul
slayes the Priests of the Lord, as Traitors, by a verbal order. Here were
Vineyards for him, to give his Court Parasites.
and Doegs hand, eighty five persons that did wear a linen Ephod; and what was
the pretended crime? Oh they were Traitors, for they conspired against me,
says Saul, and their hand is with David, they gave him bread and a sword, and
inquired of God for him, and did not come and tell him, who was their King,
etc. Having destroyed the City, and the inhabitants, men, women, and children,
here were rewards, and gratuities for his Courtiers. This was a quicker way
than levying of Taxes.

So he dealt with the Gibeonites, The Gibeonites slain by Saul, what became of
their estates? Kings as well as the Judges were to govern according to the Law
of God. See Deuteronomy. 17.18 19, 20.
2 Samuel 21.1. He slew them, no question they had some substance, and to whom
did it belong but the King? Now the Judges while they were the Higher Powers in
the Nation, under God, did not use to take away the lives and estates of their
brethren arbitrarily as Kings did, but observed the Letter, and the Equity of
the Law, and there is no Law that I can find for taxing their brethren with a
monthly Assesment, or otherwise.

I have been the larger upon this, to the end you may see, when a single person
Reigns and Rules in the PORT, POMP, and POWER of an ABSOLVTE KING (destroying
old Laws, and making new at his pleasure, permitting such Laws to continue in
force, which do not so nearly reflect upon his Interest, but suppressing all
others) there is more danger to a free people from him, than from those who are
circumscribed by the Law, and have no Army at command to stand by them in case
they should mis-govern at any time.

Thus you have seen, as in a glass of Crystal, That they who set up the
PROFITABLE TRADE OF KING-CRAFT, WITH MEN OF WAR TO PROTECT THEM, (for Saul was
General, as well as King) ^^y, in a short time (if they follow their Leader
Saul, the first Monarch over the Church and people of God) become very rich in
Silver and Gold, and other substance, from the Confiscations and Impositions,
etc. which by their Prerogative Royal they lay upon the people.

I shall pass over David's times briefly, because he being a man after Gods own
heart, (...), Act. 13.22.
and generally desiring to fulfill all his wills (and not his own) was by grace
prevented, and restrained from those outrages which his Predecessor was guilty
of.

The matter of Vriah is excepted indeed, when all his other mis-carriages were
buried by an act of oblivion from the Great Jehovah, as you find it, 1 King.
15.5.

Nevertheless, for our learning, as to the point in hand, he took away
Mephibosheths lands 2 Samuel 16. begin. zibah the Court Parasite flattereth David
into an unworthy and unjust proceeding against innocent Mephibosheth.
, without hearing the Accused, and the Accuser, face to face. And certainly, if
he did such an act of injustice in the time of his streights, he might have
made many such instances of taking away the estates of guiltless subjects, if
the Lord had not kept him from such oppression.

A single Person (though a Saint) in the exercise of highest Power, will
certainly act the part of a wicked Tyrant, if he hearken to wicked Informers,
as you find even David did to Zibah; how much more, if he be an Hypocrite, will
he persecute the Righteous, who have detected his tyrannical subtle
Dissimulations?

In the next place let us examine the Reign of Solomon the wise. His Government
also was very heavy herein Solomon laid a Tribute, and a heavy yoke also. 2 Chronicles. 10.4. 1 King. 12.4.
, especially in his latter days; for all the Congregation of Israel, came to
his Son, saying, Thy Father made our yoke grievous, now therefore ease thou
somewhat the grievous servitude of thy Father, and his heavy yoke that he put
upon us, and we will serve thee.

Its plain, the people accounted themselves oppressed, and wearied with the
weight of Solomon's Government: It is also clearly expressed in the Text, that
King Solomon, 1 King. 5.13.
did raise a levy out of all Israel, and that Adoniram or Adoram who was over
the Tribute, being sent to quiet the Mutiny, was slain by the people, 1 King.
12.18.
enraged against Rehoboam for giving such an answer. All this is past dispute.

Quest. But what was that Tribute or Levy, in particular, which occasioned so
fatal a Rent of ten Tribes from the house of David on such a sudden?

Ans. So far as I can apprehend for the present, by comparing things together,
it was that Tribute (of men) mentioned, 1 King. 5.13. (...), (the same word in
Romans 13.6, 7.) LXX.
it is varied in the Margin, You may find that Solomon was exceedingly addicted
to build, and to plant, and he employed an hundred and fifty thousand men, I
suppose the most part of his Reign, to build (besides the house of the Lord,
and his own) several Cities for store, Cities for his Chariots, Cities for his
Horses, etc. 1 King 9.19.
And though they were Tributaries, and not of the children of Israel, yet,
Verse. 21.
being eppressed with constant bond-service (as it is called) Its no marvel
though they grew discontent and mutinous. And although they having a reverend
regard to King Solomon, who first imposed this Tribute or Levy, 1 King 12.16.
Rehoboams continuing, and going about to increase their burden and bondage,
fatal to his Court-Interest.
would not rise up against him, yet, it appears, they would not endure the
Yoke, and the Burden to be continued upon their Necks and their Backs by his
son Rehoboam.

However it was, you see their Oppressions long continued, bred discontent, and
that discontent broke out into that which the New King, and his young Privy
Counselors would, no doubt, account and call Rebellion, and no doubt, they
would have made a war upon them, rather than have put up so high an affront, if
God himself had not sent a peremptory prohibition by his Prophet, to prevent
them, 1 King. 12.23, 24.

From the premises, in this Instance of Solomon and his Son, these following
Observations may be made.

1 That the most prudent Monarchs are too apt to stretch their power beyond its
bounds, and to advance an Assumed Prerogative to the prejudice of the people,
in point of Liberty, and comforts otherwise.

2 That all extrajudicial and illegal Impositions, Taxes, Tributes, Levies, and
Assesments in any kind whatsoever, do engender very bad blood in the peoples
veins, which produces dangerous discontents, and distempers in the midst of
them.

3 A free people oppressed by violent Imprestings, Imprisonments,
Confiscations, and any Arbitrary practices, though managed by the wisest
Statesmen, will watch a convenient season to obtain a just remedy, or throw
their Riders.

Issachar was compared to a strong Ass, couching down between two burdens,
Genesis 49.14. Issachar is compared to an Ass, for becoming a servant unto
Tribute. 1 Chronicles. 12.32.
he saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant, and bowed his
shoulder to bear, and he became a servant unto Tribute.

But afterward the men of Issachar (the Ass was now become a man) had
understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do, the heads of them
were two hundred, and all their brethren were at their Commandment.

The Tribe which was most oppressed, could tell when it was the best season to
relinquish the house of Saul, and to set up David to be King; And no question,
those of Gods people now, who beside the burden which is laid upon them in
common with their neighbors, are under bondage otherwise for conscience sake,
who are called and looked upon as Fools, will have understanding given them to
cry Hosanna to the Son of David, when their Brethren that hated them, and cast
them out for his names sake, shall be ashamed, and secretly wish, that the Son
of David would delay his coming; but this by the way.

The next King which I shall mention after Solomon and his Son, is Asa, he also
oppressed the people, Asa a good man in the main, but a bad king, in that he
imprisoneth the Lords Prophets, and oppresses the people. 2 Chronicles. 16. from
verse. 2. to 10.
though a godly man; he had taken treasures out of the house of the Lord, and
out of the Kings house, both silver and gold, and sent it to Benhadad King of
Syria, to help him against Israel.

Hanani, the Seer, makes bold to meddle with these matters of State, reproves
and threatens the King from the Lord, for his sin, and his folly; The King was
wroth with the Seer, and, being in a rage, put him in prison, and having made
the SEER fast enough, that he might not OVERSEE HIS STATE AFFAIRS, he oppressed
the people at the same time. What this Oppression was, is not expressed; but to
me it appears, by the Context, and other circumstances, that he got this money
(which he issued out of his Exchequer to bribe Benbadad) from the people,
afterward, by a Levy or a Tax; for Kings, and such like creatures, who are
supreme Lords, do not use to be so kind-hearted, as to pay a great rate for the
public peace, with their own money, and the people never hear of the bargain,
before, nor after; surely they have other uses for the treasures of the Kings
house, if they have either Son or Daughter, or their own kindred to show
kindness to.

But if this Instance have some darkness in it as to this point, sure I am it
is beyond all controversy, Menahem a Raiser of Taxes.
that the condition of the people under Menahem, was very sad, in reference to
this point of Oppression, and of Taxes by name 2 King. 15. from verse. 16. to
22. A sad story. Menahem, a cruel Usurper.
. This Menahem smote Shallum, and slew him, and Reigned in his stead (what this
Shallum was, you may see in the Text) Now because a certain City, called
Tipbsab opened not to him, therefore he smote it, and all the women which were
with child he ripped up; Oh horrible Tyranny! He was resolved to be a Monarch,
right, or wrong, and woeful was the calamity of that City which refused TO
PROCLAIM HIS SWORD-TITLE, for other Title he had none. This example affrighted
other Cities, and, poor Wretches! they had bettet yield, than resist a bold and
resolute Usurper.

But how did he get the Kingdom confirmed? Menthem buyeth the confirmation of
the Kingdom, and causes the people to pay for his purchase. The rich men
taxed, the poor spared, by Menahem.
He gave a Bribe of a Thousand Talents of silver to Pull King of Assyria, that
his hand might be with him to confirm the Kingdom in his hand; But who must
pay for all at last? the Holy Ghost will have us to know, That also, Menahem
EXACTED THE MONEY of Israel, even of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man
fifty shekels of silver. So the King of Assyria (the head Landlord it seems)
took a good round fine, and went away; but it is worth our observation, That he
exacted the Tribute-money of the rich men, who could spare it out of their
superfluity. Truly he was a good natured Tyrant to the poor, if he spared them
out of pity and tenderness; I wish it were a custom in this Nation.

We have yet a more distinct account of this raising of Taxes; you shall find
it recorded in the 2 King. 23.35. Pharach-Nechoh put the land to a Tribute of
an hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold; and having left Eliakim,
whom he had made King, and called him Jehoiakim; Jehoiakim a Raiser of Taxes. 2
King. 23.34, 35.
he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharach;
he the said King, exacted, says the Text, the silver and the gold of the
people of the land, of every one according to his Taxation.

Thus you have the original and progress of this constant Companion of
Kingship hitherto, in the story of the Kings and Chronicles; but if you look
narrowly into the Prophets, The writings of the Prophers do confirm this
History of Taxes Nebuchadnezzar the head of gold, yet a heavy oppresfor of the
Jews
you will find these truths abundantly confirmed, insomuch that the people had
cause to cry out in that day mentioned by Samuel, in 1 Samuel 8.18. because of
their King which they had chosen them, and because the Lord (as he told them)
would not hear them in that day.

But now, as for the four Monarchies, under all which they were in bondage, I
shall give but short hints of their sufferings in this matter, because I would
not be tedious to the Reader.

I begin with the first verse of the Lamentations of Jer. Lam. 1.1. and 5. v.
2. and 4.
says that Affectionate Prophet, She that was great among the Nations, and
Princess among the Provinces, how is she become TIBUTARY? And in the fifth
Chanter, Our inheritance is turned to Srangers, our houses to Aliens, we have
drunken our water for money, and our wood is sold unto us; For men of
profligate lives, and such as were Traitors to their Country, and to the Cause
of God in their day, to be punished according to their demerits, and according
to Law and Equity, is not unrighteous; but for the choicest people to be worse
dealt with, and more oppressed than their wicked neighbors, this is heavy, and
yet this was the condition of the Prophets, The Kings and Princes of Judah
oppressed and broken with burdens and bondage, after they had oppressed their
subjects.
and most eminent believers, under their Kings for the most part, till at
length, for their abusing the Prophets, and oppressing the people, especially
those who were quiet in the land, the Kings, and the Princes, and the Judges,
and the men of War, were carried into Captivity, and oppressed, and put under
the yoke of the King of Babylon; She that was Princess among the Provinces
became TRIBUTARY. This for the first Monarchy.

That bondage and burden of Taxes and Tributes under the Persian Monarchy, The
people of God under Taxes and Tribute, by the Perfian Monarchy.
is notably expressed by the Levites, in the ninth of Nehemiah, the two last
verses, and is much like the case of some Saints come lately out of Babylon at
this day; Behold, say they to the Lord, We are servants this day, and for the
Land that thou gave unto our Fathers, to eat the fruit thereof, and the good
thereof, behold we are servants in it, and it yields much increase unto the
Kings whom thou have set over us because of our sins, The Grecian Monarchy a
Raiser of Taxes, he who is called by that name, did belong to this Empire, Dan.
11.20.
also they have DOMINION OVER OUR BODIES, AND OVER OUR CATTLE AT THEIR
PLEASURE, and we are in great distress.

The Grecian Monarchy also had power over the Jews, Alexander, when he besieged
Tyrus, sent for that tribute to Jaddus the High Priest, that they had paid to
Darius, but Jaddus sent an answer that he was sworn to Darius, and while he was
alive, he must not break his faith; but afterward (that the word of the Lord
might be fulfilled in Zech. Zech. 9.8. Alexander sends for a Tax, but,
though denied forbears violence. Joseph. Ant. lib. 11. cap. ult.
9. saying, I will incamp about my house, because of the Army, because of him
that passes by (meaning Alexander the Great, and his Army toward Egypt) and
because of him that returns (meaning the same Alexander, returning that way
after the Conquest of Egypt) I say, because of this word, Alexander did not
offer violence to Jerusalem, as he threatened, when his demands to Jaddus were
not answered, but came to an agreement about Tribute, and yielded to Jaddus his
request, that the Taxes might be forborne every seventh year, because, by their
Laws, The land must rest every seventh year Lev. 25.7. first verses.
, and not be sowed; but although this Monarch was favorable to the Jews in
point of Tribute, or other burdens, for he, as Histories mention, was well
affected to the Nation of the Jews, yet his successors, especially some of
them, were most cruel Tyrants, and Taskmasters; but I shall not insist longer
in this of the third, or Grecian Monarchy.

But as for the fourth Kingdom, The fourth Monarchy taxes all the world, and
the Jews in particular, recorded Luke 2.1, 2, 3.
or Roman power, they the Jews, have abundantly drunk of this cup of
Bitterness under them, for as their sufferings were greater, so they were
likewise of longer continuance, and they are not delivered to this day.

The Lord Jesus was born at that time when all the world was to be Taxed by the
Decree (...).
of the Roman Emperor, so that as he was under the Law of Moses, in one
respect, so in another, he was under the power of the fourth Beast: And
afterward, he paid Tribute to the Romans Officers, though he intimated the
children were free Mat. 17.25, 26, 27.
; The people of the Jews were so desirous of freedom from the Roman bondage,
every way, that they sufficiently signified it several ways, Publicans and
Harlots, Publicans and sinners, a very frequent phrase among the Jews.
they were ready to rise and follow any one almost of their Nation, who would
pretend to be a Deliverer, and a Savior of them from the Romans, and to
signify their discontentednesse at their Taxations and Oppressions, they
ranked the Publicans with Harlots, and such gross sinners.

But now Consder, Christ and his Apostles taught the Disciples and Christians
to pay Tribute and Custom Matthew. 17.27. Rom 13.6, 7.
quietly, patiently to endure those Burdens, and worse than those, of spoiling
their goods, because they knew that this fourth Beast was by the appointment of
God to be dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly. God had ordained it to
have great iron teeth, to devour and break in pieces, and to stamp the residue
or remnant with the feet of it; They gave them no encouragement or countenance
in the least to resist this exceeding dreadful Beast, by abusing, beating, or
otherwise rising up against it, or the Officers which were employed by it, as
sometimes they had opportunity, as well as the Jews, to make some opposition,
if Christ had given liberty.

And on the other side, when ever the Jews did make head against the Romans, as
they did to the uttermost, and to the very last man, as it were, many times,
yet they always found the issue was sad and unprosperous altogether, they
could not possibly shake off that yoke of bondage, which the Lord had
determined to yoke all Nations with, as those who are versed in Prophecy and
History in any competent measure, do well know.

Thus the Saints and best Christians did exercise Faith and Patience (they are
often put together in reference to this point that I am treating of) for the
first 300 years after Christ, they did bear very heavy burdens, spoiling of
their Goods, Houses, Lands, Lives, all went, under the Heathen Romans, being
still the Higher Powers in all the habitable world.

Then Constantine the Great, being a Christian, Constantine gave a little
reviving to the Christians in their bondage.
there was a lucid interval for a season; the Saints had rest from persecution,
and from other hard bondage in the Mines, and other miserable conditions which
they had endured, but whether from Taxes and Tributes, that I shall not insist
upon, for I hasten; I believe the Christians generally, paid their Rates and
Proportions with other people, toward the support and maintenance of the
Majesty of the Roman Name and Empire.

The Arian persecution I will pass over, and come down toward these days,
these wonderful days wherein we live.

What beavy Taxes and Impositions the Kings of the Earth, The Whore of Babylon,
the Beast which catrieth her, and the ten horns in Rev. 17.7, 12, 13, 14.
and the Whore of Babylon, agreed together to lay upon the people, though never
so good Catholics, is known by the Histories and Annals of the several
Kingdoms and States, under the jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome; and the Lords
people, you may be sure, could not escape the common calamity, where Kingship
prevails; nay, it had been as much as they could have wished in this world in
that matter, if they might have born the common burdens of the inslaved
people, and no more; but they were singled out from their Neighbors, and set
apart as a But, for the Pope and Popish Princes to spend their Arrows upon, in
a more especial manner: Read the History of the Waldenses and Albigenses, it is
worthy serious perusal at this time.

Our Ancestors indeed struggled hard for Magna Charta Magna Charta in many
parts is made waste paper by the Soldiers now.
, in time of popery, as much for freedom from Court-tyranny, I think, as any
Nation we read of, yet histories are plain, that there were grievous burdens
laid upon the people, partly by the Pope, for the maintenance of the Universal
Bishop, and partly by the Court (the interest whereof, was always, and ever
will be, an interest cross to that of the people, especially of Gods people)
but it was best for the people, when their Kings and the Court of Rome were at
the greatest distance.

At length, K. Hen. 8 deposed the Pope from his Headship in England and made
himself Head of the Church, and taxed the people, the Parsons and Vicats etc.
in the Popes stead.
through the wonderful providence of God (upon what account I will not here
mention) K. Henry 8. east off the Pope, and so destroyed his Game, which had
been so gainful for so many ages, I mean the winning of so many Peter Pence,
Annates, money for polls, and other trinkets, etc. but the King would needs be
head of the Church in the Popes stead, and so by his Court of Augmentations
enriched himself with those Revenues which belonged to the Monastries, and the
Pope, yet this was little ease to the people, for what a Tyrant this King also
was to his Subjects, especially to the best of the Saints, the scourge with six
Coards (as I remember it was called) and Sir Walter Rawleigh in his Preface to
the History of the world, will well inform us. Q. Mary oppressed the Saints
with fire and faggot. Q Eliz. a moderate higher Power, yet the people of God
(under the name of Puritan) under great bondage.
His Daughter Mary also sacrificed the lives of the choycest Saints, for the
service of that Beast, But I hasten.

Indeed, his Daughter Queen Elizabeth, who being more in good earnest for the
best cause then in the world (called the Interest of the Protestants) against
the House of Austria, and the Catholic Popish league in France, governed the
Nation more honorably, and was a better Higher Power, than any I read of before
or since, in the Catalogue of Monarchs (King Edw. 6. died in his nonage) and
yet it is well known what havoc was made of the Nonconformists, under the
notion of Puritans, in her time; how were they oppressed and persecuted by the
Prelates? and what Burdens and Impositions, what Costs and Charges they were
put to in respect of their noncompliance with the Ceremonies, is remembered to
this day, the lives of some of the choycest Saints were taken away for bearing
testimony for the Lord Jesus, against the Lords spiritual (as the Prelates were
called) and their abominations, and other abuses in the Court.

Thus you see how the Disciples endured a very heavy yoke of bondage, even in
that period of time, when the fourth Beast was most tame and most gentle,
namely, in Q. Eliz. time and reign.

Before I pass from this Point, The two Scottish Kings lay heavy yoaks upon the
Saints K. James a soat oppressor of the Nonconformists.
I must give a short remembrance of the two Scottish Kings and their Government.
Not long after King James came to the English Throne; there were suspended,
silenced, deprived, turned out of house and harbor, etc. almost two hundred of
the choycest Preachers throughout the Nation, men of the best Gifts, eminent
for Godliness, sound in the Faith, most succesful in the Ministry, and why was
the condition of these precious ones so much worse than that of their Brethren?
because they would not worship the Beast; because they could not subscribe to
the Ceremonies of the Church of England, etc. therefore they must be
impoverished, by Fines, Attendance, Fees, Mulcts, and Penalties, Besides the
common burden of the Nation in point of Taxes, the Saints help to maintain
their Brethren, the Preachers, who were silenced, and put out of all.
which they were oppressed with: This undoing of many Families, occasioned the
godly people to distribute to their necessities; some of my Kindred, to my
knowledge, have given, several of them, yearly allowances for twenty or thirty
years together, after the King and Bishops had taken away their livelihood, for
nonconformity: It is incredible to the young generation of Disciples, what the
best sort of Saints have suffered since the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth: And
though I am not of that age as to remember any public Transactions in the
reign of this first Scottish King, yet by History, by Books of another nature,
by converse with ancient intelligent Professors, I do so well understand the
heavy Oppressions and Persecutions of the best people in the Nation, that I do
judge, and publicly declare, it were a very noble enterpize to collect a
faithful history of the sufferings of the servants of God, for testifying
against the Beast and the false Prophet, so boldly, so constantly, and so
successfully this last hundred years, or since the tenth year of the Queen
aforesaid.

However, when the Judge of the quick and the dead shall engage in this work, 1
Cor. 4.5.
of bringing to light the hidden works of darkness; and of revealing all the
plots of the Kings and Prelates, for the crushing and suppressing of the truth,
and those Saints that owned it, the admiration will be unspeakable; Oh what a
cloud of witnesses will then appear with Christ in glory, who in the world have
been over-clouded with shame and most infamous reproach, Col. 3.4.
with all disgrace imaginable. But whether am I carried? excuse this sudden
digression; K. Charles an unreasonable raiser of taxes.
and observe with me, that Charles his Son, who reigned in his stead, walked in
the ways of his Forefathers, and how far he went beyond his Predecessors in
imposing illegal Burdens upon the people, I leave to Lawyers are acquainted,
with his projects to get money from the people.
Lawyers to compute, who are more versed in those Affairs.

But I know that it was a sad time with the most zealous, heavenly Christians,
with the most eminent preachers and Professors, Will. Laud a great persecutor
and oppressor of the Saints by fines, imprisonment, visitations, etc.
the persecution was so hot under William Laud, both when he was Lord Bishop of
London, and afterward of Canterbury, that thousands of good people did
transport themselves to strange remote Countries, some fled to neighbor
Nations, to get out of his reach, this was great oppression; as for those that
staid behind, they hid themselves in corners, were put to great cost and
charges upon the account of their nonconformity, besides what burdens were
laid upon their shoulders in common with other people, they were taxed, fined,
sequestered, and squeezed, by the Prelates Court^ and Officers, most
unreasonably: How many turned out of doors for not reading the Book of Sports,
allowed upon the first day of the week? Yea, the very visiting, and speaking,
or showing any kindness or countenance to Mr. Burton, Mr. Prin, and Dr. Bastick
as they journied into banishment, through the Countries, cost many precious
souls very dear, as will appear in fullness of time to all the world.

After this, The Classical Directory, the common Prayer books successor cost
the Nation a great sum.
a costly Common Prayer for Scotland was formed and imposed, seconded with a
great Army, which, and all the illegal Taxations before, as for Knighthood at
the beginning of his Government, the Isle of Ree. Ship Money, etc. had made the
very common, carnal people, to see the English Government inclining to the
French Garb, where the Taxes are endless, easeless, and remediless, as the poor
Peasants may well compute.

Thus, I have drawn this line of the HISTORY OF TAXES AND TRIBU^ES, of
ARBITRARY LEVIES AND IMPOSITIONS, through so many ages, tracing this hateful
monster from its cradle, in Souls time (who was the first Monarch over the
people of God) to its old age; for indeed, Christians, it waxes old, and is
ready to vanish away. Wait but a while, you shall hear more. But to finish this
discourse, I have, you see, brought you down to the beginning of the Scottish
Troubles, which being a day of small things, The Scottish opposition to the
Prelates and their trinkets, a door of hope opened to the oppressed Saints.
was ready to be despised, as not having any great birth in the womb of it.
When the Scottish woman threw her stool at the Priests head in the chief Church,
as they call it, at Edinburgh, as he was reading the Mass Book over her head in
the Scottish language, and a tumult followed thereupon, I hearing of it, was
very much affected with it, and found my Spirit mightily raised to expect great
things. I looked on it as the first great turn of the Tide, whereby we were
carried so fast toward the Sea of Rome, and that was the first occasion of my
looking into the Revelation, and the Prophet Daniel.

Whereupon I saw plainly the Lord was resolved to turn back the captivity of
his people, The Parliament will not levy a Tax to make war with Scotland.
especially when the short Parliament refused to tax the Nation for the
maintenance of the war with the good people of Scotland; that Assembly being
dissolved by the Kings Prerogative, he was constrained much against his mind to
summon another Parliament, in the same year; the most High overruled him,
brought him into inextricable labirynths, all the policy of his Statesmen
could not prevent the approaching Decrees of the King of Kings.

Whereupon the God of Heaven being with them for Judgment and Justice, Illegal
Taxations, damned in full Parliament.
all Arbitrary Courts, all illegal Taxations, were damned in full Parliament.
This was a year of Jubilee to the poor oppressed Sectaries, and
Non-conformists. It is a year to be remembered with gladness and great joy.
Light breaks forth, the bondage upon the Saints is gradually taken off. We took
them captives, whose captives we were; we rewarded them as they had rewarded
us; we ruled over our oppressors.

The spirit of Antichrist in the Prelates and their Faction, in Court, City,
and Country, cannot endure to hear of, and see the liberty of the true
Israelties, the return of the banished, imprisoned ones: the downfall of their
Diana enraged them, the Beast also began to roar in the sense of this deadly
blow.

But the Spirit of Christ rises higher and higher in his Servants, being
encouraged by the high Court of Parliament, whose Office it was to take an
account of the grievances and oppressions which had made the people full of
discontent against the ways of the Court, especially against the Prelates.

At length they take part with one Higher Power, The persecuted Puritans join
with the Parliament against the interest of the Court, that house of Bondage and
Taxes
being lawfully called thereto, against the other Higher Power, who had so
crushed them by Prerogative, and Arbitrary proceedings, as was well known to
millions. Generally, the persecuted Christians, and all the Puritans, joined
with the Parliament, for Christ and his interest, so far as they knew it against
the King and his Prelates; for they well understood that the Court interest,
and that of the Lords spiritual (as they were then called) was opposite to the
Lord Jesus and his affairs.

Hereupon the one Power and the other call for help every way, first by way of
Benevolence, Taxes levied to destroy the old Taxes Clavum clavo.
and free Contribution, afterward by Taxes and Excise, I dare say for them, who
saw the wheel in the midst of the wheel Ezekiel. 1.16. and 10.10.
, so long as we perceived the Work of the Lord promoted, they might call for
any thing almost and have it; a free will Offering they had of Gold, Silver,
Jewels, Servants, Sons, Husbands, for the Lord had stirred up the Spirit of his
people in the Land exceedingly, and they came in singleness of heart to serve
the Lord Christ, and to do work in his house Hag. 1.14.
, in the removing of Rubbish and other obstacles which were laid in the way by
the Man of sin, others had other ends in going on this warfare, as afterward
did frequently appear.

Thus at the beginning, we were ready to part with a great part of our
livelihood, for the complete recovery of our Liberties, and that we might see
written vengeance executed Ps, 149.9. Jer. 50.28.
, even the vengeance of the Lords Temple, etc. and the cause of Christ carried
on, and prospering against Antichrist and the Fourth Monarchy.

But when we saw that the first Army was debauched by means of many mercenary
Swordmen, The first Army not fit instruments to destroy Tyranny.
and Soldiers of Fortune, and by the prevarication of the Nobility and great
men of the Nation, we knew the Work of the Lord would not prosper in their
hands; thereupon, it may easily be conceived, we began to pay our Tribute or
Taxmoney very unwillingly, the Taxes and Contributions lay exceeding heavy, and
no work done: We complained to our friends in power, we sought and besought the
Lord, that we might not be carried back again to Egypt, but forward toward
perfection in this cause. The Lord was entreated of his praying people, The new
Model formed and used by God to renew the work begun for the good of the Saints.
and gave them the NEW MODEL, formed contrary to principles of State Policy;
but it being of God, and we finding that his Servants would serve him, Rev.
22:3. and not themselves, we paid our Taxes freely again, I mean, the people of
Christ who were made willing in the day of his power (or Armies, as some read
it) Psalm. 110.3. the understanding sort of believers, who knew what England
ought to do (though those of the Scottish way and spirit were very opposite) did
freely lay out themselves for their encouragement, as foreseeing what would
follow upon the taking away of Monarchical Tyranny, or Tyrannical Monarchy, as
afterward it came to pass.

And whereas it may be accounted as heavy a bondage to be taxed by
Aristocratical Sovereignty, The Remnant who did cleave to the work, willing to
be taxed, and to charge themselves for their Brethren in Arms
as by Kingly Power, I say no, not so in this case, for we were satisfied that
this charging of our selves, as the Scripture speaks, Nehem. 10.32. was for the
pulling down of that Power, which has it as an essential property, entering
into the very constitution of it, to oppress the people, when there is no need
of Impositions and Taxations.

But to go on, Great affection to the new model abounding in the work of the
Lord.
THIS ARMY THVS MODELD, had the Prayers, Faith, Affections, Purses, and other
assistance, of as knowing and heavenly Christians, as I believe were in the
world; they looked on them, as their dear Brethren (when others despised them,
and wished no good unto them) they preferred them before themselves, esteemed
them above all the Armies that had been before them in any age since Christ's
time; Taxes were not Taxes, Burdens were not Burdens, great payments were
light matters, every three or six months, when others paid their proportions
out of Fear, THIS REMNANT parted with their estates in Love, we did not
complain as others; For all this while they behaved themselves like very choice
Instruments in the Lords hand: Oh the honorable mention made of them before
the Lord! the Saints Bucklers, under God, against Tyranny; our Protectors, and
Defenders, as an Army against our sworn enemies, friends of Christ, and his
Interest, they appeared most notably resolved to cleave to the work of the Lord
against Babylon, so far as we could perceive, we verily thought with our
selves, by their prayers, speeches, and discourses, their Declarations,
Promises, Appeals to God, etc. That it had been almost impossible they should
ever prevaricate with the Lord, and his people.

Hereupon, I say, it was plainly seen, how some people carried themselves, and
how differently from others, we gave not grudgingly, or out of necessity 2 Cor
9.7. (...), Not with grief and sorrow, because we must part with it.
, but cheerfully, that they might, as from their brethren, be encouraged to
proceed as they had begun.

Thus it continued while Worcester Victory, and a good space after, because we
hoped, after they had rested, and secured their spoils and arrears, etc. we
should find them rouse up again, wherefore the Lambs followers continued their
payments with a good will, I can speak for my self, and I believe many others
did so; for when the Parliament grew sluggish, and careless of the work of
Christ, now their own turn was served, we had ground to believe that those who
had seen the wonders of the Lord in so many Battles, Sieges, Victories, would
not have given over so glorious a work, and service for Christ against the man
of sin, and his Adherents, and for which they had been so well recompensed both
by God and man. The new Model decline in zeal to the Cause of Christ, and his
people.


But, DALILAH DECEIVED SAMPSON. And the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the
eyes, and the pride, have caused the mighty men of War to fall. If they had
dealt fairly with their faithful Brethren, and told us the truth, namely, That
the Lord was not with them as in times past; if they had ingenuously confessed,
that though they had overcome the men of the world, yet the world bad overcome
them (as we saw plainly, some of us, it had) if they had let us understand from
themselves (that which we feared would afterward appear) that they would
deliver us no further, that they could not advance one step further against the
scarlet Whore, and the Kings of the earth who commit fornication with her, that
they were not spirited to follow the Lamb any further, because they had gotten
Farms, and Palaces, and Parks, which they must look after, and fall to building
and planting, etc. as in the days of Noah, and as it will be before the coming
of the Son of Man; I say, If they had freely opened their bosoms to us, in
these matters, as some of themselves must now needs say, there was cause they
should. It is very probable, we should have dealt with them in an honest
Christian way, and have persuaded them, to have given encouragement to their
Brethren, whose hearts God had made willing to proceed in that glorious
Warfare, which they had thus far, and thus happily begun and carried on. The
new Model had warm clothes applied to keep life and heat in them.


And indeed, some few of us did follow them with warm clothes to get heat into
them, and to quicken them to the work of God, and further told the chiefest of
them, though there was a withdrawing in some, yet others were resolved to
promote this honorable Design against the kingdom of the Beast; Some brethren
in danger for pressing forward the work.
but being betrayed by some of our own number, we were, we perceived, taken in
a snare, to the danger of some of our lives, if the Lord had not prevented. But
for them to decline in their affections to this noble Cause more and more, The
new Model pull down what they had built, and build again the things they had
destroyed.
to lose ground every day, and yet to keep the Sword in their hands; nay to
exact the full sum of the Taxations as formerly, and yet to suffer the
Enterprise to slide back insensibly into the same, or a worse condition than
before; Nay, more than this, for the NEW MODEL to build again the same things
they had destroyed, for the famous Commanders in that new Model, to set up old
M^narchy under a strange notion, and uncouth Title, The new Model sets up old
Monarchy in a new disguise, and persecere those who will not fall down and
worship the Image which they have set up, contrary to their own engagements.
against the very appearance whereof they had so frequently, and so solemnly
engaged and declared: And yet further, to command us also, who were their firm
friends and brethren in all their streights, to shut our eyes, and believe as
the Court believes, upon pain of imprisonment; and if we put them in mind of
their Apostasy, of their deceiving the Saints, and mocking of Christ, presently
to say, Take him Jailor; Oh, this is not to render to the Lord according to the
benefit done unto them; this is not to recompense their brethren according to
the kindness they have ever been ready to show unto them.

So that truly, The little remnant unwilling to be charged again, as in time of
the first Army, because all things go backward.
upon consideration of that which went before, I must needs say, I cannot so
freely pay Taxes, and give them wages now as formerly, when they minded, or
pretended to mind the things of Jesus Christ, the liberty of the Saints, and
the calling of that bloody City, that cruel City, to an account for all those
massacres, murders, and slaughters, and other cruel usage of our forefathers,
and of the present generation of Saints, now suffering exceedingly at home and
abroad by her Paramors, and Lovers, the Kings and other Tyrants of the earth,
and I am confident many Saints are unwilling of; Nevertheless, Yet rather than
resist, they do still part with their estates, though not so freely as formerly.
to deal plainly with all men that shall read or hear these things, My
Principles, and that light which I have received from the good word of God, did
cause me to surrender and give up my body, and my goods without resistance, yea
I have paid heavy Taxes during this my unjust imprisonment, also, even as when
I was at liberty; and let the powers proceed to oppress me, as far as my
heavenly Father pleases, I rejoice I have any thing to suffer the loss of, in
so excellent and honorable a Cause as this is, wherein with my
Fellow Sufferers, I am embarked.

But having treated thus largely from the word of God, and from Authentic
Histories (which are excellent Interpreters of Prophecies) concerning these
troublesome Inmates, which have gotten into our houses and bowels, which sit
upon our skirts so constantly at every turn of Government, and though we should
speak them never so fair, they will not depart, till they are forced out; by
Judges as at the first, and by Counselors as at the beginning. my practice in
paying Taxes, and suffering imprisonment without resistance; It may be asked of
me by some knowing Saints, What are the particular grounds and reasons of your
practice in this particular?

Ans. The reason of paying tribute without resistance.
The return I give to such a Question, is this, according to the Apostle, I AM
SVBJECT TO THE POWERS IN BEING, BECAUSE I MVST NEEDS BE SVBJECT, PARTLY FOR
WRATH, PARTLY FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE, Romans 13.5. read, and consider that sentence.

I explain my Answer thus; First,

I am subject for wrath (...).
, or because of wrath, that is, the wrath of the fourth Beast, or Roman spirit
in the powers; for if I should have resisted, when the Pursevants came to
attach my body (for my spirit indeed, blessed be the Lord, was, and is out of
theirs, and their Masters reach) their Roman wrath would have showed it self
presently by wounds or bruises, or other outrageous violence; now I was not
prepared to stand upon my guard, as others have done in the like case, neither
did I intend to flee, or make any escape, for I was not afraid, having done no
evil for which I should be afraid of the powers.

Now I knowing that there was a power in being, and apprehending that I could
not glorify God better for the present than by suffering, I quietly, and
exceeding cheerfully submitted, and obeyed the Order, in the Authority whereof
as to them, they had apprehended me, and went along with the poor creatures
without gainsaying. I had a blessed Catalogue of suffering Saints, beside the
King of Saints, whose examples were very encouraging, in conjunction with so
good a Cause. And thus I was, and am still subject for wraths sake, (as it is
translated, or because of wrath) for what single person can stand before the
wrath of the Powers of this world? during that time of Domination which is
allotted to them, he must needs be subject, or come under their ordering (as
the word implies) because of wrath; their wraths, not Gods, thus I understand
the place.

In the next place, I say I am subject to the Powers in being, because I must
needs be subject, NOT ONLY for wraths sake, BUT ALSO for conscience sake, or
because of conscience; that is, as the wrath of violent men have a kind of
compulsive power, which will necessitate single persons, or unarmed persons, to
yield to those who have power, which is a real acknowledgement that they are
the Higher Powers, who bear all before them; So in like manner (but in a
different way of working) Conscience in a godly man, and a knowing Christian,
has a constraining power, which will produce a resignation of our selves up to
the will of God, who is Lord of the Conscience, and he persuading me, upon
plain grounds in his word, to suffer under the fourth Kingdom, for the service
of himself and his Son, I cheerfully obey, and forbear all words and actions of
opposition, after the manner of men, until the Dominion be taken away, to
consume and destroy it utterly, as other Kings and Kingdoms have been destroyed
heretofore; And so I acknowledge there are Higher Powers in being, and I
finding and feeling it so to be, am subject (because it must be so) not only
for wrath sake, but for Conscience sake also, and as Peter says, for the Lords
sake; 1 Pet. 2.13. (...).
which is a further obligation upon a Christian, to suffer patiently those
abuses which are offered to his person, Relations, good Name, Estate, or any
thing that is his.

Nevertheless, this I add, That I groan all this while with other oppressed
creatures, Rom 8.19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
for the manifestation of the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. For
certainly the creature being made subject to tyranny, and the cruel lusts of
proud men, NOT WILLINGLY, but by reason of him who has subjected the same in
hope, cannot but in the light and power of that Spirit which is in them, cry
out in Faith, and earnest expectation, COME LORD JESUS, COME QVICKLY; and let
all the followers of the Lamb say Amen. And let all the wonderers after the
Beast fill up the measure of their Fathers, in reproaching, imprisoning,
oppressing, and otherwise persecuting the Saints of the most High, and receive
that recompense of reward which is meet.

Object. If any shall here object and say, Why did we fight against the King?
you your self did ^ppose him, you preached other Doctrine in those times; and
if we must be so subject now, and yield to the present Powers without
resistance, as you have said and done of late, is not this a contradiction to
former Principles and practices? etc.

Answ. All particular persons (of whom I always speak, and it must be
remembered) I mean the Saints of the most High, did yield subjection to the
King; yea, and to the Prelates, actively or passively, without resistance,
those who were Non-conformists then to the Antichristian power, as I am now,
did suffer patiently and cheerfully, as Christ left them an example; this was
so while the King was the only supreme Power in being, and until God raised up
a Horn of Salvation for them; and then as I said before, the Puritans joined
with Parlamentary Power against Regal Power exercised contrary to Law and
Justice; and I was one of the number, being lawfully called to oppose tyranny,
by the authority of the highest Court, and I never did, nor do repent of that
engagement against that party, etc.

Whereas now there is no visible Powers in being, to relieve me, and other
oppressed servants of the Lord, it is with us now, as it was under the old
Monarchy, there are no Saviors, no Deliverers; our Deliverers are become our
Persecutors, Zach. 1.2, or 3, last verses.
and there is no power to refist, or oppose, for the spirit of the Horns (as
Zacharias calls the persecuting Powers) is gotten into the Carpenters, the
Carpenters are at length metamorphozed into pushing and goring Horns.

But when soever God shall provide new Carpenters to fray away these Horns that
scatter the true Israel, no question but Israel will be willing to be
delivered, and to take them Captives whose Captives they were, and to rule over
their oppressors, as they did about fourteen years ago.

Obj. 2. But it may be further urged by others, But particular Christians did
go to Law with the King, before the Parliament was called, and so opposed him
that way, by Arguments drawn from Reason and Justice, as Mr. Hampden, etc. and
cannot you go and do thus likewise? namely, wage Law with your Oppressors.

Answ. 1. Most of the Judges were deaf on that ear concerning Law and Justice,
and were for the Kings Power, and Prerogative, and so carried it for the King,
being overawed; this I have from a good hand: Nevertheless, I honor the memory
of those worthy persons, who were willing to spend their Estates, and hazard
all, rather than not to bear testimony against tyranny.

2 If the Sword were not the supreme Power, and if all the Laws were not
silenced (or suspended at least) which are against that Sword-interest, It may
be some particular persons, whom God should make free, might dare to wage or
plead the Law of the Land against their oppreffors, or appeal to the higher
Powers (if there were any as high or higher than the sharp power of the Sword)
as Paul did from the Jewish Powers unto Augustus; Act. 25.11, 12.
But when Caesar, who was the highest Power on earth, did oppress him, whither,
or to whom, could Paul appeal, but to Jesus Christ, the Lord of Lords, and King
of Kings? and thus it is with me.

Cranmer appealed from the Power in being, which oppressed him, to the next
General Council, whch was a Power in some ages had in great veneration, but
what good could that do him? the present Power burnt him to ashes, and his
Appeal to a future contingent Power dyed with him; yet it was a kind of
Testimony against his persecutors.

And if that be judged to be of any use upon Scriptureground, I can enter my
Appeal to the next higher Powers, which the God of Heaven shall set up in
mercy, and love to his poor Remnant, to do us right, and deliver us from our
potent persecuters.

But as the case now stands, I am made a Bond-slave, who was born free, and
never forfeited my liberty (blessed be the Lord, I can speak it before men and
devils) by any transgression of man's Laws; yet I have, and do cheerfully, and
with great delight, submit to the will of God, in these sufferings, so
burdensome to flesh and blood; and I am persuaded, if they should scourge me
as the Jews did the Apostles, and as the Prelates did some under the former
Monarchs, I should rejoice to be counted worthy to suffer shame for his name
Acts 5. last verse. Gal. 2. last verse.
, who has loved me, and given himself for me, the unworthiest worm of all; and
if the Lord should permit them to put me to a shameful death, like the death of
the Cross, I am ready; But it is not yet signified to me, by what death I
shall glorify God: Oh, its a sweet life to live free from the fear of death,
Joh. 21.19. Heb 2.14, 15, 1 Cor. 15.57.
Thanks be to God who gives us victory through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory
and Dominion for ever, Amen. Hitherto of giving Tribute.

Now as touching the other two particulars, Honor and Fear due to Higher
Powers, as Tribute and Custom is due unto them
Honor and Fear, which are to be given to the Higher Powers, beside Tribute
and Custom; In a very few words, this I have to say, That I always freely
gave honor to whom honor was due.

And in particular, when I was apprehended the first time, namely, about the
21. of the 10. Month, 1653. and brought before the Council, for expounding the
Prophecy about the little Horn in Dan. 7. I did obeisance according to the
custom of the Country, or Nation in which I live, used toward Superiors, I
stood while they sat, and with my head uncovered, the General having his hat
on, and this without reluctance; besides, I freely gave him the honorable Title
of a Lord, in discourse with him, as being Captain General of all the Forces;
and I suppose this is to own a Higher Power, for those who do not own
Government and Superiority among men, do not so behave themselves, as namely
the Shakers, as they call them, or any others of those principles; and thus I
did to the Committee of the Council, when I was apprehended and brought before
them this second time; and I do not remember that ever any Powers did challenge
me in this matter.

As for Fear, and the rendering of fear to whom fear is due, I am of this
persuasion, that if I were guilty in mine own conscience, and before the Lord,
of any such gross wickedness, as some of the choicest Saints have been
overtaken, and overcome withal, and were brought to a legal trial, and
convicted by witness without, as well convinced by witness within, I should
be afraid of the Power, but not otherwise; For the Apostle says, Will thou not
be afraid of the Power? do that which is good; but if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid; so that in this also, I am ready to own any Higher Powers
which shall be set up in my days, when there is occasion and reason for it;
and surely no man can say (at least if his words have the sap and juice of
sense and reason in them) that I ought to fear any power, higher, or lower,
unless when I have done evil, and this be made known unto me in the light of
the righteous Law of God. But, though I know nothing by my self, yet I am not
thereby justified in the sight of God.

Thus I have (for the Cause sake, which might suffer, if I should have
neglected this impudent slander) freely declared my former and present
principles concerning the Powers in being; But who could have imagined, first,
That in saying, I owned the present powers, I had recanted; and submitted, and
acknowledged them to be a lawful Authority, and an hundred false rumors, to the
grief of my brethren, of the same spirit with me in the present Truth? whereas
I never said nor thought otherwise. And who could have imagined secondly, that
any one who calls and accounts himself a Christian, would take part of the
letter, or a few sentences here and there torn from the rest, and thereupon
divulge and show them as a testimony and proof of such a Report? whereas, to
recapitulate all in a word, This is that I will close up this Section with.

1 I acknowledge, there are Higher Powers in being, and every one must grant
this, as well as I, and my Fellowprisoners; for they feel it, I believe, though
not so effectually as we do.

2 I yielded my body to be apprehended and carried away, without striving or
lifting up my voice in the streets, when they sent their Messengers with swords
(and it may be other weapons about them) to bring me before the Council. And I
reckon this to be an owning of the present powers. I never did yield thus far
to private men, who should come to apprehend me, in my house, or otherwhere; I
were bound to stand upon my guard in such a case, as men do every day against
Thieves and Robbers, etc.

3 I am subject to them also, for wraths sake partly, and partly for conscience
sake, in point of Taxes; I would refist others, who should demand any part of
that wherewith the Lord has blessed me, by inheritance, or otherwise,
nevertheless, I would be very glad to live under a Power that would not be a
Raiser of Taxes, and hope to see Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at
the beginning, Isa. 1.26. before I dye.

4 I give honor where it is due, I understanding it to be due; but when persons
are not known, how can it be known what is their due, or what respect belongs
unto them? and I conceive this is an owning of Powers likewise.

5 I am willing also to be afraid of the Powers, if I am found to be an evil
doer hereafter, and this made out to me by the word of God.

And what is due to others of the children of men, I desire to give or render
to them according as is meet, for I would owe no man any thing but love; and
the Lord help, and quicken^es all up to love, to love the Lord, and to love all
the Saints; yea, the Lord make his people to increase and abound in love one
toward another, and toward All Men, as it is written, 1 Thessalonians. 3.12.

Before I pass to the next Section, it seems requisite, that somewhat from
the Scripture should be spoken concerning the time of the end of those Yokes of
Bondage, whereby the best people have been oppressed by the Kings of the Earth,
from King Saul^ time unto this day; For it is very probable, that the
intelligent Reader does remember that I hinted such a point in the Introduction
to this Historical Epitome of those Burdens whereof I have been speaking,

Quest. Saying, What hope is there of an end of these burdens.
But when shall the Lords people be a free people? when shall the Oppressor
cease? when shall the Extortioner be hindered from taking of our Substance? we
had thought this New Model would have continued as they begun, to be our
Deliverers from Monarchical and other Tyranny; but we have learned, Every man
is a lie, and lighter than vanity; Psalm. 62 9.
and therefore we will no longer rely upon an arm of flesh: What does God the
Lord speak to his people in this matter, etc.

Answ. 1. It is apparent, and plain, (...). Bu^chered or sl^ughtered, so the
word ^ig^ifie^h; Jugulo, to cut the throat, as Butchers do with sheep, Romans
8.^7. (...), We are counted as sheep for the slaughterhouse. The Roman Empire
was like a slaughter house the first 300 years.

Ezra 9.8.


that as the souls of the Saints, slain in former ages for the Word of God, and
for the Testimony which they held, do continue to cry HOW LONG, O LORD, HOLY
AND TRVE? so the living Saints, who also are lively, and sensible of the
present persecutions and imprisonments of their Brethren, do Echo to the voice
of those who have died in the Lord, and for the Lord, HOW LONG, O LORD, HOLY
AND TRVE?

2. But then consider, that as it was with the godly Jews, upon their return
from their captivity in Babylon, so it is with us, who but a few years ago came
out of Babylon in part, and but in part. And Ezra's words will well express our
present state, or at least, as it was some few years since, For a little space,
or for a moment, grace has been showed us from the Lord our God, to leave us a
remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may
lighten our eyes, and give us a LITTLE REVIVING IN OUR BONDAGE. For we were
Bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended
mercy unto us in the sight of the Kings of Persia, to give us a REVIVING, to
set up the house of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and to give
us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.

Yet afterward, this fair first fruits of redemption was blasted; for in the
first of Nebemiah, a bitter complaint is brought (which may answer our
condition likewise) The remnant that are left of the captivity -- are in great
affliction and reproach, Nehem. 1.3.
the wall of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burnt
with fire.

Thus you see their little reviving from their bondage, and OUR LITTLE REVIVING
FROM OUR BONDAGE, comes afterward to be extinguished; in reference to
Church-work, the Temple-work could not go forward, the walls and gates being
broken down and burnt with fire; and this is our complaint also. And as for our
outward Liberties and Estates, Nehem. 9.37. Nehem. 10.28.
The Kings have Dominion over our Bodies, and over our Cattle, AT THEIR
PLEASVRE, and we are in great distress, as were those Jews at that time.
Namely, such as had separated themselves from the people of the Lands, unto the
Law of God. Observe that description, they separated themselves, etc. and so
let the Disciples of Christ do at this day, unto the LAW OF THEIR GOD ALSO, for
this is expected from them by the Lord. The consideration of this NEW
UNEXPECTED TYRANNY, under which we groan, does cause many poor hearts to fear
our deliverance is not near, and the rather they fear it, because the famous
NEW MODEL with whom the Lord was so eminently, when they were about his work,
are so exceedingly degenerated, that they have espoused the old quarrel, and
the old interest, under the ill-favored disguise of another kind of Kingship;
which yet is not another, but the same, in principle, in spirit, and in
operation.

Answ. 3. Wherefore do you indeed desire to know whether or no the Lord will
shortly turn again the captivity of Sion, Psalm. 126.1.4.
as the streams in the South? would you in good earnest, have skill and
understanding in this matter? Then in the next place, take my Brethren, the
Prophets for an example, particularly the Prophet Daniel, Dan. 9 2. See 1 Per
1.11. Searching wh^^ or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in
them did sigu fie, when it restified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and
the glory that should follow. Rev. 17.17.
who understood by Books, the number of the years, when the desolation of
Jerusalem (of holy Jerusalem) should have an end; The Teachers of the people
are exceedingly to blame, that they do not fore-warn the people to come out of
Babylon, and engage against the Kings of the Earth with all their might. But
what do I mean to charm the deaf Adder? it is not for their interest, to
discover the nakedn^ss of the searlet Whore, much less to exhort the people to
strip her naked, and make her desolate, that she and her lovers, the ten Horns,
or Kings, may no longer oppress the people, to maintain them in their c^stly
trade of fornication, each with other; but more of this hereafter.

But because those Truths which concern the time of the end, in Daniel and the
Revelation, cannot be so well understood by the Saints who are unskilful in
that part of the word of righteousness, therefore, they shall do well to
enquire of those, who by reason of use, Heb 5 13, 14.
have their senses exercised in those most excellent mysteries: And if they
look up to the Lord with unfeigned desire not to be taken in that snare which
shall come upon the Inhabitants of the earth, do read those Books concerning
the accomplishment of these promises, as the Eunuch did Isaiahs, who knows but
the Lord may provide a Philip, to open and interpret those mysteries to
satisfaction beyond all expect^tion? Generation work in three books of great
use in these times, by Jo. Tillinghast.
And because, by special providence, I have received refreshment three several
times, by three several Books written by Mr. Tillinghast concerning
Generation-work, the^e^ore I recommend them to the Saints. The first time was
when I was conflicting with strong temptations to intermit my method of
Teaching, concerning the present Truth, and work of Christ, and the Spirit of
God meeting my spirit in reading the first of Jeremy, Jer. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. and
17.18, 19. 2 Cor. 10.5.
and helping me to subdue those carnal reasonings, The first part of
Generation-work was unexpectedly brought to my hands at that very juncture of
time, when I had been a thinking that I was alone in this business. The next
season was exactly, when I was apprehended and committed to the Messengers
house, An Introduction to this Altogether-causelesse long Imprisonment (as the
Lord knows, to whom I have Appealed) even then also unexpectedly was the second
part brought unto me, first in sheets, and before the publication; the third
time, when I was shut up a close prisoner in this strong Castle, and none of
the Saints suffered to come at me, as formerly; and at that very time the third
part was conveyed to me; I look upon it as very instructing to me, that they
should be published at those seasons when they might be most useful for the
encouragement of so weak a Worm.

I could not but take this opportunity to bear testimony to my dearly beloved
Brother, and Fellow Laborer in the present work of Christ, and Fellow-student
in this present Truth, which shall prosper, and prevail, in despite of Men and
Devils, even to the darkning of that Pomp and Splender of the Kingdom of the
Beast, and to the subverting of that Power and Policy which now delude and
govern the Nations, Rev. 16.10. (...) His Kingdom became darkened, or was made
dark.
and that in such a mavelous manner and method of proceeding, as shall amaze
the wisest Princes of this world, when they enter into a deep consideration of
the same.

But, that I may, if the Lord please, convey a little light into the
understanding of my Brethren in this Cause, This I say at present, When the
people of God are come out of Babylon, and have once made a further and more
complete separation from that Scarlet, Bloody, Drunken Strumpet, Rev. 18.4.6.
SO AS THAT THEY PARTAKE NOT IN THE LEAST OF ANY OF HER SINS, when they are by
the Lord put into a capacity of rewarding her, as she has rewarded them, and
their elder Brethren in the generations before them; Then, and not till then,
will the Saints throw the Burden off from their own shoulders, and the iron
yoke of Taxes and Tribute, and of other Bond-servi^e, Jer. 51.57.
upon her neck, and upon the necks and the shoulders of her Princes, of her
wise men, her Captains, and her R^lers, and of her mighty men. Oh, Dear
Brethren, shall we live to see that day? What a sight is here? It is
Spectaculum dignum Deo; the Lord Jesus who sits on the right hand of the
Father, expecting to see his foes made his footstool, Heb. 10.12, 13 Isa 37.22.
Rev. 17.5.
will take great delight to see The Virgin Daughter of Sion despising the
Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the earth, to laugh this proud Lady of
Kingdoms to scorn, to behold the Daughter of Jerusalem to shake her head at
this persecuting City; she and her Lovers shall be like ashes under the soals
of the feet of this Ransomed and Redeemed people. Therefore be of good courage,
Mal. 4 3.
oh ye oppressed Saints, fear not, for Jehovah Elohim will make your Horn
iron, and your Hoof brass, and you shall beat in pieces many people, but
remember you consecrate not their gain to your selves (as the new Model has
done, Mich 4.13.
which will not turn to so good account as they think for) but to the Lord of
the whole earth, who expects to be honored with the first fruits of all your
increase.

I read of three sorts of Princes; first, Three kinds of Pri^ce^, and but one
kind good.
The Princes of Babylon, mentioned even now; Secondly, The Princes of the
Degenerated Jews; And thirdly, Jehovans Princes.

1 The Princes of Babylon are altogether for the spoil, and the prey, for the
crushing of the people, so that they were, and are abundant in treasures, and
there is no measure of their covetousness, Jer. 51.13.

2 The Princes of the Jews revolted from the Lord; Her Princes (speaking of
Jerusalem, says the Prophet) within her, are ROARING LIONS, Her Judges are
EVENING WOLVES, they gnaw not the bones till the morning, Zeph. 3.3. Jerusalem
is called An oppressing City, Her Princes are Lions, etc.

3 Jehovahs Princes, Ezekiel. 45. In the Land shall be the Princes possession in
Israel, and MY PRINCES (says the Lord) SHALL NO MORE OPPRESS MY PEOPLE; Ezekiel.
45.8, 9. Ezekiel 48.35.
and the name of that City shall be called, The Lord is There, where the Lord
is, and where his Princes are, there shall be no more any oppression and spoil.
The Prophet goes on, Thus says the Lord God, Let it suffice you, Oh Princes of
Israel, Remove violence and spoil, and execute Judgment and Justice, TAKE AWAY
YOUR EXACTIONS FROM MY PEOPLE, says the Lord God.

When you see Princes and Rulers squeezing the people, raising of Taxes,
compelling the poor Parishioners to pay treble Damages for not paying the Popes
Tithes; while you feel the Publican, and the Excise-man countenanced and
encouraged in their vexatious Collections, and exactions upon the poor of the
people, Think with your selves, these are not the Princes of Jehovah, but
either they are the Princes of Babylon directly and professedly, or else the
Princes of Apostatized Israel, who have the name of Christians, but the nature
of Tyrants.

But on the other side, when you see an Higher Power encouraging the Lords
people to come out of Babylon, effectually and for ever; when you see the chief
Magistrates in their own persons to renounce all communion with the enemies of
Christ, and to make an unfeigned separation from the carnal and world-like
Church; when you discern their indignation to be altogether against Raising of
Taxes, and imposing the Tribute money upon the children who are free, and to
levy their Tribute of Bond-service upon those, who will not have Christ, but
Antichrist reign over them, Then lift up your heads, and hope that your full
Redemption draws near. Mat. 17.25, 26. Christ Jesus the Lord pronounces the
children free; and the Kings of the earth in those days did not exact or take
Custom or Tribute of their own people, but of strangers, as it appears by
Peter's words.


But how far, Oh God! are thine own people from promoting their own good? or
from removing the oppressions of their brethren? they are taking a DIRECT
COURSE to perpetuate the Kingdom of the fourth Beast, in these Nations, after
all thine appearances for their deliverance; and instead of saying, Come Lord
Jesus, Come quickly, with the Spirit, and with the Bride, in understanding,
they say, God save the Image of earthly Monarchy, they shout as when Saul was
made a King, OH IMAGE OF KINGSHIP, LIVE FOR EVER! Verily the Lord Jesus will
find a time to reckon with whole Churches, and their Leaders that cause them to
err; and it is ten thousand to one, if any of those who sent up Pillars out of
the Countries to support and shore up the tottering, and decrepit Roman power,
Heb. 49 (...), There remains a Salbatism, or Sabbatical rest to the people of
God.
shall enter into that Rest, which remains to the people of God.

The Lord have a gracious respect to that Remnant which he has reserved to
himself out of the mixed multitude of Hyprocrites and Apostates, Oh when will
the Lord form a people for himself? as the Kings of the earth have formed a
people for themselves, to show forth, to set forth their praise and honor, and
glory in the world.

How are the souls of many Saints in travel till Christ take to him HIS GREAT
POWER and REIGN? Rev. 11.17.
they long to see the return of their King from that far Country to which he
went so many hundred years ago to receive a Kingdom for himself, and to Return;
Return, Luke 19.12.
Psalm. 45.2. Rev 5.5. Rev. 22.16. Mal. 4.2. Luke 9.26. Mat. 24.42.
Return to the many thousands of the true Israel, Oh thou fairest among the
children of men; Oh come, Thou Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Thou bright and
morning Star, Thou Son of Righteousness, Appear in thine own glory, in thy
Fathers, and of the holy Angels; Nevertheless, not when we would, but when
thou will; in the mean time, we, by thy grace, will wait, will watch, will walk,
as those who expect their Lords coming, to take vengeance on his enemies, and
to repay recompense to his Adversaries according to all the evil they have
done in thy sight to thy poor oppressed people. Amen, Hallelujah.

Having thus far endeavored to set those things straight, which Satan and his
servants had made crooked, representing me most basely, and extreme unworthy,
as an Apostate, to the prejudice of the service of Christ in my hand, so far as
in them lay: I shall now proceed to the next part of the Letter, which has
been so grievously handled, having been tortured and torn limb from limb, as it
were, and examined upon the wrack, to make it confess as the enemies of Christ
would have it.

SECT. IV.
THe principle Clause in this part of the Epistle foregoing, I conceive is
this, By the Powers in Being, I understand the Army as supreme, all those that
join with them to carry out the work of Justice and of Mercy, according to the
indubitable principles of right Reason and Equity, etc.

For the manifestation of the truth, or at least, of my apprehensions
concerning this matter, I may according to the Rules of method, first speak of
the Armies supremacy, and then of those who join with them for the ends even
now expressed.

Concerning the first, I suppose, it is needless to spend time to bring
demonstrations for the confirming of this Assertion, there are enough made
ready to my hand, in that all men grant (which they would not do, without
sufficient demonstration, wise men especially) first, that the Army was, and
is, yet to this day, a power in being; And then secondly, they must needs
acknowledge it Supreme, for the Nations, and all sorts of people (beside them
of that Corporation) do feel it sufficiently, it is a truth that may be felt,
some feel it with smart, as being oppressed by them, and there is none to
rescue the oppressed out of their hands, there is no Horn of salvation raised
up of God to push them lower, unto this day, and others feel it with gladness
and delight, for their gain is great. There is indeed a name and a noise of an
Assembly called a Parliament, Jer. 52.32.
and of Reverend Judges, sitting aloft and somewhat high, to judge the people,
but still the Armies Throne is higher than the Thrones of all the other powers
in the Nations, they set open, and they shut up the doors of the Higher or
Lower House according to their pleasure; so that instead of proving that they
are the Supreme Power in these parts of the earth, I have somewhat else to do,
toward the explication of my meaning, namely to declare how it came to pass,
and for what end the Lord has so ordered it at this season.

And this I will do, by the help of the Lord, as a Minister of the Gospel, who
of all other men, are most of all bound and engaged to regard the works of the
Lord, and to consider the opperations of his hands (especially, Isa. 5.12.
those works which are wrought and brought to pass in their days) that so the
knowledge of the Lord may spread and increase among the Saints; even that
knowledge of God which is attained by the word of his mouth, and the works of
his hands, the study and meditation of the mavelous works of the Almighty,
being most sweet, and abundantly satisfactory to every heavenly heart.

For the more perspicuous explication of that which I apprehend in this matter
(but cannot utter as I would) I have digested my meditations into the ensuing
Propositions or Observations, which in a very short space will help you to pass
through a vaste tract of time, and that with such evidence of truth, as you go
along, that you need not stay and spend time to apply the touchstone to it, as
in some cases it is necessary to be done.

Propos. or Observe. 1. The most High rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives
it to whomsoever he will, Dan: 4.32. He changes the times and the seasons; He
removes Kings, and sets up Kings; He gives wisdom to the wise, and
knowledge to them that know understanding, Dan. 2.21.

Prop. or Obser. 2. This most High God divided to the Nations their
Inheritance, Deuteronomy, 32.8. and the first ground, and as it were, Catholic
Dominion, was given to the Assyrians and Babylonians; the next, to the Medes
and Persians; The third, to the Macedonians or Grecians; The fourth, to the
Romans. These four successively, each in their times, according to the All-wise
appointment of the will of God, were Lords of the world, Dan. 2. Dan. 7. Dan.
11. The people of God were not free from these yokes of bondage, as you have
read already in the former Section.

Prop. or Obser. 3. The Roman Monarchy, the last of the four Kingdoms (or
Beasts, as the Spirit of God does expressly call them) was at its full growth or
(...) about the time of the birth of the Prince of the Kings of the earth,
Numb. 24.17.
just at the Meridian of the Roman glory, did the Star of Jacob arise and
shine, but with a very dim light to the sight of the world, for yet he had not
manifested forth his glory, as afterward he did, Joh. 2.11. This is plain, as
from other Histories, so from Luke 2.7 first verses, Where all the world, you
find, was to be taxed by the Decree of Augustus Caesar, who now was in
peaceable possession of the Roman Empire ( Anthony and Lepidus being overcome)
The Kingdom of Heaven, it seems, which shall break in pieces all these
Kingdoms, was designed to be set up at that instant conjuncture of time, when
this Monarchy was grown to its full perfection. But more of this in due time
and place, if the Lord so please.

Prop. or Obser. 4. This fourth Beast, both killed the Lord Jesus, and Millions
and Myriards of his Discipes for the first 300 years after Christ, as the
Ecclesiastical Story of the Ten first Persecutions, does at large declare.

In process of time, after various forms and shapes assumed (as in Rev. 17.10.)
He appears at length with seven Heads and ten Horns, and upon his Horns, ten
Crowns, etc. Rev. 13.2, 3. To this Beast, there described, the Dragon gives his
Power or Host, his Throne, and great Authority, and so prosecutes, on the
behalf of the Dragon, the old trade of deceiving the Nations, and persecuting
the Saints of the most High; especially, he falls upon those in every age, who
are zealous contenders for the present truth of every age, Rev. 11. Rev. 13.
Rev. 17.

Prop. or Obser. 5. These North-west Nations are undoubtedly some of those ten
Horns, which have given their power and strength to the Beast, to make war with
the Lamb and his followers. And the evidence of Prophecy and History is so
strong in this particular, that all the Protestant Interpreters, whom I have
conversed with, do agree in this Truth, That the Race of Kings in this Island,
have, together with the other Kings of Europe, agreed, and given their Kingdom
to the Beast, Rev. 17.13. and whether it be wholly taken from him again, I
mean, in this Nation, to this day, is worthy a grave and serious examination.

Prop. or Obser. 6. Now more particularly, King Charles was within the compass
of these Prophecies, for he was not for the setting up of the Kingdom of
Christ, No, not so much as in appearance or pretense, much less in heart. The
spirit of the fourth Beast was plainly to be discerned in him by those who were
wise, and had their spiritual senses at their right hand: For the wise shall
understand, faith Daniel, but none of the wicked shall understand, Dan. 12. But
observe carefully that which follows.

Prop. or Obser. 7. This King Charles was fourteen or fifteen years since
acknowledged an Higher Power in these Nations, being in quiet possession of the
best Title to Govern and to Rule the people, of any other. But the Decrees of
the most High, for this age, being to take place, he was necessitated to call a
Parliament, and to give it an existence in conjunction with the free people of
the Nation, they being the two legal efficient causes thereof. So, here was
another Higher Power in being, sent by him and the people (as the Apostle
distinguishes the Powers) according to the known Law of the Land. This we have
heard and seen, and it was, and is still, mavelous in our eyes.

Prop. or Obser. 8. This second Higher Power, as I express it, did contend with
him who helped to make them a Power, and to give them their lawful existence in
that capacity. This power, after many bloody conflicts, by their Forces, did
take away his Dominion, to consume and to destroy it to the end; then there
was, we thought, an end of Kingship, and this second Power declared themselves
the Supreme Authority of the Nation, changing the Government from the notion of
King and Kingdom, into that of a Commonwealth: This was a great and wonderful
work of God, which we are to consider with great regard.

Prop. or Obser. 9. This Higher Power (now supreme) had empowered and Authorized
(after the Essexian Army was not found a fit Instrument for the work) the new
modeld Army, and so they became a second higher Power in the Nation also, sent
by the Parliament, as the Parliament was sent by the King and People; But yet,
and for a good space, they were, and they acted, as subordinate to the Supreme
Civil Authority: Nevertheless, in process of time, after most admirable
Vicissitudes, this military, subordinate higher Power, did take away the
Parlaments Dominion, to confume, and to destroy it to the end. I say, they
plucked up the supreme Power (so owned by themselves) by the very roots, even as
they had eradicated Monarchy, and damned it for ever, as much as in them lay.

Prop. or Obser. 10. Hereupon, no Ancient, Legal, Civil higher Power, or
supreme Authority, was in being; And, that there might be a total destruction
or dissolution of the old Fabric to the foundation, yea, of the foundation and
all, The Soldiers took upon them to set up an Assembly, somewhat like a
Parliament, which by major Vote called themselves by that name (but how
improperly, not to say ridiculously, let Law and Custom speak; for neither King
nor people did put forth any causal virtue toward their production, as by Law
they ought) But to be short, the Soldiery quickly pulled them down again, like
King Charles, who by his Prerogative, when the Parliament had no mind to humor
his lusts, would dissolve them at his pleasure.

Thus you, by this time, do not only understand that they are supreme, as I
assert, but you see, quibus viis and modis, by what ways and means they are
gotten into the Throne. Now, can any Christian, nay, can any rational Creature
find fault with me for observing these wondrous works of the great Jehovah? Can
they find in their hearts to be angry with me for calling aloud to all the
Saints (and others too, if they had ears to hear) in David's words, Come, behold
the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the earth, Psalm. 46.8.
and as he cries out Psalm. 66.57. Come and see the works of God; he has been
terrible, he will be more terrible in his doing toward the children of men; He
rules by his power for ever, his eyes behold the Nations. Let not the
rebellious EXALT THEMSELVES, Selah. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these
things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord, Psalm.
107.43.

We have seen, we have seen an end of all perfection, which has been preserved
for so many ages. The person and power of a King, and the Son of ancient Kings,
is cut down, and cost out as an abominable Branch, the Privilege of Parliament,
the Parliament, and all their numerous unknown Privileges pulled down, and
devoured by the Army at a Breakfast; the Liberties of the people also have met
with the same destiny; thus this ancient threefold Cord, made and preserved by
our Ancestors, with so much care, with so great cost of blood and treasure, is
utterly untwisted and broken all to pieces.

By this brief account of these astonishing Alterations, that great Truth which
I laid as the first stone, and the corner stone of this Discourse, is worthy of
remembrance; The most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, He changes the times
and the seasons, He removes Kings, and sets up Kings, He the Lord does all
these things; and other wonders without number. His works are honorable and
glorious, sought cut of all that have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111.2, 3.

Thus, according to that talent of understanding which is given to me, in these
great and strange transpositions of Powers by the effectual influence of the
first cause, according to the words of the Prophets (Kingly Power,
Aristocratical Privilege, and Democratical Liberty, being dissolved, destroyed
and disanulled, as you have read, heard, and seen) the Army must needs be the
remaining Higher Power within these Nations; If any Man, Lawyer, Statesman,
etc. know a Higher Power than theirs, a stronger power than theirs, a more
absolute power than theirs, I would willingly hear him speak his mind in that
particular.

But to proceed, if it be observed, I only say, They are the Supreme Power,
without addition, or determination what kind of Power; I own them as an Higher,
as the Highest earthly Power, de facto, acting and exercising such a
superiority over the people; but quo jure, that is another Question, fitter for
the Lawyers to plead, if they would or Durst, than for me; yet, this I can find
ground to say, If any one ever heard me say they were a lawful Authority, or,
as is suggested, If any person whatsoever can produce any writing, wherein I
acknowledge them a lawful, or legal Authority, since the 16. of the 10. Month,
1653. let them publish it to the world, and I will ingenuously confess, I am
no way able to mantain or justify such an Assertion in the least; let them
that please exercise their wits to persuade the credulous; For, Nibil tam
incredibile, quod non, dicendo, fiat probabile, as Tully faith.

I shall, according to the duty of my Office, declare from the good word of
God, what is there upon record, for a testimony against that generation of Back
sliders from the Cause of Christ, whom these following truths, either do now,
or may hereafter very much concern.

The Scriptures of Truth do give us much light in the matter under
consideration. Rom 13 (...), to the Higher powers 1 Pet. 2. (...), to the
King's supreme and 1 Timothy 2. (...), which are in superiority.


There are several degrees and several kinds of Powers.

There are Higher or Lower Powers, Supreme or Subordinate. The Translators do
render the word Higher in Paul's Epistle to the Romans, and the same word they
translate Supreme in Peter's Epistle to the Jews. This is also plain to sense
and reason. I shall not trouble the Reader further with this, so I put it
first, to dispatch it, unless I meet with an opportunity to do further service
with this distinction.

As for the several kinds of Higher Powers, that also needs little explication.
In some Nations there is one kind, in others another kind, Kings, Judges,
Elders, Patriachs, etc. But there is also a Distribution of Powers by their
Adjuncts, Distributio subjecti in adjuncta.
and so the Powers that are, are either Lawful or Unlawful.

Lawful Higher Powers are such, either from God, or from Nature, or from
Nations.

From God, either first, by especial Designation, in love and mercy to a
people, as Moses, David, Christ Jesus the Lord: Or else secondly, by especial
Designation in wrath, for trial and punishment to a people. Thus, Jeroboam was
set up by God for trial to the ten Tribes, and for punishment to Solomon, or
rather chastisement, and punishment to his son Rehoboam; says God by his
Prophet, I have given ten Tribes to thee. I will take thee, and thou shall
Reign, and shall be King over Israel, 1 King. from 29. to 37. compared with the
12. Chapter, and the 24 verse.

Thus Saul was given to the Israelites by God in his anger, partly for trial,
that he might see what was in their hearts, and partly for punishment, because
they had rejected the Lord from being their King, nevertheless, Saul was a
lawful Higher Power for a time, although given in displeasure.

Thus Baasha was exalted out of the dust, by God (as the Lord sent him word)
and by him made Prince over his people Israel, to fulfill the word of the Lord
against Jeroboam and his house, 1 King. 16. Chap. verse. 2. There are other
instances, but I proceed.

In the next place, there are Higher powers by nature, that is, they are
possessed, and that justly, of the Dignity of Superiority, and of the power of
Government, by a pure, natural Right.

These Higher powers, are either Paternal, or Patriarchal, such a right had
Adam, the Father of all Living, so Noah, Abraham, and other heads of the houses
of their Fathers, as the Elders of the Israelites in Egypt, Exodus Exo. 3.16.4,
29.
6.14. The lower powers in Families, are a Steward, whom the Householder, or
Lord of the Family, makes Ruler over his Household to give them their portion of
meat in due season, as Christ expresses this matter, Luke 12.42. such an
inferior power was Eliezer of Damascus, the Steward of Abraham's house; so
Tutors and Governors of the Heir, till the time appointed of the Father, are
lawful lower powers, etc.

Thirdly, Higher powers are justly such by a National Right, or by the
voluntary consent of those Nations whom they govern, and this, either in time
of peace, by election or succession, as Judah did cleave to Rehoboam, the Son
of Solomon (and many other Instances might be added) or else by victory in a
just War, as the Canaanites became Tributaries, and other people also in all
ages; And thus the Lord Jesus himself, will be actually an higher power by
conquest of the Nations, For in Righteousness be will judge and make war, Rev.
19.11.

But to conclude this part of the Distribution; It is to be noted, that one and
the same person, or the same persons, may be lawful higher powers (by an
accumulation of all these titles put together) in several respects, after the
examples in Scripture, and in other Histories. They may rule over some people
in the Authority of God, over others by the Title of Natural Right, over others
by Inheritance, over others by Election, over other people by the Title of a
Lawful War, and all at the same time. I could give a good account of this upon
principles of Justice, and Right Reason: But I hasten; and therefore this shall
suffice concerning Higher powers, lawfully such, becoming so by the appointment
of God, of Nature, or of Nations, by Any, or by All of these claims before
mentioned, or by any other warrantable plea, whatsoever it may be.

Now concerning those Higher powers, who are such de facto only, and in present
possession, but not de jure, or by any known law of God, or man, they also come
under a Ministers confideration, and have several heads of distinction, whereby
they may be known.

The Higher powers in being, without lawful Title and just Authority, so to be,
and so to Rule, are such; first of all by Usurpation, which shows it self
either in times of Pence, or in time of War. And secondly, by degenerating into
Tyranny.

Usurping Powers in times of Peace, Higher Powers by usurpation are unjust.
attain the Government, either by murder and other violence, or else by fraud
and flattery.

Of the first sort, I judge Athaliah to be one, Athaliah usurps the power by
murder.
who espying her opportunity, took hold of it, and destroyed all the seed Royal,
and reigned over the Land above six years, according as I compute, 2 King.
11.1. 2 Chronicles. 22.10.

Thus Hazael murdered his Lord (and reigned in his stead) 2 King. 8.15. Hazael
likewise
even when he lay upon his sick and deathbed, and afterward became a cruel
Tyrant, and ripped up the women with child, as it is upon record, 1 King. 8.12,
15.

So Richard the third, Surnamed the Usurper, Richard the third mide himself
King by murder.
who being Lord Pretector, murdered his two Nephews, that he might reign in
their stead: But did the Crown fit fast upon his head? no, about two years
after his Coronation, he was slain in Battle, and the dead Carcass
contumeliously used, all men observing how he was rolled to his grave in blood
and mire. See the History more at large. This for the first member of the
distinction.

In the next place, Higher Powers in being, Usurpation of the power by fraud. 2 Samuel 15.6 first verses. Absalom a most traitorous Usurper by speaking lies in
hypocrisy.
may get possession of Government or Rule, by fraud, and by speaking lies in
hypocrisy, as Absalom for a time, by his fair and plausible dissimulation, and
officiousness, telling the people what he would do if he were King; his words
are these: First, See that thy matters are good and right, but there is no man
deputed of the King to hear thee; this was to insinuate a dislike of the lawful
present Power. Note again, Moreover, says Absalom, Oh that I were made Judge
in the Land! that every man which has any Suit or Cause might come unto me,
and I would do him justice; and he would even kiss those who did obeisance to
him, and thus stole away the bearts of the men of Israel, that he might the
more easily EXALT HIMSELF.

Thus the p.O.P.e. and other Usurpers innumerable; The p.O.P.es Ulurpers by
speaking lies in hypocrifie.
that of Dan. 11.21. is considerable, There shall stand up a vile person, to
whom they shall not give the hour of the Kingdom, but he shall come in
peaceably, and OBTAIN THE KINGDOM BY FLATTERIES.

Also, Abimelech a notorious Usurper, Judge. 9.
Abimeleck made himself King (such an one as it was) by fraud, flattery and
murder, Judges 9. throughout.

This for the second sort of Usurpers in peaceable times.

Usurping Powers by force of Arms, Usurpers by the means of war. 1. During the
War.
are to be reputed so, either during the War (slagrante bello) betwixt the
lawful and unlawful Power, or after the end of the War (extincto Bello) when
the Victory is obtained, by him who usurpeth the power.

Instances of the first, 2 Samuel: 2.9, 10
are Abner and Ishbosheth. Abner, after Saul's death, made Ishbosheth Saul's Son,
King. (I commend him, he did not make himself the Monatch) King over Gilead,
and over the Ashurites, and over Jesreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin,
and over all Israel, over whom he reigned two years; but the House of Judah
followed David. Now, let the Reader observe carefully, David only was the
lawful Power, the only Higher Power, de jure, of right, over all Israel, and
though Ishbosheth reigned two years, yet he was not the King de jure, but only
de facto, and so was not a lawful Higher Power, or Supreme, but an Usurper;
while the War lasted, on his part, it was an unjust war also, and Abner had not
a lawful military Power neither, as General of the Army. All was unlawful, and
against the express will of God. This for the first.

The second sort of Usurping Powers by the Sword, 2. After the war 2 Samuel 17.
and 18 chapters.
are so accounted, who set up themselves, or are set up by their Armies, upon
Victory in an unjust Quarrel. Thus Abselom would have been an unlawful Power,
if he had prevailed in that Battle, which he fought against his Father; and
there are many examples in Histories, of this kind of Usurpation, particularly,
in the History of the German Emperors. But I hasten.

An Higher Power also, 2. Head Powers (...). unjust by ^^generating into
tyranny.
who has lawful Authority at the beginning of the Government, may through
Tyranny, or mal-administration, become an unlawful and unrighteous Power
afterward, as King Saul and King Charles. And Histories are full of it.

But of all Usurpers or usurping Higher Powers, who get into the Throne, those
are most abominable, as Powers, who, being INTRVSTED BY A PEOPLE to deliver
them from slavery and servitude, and for the public good and Commonwealth,
having Conquered the common Enemy, or Tyrant, do betray their Trust, and bring
their friends (who paid them, and prayed for them, who helped to bear their
burdens, esteemed them as Brethren, and fellow-Citizens) into as bad, or worse
servitude and slavery than they were in before; and this contrary to Oaths, and
all manner of Promises, Protestations, and other Engagements. Pretending they
would make them a free people, and then MOST PERFIDIOVSLY put an IRON YOKE upon
their friends, and upon their posterity, as much as in them is. But more of
this abomination by and by.

I shall break off from this work of distinguishing of Higher Powers (for the
forms and variations are endless) the supplanting, and pulling down of each
other in a most wonderful manner, is represented in two chapters most notably,
1 King. 16. and 2 King. 15. One King reigns two years (that's a great space)
another six months, another reigns one full month, another seven days. These
things are written for our instruction, upon whom the ends of the world are
come.

But of all Claims and Titles to Government, that of the long, sharp Sword, is
the most confounding, and the most confused of all the rest.

Now let the Army prepare themselves to plead in their own defense, for a most
strict inquiry will be made, in whose Name, and by what Authority they have
done, and continue to do all these things, which they have done of late days
against the Truth, the Work, the Cause of God, now to be advanced by Others,
whom God will choose and use.

This for the present shall suffice to the point of the Armies Supremacy.

As for those who join with them to carry on the work of Justice and Mercy,
according to the Indubitable Principles of right Reason, and Equity (which is
the other part of the clause under consideration.) By those, I mean, the
Inferior or lower Powers, who comply with the Swordmen in governing the
Nations by new Laws; and of these, I say, they are not to be resisted That is
by particular private persons, as I mean through out.
, doing that which is just and right among the people. That is the sum of the
matter in hand.

Object. It will be said, This is strange, is not this to speak contradictions?
to speak so sharply against the Powers but even now, and now to acknowledge,
that they do carry on the works of Justice and Mercy?

Answ. No, not so in the least; for you shall hardly read or hear of any Powers
(though never so wicked and tyrannical in their Government) but at times they
were found to do many things good in themselves, and agreeable to the
Principles of Righteousness and Equity, though in other respects they were
abominable wretches in their governing of the people under them.

For instance, when I wrote this passage in my Epistle, of carrying on the
works of Justice and Mercy, I particularly thought of their keeping under that
Enemy which has been so long contended against with so vast expenses; and this
is the great work of Justice upon that party, and Generation, whose malice has
been and is inveterate against the Saints of the most High, whom the Lord would
not ever have to rise up any more to molest and persecute his people. Justice
upon the wicked, is mercy to the righteous.

The suppressing of Thieves and Murderers, etc. is Justice and Mercy both; and
so far as any Powers, Higher or Lower, do promote these works, they are not
therein to be resisted or hindered. But I shall make it plain by two or three
Scripture-Instances.

Avashuerosh made a Feast according to his state, but the drinking was
according to the Law, Ester 1.8. None did compel, for the King had appointed to
all the Officers of his house, that they should do according to every man's
pleasure. Now in this law and appointment the King was not to be resisted; But
when the same King gave the Jews, Gods people, into Hamans hand, Ester 3.11.
To do with them as it should seem good unto him, this was to be resisted, so
far as God gave power and opportunity. See the end of the Story; The Jews fell
upon their enemies and destroyed them.

Again, Saul persecuted David for his life (like a wicked Tyrant as he was) and
having almost laid hold on him, tidings came, the Philistims had invaded the
Land, 1 Samuel 23.27, 28
he left David, and went to drive out the Enemy; in this he was not to be
resisted, or opposed, it being for public good, and the escape of the Lords
servant.

So Herod, that vile Tyrant, who beheaded John, Mark. 6.20
yet heard him at sometimes, and that gladly, and did many things, that is,
such things as John's Doctrines did direct unto.

Thus you know my meaning in this also, that when I speak of the Higher Powers,
their doing what is in it self morally good, and that we are not to resist them
in such actions; yet I do not hereby in the least acknowledge them to be a
lawful Authority, for there is no such necessary connection betwixt them two, as
if, when the present Powers, at some times, in some things, happen to do that
which in it self is just and right, therefore it must needs follow, that they
are a lawful Authority, or Just Power; for the one is found to be where the
other is not.

As a lawful Magistrate, in doing wickedly, is to be hindered and prevented,
that he bring not ungodly enterprises to pass; so when any Tyrant or Usurper
does that which is lawful and right, and according to the plain Principles of
Justice, (as most commonly they do somewhat of that kind at certain seasons)
herein there is no reason of resistance: Yet this is no confirmation of him in
his unjust Power; for there are sufficient grounds for any, whom the Lord shall
anoint to that work, to take such Tyrants off from the face of the earth;
notwithstanding that which has been spoken concerning a private persons
forbearing to interpose for the hinderance of any good thing performed by them
at any time.

This is all that I intend to speak to the second part of that clause, which in
this fourth Section was to be explained.

Only I think it useful, Gods end in this strange and unexpected alteration is
to be considered.
that some consideration should be had of the Lords END, in ordering the
Affairs and alterations of this Time and Day, in such manner, That after all
ancient Forms of Government in this Nation are destroyed, the Army should thus
take upon them to Rule over the people, good and bad, friends and foes, in like
manner, as if we their Brethren had been conquered by them, and subdued, as
were our enemies and theirs; (which to me appears one of the most astonishing
providence of these last fifteen years.) That those who were such a praying
company, such an Heavenly people in their carriage, as if the Headquarters had
been the very Suburbs of the New Jerusalem at the least; (what a sound from the
Camp in those days of the Cause of the Lord Jesus, of the deliverance of the
Saints, of the Kingdom and reign of Christ, of vengeance against Babylon and
Antichrist, and multitudes of such phrases, and Scripture-expressions?) I say,
this is most mavelous, to observe that these things are forgotten, as if they
had never been mentioned or talked of in the least. What should be the Lords
intent or design? what may be the mind and counsel of the Almighty, thus to
suffer these men (after all the goodness and kindness of the Lord toward them)
to set their feet upon the necks of their poor oppressed Brethren, that never
left them in the least, till they left Christ and his Cause to sink or swim;
and then to raise up themselves into this high and mighty honor of being the
Lords of the Nations, and their Iron-Law-givers, not so much as consulting with
their faithful friends, whose prayers and counsels they were wont to desire
upon their entrance into great Enterprises?

Quest. Who knows the mind of the Lord? is this secret with any of those that
fear him? and who walk before him with a perfect heart?

Answ. Although I would not presume to intrude, where I must not hope to be
admitted, yet, I may give in my apprehensions in this matter with sobriety and
submission to Saints of more intimate acquaintance with the Lord, without
offense, and that in a very few words.

1 The Lord may permit these things, these strange mutations of men's minds,
that all the world may see, that marching out of Egypt, and entering into
Canaan, are motions very much differing from each other, of 600000 men which
came out of the house of Bondage, but only two single persons entered into the
promised Land. Those men who conquer Ameleck, dare not encounter with Anak; but
had rather make a Captain to go back to Egypt, than follow God their Leader
over Jordan; and as the Apostle phraseth it, As it was then, even so it is now.

2 Another end of Gods leaving this unhappy new Model, and their unhappy
General, to themselves and their own hearts lusts, may be this, That the poor
afflicted people, plainly perceiving that they will not, cannot, do that work
which they declared for, might be so much the more importunate with the King of
Saints, to make haste, and come himself, and in the mean time to provide
himself of new servants to carry on that most blessed Design, which his heart
is set so much upon.

3 That the All-wise God may take advantage to separate the precious from the
vile, who being so busy in beholding and wondering after this new Image of the
Beast, there is a rare opportunity for the faithful followers of the Lamb, to
leave and depart from those professors, who have now demonstrated to the world,
that they followed Christ and his Cause for the loaves, and not for the
miracles which he has done before their eyes.

4 That having made this further separation from Babylon in the Army and in the
Headquarters at King Charles his Palace; He may form a peculiar people for
himself, to begin where the New Model left, even to pour out those Vials of the
wrath of God upon the Antichristion State and Seat, which are next to be
emptied by those Angels that come out of the Temple.

But if, These are no part of his end propounded to himself in this matter,
then I exhort the Saints, who are inquiring into these things, to observe
exactly every step of Providence, Finis op ris, Finis operantis.
that they may see what end the Lord will make, for it is good to understand
the end of the action, if we must not know the end of the Agent, or efficient
Cause.

So much in reference to the consideration of those ends which the Lord might
propound to himself in this strange passage of Providence.

I have not yet finished the explication of this clause, There is somewhat yet
further to be unfolded, and communicated to my Brethren in the Lord, throughout
all the Churches of the Saints, who are spirited for Generation-work. On that I
might be anointed with fresh oil, to speak forth to the advantage of the truth
and work of Christ, what I have received of the Lord! that so others might hear
and fear, and do no more either so foolishly, or so presumptuously, as lately
they have done.

But first, I must premise a few words, for a Manuduction thereunto. Thus I
apprehend the thing, and thus I express my mind.

One part of a Nation, may, for their own ends, accept of that person, or those
persons, for a supreme, or a subordinate power, which another part of the
people may lawfully refuse to close withal, or accept for their Rulers, or
their Governors, though thereunto required, or otherwise attempted by their
Brethren.

There is a famous Instance of this, in the 1 King. 16.16. Zimri, a Soldier of
great command in the Army, but not then General, conspired, and smote and slew
the King, and reigned in his stead.

The people who were encamped against Gibbethon, hearing hereof, made Omri the
Captain of the host, (or their General) King over Israel that day in the Camp.
Here was part of the Soldiers had made Zimri King, and the greater part, I
suppose, made Omri King. But this is not that which I intend for my Instance,
the quarrel being betwixt the Soldiers, in this place. King Omri overcame King
Zimri, for they shall have that Title (seeing the Holy Ghost says (of the one
and the other) that they did reign, though Zimri reigned but seven days) And
then, this is my Instance; the people of Israel were divided into two parts,
Half of the people followed Tibni the Son of Ginath to make him King, and half
followed Omri-Surely the Spirit of God intends some instruction to us by this
punctual Narration of such a matter, 1 King. 16.21.

I conceive, for my part, that upon Considerations which might be offered, they
could not impose a King upon each other, being equally free; who had the better
Title, it is hard to say; for the one had as many votes as the other, the
people being equally divided. At length Omri obtained the Crown; and so all
must consent, or be silent, which in a sense, is as much as consent for the
present.

We may put the case thus, Suppose half the free people of England are for the
setting up of a Monarch with a guard of thirty thousand men to protect him in
his Honor and Power; Suppose half the people are for a Commonwealth, what Law
of God or man will justify the first half, that have declared for Monarchy, to
impose upon the other half, who (knowing the manner of all Kings from the
infallible Oracles of God) refuse to be governed by Kingship, and accordingly
declare against it? considering they are as free as themselves, who presume to
impose, and have more from Scripture, and the Law of the Land, for their
rejecting of a King, than the others for embracing him, especially if imposed
upon them by their Equals, Equals in that point of Freedom. Verily, if a small
inconsiderable number of the Freemen of England (not to mention other
Considerations) do oppose by all Arguments such an Imperious power from their
Brethren insulting over them, I do not see how any honest man can draw a sword
against these dissatisfied Freemen; and if the sword forbear, I make no
question but Scripture, Law, and Reason would prevail.

But it is worthy of Observation, That the Captain of this Host is not yet
advanced so far toward the settling of this new Yoke upon the Nation, as Omri
was in that, 1 King. 16.22. for adbuc sub Judice lis est. And the Army,
together with their Partakers, in the late, declared, strange Government, not
having made hitherto a perfect Law according to their own pleasure and
principles, for the settling thereof, we wait to see, and to know what the Lord
will do, and how far he will permit them to march in this dangerous path, for
the compassing of their ends, who have been the chief Actors and Contrivers in
this unparalled, earthly Design, to say no worse of it for the present.

But to leave those who have the spirits of Freemen (if there be any shut up
or left) to dispute with their tongues and pens against the Soldiers Swords, I
shall proceed according to the latitude of my Commission from the Lord Jesus,
and direct my discourse to those people of God, who have openly testified, that
the Lord is their Judge, that Jehouab is their Lawgiver, that Jehovah is their
King, Isa 33.22.
and that he will save them, I mean those Elders and Brethren of the Churches
of Christ, who have professed to make a complete and perfect, that is, a total
and final separation from the Mother of Harlots, and from the Beast that
carries her; Rev. 17.5, 7.
and this they have done according to the Counsel and Call of God in the book
of the Revelations.

And unto them I say, on the behalf of their Lord and mine, Brethren, Ponder
the paths of your feet, for every particular step, of every separated Saint in
this Nation, since the Twelfth of the Tenth Month, 1653. has been, and is of
very great moment, and according to their walking since that day, and hour,
when the Word and Spirit of Jehovah received so high and so desperate an
Affront, they may rationally expect extraordinary consequences for good, or for
evil, coming toward them, and remember this, which you now read, is neither
Dream nor Fancy, although the Rulers of this world will so account it, till the
God of heaven compel them to change their minds.

It cost the Six hundred thousand very dear (even all that came out of Egypt,
Number. 14.
who were of twenty years and upwards, yea the righteous as well as the wicked)
their making of a Captain to carry them back again to Egypt, when an opportunity
was offered by God, to pass over Jordan into the Promised Land.

But let me in brotherly love expostulate the case with you, for I am, through
grace, a fellow-member of the same Body. Suppose the three Nations generally
WILL be like the Israelites, when they rejected Jehovah from being their King,
and WILL join with those earthly-minded men, who said, and proclaimed it, We
WILL have a new kind of King to Reign over us, and we WILL compel our Brethren
by Fire, and Sword, by Jaylors, and High Courts of Injustice, to accept of that
Monarch whom we have chosen for our selves. Will you vote with these men, and
comply with these Apostates and Hypocrites? You have given up your names to the
Lords Jesus, to be a peculiar people unto him, are you not, or should you not
be an holy Nation in the midst of the Nations? walking in the name of your
King, as the men of the world walk in the name of their Monarch? Was it not for
your sakes chiefly, That Jehovah rebuked Kings and Princes of late years? Is it
not for his Sons sake, Psalm. 105.
and his Saints sake, that he has pulled down the whole structure of the old
Government of these Nations? yea, he has so ordered things, that the very
foundations are destroyed, which not long since were accounted sacred, and to
the maintenance whereof the people were bound by Oath, and solemn League and
Covenant, except a few, who foresaw, that God himself was engaged against the
Old Heavens, and the Old Earth in these Islands.

Were not these wonderful changes and desolations brought forth and finished,
when the Officers of the Army, in their own names, created, formed, and set up
a Supreme Power after their own inventions? and then, after some few months,
(when some choice spirits were resolved to proceed in that work, which the New
Moael had begun, viz. to remove the remaining Rubbish of Heathenish and Popish
Customs, which obstructed the grand Design against Babylon, and the Kings of
the earth) did not the Swordmen of that once famous New Model, break in
pieces, and annihilate their own creation? and that in the sight of Heaven and
Earth, without blushing, and then tell the world a fable about Resignation,
whereas no agreement, vote, order, or act passed in that Assembly to any such
purpose?

But I must sigh out this complaint; Very many of those who profess, and
pretend to be the Saints of the Most High, have eyes, and see not, they have
ears, and hear not, they have hearts, and understand not unto this very day;
The veil is upon their hearts in the reading of the Prophecies of the Old, 2
Cor. 2.14.
and the New Testament: And assuredly, the Lord has a great controversy with
many of his own people, because of this, who will find him walking contrary
unto them, because they have walked contrary unto him, in this particular. What
call from God or man, have we to join with the Nations in setting up a New
Image of worldly Government, especially, at this time of the day, when that
which our Ancestors built, our God has broken down; and what our Forefathers
had planted, the Almighty has plucked up, even the principal Pillars, and
Foundations of the former Frame? and is it an employment worthy of us, to help
to repair the Tower of Babylon in this Land after these Earthquakes? or to heal
the deadly wound which the Beast has received? Consider, does it become us to
help mingle the Iron and the Clay together, that the Image may not want one of
its Ten Toes?

Should you not rather unite with one another, to help consolidate that Little
stone, which is to smite the Image upon its feet? And put on the whole Armor of
God, that you may be ready at an hours warning, to follow the Lamb, who will
ere long appear as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and make lamentable havoc
with the scarlet Whore, and the scarlet colored Beast upon which she Rides,
whose Ten Horns at length, or some of them, shall be guided to push the mother
of the Abominations of the carth into a Pit of destruction, prepared for her by
the Lord.

Besides all this which has been spoken, would it not be found to be part of
our glory and perfection at the appearance of Jesus Christ, to imitate the
Apostles and Churches of Christ in the first times, when they were so eminently
taught of God, in reference to this particular? For when the Apostle Peter
spoke that word of Exhortation, Act. 2.40.
That they should save themselves from this untoward Generation; Assuredly he
intended not only a separation from the Doctrine, Worship, and Government of
the Jewish Church, but from the State also, and Government thereof; for now
they had accepted of the Lord Jesus as their Prince to govern them, as well as
their Savior to redeem them; it being one of the last matters which he gave
them in charge before his Ascension, viz. Mat. 28 20.
to teach all his Disciples to observe all things whatsoever he commanded, for
all power in heaven and earth was given to him; and they were not to be Moses
his Disciples henceforward in any thing, and so came off from the Government of
the Jewish Commonwealth. Accordingly, when Peter speaks of the Magistrates to
the people, he calls them their Mogistrates, YOUR RULERS, says Peter, he does
not say our Rulers, Act. 3.17. again, when he was, with John, convented before
Authority, this is his language, Ye RULERS OF THE PEOPLE, and Elders of Israel,
he owned them to be Rulers, that is, of the people, but called them not at any
time by any such title, as might signify that they were over them, that is,
the Church, as before, when as yet they were of the world; for then indeed they
must own them as their Rulers, for they had no others to rule them, except the
Soldiers. And upon this consideration, of their being under the government of
Christ, they did no longer mind what Rulers were set up in the world, by the
men of the world; those who were Saints by Calling, undoubtedly, had no heart
to busy themselves about the choice of a Roman Emperor, though Citizens of
Rome, as Paul was; but let the Army set up whom they pleased, and pull down
whom they would, it was all one to them. And as for the Senate of the children
of Israel, Act. 5.22.
as we read it, they had little cause to choose any members for that
Parliament, they being looked upon as a company of Sectaries or Separatists,
and so were of another Company, Communion, and Commonwealth.

And so in like manner Paul draws the Saints at Corinth from the Courts of
those higher powers, to compose and determine all controversies among
themselves; for they had better Laws, and might have better Rulers of their
own, than any the world had, and then what need they seek any further? 1 Cor.
6. the beginning of the Chap. So that for my part, if I were at liberty, I
should be as far from meddling in the choice of Knights and Burgesses under the
present Sword-Sovereignty, or any other, as from meddling in the choice of
Archbishops or Bishops, as they were then called, or of Arch-tryers or Tryers,
as they may be now called; and why should not others be of my mind, who have
any knowledge of God and his wonderful works in these days? and so never choose
any more Magistrates, till Christ, and his Laws, and Government, come to take
place in the Nations. It is a most incongruous course which some Christians
have taken, since the Lord pulled all in pieces (namely the late Powers) to
pray for the setting up of the Kingdom of Christ in the world, and
nevertheless join with those who pull down, or prevent that which they seem to
pray for. But, let all the Saints and faithful Brethren in Christ throughout
this Nation, take heed, they do more so much as touch with the Fourth Kingdom,
now that the Lord is about to take away its Deminion, to consume it utterly,
and to destroy it to the end.

Thus I have endeavored to represent at large my apprehensions concerning the
Powers in being, and I am fully persuaded, that my Principles, if improved
according to their natural tendency, would make notable work among the Kings of
the Earth, and their under Officers; Oh how would that word of the Lord be
fulfilled in Jer. 51. Jer. 51.58.
The people would labor in vain toward the intended settlement, and the felk
should work in the fire, to cause the Iron and Clay to soder and to
incorporate, and yet do no good upon it, but be wearied out. Babylon and her
Princes, her Captains and her rich men, her Statesmen, and her mighty men,
would be tired out with anguish and vexation of spirit, if the Spirit of the
Lord would vouchsafe to assist us in doing and in suffering according to the
Will of God in this day.

Nevertheless, I am afraid I shall not be understood by some, in these things,
although I have endeavored to make out my thoughts with all the plainness I
could; wherefore I will recollect all in a few words, by the way of
distinguishing one thing from another; Thus,

1 It is one thing to own the Higher Powers according to God, and his
directions in the Word of Truth and Rigtheousness; and it is another thing to
own them in such a manner, and to such degrees, as they themselves desire, and
lust after. The former way I walk in, the latter, I shall never be found in, by
the grace of my God and Father.

2 It is one thing to own them as Powers, and another thing to own them as
lawful and righteous Powers, the first we must needs do, for they have Dominion
over our bodies, and over our substance, by their Swords, at their pleasure;
but to own them as having a right, either by the Law of God or Man, thus to
Rule over us, I absolutely and utterly refuse.

3 Again, It is one thing to own them, and to acknowledge them, as the Rulers
of the people, when they have universally accepted of their iron yokes; and
another thing to own and acknowledge them to be our Governors, who never did,
nor do ever intend to choose or accept them according to that new Instrument of
servitude published to the Nations.

4 It is one thing to own the Higher Powers, so, as not to resist them by
force, when they do that which is in it self lawful and right, though they have
no lawful Authority; and it is another thing to own them in their oppressions,
persecutions, all their unrighteous Decrees, and tyrannical practices:
according to the first part of the distinction, particular persons in their
private capacities have forborne to interrupt them; but as for he other part,
none but base Sycophants, and their fellow Tyrants, will therein testify their
owning of them.

5 It is one thing to own the worldly and tyrannical Powers in the way of
necessary subjection, and another to own them out of choice, and voluntary
Approbation: The former, Christ and his Disciples have practiced; but as for
the other, none but ignorant Slaves have yielded to it.

By these distinctions, and such like, it may easily, I conceive, be
understood, wherein, and in what respects I own the Powers in being, and in
what respects, I neither do, nor ever shall own them, the Lord continuing to be
merciful unto his unworthy servant.

And as for the Power of the Army, which I accounted the Supreme, or the
highest and strongest is these Islands, I do still adhere to my former
apprehensions, that it is so, and that they and their partakers have done and
may do (while their time lasts) many things in their own nature just and
good, yea, good and profitable to mankind, as the suppressing and punishing of
Thieves and Murderers, etc. And in, or for the doing of such things, I do not
find any honest man rising up against them, but this will not signify in the
least, any such thing, as an approving of them to be lawful Powers, as I have
showed before, and as it may be further instanced in their Predecessors, who
though they did many excellent things in their day; yet because they miscarried
in other respects, the Lord did find them out, and took a convenient time to
lay their honor and power in the dust. Let this suffice at present, for I must
now dispatch this Section.

There is one Objection only, which possibly may lie upon the spirits of some
choice servants of the Lord, and this it is.

Object. Although Christ and his Disciples did submit to the Higher Powers in
their day, yet it does not seem to be a pattern for us, upon whom the ends of
the world are come. For first, We have resisted the Powers in our day, and are
blameless, in the account of the most judicious Teachers which are among us.
And Secondly, If we should submit, as they in the primitive times, how could
vengeance be executed upon Babylon and her Adherents, the Kings of the earth,
according to the Prophecies in the Word?

Ans. 1. I grant, it is most true, there is ground to expect a time, when we
shall no more be subject to the Fourth Beast and his little Horn, which time
(you must think) those who suffer in all Countries, under Papal, and Regal
Tyranny, do long after, but till that time, you see that the two witnesses do
suffer under the prevailing power of their Adversaries.

Ans. 2. But for satisfaction of those who have not considered the matter, viz.
the different estate of the Saints, in different times, It is to be remembered,
and well observed, That Jeremy in the beginning of their captivity, did by the
word of the Lord, direct the Jews, to seek the peace of the City, whither he
had caused them to be carried away captives, and to pray unto the Lord for it,
Jer. 29.7.
for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace, Jer. 29.7. But now, if you turn
to Psalm. 137.8, 9. you shall find there was a time to come, when the Jews
should be contrary minded to that passage before mentioned; saying; Oh Daughter
of Babylon, who art to be destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards thee as
thou have served us. Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones
against the stones. You see what different language and carriage here is, in
reference to the same City and Power, at different seasons; yea, Jeremy
himself, who sent word that they should pray for Babylon, as you have heard at
the beginning of the seventy years, sent another message contrary to it, not
long after. I will fix but upon one passage or two, Jer. 51.33. It is time to
thresh Babylon, says the Lord, and the time of her harvest shall come. Again,
verse. 35. The violence done unto me, and unto my flesh, be upon Babylon, shall
the Inhabitant of Zion say, and my blood be upon the Inhabitants of Caldea,
shall Jerusalem say. Here is very differing language from the former message,
this cannot be praying for the City, it is no less than cursing of Babylon, as
you plainly see; Even thus it is with the true Israelites of the New
Testament-times, when they were first of all persecuted by the Roman Power,
they could not prophecy, nor pray for the ruin of Rome, it was not the truth
and work of that age, and so there was neither light nor spirit for any such
enterprise; but now it is seasonable in this day; and I am persuaded, if it
were possible for the Apostles to be, and to come among the living Saints in
this Nation, who have not defiled their Garments upon the dunghill of this
world, nor betrayed the Cause of Christ wherewith they have been entrusted,
they would encourage them to spend their arrows, and not spare, against this
mystical Babylon; they would own that cause, and work, and truth, for which we
endure so great oppressions and persecution; and therefore, although I must
needs be subject till the time of deliverance come (and that deliverance shall
come by Instruments anointed of God, as Cyrus was, yea, with a better
anointing) yet, because by a spiritual instinct, flowing from that Divine
Nature, whereof through rich Grace I do partake, I do know assuredly, that we
shall be so far, ere it be long, from praying for the Powers under the little
Horn, that we shall reward them as they have rewarded us; Therefore, I say, do
I thus speak, and thus write, and pray with other enlightened and enlivened
Saints; Pour out the remaining vials of thy wrath, upon the PRESENT POWERS of
the Earth, who will not have Christ to reign over them; and let all the
followers of the Lamb say, Amen.

Thus I have finished the explanation of the fourth Section of the Epistle,
with such further manifestation of the truth in this point, as for the present
I am furnished withal from the word and Spirit of the Lord, and therefore I
shall pass on to the next.

SECT. V.
IN this part I am willing to give an account to those who are dark in this
matter; How I can justify my practice of preaching down the Powers in being,
as my manner was, when as my declared Principlet are (and have been constantly)
to own them, and therefore not to resist or rise up against them; how can these
things stand together? It seems a Paradox, if not an impossible thing in
reason, that the same man, at the same time, should both own the Powers, and
endeavor their destruction. Thus, no question, many will query concerning this
matter.

Answ. 1. If it were needful, I might easily show how common a thing it is for
two contrary qualities to be in the self-same subject, at the same time, in
diverse respects, and in different degrees; but those School-distinctions, are
not for the edifying of such kind of inquirers, as I intend satisfaction to,
and therefore I shall first put them in mind of that which is in the Letter,
and then explain my meaning by particular instances in the word.

Answ. 2. The sum of what I wrote is this, That the Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs, in all ages ( i. e. since Kings, and such like Arbitrary Powers were
over the Saints) did own the Powers in being in their days, and yet at the
self same time, they Preached and Prophesied against them for their
Abominations, and so have I done, and will do, the Lord assisting, according to
their examples. This is the sum of the Answer in the Letter.

Now, I will endeavor to illustrate that which seems so dark to others.

I begin with Samuel; First, He owned Saul, as an Higher Power, anointed and
appointed of God, to rule over his people, as you find in 1 Samuel 9.17. and 1 Samuel 12.5. in this last Chapter you shall find these words to the people, --
That ye may perceive and see, that your wickedness is great which ye have
done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you a King; concluding thus, If you
shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King; and
Saul was present all this while, when he affrighted the people with sudden
thunder and lightning in the time of Harvest, to convince them of their great
wickedness in asking a King, and might muse with himself, to observe how far
Samuel owned him as a King before the people, and yet at the same time he
threatened and terrified the people for desiring him.

In like manner, after this, though he owned him as the King of Israel, yet
what a testimony did he bear, from God, against him for his hypocrisy,
disobedience and rebellion against the Lord? and moreover, to the hazard of his
life, prophesied or declared that God would reject him, and had rejected him,
and would set up his neighbor in his stead, etc. This instance does
sufficiently explain my principle and practice. But I shall not insist so
largely upon Scripture-instances, but put you in mind what I am to prove, viz.
That it is very possible (for it has been common to many of the Servants of
the Lord) for the same man at the same time to own the Powers in being, and yet
to Pray, Preach, or Prophecy against them, as if they did not own them. For
this, read the history of the Kings and Chronicles throughout; I shall mention
but one Instance, concerning King Ahab, and the Prophet Elijah: These two met,
and this was the Kings salutation to the Prophet, Art thou he that troubles
Israel? Elijah Answers him, I have not troubled Israel, but Thou and thy
Fathers House, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of Jehovah, and thou
have followed Baalim. This was one greeting: Observe the next, 1 King. 21.20.
Ahab said to Elijah, have thou found me, Oh mine Enemy? The Prophet answered, I
have found thee, because thou have sold thy self to work evil in the sight of
the Lord; and so he proceeds to prophecy against Ahab and Jezebel, for their
murder of Naboth, and taking away his Vineyard by oppression, a Prophecy it
was of utter destruction of the whole Family.

That of Daniel, in dealing so plainly with King Belshazzer, Chap. 5. from the
18. to the 28 is suitable to this point in hand, nothing more clear than this.

Object. It will be said, It is undoubtedly true, that the Prophets did
acknowledge the Powers in being, and yet at the same time did not spare them in
the least, either in respect of reproofs, or of threatening those plagues and
punishments which the Lord intended to bring upon them; But what does this
concern us in the New-Testament-times, they were anointed of God to that work,
but is that an example for us to walk by who are Ministers of the Gospel? etc.

An. This evasion is most absurd; for can any rational man imagine, that God,
taking such special care, as it were, not to leave himself without sufficient
witness against the abomination of the Higher Powers in those days, will leave
himself without witness now? can it enter into any sober man's heart, that the
Lord should for above this thousand years leave the Rulers, who pretend to be
Christian Kings and Princes, to the inclination of their own natures, which are
bad enough, and none to reprove or threaten them in the name of the Lord for
all their abominable wickednesses committed in the sight of the sun? no, they
shall never plead another day, The Kings and Princes of the Jews had Messengers
and men of God to speak unto them, to turn them from their evil ways, but we
had none to preach plainly and boldly against our sins; but if we had known, or
it had been told us, that such and such things had provoked the eyes of thy
glory, Lord, we should not have persisted in the perpetration of them; but our
Chaplains and Ministers were no Prophets, to deal with us as the Kings of
Israel and Judah were dealt with; therefore we desire these things may not be
imputed to us. No, I say, the Lord will cut off all such Pleas and Apologies;
For the Lord will tell them, though your Court-Chaplains were so base and
cowardly, as that they would not deal plainly with you, yet there were faithful
Servants of mine, who at a convenient distance did cry out, because of all your
abominations which you did commit, but these you persecuted and banished, and
otherwise oppressed, etc. this I know will be returned to such Apologies.

But yet to gratify the desires of such as would understand the truth, I shall
come to the new-Testament-times; And first, John the Baptist, did not spare
Herod the King, though he was owned as the Higher Power at that time, he could
not connive at his Adultery and Incest; his testimony cost him his head, as the
story is briefly related by the Evangelists. But it may be some may object, He
was not a Minister of the New Testament.

Therefore, we will observe Christ's practice in this matter; He owned the
Powers and Rulers, nevertheless, he so reproved, threatened, preached and
prophesied against the Chief Priests, the Scribes, and Pharisees (abundance of
which Sect were Rulers of the Jews) as that they sought to lay hands on him
from time to time, but the Text says, they feared the multitude. His Doctrine
did single out the hypocrisy, folly, malice of the Magistrates, from the sins
of the multitude; for if Christ had never so much preached against the sins of
the people, the Rulers would never have persecuted him, who had stood up for
their interest; but you shall always find the Doctrine of our Lord did vex and
disturb the Higher Powers exceedingly. read the 21. of Matthew. from the 33. to
the end, compared with the same Parable in the 12. of Mark, and the 20 of Luke;
Also consider of the tenor of his Doctrine in the 23. of Matthew, from the 12.
to the end of that Chapter.

But let us go on to the Apostles times; after Christ had sent down the Spirit
to furnish them with gifts for the work of the Ministry, more richly than
before, Peter, in his sharp words to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem (the Higher
Powers are here included) accusing them of the most abominable wickedness that
almost could be committed, expresses himself thus, Him (meaning the Son of
God) ye have taken, and by WICKED HANDS HAVE CRUCIFIED AND SLAIN; but more
close to the matter in hand, in Acts 4. verse. 8, 9, 10. He owneth the present
Powers, and yet charge them with most horrible Murder; the Powers charge him
and John straightly to speak no more in that Name, but to forbear; they dis-own
their commands to their faces (though they submit to their Mittimus and
Gaolers) and tell them, that God had raised up Jesus, WHOM YE SLEW, say they,
and hanged on a Tree; Observe how peremptory these Gospel Ministers were in
refusing to hearken to their threatenings, there are but few readers observe the
emphasis, for the Jewish Powers were apt to put it off to Pilate, for he
condemned him, and crucifying was not the Jewish manner of execution of
Malefactors; besides, they had not power of life and death (for the Romans had
reserved that to themselves, as a peculiar character of the supreme Power, and
of their absolute Sovereignty) yet Peter charge the High Priest, and the
Council, with the murdering of Christ; you may observe, how near this
accusation went, Act. 5.33.
for the Text says, Upon the hearing of this, they were cut to the heart, and
took counsel to slay them.

But now, according to the principles and speeches of many wise Englishmen,
Peter and John might be thought not to use so much subtilty and discretion, in
the presence of the Rulers, whereby they might have kept out of prison, at
leastwise out of danger of death; for were not they Ministers of the Gospel?
What need they have spoken such words, as must needs provoke the Higher Powers?
especially, after they had born their Testimony once and again, they might have
forborne for the future, seeing no good came of it; we in this age have found
out a better way of preaching, for we know how to order things so, as that if
we preach never so often before the Higher powers guilty of very gross
wickedness (as the word of God, and our consciences tell us) yet we will not
cut them to the heart, as Peter, and John, and Stephen did; we will preach the
Gospel.

The Truth is, I fear this will appear a real truth when all secret things come
to be revealed; but as for thousands of the English Parsons and Vicars, and
Curates, and State-Lecturers, or Augmentation-men, I am far from doubting of
their compliance with any Powers which get the uppermost, its no matter how or
which way; instead of appearing for the present work, and truth of Christ,
against the present Rulers, they appear for the present profit, of their
several and respective Benefices, and therefore we must not expect they should
be followers of the Apostles, as they followed Christ, in bearing witness
against the wickedness of great and small, without respect of persons.

Object. But yet again, there are others who come with another ridiculous
Objection in this manner: Although it be a truth, that the Ministers of Christ,
the Prophets, and Apostles, etc. were very zealous against the Higher powers,
because of their abominations, yet what they spoke was to their faces, and not
behind their backs, as all the Instances given by you do declare; they did not
disgrace or arraign them, as it were, at the Bar of the Vulgar, as you do, and
your Fellow Sufferers; this comes from some, who do not well know what to say
with reason.

Answ. 1. For answer to this, The Higher Powers are seldom found to send for
plain-dealing Preachers, to pray or prophecy in their Chapels, or if it happen
that they hear them once, its very improbable that they shall be sent for a
second time, and then how should the servants of the Lord declare the Lords
Message in their hearing?

Answ. 2. We have Instances from the Prophets, and Apostles in this particular
also. Amos prophesied the destruction of Jeroboam while he himself was absent;
for it may be the King and his Courtiers would not hear Amos, who was but a
Herds-man, and a Gatherer of Sycomore-fruit, yet it was a testimony against
them, though they were absent whom it most concerned; so that we Prisoners are
not the first, who have declared approaching destruction to the Higher Powers,
in their absence.

Moreover, Christ called Herod a Fox, or that Fox; and Paul called Caesar,
Lion, behind their backs: And why do not our angry Brethren say, they might
have forborne such kind of language? they not being present, at least they
should not have called the two Highest Powers among Jews and Gentiles by the
reproachful names of two wild B^asts, and those too, such Beasts of prey.

And why do they not find fault with Peter and John, with Paul and Barnabas,
who in their Sermons to the people had no more good manners, than openly to
declare the Higher Powers guilty of Murder, and the worse kind of Murder, and
this behind their backs, and that in the presence of Thousands? See Acts 3.17.
and Acts 13.27, 28. There Paul charge them in another Country, and amplifieth
the matter against them.

But further, in their prayers to God, they named Herod and Pontius Pilate, in
relating their wicked combination against the life of Christ. And I know no
reason why we may not pray and preach after that manner as the first Christians
did, who I am sure, were more full of the Holy Spirit then any of us. They were
bold and resolute, and whether the Higher Powers were absent or present, it was
alike ^o them. Certainly open Murder, and open Hypocrisy, and Apostasy and
Perjury, and Treason against the King of Glory, must be openly and publicly
witnessed against before God, Angels, and all the world.

Shall the Rulers be so bold, as to commit open abominations before all the
people, and shall not the Ministers of Christ, who are called thereto, be as
bold, and declare as openly against those abominations, and that before all the
people, whether the guilty ones be in the hearing or not? God forbid, that we
should forbear to bear our public Testimony against public wickedness.

Object. But others, who understand themselves better than the former sort of
fault-finders, have a greater charge than those before mentioned; for say they,
We may upon occasion declare openly against those who so sin, without respect
of persons, whether they are present or absent; but what have we, who are
ministers of Christ, to do to intermeddle in State-matters or State Affairs?
the compass of their Commission will not warrant them to be (...), Bishops in
another man's Diocese or Province: The whole work of a Minister of the Gospel is
reduceable to two heads, To bring Souls in to Christ, and to build them up in
Christ; and whatsoever is besides this, is beside the Cushion. Many other words
there are, and may be excogitated, to represent it as a very odious matter for
Ministers to meddle in State Affairs; Cannot they be content, if they have
liberty to preach the Gospel; and if they would keep to that, and leave the
Government of the Nations to be managed by the Higher Powers, they need not be
apprehended, imprisoned, etc. as they are, so that they may thank themselves;
With much more such stuff as this.

Answ. I perceive plainly, that these kinds of Preachings and Discoursings have
such a plausible veri-similitude, that they are believed by many honest hearts,
to be as true as Gospel; namely, That those Ministers are to be blamed as too
pragmatical, who insist upon such points, and very worthy to taste and feel the
coercive power of the Civil Magistrate; insomuch, that we are under a very
great disadvantage for the present.

But yet I hope we may be heard to speak for our selves, and to plead our Cause
from Scripture, and from Principles of right Reason, and otherwise. Wherefore,
let the Question be stated thus,

WHETHER, AND HOW FAR, A MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL MAY INTERMEDDLE IN STATE
AFFAIRS WITHOUT SIN?

Before I come to argue and urge the truth in this problem, it will be needful
and useful to explicate the terms of the Question; in this ensuing order.

First, What is meant by STATE AFFAIRS, or matters of State.

Secondly, What is the force and signification of that word meddle, or
INTERMEDDLE.

Thirdly, Who is to be accounted a MINISTER OF THE GOSPEL.

For the first; State Affairs, or matters which concern the State, are, as I
conceive, among us to be considered in contradistinction to Church Affairs, or
matters which concern the Church. For that distinction of Church and State,
being received and kept up, as proper to those parts of the world where there
is a Church State, either really or in pretense, it will give us light in this
controversy. But besides this, that distinction of Jehosaphat will help us to
understand this matter more fully, in the 2 Chronicles. 19. last verse, the Matters
of the Lord, or of Jehovah, and the Matters of the King (the Septuagint reads
it thus, (...), -- (...). Tremelius thus. In omninegotio Domini, and in omni
negotio Regio) so that the Matters, Business, and Affairs of Jehovahs are set
by themselves, and the Business and Affairs of the King, are put by themselves,
in a distinction from the other.

Moreover, the usual phrase in the New Testament helps us, where it is said,
That you may know my Affairs ((...)) That I may know your Affairs ((...).) So 1
Cor. 7.32. The unmarried cares for the Things, or Matters of the Lord,
((...):) But the married for the Things or Affairs of the World, ((...);) which
Things, the Apostle, (though it be a circumlocution in the translation) calls
by one word, (...) ( i.e. Things that pertain to this life) in distinction from
the Things of a better life. So that upon the whole, we must agree to
understand by that phrase, State Affairs, those Things or Matters which do
properly, and directly appertain to the Civil Magistrate, to take care and
cognizance of, and to manage and order for the outward good and welfare of the
people, as Wars, Peace, Laws, Customs, Taxes, etc.

The second Term, to intermeddle, is or may be taken in a bad sense, as first
to intrude. ( Col. 2.18. (...)) into those things that belong not to us; for a
man to thrust himself into business ( sese ingerere, as Beza renders it.) It is
true, a man may have skill to manage such and such Affairs, but to interpose,
having no call thereunto, he may be justly accounted a meddlesom pragmatical
man, a busy, forward Companion in such a case, and one to whom we use to say,
upbraidingly, you may meddle with your own matters, or with your own business.
The Greeks do give this kind of carriage a fit word, (...), that is, a busying
ones self about many affairs, which yet do not any way concern us; and indeed
such a spirit is very unbecoming a Minister of the Gospel.

Secondly, It is the property of others, out of an overweening conceit of their
own dexterity and skilfulness, to undertake to meddle with great matters, or
things too high for them, or too wonderful, as David speaks, Psalm. 131.1. of
such also the Apostle Paul does write, 1 Timothy 1.7. They will needs be Teachers
of the Law ((...)) and yet neither understand what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. Surely, it was vainglory which put them upon such practices. Solomon
gives this as one character of a fool, Prove. 20.3. It is an honor for a man to
cease from strife, but every foot will be meddling. Moreover,

Thirdly, some there are, who by reason of their natural temper, are found to
be very much addicted to meddle with all matters, and yet good men. It is not
so much from vainglory, it is not so much from self conceit of their fitness
to interpose in diverse businesses, but they have a kind of Desultory Genius,
which would be ever and anon leaping from one thing to another; they have an
inward longing to be doing, and to be meddling, like as some men, who having
itching ears, do heap unto themselves Teachers, as the Spirit speaks, 2 Timothy
4.3. so these are troubled, as it were with itching fingers, their fingers itch
to be meddling, to be doing; undoubtedly this is a lust to be mortified; We
describe such men, when we say proverbially, They live to have an Oar in every
man's Boat, or in another man's Boat. Solomon also intimates such a spirit in
Prove. 26.17. He that passes by and meddleth with strife belonging not to him,
is like one that takes a dog by the ears; If he do but pass by and that upon
other business, (it may be serious business) yet his nature is such, if there
be any occasion, he will be ready to intermingle himself in the Contention. But
I take not the Word in this sense; For this troublesome corruption in a
Minister, or other Christian, is to be watched and prayed against. See 1 These.
4.10, 11. We beseech you, says he -- and that ye study to be quiet, and TO DO
YOUR OWN BVSINESS. Yea, Plato said almost in the same words, (...). For a man
to do his own business, and not to be a Poly-pragmatist, (or not to meddle in
other men's matters) is one part of Justice. Thus I grant, that it may be sinful
to intermeddle in some cases, as you have seen in these three last particulars.

But yet to meddle, or intermeddle, is an act which may be taken in a good
sense. It is lawful, yea, a duty, to intermeddle at some seasons, and upon
some occasions; for God and good men may agree to give a man a call, and skill
to do those things which ordinarily he may not meddle withal. Thus Phineas
stood up and executed judgment; It was far from Phineas his Office to be an
Executioner, yet he engages at this time out of his zeal to Justice, and
against most horrible wickedness, Psalm. 106.30, 31. compared with Numb. 25.7.
this sudden act, so much out of the way of his calling, is counted to him for
righteousness; yea, to all generations for evermore.

Likewise Peter the Fisherman, and Fisher of men, had used to preach more than
to fight, for he carried neither Sword nor Staff about with him, when Christ
sent him forth as a Lamb among Wolves; Yet at a certain season afterward, he so
far intermeddled with State Affairs, as that he cut and slasht, till one of the
STATES OFFICERS had lost one of his ears, he being in the number of those who
came to apprehend his Master.

Its true, his Office and Employment was to strike upon the ears of men, as it
were, with another kind of sword, the two-edged sword of the Spirit; but now he
had laid that aside for the present; yea, and Christ himself against this
juncture of time had bid him that had never a sword (that is, of iron and
steel) to seel his coat and buy one, which kind of trading and merchandise, I
believe, they did not use to meddle with in former time. Other Instances might
be given, but I forbear, for these were extraordinary cases, and I shall nor
urge them.

But beside, to intermeddle may be taken in a good sense, in that Prove. 18.1.
Through desire a man having separated himself, seeks and INTERMEDDLETH with
all wisdom. I know Tremelius carries it in another way; but it is varied in
the Margin thus; He that separateth himself, seeks according to his desire,
and INTERMEDDLETH WITH ALL WISDOM. So the English Translators. But Trem. has a
marginal note, in omni essentia, in every essence or being; It looks something
like the character of a grave Philosopher (such an one as Socrates or Plato)
who intermeddles with all wisdom, or with every Essence; yea, its worthy to be
weighed, what Solomon speaks in the person of a Preacher, Eccl. 1.12, 13. I THE
PREACHER, says he, gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom, concerning
all Things that are done under Heaven. Does not this expression seem somewhat
like that Proverb of his, last mentioned? That which is there called an
intermeddling with all Wisdom, or every Essence, seems to be in this place of
Ecclesiastes, called, A searching by Wisdom, concerning all Things that are
done under the Sun. And undoubtedly, it is no disparagement to
Gospel Ministers, to be Christian Philosophers, or Lovers of that Wisdom which
is to be found and obtained, by conversing, or inquiring into the word of God,
and into the works of God, and therefore their intermedling in all such
affairs, from such principles, cannot be interpreted in an evil sense, as if it
savoured of pragmaticalnesse, or anything like it. This for the interpreting of
the second term. And hitherto, I suppose, I have not swerved from the truth in
my explications.

The third and last expression is likewise to be brought to a fixed conclusion
and determination, that we may rightly understand the question throughout every
part of it; and my meaning in this, viz. who are Ministers of the Gospel; I
shall first signify negatively, and then positively.

1 Wherefore first, I do not intend the Pontifical and Prelatical Clergy, for
from the highest Archbishop, as such, to the meanest Curate, there are none of
them whom I look upon under that notion. Although we do know (for we have heard
them) that by the help of good natural parts, and their superadded, acquired
abilities otherwise, namely, by reading, meditation, imitation, and exercise in
preaching, they have excelled many Ministers of the Gospel, truly and properly
so called, and acknowledged by God and man.

But, as it is one thing to serve God in the oldnesse of the letter, and
another, to serve him in the newness of spirit, or the spirit; so it is
frequently found, that a man may be an able Minister of the New Testament,
according to the letter, but not according to the spirit, and the ministrations
thereof. See the distinctions, Romans 7.6. and 2 Cor. 3.6.

Diverse of these Episcopal Preachers indeed, did likewise intermeddle in State
affairs, for they were Justices of Peace, and Privy Counselors to Kings and
Queens, but I never approved of them, or their employment, in reference to the
Ministry or Magistracy, in both which they did intermeddle more than they will
have thank for, when they appear before the Judgment seat of Jesus Christ, to
receive every one according to his works, and what he has done in the flesh,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. So much for these, I have done with
them.

2 Neither secondly, do I mean, the present Universities, Vice-Chancellors,
Doctors, Proctors, Heads of Houses, Deans, Prebends, Cannons, with the rest of
their Brethren, by what Academical Name or Title soever they are dignified or
distinguished: Although I know likewise that many of them, have gifts for the
preaching of the Gospel, and I hope are truly godly.

But, to speak freely, undoubtedly it would become those of them, who know
their Lords will, to take care to do it; for it cannot be denied, that they
sinfully intermeddle in the things of the world, though they pretend to be
married to the Lord (and so are to take care for the things of the Lord) This
is plain, in regard they have accepted several worldly Offices and Authorities,
which they exercise after the Rudiments of the world, for they cannot exercise
them according to God or to Christ; for they are none of the things of Christ.
Oh! that they are far from imitating the Apostles, and walking in their
steps, the Lord knows, and we also; for they gave over the serving of Tables,
which yet was Church-work, that they might give themselves continually to
prayer, and to the Ministry of the word.

And therefore before I go any further, I do publicly bear witness on the
behalf of the Lord Jesus, against all that kind of meddling in State Affairs,
which does, in the least, hinder or interrupt the fervants of the Lord in the
exercise and improvement of that Ministry which they have received in the Lord,
and for, and from the Lord.

For let us consider what the Apostles say in that place forementioned, Act.
6.3. It is not reason ((...)) that we should leave the word of God, and serve
Tables. A sentence it is, worthy to be written in letters of gold, yea to be
written with the Spirit of the living God, not in Tables of (marble) stone, but
in flespy Tables of the heart. But, alas! where shall we find such a spirit
among the Ministers of these times? who generally leave the word of God, and do
worse than serve Tables, in that sense which the Apostles intend, for thy
serve, and worship, and wonder after the Whore of Babylon, and the Beast that
carries her, yea and the very Horns of that Beast that carries that Harlot
(this is truth, the Lord knows, in whose sight I write these things) and yet
they (...) call themselves, and expect that others should account of them, as
of the Ministers of Christ, and faithful Stewards of the Mysteries of God. But
it is to be justly feared, that Jehovah will write down other Titles in the
books of his Accounts and Remembrance. Thousands will not look like the
Ministers of the Gospel, when those books, and the book of the New Testament
shall be opened in the sight of all the world; although now they go under that
notion among almost all sorts of people. But enough of these also for the
present, let us proceed.

3 Neither in the third and last place, by the Ministers of the Gospel, do I
here intend, or understand, the Parsens, Vicars, Rectars, Incumbents, or other
such like Ministers of the Parish and Collegiat Churches or Chapels, in this
Nation, or any other, or yet any like them, by what new Babylonish names and
Titles soever they are dignified and distinguished, according to the known Laws
and Customs of those Lands: For undoubtedly, that old, moldy, Popish
Relation, betwixt a Parish Minister, and his Parishioners, or Parish Church, is
of the self-same nature, with that which was anciently betwixt the Prior or
Abbot, and his Covent, betwixt the Lord Bishop and his Diocese, betwixt the
Dean and his Chapter, and all such like Corporations. I say again, and disprove
it who can, or dare, this Parish Relation with its appurtenances (which I shall
treat of in due time, I hope) is of the self-same foundation and constitution
with the others, and equally a stranger to the New Testament; for the Te^^ator
spoke nothing in his last will touching these creatures, and their Relations
each to other, and therefore must go the same way that their Predecessors have
gone before them, I mean, as to the disanulling, and annihilating, every plant
which our heavenly Father has not planted, nor has his Son watered.

I have, I confess, been somewhat large, and that, beyond my first intentions,
in opening these Mysteries of the Man of sin; but the Lord knows how to improve
every particle of tru^^ for the interest of our Lord, and to his blessing I
recommend these Explications.

Wherefore to finish this part of my work, I say positively, That by Ministers
of the Gospel, I understand the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Teachers, who are over the true Churches of Christ, according to God, which
true Churches, were either such as were rightly called out of the world, and so
formed and constituted by the immediate Ministry of the Apostles, and the other
faithful Ministers, before the Apostasy; Or else secondly, such as are rightly
called out of Babylon, and so Reformed and restored, or Re-constituted,
according to the Primitive Pattern, so far as is requisite for the putting of
them in statu quo, in the former condition. Or thirdly, such, as by Messengers
or Apostles of the Churches ((...)2 Cor. 8.) shall be orderly called and formed
from among the heathens, as it is hoped, it is or may be in New England among
the Natives; or among the Jews, who, we expect, shall, ere it be long, be
grafted in again.

And those who are thus over, and in relation to such Churches (among whom
Christ will delight to walk, that he may transform them from glory to glory by
his Word and Spirit) they are the Ministers whom I mean, and particularly
intend in this Question, namely, those who being separated to the Gospel of
God, according to Rule, do accordingly walk before the Lord, and his people, as
becomes the Gospel in all things. And certainly, all who own the title of
Christians, must acknowledge that such as these, are to be accounted Ministers
of Christ, and of the Gospel.

These things being premised for explication, I am now to make out from
Scripture, and from principles of reason, and truth, flowing from express
Scripture, That it is lawful, in many cases, for the TRUE MINISTERS OF THE
GOSPEL to MEDDLE with STATE AFFAIRS, or with the matters of the world, as they
are distinguished from the matters of the Lord, or Church Affairs, with those
matters which properly belong to the Civ;l Magistrate, namely, the things of
this life; and I hope, what I shall say in this point, may be of some use to
fright away those Bug bears, which are made use of, to affright and discourage
many precious hearts from strengthening the hands of the Lords servants in the
present service of Christ, against Babylon, and the Kings of the earth.

But as I am entering upon this work, that politic fetch of Paul (honest Paul,
and it was honest policy) when he made that notable Division among the
Pharisees and the Sadduces ( Act. 23.6.) and so much for his own advantage,
against the injustice of the Higher Powers, the High Priest and the Council; I
say, that sudden Diversion which he made, comes into my mind; And, in regard
that the Envy, Ill will, and Evil-speakings against my person, and against my
practice, have broken out at the lips of so many Professors, I judge it meet to
shelter my self under that shield and buckler, which Two of the New made
Doctors of (School) Divinity, and like Gamaliel, had in Reputation among all
the people, have made ready to my hand; For certainly, it will be of some use
for the qualifying of their anger and displeasure, when they understand how far
they are of the same mind with me in this matter.

First therefore, I quote Dr. Tho. Goodwin, in the 42. and 43. page of that
excellent Sermon of his (worthy of a new Edition, with Additions, in this day)
These are his words, and the sense of his words, if I understand sense; The
Saints have vouchsafed them by God a privilege in RULING and GOVERNING THIS
WORLD, and the Providence of God therein; They are Privy Counselors to the
great King of Kings, who governs all the States and Kingdoms of the world. And
God does give these Saints a COMMISSION TO SET UP AND PULL DOWN by their
Prayers and Intercessions. The Old Testament speaks in a high language in Isa.
45.11. -- Concerning the work of my hands command ye me; who speaks this? the
words before are, Thus says the Holy One of Israel, etc. It would have been
blasphemy for us to have said it. -- Then he goes on, bringing in the Lord
speaking thus, Behold, I that am thus your Maker, give you leave to dispose by
your prayers, the great works of my hands, which concern my children, my sons;
THE AFFAIRS OF KINGDOMS, even so far as they relate to their good; the Doctor
goes on; And he (God) speaks it upon this occasion, that for their sakes he had
raised up Cyrus, and pulled down the Babylonian Monarchy, because they by their
prayers had sought this. Thus far the Doctor.

Now I cannot distinguish and judge of the juice and sap of words and phrases
in the least, by my Intellectual taste, or palate, If to rule and govern this
world, do not suppose and signify a meddling in the affairs of it; And if Privy
Counselors entrusted and authorized by Commission to set up and pull down, can
do either the one or the other, without intermedling in such affairs, I am very
much mistaken. Nay further, he says expressly, that leave is given them by God,
to dispose the works of his hands, the affairs of Kingdoms, even so far as they
relate to their good, and I judge, no Ministers of the Gospel desire to dispose
them otherwise than for their good. But still I say, they cannot dispose the
affairs of Kingdoms, but they must meddle with those affairs unavoidably.

Ob. All that can be said by way of Objection or Opposition, is this, that the
Doctor speaks of Saints, and not of Ministers, and also that what is done is by
their Prayers and Intercessions.

Answ. All this is readily and easily answered, as first, Ministers do not lose
the privilege of Saints, when they are made Ministers by Christ and his
people, no more than an other officer of a Church of Saints, does lose, or is
deprived of the privilege of a member, upon his being chosen into office. So
that if God gave him this privilege as a Saint, of ruling, governing, disposing
the affairs of Kingdoms, he may still claim it, and make use of his Commission
after he is become a Minister of the New Testament.

And as for the second part of the Objection, I acknowledge he there speaks of
disposing by prayer and intercession only, but this does not in the least
invalidate my Assertion; because, to set up, and to pull down, to Govern, Rule,
and dispose the world, and the Affairs of Kingdoms, by prayer, is one way of
meddling with matters of State, and an excellent way; Especially, if that
Spirit which accompanied the first Christians, be but President and predominant
among those privy Counselors, who meet in Christ's Name, to set up, and to pull
down, according to their Commission, for those whom I mentioned, made notable
work with that act of State, and that State Policy, whereby Herod and Pontius
Pilate proceeded to murder the Prince of Life. The Faith and Prayers of the
faithful remnant, have been in all ages, and will be henceforward, much more
dangerous to the Kings of the earth, and their Affairs, than the greatest
quantity of Gunpowder set on fire in any Magazeen whatsoever, can be to any
City or Town, where it is; if once they spring a Mine, as I may so say, they
overthrow whatsoever they did undermine, with a more irresistible force, than
is imagined or believed. For, est quaedam precum omnipotentia, as he said.

The true fervent praying against States, their Laws and Government, etc. is
meddling with a witness, and yet it is hardly known who burts them; but at the
last day it will be known what execution has been done upon the Empires and
Monarchies of this world, by the Lords people in the several exigencies of
their Affairs; for we know that the Affais of State, Reason of State,
State Policy, and the Laws of the Land, have above all other things obstructed
the deliverance of the choycest servants of the Lord, from age to age.

I could illustrate this Point of the Ministers and peoples meddling by prayer
with the things and interests of men, and of the worldly Powers, and in some
measure show of what excellent use it will be to overthrow the Thrones of
Kingdoms, etc. But I refer it to the true Ministers, and the few faithful
Brethren in Christ, to exercise themselves herein day and night, as, I hear,
they begin to do. But let them remember, and not forget upon any terms, that
Faith is the very life and soul of prayer, and if you meddle with these, or any
Powers abroad, without that, you will meddle to no purpose; But let no man
imagine, that because we have not an Answer all this while, therefore we are not
heard, for Faith waits upon. God for the bringing forth his purposes and
counsels in his own time; and God forbid we should limit the holy one of
Israel, or prescribe to him a method or manner of proceeding, in the production
of those ancient Decrees, which are to be brought forth in the time appointed
of the Father. So much for this first way of meddling with State Affairs.

The other Doctor of the Divinity aforesaid, is also of great reputation, and
therefore, I hope, my adversaries will not turn away from his Doctrine in this
matter. I am bold to call him forth to plead for this Truth, for his Preached
and Printed Principles, do very much tend, in my apprehension, to the
justification of the practice of those Ministers of the Gospel, who do or shall
hereafter intermeddle in State Affairs, as becomes Ministers; for no otherwise
would I have any one to meddle, than as becomes him, in the judgment of the
spiritual man.

There is one notion of his (in the Sermon which I mean) which certainly had
the pre-eminence of many others, in his mind and judgment, and which I shall
transcribe in the first place, and then improve it according to its natural
tendency, as the Lord shall help, on the behalf of his own Truth and Interest,
so suddenly and unworthily deserted by those who seemed very stout Assertors of
it not many years ago.

The words of Dr. O. in the Sermon. on Heb. 12.27.

All the PRESENT STATES OF THE WORLD are cemented together by Antichristian
lime, as I shall show afterward. Unless they be so shaken as to have every
cranny searched and brushed, they will be no quiet habitation for the Lord
Christ and his people. This I find in the 14 page.

Again, in the 25 page I find him speaking to this purpose. The Heavens and the
Earth of the Nations, in their present constitution, are directly framed to the
interest of Antichrist, which by notable advantages at their first moulding,
and continued insinuations ever since, has so riveted it self into the very
fundamentals of them, that no digging or mining, without an Earthquake, will
cast up the foundation-stones thereof.

Yet again, to the same effect, p. 35. Is it not evident to him that has but
half an eye? that the whole present constitution of the Governments of the
Nations, is so cemented with Antichristian mortar from the very top to the
bottom, that without a thorough shaking they cannot be cleansed; And a little
after, This only is certain, It (the said shaking) shall not stop, nor receive
its period, before the interest of Antichristianity be wholly separated from
the power of those Nations. Thus far the other Doctor.

1 Now first, We see plainly, or may see, that he for his part meddles with
States and Governments of Nations, all along throughout the Sermon.

2 He does particularly declare the nature of their Constitution, both
foundation and superstruction; showing also how the interest of Antichrist is
intermingled or interwoven in all or most of those States in Europe, and that
from the top to the bottom.

3 He declares and foretells the shaking, translating, and new molding of all
those States and Kingdoms.

4 He affirms, that every cranny must be searched, for that Antichristian
mortar or lime and sand, which does cement the constitution of the Governments
of the Nations, and that this shaking, searching, etc. shall not stop, nor
receive a period, till the interest of Antichristianity be wholly separated
from these Nations.

From all which, and many other passages in that Sermon, I do make this
inference, That the Ministers of the Gospel may lawfully, or without sin, yea,
must necessarily intermeddle, and be employed in searching into the Affairs of
these Kingdoms and States. Yea, further, for ought I can discern, they must be
employed by their Lord and Master, as the chief laborers, which are to brush
and cleanse the States and Governments from that Antichristian mortar.

For certainly, it may be easily demonstrated, that it appertains properly to
their Office, and as a principal part of it, in these last times, to discover
the Man of sin, to find out Antichrist in all his subterfugies and diverticles,
to trace and hunt him in all his windings and turnings; for what sort and
generation of men will the Lord (...) and anoint to deal with this great Enemy
of Jesus Christ's, if not the Ministers of the Gospel? And if it be true, that
this Doctor has written elsewhere, (as undoubtedly it is from
Scripture-ground) namely, that the Pope has expressly bargained for his own
interest, and provided that that should have the chiefest place in all Oaths
and Bonds that were betwixt Princes and people, then we must look into the
Affairs of States, and their Laws and Administrations, and wherever we find
any thing of that Son of perdition, that horned Beast, etc. to detect him, and
his legerdemain, and call upon the people of God to help pull down all those
things which are of Babylon, and the Beast (though it be of the very
fundamental constitution of the Kingdom and State) which we have detected by
the help of the Word and Spirit.

That Scripture Rev. 17. does express the truth which you have read, in a few
excellent words, These, says the Spirit, (that is, the Ten Horns or Kings)
have one mind, and will give their power and strength unto the Beast.

And they, (according to what is prophetically spoken) have long fince given
their power and strength unto the Beast, but we hope it will be taken from the
Beast ere it be long; but the words of the Apostle John, by the Spirit, are far
more emphatical, than they are rendered by the Kings Translators, I could
methinks read them thus, They shall deliver up that their Power and Authority
unto the Beast, i.e, that Power which they received, as in the former verse,
for they received power as Kings one hour with the Beast; which implies, they
received not their Power at first from the Beast; for you see, they and the
Beast came into the world much about a time; but afterward, these Kings come to
be of one mind, ((...)) which intimates, they give their Power and Authority
upon deliberation, they know what they do, it is an act of State, and then they
come to be of one and the same mind at length; what one does, all will do; and
so they agreed to give up first their Militia, or Military power to the Beast,
their Armies, (...), See Mede on Rev. 13 2. and indeed histories are full of
this truth, for the Militia of each, and of all these Kings, was at the beck of
this Beast. Upon these two or three words, they shall give up their Power, or
Hosts, ^o the Beast, large Volumes of histories, to show the accomplishment of
this Prophecy, might easily be written, by me, or any other who had leisure and
skill to collect and sum up, what is upon record in those Kingdoms here
intended.

And besides, they give away, or deliver up their Authority, for so I render it
((...)) and so it is rendered, in Rev. 13.2. This signifies the Civil Power, and
in the 17. verse of this chapter, it is their Kingdom, so they part with all to
the Beast, (...), they give all up, as men do when they pass away their Lands
under hand and seal; they were their own Kingdoms, which they gave away; but it
may be asked, what folly was this? I answer, it was not folly in their opinion,
all was for the good of the Catholic Church, the Spouse of Christ, this was
suggested, and they believed it; whereas in truth, these Kings fell in league
with this beautiful bold Strumpet, and committed fornication with her, and so
being entangled in her love, did not regard what costs they were at to satisfy
their lusts, but bestowed all they had upon the beast that carried her, and all
for this drunken Harlots sake, and for her use. Indeed it is wonderful to read
and to consider, how the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with
that great whore of Babylon, and how the Nations also have been made drunk with
the impoysoned intexicating wine of her fornications; for they did always
follow the examples of their Kings, or chief Rulers (Regis ad exemplum) and how
the Merchants of the earth have waxed rich through the abundance of her
delicacies.

Now then, in the name of the Lord let this Question be asked; shall not the
Ministers of the Gospel (in opening and applying the Scriptures which concern
this matter) endeavor by all means to break the league, betwixt this whorish
woman and her Lovers, or Paramors, these Kings of the earth? Is it not their
duty and office to recover the Nations from their drunkenness? who dare forbid
the true Ministers of Christ to intermeddle in those Affairs of State, which
are managed for the interest of the great whore that sits upon many waters?
I declare it before the world, we will meddle with them more and more, as we
grow and increase in the knowledge and understanding of those Oracles and
Prophecies which concern the ten Horns: And whether I live or die, let the
present and approaching Generation know, that the Ministers of the Gospel shall
be employed by their Lord, the Prince of the Kings of the earth, as some of his
principal instruments, to pluck up, pull down, and break in pieces the
governments of the Nations, for Antichrist is got into the bowels; foundations,
establishments of their powers, and it is our business, it is our proper work,
as you heard, to seek him out, and reveal him in the sight of all the Nations
of the earth.

These Pastors and Teachers (in regard their flocks are to be used in the
destroying of the Babylonish Strumpet) must search every cranny, as the Doctor
speaks; they shall to this end be endued with such power, and with such a
Spirit from on high, as that in a sense, and in a degree, they shall be as
exact, accurat and curious, as the Jews use to be in seeking and searching
every hole, corner, and cranny of their houses, for the finding and purging out
of the leavened bread, according to that command of God, Exodus 3.7. There shall
no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with
thee in all thy quarters. The manner of doing this is set down at large by
Writers, what care and industry was used to clear their houses of the leaven
aforesaid; And as Paul exhorted the Church of Corinth, to purge out the old
leaven, that they might be a new lump. So shall the Ministers of Christ, ere
long call upon the Nations and Statesmen therein, to purge out the old leaven
of Antichristianism, yea all the old leaven and the new leaven; and as the
Prophet Jeremiah says, there must not be left a stone of the Babylonish
building, For a corner, nor a stone for foundations: for Babylon shall be
everlasting Desolations, says the Lord, Jer. 51.26.

And if it be asked how this shall be? the Preacher and Doctor aforesaid will
tell you, and has told us in part. And I hope I may have liberty to give in my
sense also, for further explication.

We shall reward Babylon as she has rewarded us. And among other ways of
recompense, we shall by the Spirit and Providence of God, be led and encouraged
to go on in prying into every corner with the candle of the Lord. We shall look
and search narrowly to find out the Babylonish leaven, the Popish mixture, the
Antichristian mortar, which is yet remaining in these States and Kingdoms; for
as sure as the Lord lives, there is much of all this even in this nation,
notwithstanding all these Earthquakes, and wonderful Revolutions. Yea, I will
say it boldly and truly, the Relics of Popery are maintained and protected by
the present Powers. But to this end that there may an utter extirpation of all
those Popish Remains, A Glorious, Evangelical inquisition shall be set up in
due time, and the Ministers of the Gospel shall be Gospel-inquisitors (I speak
in allusion to the Spanish, Popish Inquisition) and then we shall have recourse
to the Law and to the Testimony (to the Law of God, and to the Testimony of
Jesus) and that being the Touchstone, what we find contrary to sound Doctrine
and the power of Godliness, contrary to or destructive of the liberties and
privileges wherewith Christ our Lord, our Judge, our Lawgiver, our King has
made us free, and endowed us, by those TWO INSTRUMENTS OF HIS GOVERNMENT, and
the Magna Charta of his subjects; I say we shall have recourse to the word of
Christ, and what is found opposite or contradictory thereto, we shall discover
it and and reveal it openly, as the Lord shall give opportunity and Spirit
thereunto. When we are once anointed with fresh cile, for these new motions,
and expeditions, we shall intermeddle so, as to examine and inquire into the
Oaths and contracts of the State. We shall bring the old known Laws of the Land
(made most of them when Reason, and Religion also, were at the lowest Ebb, when
Kings and Parliaments were the Protectors of the Beast and Whore) and so into
the customs in all Courts of Justice and Judicature, of which, though many are
fallen asleep, and are rotting in the grave of oblivion, yet others remain alive,
and are confirmed by oath and solemn engagement. All Acts of State will be
meddled with; and the Edicts of the Rulers of the people, brought to the trial.
And let the Powers assure themselves, whatsoever Oaths or Branches of Oaths,
whatsoever customs or Relics of customs or Traditions they have received from
theirs and our Popish Ancestors, which have the stamp and superscription of
Antichrist, or the Man of sin upon them, and are still underpropped and
supported by the present Commanders and Lords of the Nation, we shall in the
power of Christ Jesus the Lord, and of his Truth and Spirit, so far meddle with
all of them, as that we, our brethren and companions in the Kingdom, the cause
and the work of Christ, shall never be satisfied or well pleased till they are
broken all to pieces, suppressed and consumed to nothing.

But lest, some Readers should censure me as too peremptory and malapert in my
expressions; Let us hear what our Author before mentioned says further to this
point.

Although in those passages which I have transcribed, he seems to content
himself that there should be only a shaking, 2 brushing, and a cleansing of
States and Governments from the mortar aforesaid; Yet in another part of his
Sermon, he comes more home to the truth, where he says, that no Atonement
shall be made for the blood of the Saints slain under the Notion of Heretics,
nor Expiation be allowed, whilst a TOE OF THE IMAGE, OR A BONE OF THE BEAST IS
LEFT UNBROKEN. I assure you, this is somewhat a severe expression; this is much
more then brushing off the mortar and the Cement; I wish he himself would fall
upon the Image, if it were but upon one of the little toes of it in England,
with the hammer of the World. Would to God, it were the Genius of all the
University-Doctors, to fall upon the bones of the Beast, as here in the 22 page
he does express himself: such a Brush were as bad as a downright Blow. But what
if the Lord should epsy some of the most forward prosecutors of the Beast, in
times past, and who gave him many a dry Blow, to be turned Artificial
Chirurgians, and to be very busy in healing those deep wounds which were
lately made, and very careful to bind up the Bruises which the Image received
on some of his Ten Toes? the Lords eyes are upon all their ways, he knows
their works and their thoughts; and unto him I refer them for the present,
without further disquisition, and return from whence I have made this short
digression.

The Ministers of Christ understanding this, that no expiations will be
allowed, etc. and that yet, they cannot meddle with Antichrist, nor indeed come
at him, or at the Beast, and his Horms, but they must of necessity meddle with
State Affairs (the Beast and the States or ten Horns being so nearly related
each to other, and making up but one Body politic or Corporation) Let no man
imagine that the zealous faithful Ministers of the Lord Jesus, will give over
or leave off their meddling in State-matters, because of the Clamors and
importune suggestions of those preachers or professors, whose senses are not
exercised by reason of use to discern betwixt the good and the evil in this
important point of Gospel Truth.

For, without doubt, As the Pastors and Teachers, in asserting the Priestly
office of Christ, may lawfully meddle with the Popish Priesthood, and show the
contrariety thereof unto the Scripture, and thereby discover the rottenness and
vileness of all those principles which are maintained by them for the upholding
of the Affairs of the Papacy, which concern their Priests of all sorts and
sizes, and their Masses, Pilgrimages Purgatory, Processions, and such like
ridiculous Inventions, Customs and Traditions: In like manner there is no
question to be made among knowing Christians, but in handling the Doctrine of
the GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM in the latitude of it, they may interpret and apply
all Scriptures of that nature, to the Just Disparagement of the Kings of the
Earth (as the Lord constantly styles them by that Diminishing Title, and of the
Princes of this world, who shall come to nothing, as Paul says. And, for the
better and more effectual advancing of the Name and glory of Christ in the
world, they may endeavor to lessen the esteem of the little Horn and all the
Adherents to it, yea, they may meddle so far with the Higher Powers, and their
Acts of State, or Statute-Laws, as to discover the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof in comparison of the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of
the Lord Jesus for the Government of the Nations; and if they may meddle with
those more weighty affairs of the States and Kingdoms of Europe, or the Horns
of the Beast, among whom Antichrist has such a considerable Interest; surely
then, they may intermeddle with lesser and lighter matters of the Government,
viz. foolish and Ridiculous customs. Tully said well, In Actis publicis nihil
lege gravius. The Laws of a State, are the most mighty Acts of State.

And to this effect, I told the Committee of the New-Court-Council, when they
spoke of my meddling with State-matters, as the phrase is; I told them, I would
meddle with all things from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the
Revelation. And I know assuredly the word of God meddled with all things under
the Sun. And therefore I was not to be contracted in my Ministry.

And what I said then, I after so many months Imprisonment confirm publikly, I
will meddle with every thing which is handled and revealed in the good word of
God, So far as the Lord by his grace and providence shall vouchsafe to give and
administer unto so unworthy and so sinful a servant of his, either light or
opportunity; and I will call no man Lord or Master upon earth by his
assistance, so far, as to ask leave so to do; For my Lord is greater then all.
And I pity the present power, because I foresee, that unless the Lord do many
marvelous things in mercy to them, they will stumble so often at that stumbling
stone, as their bruises will be very hardly cured. I conclude with this one of
D. O. Expressions; That, says he, which does and shall stick upon Potentates
to their Ruin, is not so much their own or any other Interest, as the very
Dreggs of this Papal Antichristian Interest thrust into their Oaths and
Obligations for no other end in the world, but to keep the Lord Jesus out of
his Throne.

As for that expression, in the Objection; Whatever a Minister meddles with,
besides bringing in souls to Christ, and building them up in Christ, It is
beside the Cushion; I answer, I care not, nor my fellow-prisoner, what is
besides the Cushion; We are sure it is not besides the Text, for a Minister to
build up believers in the knowledge of Christ. And, to open those Scriptures,
which concern his Kingdom, and his being King over all the earth, and to
interpret those Oracles, which signify that he will govern all Nations by his
own Laws and Statutes, and not by the Laws of Omri, nor the Statutes and
Ordinances of the House of Ahab; that is, not by the Statutes, Laws, Ordinances
or Edicts of the present Kings of the earth, The Beast and his Ten Horns, etc.
is beyond all Controversy a part of the duty and Office of a Minister of the
New Testament.

And if we, in telling the people, that Christ will darken, and not only so,
but utterly Destroy the Kingdom of the Beast, and all the forms of Government
in the whole world now in being, which are set up in opposition to him, Who is
Heir of all things, do meet with oppositions and contradiction from our
Brethren, beside all Manner o^ Discouragement from the higher or lower Rulers
of the Nation (even to bonds and Imprisonment, yea even to Torment and Death)
yet, being true Teachers, we ought to be so far from giving place by subjection
in this matter, for a moment, that we must rather in the name and strength of
the King of Saints, rise much higher in bearing our Testimony, and so in
intermedling with the particulars now under debate.

But there are many time-serving professors, and Neminal Christians, both
Courtiers and Others, who use to declare themselves after this manner,
concerning us: THEY BRING TROUBLE UPON THEIR OWN HEADS, AND THEY MAY THANK
THEMSELVES: If they would let the Higher Powers alone, and Preach the Gospel,
they might be countenanced, maintained, protected, and it may be preferred, as
others are.

I answer: In the self same Language, the Lukewarm generation of Ministers, and
conformable Puritans were heard to speak in the times of Prelatical
persecution; and when a certain Disciple complained to another Godly Minister,
how that faithful servant of the Lord, Master Henry Burton was cruelly handled
by his persecutors, he told him immediately, He might thank himself; If he had
let the Bishops alone, and the like, they would not have meddled with him.

And as for that great Quarrel against us, that we do not preach the Gospel, I
have this to say, that if we always preach Faith and Repentance, we shall be
always laying the foundation, and so shall never go on to perfection: but we
know, Though it be not accounted Gospel in the Courts of Princes, to declare
the glad Tidings of the Kingdom and coming of Christ, to put down all rule, all
Authority and power, that the Saints may be at liberty to serve the Lord in the
full latitude of the New Testament-Ministration; Yet the Prince of the Kings of
the earth will account it Gospel, and preaching of the Gospel also, and this in
the presence of all flattering Court-Chaplains, and of their Masters also, at
whose Tables they are sed deliciously every day, while their brethren are so
thrust into Corners, and unchristian and inhumanely used and abused by them.

But further, Do they still say, we may thank our selves? We say No. We may
thank the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our Lord Ievus Christ
himself, that we are counted worthy to suffer shame and reproach, and to be
committed to Gaolers for his Truths sake, and that glorious cause, which once
was cried up by the General and his Army, though now they have gotten a new
Cause to carry on.

Again, whereas a great noise is made, what LIBERTY we may have to preach the
Gospel, what countenance and maintenance; This I have to return to such
Discourses; first, I deny that there was or is such Liberty allowed. For
whosoever will preach the GOSPEL OF THE KINGDOM thoroughly and effectually, in
the Demonstration of the spirit and of power; and, whosoever will zealously
insist upon those Scriptures, which are profitable for the pressing of those
Doctrines of Truth, which concern the present Age and Times, or those which are
profitable for reproof, and for Correction of the present evils and iniquities
of the higher or lower powers, they shall not enjoy their Liberty Long; but if
they are suffered, and connived at, it is not because the Rulers are satisfied
with such Preachers or their Doctrine and Reproofs, but upon other
considerations, as, either to avoid the Reproachful Imputation of persecuting
powers, or else because their Instrument is but green and Tender, as King
Readiness was, when, he did politickly forbear to punish those who would not choose
him for their Lord and King (whereas afterward, when the Kingdom was confirmed
to him, he was not so modest) or upon some such profound Reasons of carnal
State Policy.

Secondly, As for their Countenance and Maintenance, for my part, I look upon
both the one and the other, as two of the sorest and most dangerous snares
wherein Ministers can possibly be caught in these days.

For is it probable, or indeed possible, for any One of the whole Generation of
the Parsons and Vicars in the Reformed Churches of Europe; or for the Nurseries
and Seminaries of them (The several Universities in the Respective Nations,
which did always, and do to this Day, All depend upon the Bounty, Munificence,
and Good will of the serveral Higher Powers) I say, again, How can it be that
these or such like creatures of man's making, should turn head upon their good
Lords or bountiful Benefactors, and so to bear an high Testimony for the Lord
Jesus, against the Oppressions, Luxuries, superstitions and other Abominations
of the Princes of the world aforesaid? It is not to be imagined or expected.
For, do rational Men look for grapes from Thorns, or for figs from Thistles?
They were not of Gods planting, and how can they bring forth fruit unto God?
But if at any time the Lord himself by his own Spirit working in any one of
them mightily, do call them forth as he did Paul, Luther and such like, to bear
his name before the Kings of the earth, they must cast up their Reckoning with
Paul, etc. and come to this conclusion, even to count all things but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus their Lord; for whom and whose
service, they will then willingly count their Benefices, and promotions
Ecclesiastical (as they call them) their Vice-chancellorships, their Headships,
their Deaneries, their Fellowships, their University-Degrees, their
Augmentations, but Dross and Dung, that they may promote the work and honor of
their Lord.

For indeed, this is the kindly Operation of the true knowledge of Christ. And
what Parish-Preacher soever he be who intends to be Christ's Disciple in good
earnest (during the time of the Dominion of the little Horn) and to follow him
close, so as to serve him with a perfect heart, He must necessarily deny
himself, and forsake his House and (Glebe) Lands; his Tithes and rates for
Tithes, whether personal or predial, his State-salary, or Augmentation, or any
other of the fine Things aforesaid: for otherwise he cannot boldly bear up the
Testimony of Jesus; nor declare against the Babylonish Beast and the Ten Horns,
in all those things wherein they are guilty of High Treason against the Lord
Jesus Christ, his Crown and Dignity. But if men will pretend to be for Christ,
and yet are so wise as to invent and contrive how to prevent sufferings for his
sake, let them stay behind and keep company with the world, the world-like
Church, and the carnal Clergy; yea let them do as the most do, and then the
fewest will laugh them to scorn.

But it may be said to me, Although you are so malapert and so bold, to throw
dirt in the faces of so many Reverend Deans, Doctors, Divines,
Vice-chancellors, with others of the worshipful Clergy, and Orthodox Ministers
in all the Protestant Courts, Cities, and countries in these parts of the
world; yet it is not much to be regarded what a prating fool does speak:
besides. Solomon says, A prating fool shall fall.

To this I reply: They will do me manifest wrong whosoever shall say that I
throw dirt in the faces of these men: for the Truth is this; They have
besmeared their own faces, with grovelling upon the Dunghill of the filthy
Antichristian world, or else they have contracted Dirt for want of washing and
cleansing their faces and their hands: And I do but tell them where the dirt
is, and where the filth sticks upon them, so as that they are and appear very
Deformed by reason thereof. And if you call me and my fellows prating fools;
for showing you where the spots of Dirt are to be found, we will be more vile,
and we will, by the grace of God, proceed and go on to play the fools, for
Christ's sake; and that, till, either you turn your backs, and depart with
shame, or until you are persuaded to look into the glorious glass of the New
Testament, and compare our words with what you find there represented to you:
for we will not be out-faced by you in this matter, upon any terms.

But put the case we are such fools as you and your Patrons say, and that we
talk much more then our share comes to; methinks you should suffer fools
gladly, seeing you your selves are so wise. And what were it for some of you,
to persuade your Lord Protector to let out of prison two or three, or a few
fools, to make sport for the wise men at the Court? Certainly, we being such
simple and contemptible Ignoramusses, could not prejudice so many wise men in
any thing we could do or say.

Thus I have endeavored to answer those objections, and to speak something to
those reproachful Cavils, which are heard by many, to proceed out of the mouths
of Those who use to appear like the friends of Christ in a Sunshine Day, but
to leave him, when Tribulations or Persecutions arise because of the word. As
for the truth, though it cannot be defended by us silly, weak worms, as the
Lord knows we are, yet, the God of Truth will lift up the Banner of Truth, and
it shall be displayed in such glory at the length, that all Nations shall flow
unto it.

The latter part of this Section needs no Explanation, for, Res ipsa loquitur.
The Thing it self speaks, and speaks aloud, so that it is heard through the
Nation, viz. that the Carnal Clergy have no heart to declare, or pray, or
confess, according to the present exigences of the cause of our dear Redeemer.
But the Counsel of our Lord is plain: Let them alone, they are blind Leaders of
the Blind, and both shall fall into the Ditch. And this shall suffice for this
matter, until a better Opportunity.

Sect. 6, and 7.
I need not spend time to satisfy any Readers concerning the contents thereof,
for they are themselves explanations of what went before. Only concerning the
later part of the seventh, I shall wait for such a season, as the Lord by his
wise providence shall administer for the best advantage of his service. For,
for the present, I do not find my spirit free to increase this Treatise to a
greater Bulk and price; and I designed only an explication of the first part,
in regard none else needed an Interpreter.

Sect. 8, and 9.
The ensuing Epistle, which I spoke of in the first Section being obtained,
That will sufficiently enlighten the Reader in the understanding what I intend
in those Things, namely, in the matter of application for my enlargment, and
how far it is from my very thoughts to accept of Deliverance upon base and
Dishonorable Terms, at any time. In regard, I know assuredly, (without any
degree of doubting that I am sensible of) that this Cause wherein I am engaged
with my fellows and companions, is absolutely and unquestionably the Best and
most Honorable Cause of all Causes whatsoever agitated and disputed at this day
in all the world.

Wherefore I will now add no more but this, He that believes makes not haste,
and shall never be confounded: And Christ is precious to them which Believe,
even in a Prison, in a Dungeon, upon the Scaffold, upon the Cross, anywhere,
everywhere; to that MOST PRECIOUS ANOINTED ONE, be Honor, Glory, and Dominion,
now and for ever. And let all that love him in sincerity say Amen, in full
assurance of faith and hope, even in the presence of all Opposition whatsoever.
Amen, and Amen.

The End.
Here follows an extract of that Letter to the Congregation, which did
immediately precede that Epistle, which being so unworthily used, did occasion
such a noise among the foes and friends of Jesus Christ our Lord, and which is
now explained as you have read.
The Imprisoned Elder, A Servant of the Lord Jesus, from his Watchtower, in
this House of Bondage, sends greeting to the Brethren, which meet together in
Warwick Lane, London.
Well-beloved Brethren in our dearest Lord,
I Desire earnestly on your behalf, all, and all manner of Communications of
Grace from Heaven, whereby you may in all Things grow up into him who is the
Head, even unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

For undoubtedly you having received the Lord Jesus, as a PRINCE and a SAVIOR,
in the light and power of the glorious Ministration of the New Testament,
cannot but acknowledge, that all your Happiness is derived from the love of the
Father through him, in whom dwells the fullness of the Godhead Bodily, etc. Now
concerning the Things whereof you wrote unto me in your late Letter, This I
say, and testify in the Lord, for a further Confirmation of the Truth
mentioned by you, and for the Encouragement of such honest Hearts, who through
faith and patience, are in the number of those, which wait for the kingdom of
Heaven, and for the Consolation of the true Israel, (for which I am bound with
this Chain) That although my Name be cast out, as vile, and I am separated by
the New-fashion'd King, and his Council from the society of the Saints, (in
which, through mercy, I so much delighted) yet I bear record before this
Congregation, to the praise of the Lord, that it is the best condition, that I
ever tasted of and enjoyed; only, one sharp Thorn, which I cannot forget, has
been made use of, to keep my spirit in a Gospel-decorum: lest otherwise, I
might have been lifted up above measure through that abundance of ravishing
glory, which I have been ready very often to be overwhelmed withal.

And yet, let the Saints take diligent Heed, that they do not expect much from
me, when I am delivered: for it may be, Brethren, These extraordinary
visitations from on High, are intended but for my Prison-state, and for my
succor and support, while I am thus suffering from all sorts of men.

I have indeed desired earnestly that the Spirit of Christ may according to his
Office, and our Lords promise, bring to my remembrance what the Lord has
spoken to me, since I was Close-Prisoner; and what I have seen, and tasted, and
heard, and handled of the word of life: for I cannot write it down, though I
attempt it. Therefore I beseech you, let there be prayer made on my behalf, and
on your behalf, and which is more, on the Lords behalf, that God would open to
me a Door of Utterance, (from that very moment, he sets open the Prison-doors)
to speak forth that mystery of Christ for which I am in bonds, and that I may
make it manifest as I ought to speak. And whereas you expect I should offer or
propound A way to you, that may be conducible to my Enlargement; I desire you
to understand, that it was never in my Heart to direct you what to do, for the
obtaining of my Liberty, for it is contrary to that light, and those
principles, whereby I walk in this condition. My Judgment is, if there be not
Light, and Love, and Courage enough in a Church of Saints, to prompt them to
the use of Lawful and Honorable Means, for the Redemption of their Officer out
of Captivity; it is Best for him still to lie in Bonds: for it concerns them
above all other people to endeavor his deliverance out of the House of
Bondage, if they Judge his presence needful and useful in the midst of them.
Also, in Answer to that Marginal Note in your Epistle, I shall be plain with
you; It is no way proper for me to appear for the obtaining of my own Liberty
in a private way; and rather then do it, I shall through the strength of
Christ, be contented to suffer Close-Imprisonment, in this blessed Cause,
during this man's reign, although it should last as long as Athaliah's, who
usurped the Chief Government, for about the space of twice three years and an
half.

It is true, my sufferings are many and great, and there is a multiplication of
Grievances and Injuries, every day, and hour of the day. And (as the Chief
Captain said) with a Great sum would I obtain my freedom, if I were imprisoned
upon a Common Account; but as the Case stands, I say again, I shall not give
place by subjection for a moment, or do Any thing more or less, that is
unworthy of me the Prisoner of the Lord, in such a precious Cause as This, (the
Lord standing by me, and fully strengthening me) for all the treasures and
riches of the New Court, and of all the Kingdoms of the Earth in to the Bargain.

And, Brethren, I have reason for what I write in this particular: for first,
the Lord was with me in a most sweet and glorious manner, while I preached
those Truths for which I suffer. His presence was also with me most Comfortably
from the first moment I was apprehended by the Pursevant till I was committed
hither; And all this time of my long and wrongful Imprisonment, he has not
left me, nor forsaken me in the least, praised for ever be his glorious Name.
And should I leave and forsake such a Lord Protector, and such a Comforter, by
any base Compliance with the Kings of the Earth and their Parasites? would not
that Spirit be grieved, by which I am sealed to the day of Redemption? should
not the Name of the Lord be blasphemed? and the faces of the Choicest followers
of the Lamb gather paleness and shame? surely these Considerations are
prevalent with me. And in this further, I much rejoice, that I can do nothing
against the Truth, but for the Truth.

Besides the former grounds of not stirring or moving for mine own liberty in
the ordinary way; I find not, upon search, that those servants of the Lord who
were Prisoners and Innocent, did ever petition, or use other ordinary means to
the Chief Governors for their own Liberty; Joseph did not, Hanani did not,
Jeremiah did not, nor John the Baptist, nor Peter, nor Paul, that I can find.

And surely there is very good reason for it, if we could search it out. I
conceive these which follow, may be given as some grounds of it.

1. Innocent Prisoners (suffering as they did whom I have mentioned) know they
have to deal with Tyrants and unreasonable Persecutors; and what will such as
these hearken to, unless the Prisoners do submit to their lusts, and satisfy
their arbitrary wills and pleasures?

2. They glorified God all the while they were suffering Bonds and
Imprisonments. The service of their Master was promoted all that time; and
being in Gods way, why should they covet to go out of so good an Employment?

3. The Prisoners and Martyrs of the New Testament follow the example of
Christ, and tread in his steps, when they patiently endure persecution for the
Truths and Righteousness sake, without making unworthy applications for their
liberty.

4. If it becomes us, not to use the means and devices of the world to prevent
Imprisonment, but cheerfully to come when we are sent for before Kings and
Councels for Christ's sake and his Gospels, how unseemly would it appear for us
after a short time to use means to get out again, after the manner of other men
who are in bonds upon other Accounts?

I shall proceed upon the other part of your Letter the next week, if God
permit; and in the mean season I beseech you and exhort you in the Lord, See
that you walk circumspectly, as it is written, not as fools, but as wise,
redeeming the time, because the days, in one sense are very evil. Wherefore be
ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.

Prayer and Praise is to be continued for

The 7 day of the 8 month, 1654. Yours in Christ, CHR. FEAKE.

FINIS.

