To the Right Honorable (his Excellency) Oliver Cromwell, Lord General of all
the Forces raised in England, Ireland, and Scotland, for the regainment of
Englands long lost Liberties, and to the Honorable Tho. Harrison, Major
General, and to the whole Council of State sitting at White Hall, J. F.
wishes health, and increase of true honor in the Lord Jesus here, and eternal
glory in the glorious world to come.
Right Honorable,
AS for many years past (by the good hand of my God) I have been drawn forth
for the public, Whatsoever is not of Christ, is assuredly of the Devil, but
cruelty, oppression, and murdering of men and women in Prisons, Goals and
Dungeons, is not of Christ; Therefore of the Devil and his servants they are,
(that so do) whose will they act, and to whom they obey.
All Felons are baylable, and not to be imprisoned before Judgment has passed
of their crime, fo. 73.
and not for self ends, Those that imprison a free man, or blemish his credit,
are by the Law infamous persons, fo. 192.
so I desire still to persist to the glory of his great name, and this my
countries welfare, being also stirred up thereunto by your (hitherto) most
Christian proceedings, Multitude of Clerks not to be permitted, fo. 246.
and revived in my spirit by the great hopes I do retain of your faithful
perseverance to the perfecting of this good work by you taken in hand (for the
calling a new Representative) to the glory of God, No Writs of Account to be
issued forth, because none may imprison another wrongfully, fo. 247.
the advance of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in true Justice, Judgment, and
Mercy, and the restoration of this your Native Countries Birthrights and
Liberties.

Upon that account I am encouraged most humbly to present these few lines to
your pious wisdom, No Right in Judgment to be sold for fees or bribes, fo.
258.
and Christian consideration, hoping that your faith and zeal for Gods glory
and this your Countries peace and tranquillity, will speedily appear by your
works to all the inhabitants of this Land, From the days of Alfred, King of
England, to the time of Edward, National Counsels were held twice in the year.
Reasons showed, That the new Statute for the imprisonment of men for debt, is
Evil, Illegal, and quite contrary to the Fundamental Law, reason, and the
liberty of the people, fo. 283. 284.
whereby all your friends in the Lord will have great cause of rejoicing, and
your enemies will be enforced to acknowledge and say, that of a surety God is
in you, and that he the only Lord of Hosts, See that ancient famous Law-book
called, Mirror of Justice, fol. 6.
the God of Israel, has done very great and excellent things by you for this
poor inslaved Nation under the Norman yoke, of 587. years continnance.

And therefore I do most humbly and heartily (in the Lord) beseech you to
consider.

That it is deliverance from this Norman yoke of bondage and slavery, Justice
and Right was then done truly, and all causes of controversy determined within
fifteen days, fol. 8.
your selves, and the people of God in this Nation have fought for, to the
hazard of yours and their lives, the vast expense of treasure, and effusion of
a Sea of blood, None to be hanged for theft, nor imprisoned for debt, fo. 192.
257.
that notwithstanding the innumerable blessings of God (through your
indefatigable endeavors) conferred on this Nation, and the several vows and
promises made by the late Parliament to this Nation for the restoration of
their ancient Rights and Liberties, as by their Declaration of the seventh of
April 1646. No Action to be entered nor received to Judgment, unlessesecurity
was first given to make good the plaint, and costs and damages to the
Defendant, if not made good, fol. 14. 233. 257.
False Witnesses are to die the death, being attainted of a false appeal, fo.
228.
and March 1648. appears; yet hitherto that great unsupportable and
unparalleled bondage of Arrest, and imprisonment of men and women's persons, is
still continued, whereby the liberty of the persons (a point of highest
concernment to the people in general) is left open to the violent, It is
manslaughter for any Officer to suffer the poor to starve, or perish, and not
to relieve them, by setting them on work, fo. 228.
barbarous, and destructive usage of every covetous curlish Naball, and most
inhumane cruel oppressor, and the prosperity of the Lawyers, and their
selfe-seeking adherents, hitherto preferred before the peace and well-being of
this great Nation, the dangerous consequence whereof is legible to all, in this
Maxim (what befalls one man to day, may befall another to morrow.)

All imprisonment for debt, Imprisonment of men till they die in prison, is
manslaughter by the Law, fol. 27. 28. 30. 274.
Corrupt Judges were then punished in the same manner and measure as had been
by them unjustly adjudged, or inflicted upon others. folio 207.
being clearly an incroachment upon the Common Law; and therefore (in the first
place) fit to be rectified at this time, and in this year of Englands Jubilee,
1653.

And as at present (through mercy) the spirits of all do partake of Christian
liberty, so is it as requisite and just, that our bodies (being the mansion
houses of our spirits) may enjoy liberty, and not to be buried alive in the
several most filthy noisome graves, None to be imprisoned, but for Felony,
Murder, and Treason, fo. 29. 57. 231. 73. 274. Also Hen. 3.1218.
called Goales, Prisons, and Dungeons.

That Liberty from the late Norman thraldom, Felons escape out of prison is no
mortal offense, because warranted by the Law of Nature for safety, fo. 226.
is the due birthright of this Nation, No Judge nor Officer is to take any fee
of the people, nor reward, fo. 64.
appears by the several Statutes of this Land, from King Alfreds time, to
the third year of this last King Charles, and was also acknowledged by all the
Judges of this corrupt age, in the case of Sir William Herbors, reported by Sir
Edward Cook, Lord Chief Justice, where it was resolved, None to be imprisoned,
but only for mortal offenses, fo. 73.
that by the Common Law, Any Judge once doing wrong, is never more to be
obeyed, fo. 230.
(which is to be understood the Great Charter of England) neither the body, nor
Lands of the Defendant are liable to execution upon judgment for debt or
damages (a fortiori) therefore not to arrests and imprisonment upon any Mesne
Process whatsoever, Goales and Prisons ordained for mortal offenders only,
fo. 72.
Goalers punishable for plundering prisoners, exacting maimes from them, as
putting them in irons, fo. 231.
for that every man is an innocent person in the eye of the Law, until
condemned by it.

How unreasonable and unjust a thing is it then, Goalers to be severely
punished for detaining any Felon in prison after his acquittalls; and if the
Felon die in Goal, being acquitted, then the Jailer is to be hanged, and is to
lose his place for exacting maimes from the prisoners, or for putting any of
them in irons, fo. 231.
that any free man of England should suffer imprisonment upon a Capias, (which
is the utmost punishment the Law can inflict upon any Malefactor) before he be
condemned by the Law.

It is therefore most clear, A Pleader (or Lawyer) once attainted of false
pleading, or maintaining any unjust Action or Cause, is to suffer bodily
punishment, fol. 230.
that all the Statutes and Judgments which have subjected the bodies of men
and women to arrests and imprisonment, are diametrically opposite to the Law of
God, to reason, to charity, and to the Great Charter, being the Fountain of all
the Fundamental Laws of England, therefore void and null; for that the body
kept in an iron Cage (as a bird) cannot yield satisfaction for any debt, any
other ways, nor by any other means, then by liberty and industry in some
calling.

For that Charter is to be interpreted by it self, Judges to suffer death for
pronouncing false Judgment, fo. 239.
and not to be infringed by the innovating Laws and opinions of Judges, that
lived in the cruel tyrannical inslaving times, If Justice thus take place
again, woe then to all our Goalers, Prisons, and Counter-keepers of this age, by
whom thousands have been thus destroyed.
whose wrested constructions (of this very point in question) has ever tended
more to the filling of their own purses, No Goalers to keep a prison to the
dishonor of the State, fo. 214.
and the purses of their adherents, with the unjust gain of destructive
contention, and by tossing and tumbling of men and women from one prison to
another, and upon Habias Corpus, and Commitments, then to the due
administration of Justice, according to the just rules of the Common Law of
England.

Wherefore upon very just reasons founded on the birthright of this Nation, A
Judge that shall delay to relieve a prisoner, and he that imprisoneth any man
till he die, and does not relieve him, are both manslayers, fo. 30.
He hanged Judge Hall, because he saved Trustrom (the Sheriff) from death, who
bad taken to the Kings use from some men their goods against their wills, for
that such taking and robbery has no difference, fo. 241.
and judgments passed by any against any one point of the Great Charter, (in
point of this Nations Liberty) ought to stand and become as Null: and all the
offenders are punishable in their estates and lives for murdering of so many
thousands, and robbing this whole Nation of their just Liberties; for if any
one absurd error be admitted against our liberty, a thousand will follow, as
at this day woeful experience shows; and the perishing lives of thousands of
families can testify.

I do therefore in the behalf of this (still inslaved) Nation, Alfred King of
England hanged 44. Judges in one year, for oppressing the people by false
Judgment, fo. 240.
become a most humble and earnest Suitor unto your Excellency, and to this
great Council, He hanged Judge Athelstone, because the judged Herbert to death
for an offense not mortal, fo. 240.
by whom the Lord has done very great things for this Nation, to the
admiration, yea to the astonishment of all Europe, and by his powerful actings
in and by you, he has made you to become Englands glory, and Europes wonder,
by putting down the high and mighty, and exalting the humble and meek: Behold
this is the Lords doing, He hanged Judge Rolfe for hanging a Felon for escaping
out of prison before conviction, fo. 240.
and it is mavelous in our eyes, and in the eyes of all Nations.

That by some speedy course all the poor oppressed in the Land may be relieved
and righted, He hanged Judge Diling, because he caused Eldon to be hanged, who
killed a man by chance, fo. 242.
the inslaved out of all prisons forth with set free from the iron bands of
their illegal and most cruel captivity, under which they are still oppressed,
yea pressed to death.

That the abominable tyrannical Writ Capias may be forthwith abolished, Judge
Th^lwell was imprisoned for imprisoning a man for an offense not mortal.
and the most ancient justifiable common course for levying of debts on men's
estates may be restored, it being indifferent to all that live under one common
Government, to take such apt remedies one against the other, (for all just
debts) as the wisdom of our Ancestors thought fit and used, Judge Belling was
hanged for judging Leston to death by fraud.
that so Foxes, Wolves, Bears, and Tigers, Judge Oswine was hanged for judging
Fulk to death out of Court, fo. 242.
(I mean wicked Lawyers, Bailiffs, Sergeants and Goalers) may thereby be
prevented from ravening any longer on the bodies of men and women, whereby
their estates for many years past, have been and still are a prey unto such
insatiable. Monsters of Cruelty, and the oppressed, their wives and children,
are thereby exposed to famine and misery.

The faithful and speedy accomplishment of this will enable many thousands
(yea all) by their liberty, Judge Seafold was banged for judging Ordine to
death, for not answering.
Judge Muckline was hanged, because he hanged Hellgrave by a Warrant of
Indictment not special, fo. 242.
to use ways and means of industry to serve their country, labor in their
several callings, make provisions for payment of all just debts, and live
peaceably and charitably one with another in this Commonwealth, Judge Arnold
was hanged for saving a Bailiff from death, who had robbed the people by
distresses, and for selling distresses, and for extorting fines, fo. 241.
to the glory of God, and to the honor of the English Nation, which hitherto
for these her cruel practices, bears the burden of a great reproach, and is
therein condemned by all other Nations, both Christian and Pagan; let the cause
be therefore taken away, and then the effects will cease.

The accomplishment of these particulars in the speedy dissolution of all
prisons for debt in the Land, and the due administration of Justice to the
people in every County, Hundred, and Town Corporate by the Neighborhood (so as
no man may travel from his habitation above four or five miles for Justice,
and not a hundred or two hundred miles, Judge Therborne was hanged, because he
had judged one Osgat to death, for a fact whereof be had been acquitted before
against the same Plaintiff, which acquittance Osgat tendered to approve by
oath, but because be did not aver it by Record, Judge Therborn would not allow
of the Acquittall which was tendered to him, fol. 242.
as now) will advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Judge R^wood was imprisoned
for imprisoning a man for a debt due to the said King Alfred himself, fo. 244.
peace and happiness to this Nation, and work the total downfall of Satan's
Thrones of Injustice, tyranny, and oppression, and of the quarterly faires kept
at Westminster, (by the illegal ingrocers of pretended Justice) where men are
daily bought and sold in their estates, rights, and liberties, and where a bit
of parchment and wax (but of the real value of one farthing) is by them sold
to the people at several rates, Judge Perine was hanged for suffering a man to
die in prison, whom he had imprisoned for an offense not mortal.
viz. from 2.s. 9.d. 4.s. 1.d. to 2.l. 3.l. 4.l. 5.l. yea 10.l. has been given
(in a long vacation) for one Habias Corpus by many people.

Behold therefore and see, are not such men workers of iniquity, doing
wickedly, by pleading falsely (in the presence of the Lord) against the poor,
and the oppressed, making thereby empty the souls of the hungry, and causing
the drink of the thirsty to fail, Judge Athulfe was hanged for causing Coppine
to be hanged, before he was 21. years of age, fo. 240.
their weapons whereby they murder the innocent, are Pens, Ink, Paper, Wax,
and Parchment; yea they undo the poor with lying words, overthrowing the cause
of the righteous in judgment, and spinning out the thread of one suit in Law,
to twenty, thirty, yea forty years continuance, thus making the remedy worse
then the disease of oppression; and when the pulses of one of their Clients
beats slow, and the other Client is quite spent, so as he can neither kick nor
winch (as some of themselves have said) then they consult to tie these two
together, by a Commission, Judge Marks was hanged for judging During to death
by 12. men, who were not sworn, fo. 240.
into the Country, there (amongst their friends) to provide more money against
the next Term, and yet these persons in the presence of their Clients seem to
be as Adversaries one to the other, and at the Bar plead and maintain that for
truth, which their own conscience tells them, Tongue thou lie.

Break their present power, He hanged Judge Wulster, because he judged Haubert
to death, though it was at the suit of the King.
O God, cast them down to the dust (as the Prelates were) and let their houses
of wickedness (called Inns of Court) become habitations for the poor, that so
Judgment may dwell in our Cities, and Justice in the fruitful field, He cut
off the band of Judge Hulfe, because be did not cause the hand of Armock to be
cut off, who had feloniously wounded one Ricbald. fo. 245.
causing the poor to rejoice, and the oppressed to sing for joy of heart, then
the work of Justice shall be peace to all, and assurance of quietness, yea
deliverance from their great Oppressors, Lawyers, Impropriators, Lords of
Manors, cruel revengefull persons, churlish Naballs, and all other sons of
Beliall.

So shall God be glorified, He caused Judge Edulfe to be wounded, because he
judged not Arnold to be wounded, who had feloniously wounded one Aldens, fo.
245.
your honorable Name, and names (as Isreal's Deliverers) recorded, and this
whole Nation comforted, and ever engaged to bless God for you their great
deliverers; stick fast therefore unto the Lord your God in this work, as you
have done unto this day, for behold, the Lord has cast out before you the
great and mighty, He hanged all the Judges in every County, who had falsely
saved a man guilty of death, or falsely hanged any man against Law, or
reasonable exceptions, fo. 243.
and none of them have hitherto been able to stand before your face.

Take good heed therefore, and love the Lord your God, and cleave not unto the
Generation of cruel men, Joshua 23.8. 9. 10. 11. Then shall ye be my people,
and I will be your God, says the Lord God, Jer. 30.22.

These particulars aforesaid (most noble and victorious Sir) together with my
more then ten years cruel sufferings undergone, The Lord God of Judgment,
Justice and Mercy, grant that such Justice may take place again in this Land,
to the terror of all cruel oppressors, and to the relief of the poor
oppressed, that so these great and powerful ravenous Wolfes may not devour
the poor and innocent Lambs any more, by making their persons and estates a
prey unto their teeths (as bitherto they have done, and wherein they glory;)
for the truth hereof, I do appeal to all the people of England, who have for
these many years longed for deliverance from these their bitter pangs and
throws, and for the enjoyment of their freedom, peace and happiness; witness
the many hundreds of Petitions presented from several Connties, and also from
sundry persons, to the late Parliament, from time to time these 12. or 13.
years space, to the same effect, who were not so wise, as to consider that the
poor laborious feet support and carry the head, and not the head the feet, and
therefore in the first place the poor feet of the body and head, are to be
cherished and strengthened for the better support of them, both in their
Walkings and National progress. For if the Lord had not been on my side, and
stirred up your Noble spirits for my deliverance from thraldom, mine enemies
had swallowed me up quick, for they were too mighty for me, and kept me locked
up in one chamber above five years, viz. from February 1645. until April 1650.
in the Fleet Prison, London, without any just cause by them showed to this day
for so doing.
from the hands of cruelties powerful instruments, (for my several services
most faithfully performed for the State, yea sundry times to the hazard of
life) I do without any desire of revenge on my cruel Adversaries, most humbly
refer to your grave wisdom, and pious consideration, beseeching the Lord to be
still the protector of you, by whom he has done wonderful things for this
Nation, under his sacred wing of safety, and your sole Director in all your
undertakings, to the comfort of all those that wish well unto Sion, and to the
amazement and confusion of his and your enemies. This is, and has been the
constant desires of him, who in all faithfulness subscribes himself,

Right Honorable, Your Excellencies, and his Countries J. F.
This 25. of the 4. month 1653.

