ENGLANDS VVarning-Peece GONE FORTH.

Written upon an occasion of the coming forth of a book of one Thomas Robbins
B. of D. And as he calls himself England's Watchman, BUT Is discovered to be
England's Blind Guide.

By one Richard Farneworth A servant of the Lord. Yorkshire. June 1653.

Every one take warning betime, lest the evil day come upon you at unawares;
and take heed of the Doctrine of the Pharisees, for they say and do not; mark
them that do so, for they are false Prophets,

Matthew. 7.15, etc. And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and Quake.

Hebr. 12.21. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Wait, and are to be sold at the
Pavement in York. 1653.

To the Reader.
Dear Friends,
AS you tender the good and welfare of your own souls, take warning betime, and
do not run wilfully on into wickedness, but while it is day hearken to hear the
voice of the Lord Christ in you, that you may know him at work in you; for when
they shall say, lo here is Christ, or lo there is Christ, go not forth, but
learn to know Christ in you; for when Jesus Christ was demanded of the Scribes
and the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God should come; he said, that the
Kingdom of God came not with observations, as lo here, and lo there; but
says he the Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17.20, 21. Take heed to your
selves, and beware of the Scribes, which Jesus Christ forewarneth you of; for
now there is many of them that do seduce, and draws from the inward Guide;
Therefore take heed of following their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the
way of truth is evil spoken of. Look into this little ensuing Treatise, and it
will give thee a Character of them, that thou may the more easily shun them
and their way, and not be an upholder thereof.

One who wishes grace, mercy, and peace to all that love the Lord Jesus Christ
in sincerity and truth. R. F.

A warning to all people to beware of the Doctrine of the Pharisees. WITH A
discovery of England's Blind Guide, who falsely calls himself England's
Watchman.
Mark 12.38, 39, 40. verses. And Jesus said unto his disciples, heware of the
Scribes and Pharisees, which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations
in the market places, the chief seats in the Synagogues, and the uppermost
rooms at feasts; which devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long
prayers, these shall receive greater damnation, Mark 12.40.


NOw all people take notice of these sort of men, which our Savior Jesus
Christ speaks of in this place of Scripture, and see if you do not hold them
up: Do not your priests now go in long robes, as these did, which Jesus Christ
bids you beware of? Do not your Priests love greeting in markets, as these did
that Jesus Christ bids you beware of? Do they not love to have you to worship
them with cap and knee? And say h^w do you master such a one, as the Scribes
did which Jesus Christ bids you beware of; these seducing spirits gets into
your hearts and deceive you, and seek to devour your souls, take heed of them,
you have good cause for it, for these men will destroy you if you have not a
great care of them, these are the men that Jesus Christ bids you heware of in
this place of Scripture, and also in Matthew. 23.5, 6, 7.

For says Jesus Christ, there in that place of Scripture: All their works they
do to be seen of men, they make broad their Philacteries, and enlarge the
borders of their Garments; and they make your purses pay for it; see if it be
not so. All People, beware of these sorts of men which Jesus Christ so much
spoke of; he knew the depth of their hearts, and that they were decei^ful above
measure: look to them, as you will answer it before the Lord, you have had
warning enough of them, ^^^w you cannot pl^ad excuse: All people consider of
it, see, by their m^^ks ye shall know them; Jesus Christ has set them forth by
a Character, as you may know them; See the 23 of Matthew, and lay it together
wi^h the 12 of Mark: And now you may see how you have been deceived with those
wolves all this night time; now that the day does appear that you may view
them; it is good for you to have a great care of them, least they utterly
destroy you for ever; they are blind guides, and walk contrary to the doctrine
of Christ, he spoke of them in his doctrine; see Mark 12.18.

See, view them well, and beware of those men, that love to get pearking up
into the highest places in the Synagogues; these are the men that Christ bid
you beware of, Mat 23.6.

Now see, do not your Priests sit lording over you, and ger pearking into the
highest places in the Synagogues, and th^se Christ bids you beware of, take
heed of these men, they are seducers, deceivers, false Christ's, or Antichrists,
that do not abide in his doctrine, Mat. 23.8, 2. John 9.

See further, they love to be called of men Rabbi, that is to say Master, as
the Scribes and Pharisees did, and do not your Priests so?

These are the men that Jesus Christ bids you have such a care of, and told of
them in his doctrine, both in that 23 of Matthew, and 12 of Mark; look to them,
and hold them not up, for God is against them, and will overturn them and their
false worship, which is Pharasaical.

All people have a care of these false Christ's; Christ said to his, Mat. 23,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
be not ye called of men Masters, For one is your Master even Christ, Mat. 23
8, 9, 10, 11. says he in another place of Scripture, The Gentiles they
exercise lordship over them, and their great ones exercise authority upon them.
The Gentiles did so, these sorts of men also you are to have a care of, and see
now if your Priests be not found in the number of them, that loves Mastery,
contrary to the doctrine of Christ, as in these places of Scripture, both in
Mat. 23.8. and this place of Scripture in Mark 10.42, 43, 44. And he that
abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God; see 2 John 9. look to
these sorts of men, they are seducers and deceivers.

And secondly he that says he is sent of God and professes himself to be a
Minister of Christ, and walks contrary to Christ, 1 John 2.18.
he is Antichrist, and that is a false Christ; now there are many Antichrists;
see 1 John 2.15, 16, 17, 18, verses.

Therefore for exhortation: All people every where, high and low, great and
small, rich and poor, bond and free, male and semale; take heed of your souls,
search the scripture, see if your Priests do not walk contrary to them, and
does not abide in the doctrine of Christ; but are among the Scribes and
Pharisees, by their fruits it does appear, and their damnation is greater; as
in Mar. 12.14. and John says, He that abides not in the doctrine of Christ,
receive him not into your house; neither bid him God-speed, least ye be
partakers of his evil deeds; see 2 John 8.9, 10.

All people, as you will answer it before the Lord, and as you tender the good
of your own souls, take heed of all these sorts of men, these blind guides,
and seducing Priests, that do not abide in the doctrine of Jesus Christ; you
have great cause to have a care of them: now I have discharged my duty to God
in forewarning you of them.

Look to it, for the leaders of the people cause them to err; as the Prophet
Isaiah says, in Isa. 9.16. And if the blind shall lead the blind, both shall
fall into the ditch, Mat. 5.14. poor people now look about you, and be not
deceived with these blind guides any longer.

I read over a book, set forth by one Thomas Robbins, Bachelor of Divinity, as
he calls himself, and Englands watchman. Truly England may well be in
blindness, darkness, and Ignorance, that has no better a watchman then such a
blind guide as he is.

For he is one of those that leads the people on in blindness, and would keep
them there, and so that Scripture is fulfilled,

The blind leads the blind, which our Savior Jesus Christ spoke of in Mat,
15.14. See if it be not so, and the Lord open all your eyes, that you may not
run on further into blindness, till you cannot get out of darknes^.

This Thomas Robbins has stolen the words of the Saints, the Prophets, and
Apostles, to make a trade of, but never came to know the life of them, and so
fulfills the saying of our Savior Christ, in that tenth of John, where he
says, All that ever came before me are Thieves and Robbers: but he may expect
the just judgment of God, that dissembles with the Lord, and that steals the
words of others to speak of, not knowing the life of them; but the Lord is
against him, and such as he is, that steals the words of their neighbors, as
the false Prophets did, which the Lord sent his true Prophet to cry out
against, as in Jer. 23.30, 31, 32. He might well have called himself England's
Blind Guide, and not England's Watchman, for he is found a Blind Guide, by
those that have the true Guide, which is the spirit of truth, who are guided by
the spirit of God, are the Sons of God: as in Romans 8.14, 15, 16.

And are set free by the blood of the lamb, to praise and glorify God; and can
say with John the Disciple whom Jesus loved; behold what manner of love is
this, That the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the sons of
God? as in 1 John 3.1.

But this blind Guide, that knows not the true Guide, as in his writing it
does appear, he has many stolen expressions, and slattering titles, calling
drunkards, and swearers, and liers, and proud and covetous, and profane
persons, such as Esau was, whom God hated, those that are in the same nature,
he nuzzles them up in their sins, and speaks smooth things to them, calling
them good people, and good christians, when as Jesus Christ when he was called
good master: he said to him that called him so, why call thou me good, there
is none good but one, that is God, Mark, 10.17, 18. ver. and he says good
people, let us have a care of this time, and speaks of false Christ's, and falie
prophets, and does not see himself to be one of those that Jesus Christ bids
the people that knows him, to beware of; those that have eyes to see may see
him to be one of them, for he is a wicked ungodly person, as he himself does
confess, in his a page, and he speaks against false Christ's, and false
prophets, that neither knows the true Christ, nor the true prophers, by any
inward Experience: but as he does confess, he is a wicked and ungodly person,
and such have nothing to do to take his word into their mouths to speak of:
for says Jesus Christ, what have thou to do to take my word into thy mouth,
that hate to be reformed; and again says our Lord Jesus, let every one that
names the name of Christ depart from iniquity, for says he, though they have
prophesied in my name, and be found workers of iniquity, I will say I know you
not, depart from me, ye that be workers of iniquity, into hell, prepared for
the devil and his angels, Math. 25. but this blind guide, though falsely he
calls himself Englands warchman, he contends for sin, which is the devils
practice, and he speaks against the people of God that knows the true Christ,
manifested to take a way sin, and to destroy the works of the devil, as they
did that spoke forth the scriptures, as in 1 John, 3. chap.

This blind guide which calls himself Englands watchman, may be ashamed of
his ministry, that has taken their money so long for that which is no bread,
neither has thy ministry wrought any reformation, for as thou say in page
the 4th, that there is nothing more used then lying and swearing cheating and
cuzening one with another, as thou say, and that which is an abomination
with the Lord, thou may now see what little use thy ministry is of, it is
abominable, the fruits of abominations are brought forth by it; and now if thou
had any grace, as thou say in page the 2, thou have but little, it does
appear that questions it, but as thou say, if thou had but so much grace
as to serve the Lord, as in page 2, thou might blush and be ashamed that
thou should be no better a watchman; But it is but that the scriptures may be
fulfilled, his watchmen are all blind: as in Isaiah, 56.10.11. ver.

Therefore woe to you, and woe to thee thou blind guide, woe and misery is your
portion.

And as thou say, it is time for thee and such as thou art to amend your
wicked live, as in thy second page; Nay surely it is high time for thee to
amend thy wicked life, that say thou art a watchman for a whole nation, and
sends thy trumpet about, to be sounded in faires and markets, that those that
have eyes to see may see that thou ^^t one of Englands blind guides, and as
says the Lord by his prophet Isaiah, his watchmen are all blind, they are all
ignorant, they are all greedy dumb dogs, and shepherds that cannot understand,
and every one looks for his gain from his quarter, as in Isaiah, that
59.10.11. ver.

Surely England has been blindly led a long time, that has no better a
watchman then thou art, a blind guide, that is ignorant of the work of God, as
thou art.

Now it is high time for England to look up to the Lord, and remove such
blind guides as thou art, who would make Christ of none effect, but to talk
of: as in the latter end o^ thy second page: which is thy principle head, and
says that false Christ's, and false prophets may be known by this, that there
be some that say they have no sin.

First, Herein thou show thy blindness and ignorance in the things of God,
Heb. 2, 16, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 5.21.
for in the true Christ there was no sin at all, he was without sin, and he
took our nature upon him, and was manifested to take away sin, and the
scripture says that he that abides in him sins not, and who so sins
has not seen him, neither known him, 1 J^hn, 3 5, 6. ver.

Secondly, And those that spoke forth the scripture, and knew him manifested to
take away sin, and to destroy the works of the devil said, 1 John 3.5. and 8,
9. 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Gal. 6.11. Gal. 5.24. Romans 6. Heb. 2.10.11. 1 John 4.17.
Heb. 2.14.15. John. 1^.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Joh. 15.1, 2, 3.
that he that was in Christ was a new creature old things were passed away, and
the old nature and old wickedness was destroyed, and they said that they had
Crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, and so have they
that are Christ's now, and withal, the Romans said, how shall we that are dead
to sin live any longer therein, for he that sanctifyeth and they that are
sanctified are of him, and they are all one, and he is not ashamed to call
them brethren, for as he is, so are we in this present world, and says Jesus
Christ himself, ye are bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, and I have
ingrafted them into me through the spirit, for says the true Christ, I am the
vine, and ye are the branches, but he does not engraft sin into the vine, it
is the pure seed which is after the spirit, which thou show thy self to be
ignorant of, and seems here to raze the foundation of the scripture, thou
blind guide, thou do exceedingly show forth thy blindness and ignorance in
the things of God, 2 Timoth. 3.8.9. ver.

Thirdly, The scripture says, little children, let no man deceive you, he that
does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous; but he that commits
sin is of the divelj, by this the children of God are manifested, and the
children of the devil, 1 John. 3.9, 8. ver.

Fourthly, The scripture says that he that is borne of God sins not,
neither can he sin, because his seed remains in him, and again we know that
he was manifested to take away our sin, and in him and again we know that he
was manifested to take away our sin, and in him is noe sin at all, so says
the scripture, 1 John, 3.9, 10.

But thou plainly shows thy self to be blind and ignorant of him, that knows
not his manifestation in thee to take away sin, for he that commiteth sin is.
of the devil, and whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God, neither he
that loves not his brother; by this the children of God are manifested and the
children of the devil.

Now thou may plainly see whose servant thou art, John 8.34. and 44. Romans
6.16. 1 John 4.
of thy father the devil, and his servants ye are to whom ye do obey, he that
obeyes sin, he is the servant of sin, serveing the devil, they are of the
world as thou art, therefore speak they of the world as thou do, and the
world hears them, all that act and delights in iniquity, as it does thee: we
are of God, he that is of God and delights in righteousness hears us, he
that is not of God hears us no; hereby know we the spirit of truth and the
spirit of error, See 1 John 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

But thou bring in David for a cloak for thy hypocrisy, thou art ignorant
of David's conditior, he spoke his experiences, and in the working our of sin,
he cries out of it; Psalm. 10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 110.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 112. Psalm.
116. Psalm. 105. Psalm. 11.8.
David did experience the two seeds, which thou show thy self to be
ignorant of, and David being delivered from sin, he said, thou have delivered
my soul out of hell, and my darling from the dog; and he said, blessed is
the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin, and David said, he would behave
himself wisely, in a perfect way, and he would walk in the house of the Lord
with a perfect heart, and says he, a froward heart shall depart from me, and
he would not know a wicked person, and he that wrought deceit should not dwell
in David's house, and he that tells lies should not tarry in his sight, etc.
And says David, him that privately slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut
off, and says he, him that has an high look and a proud heart I will not
suffer; But mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may
dwell with me, and he that walks in a perfect way, says David he shall serve
me Psalm. 101.1, 2, 3.4. to the end.

But thou and such blind guides as thou art are ignorant of David's conditions,
yet you can take his words to talk of, and say, Was not David a man after Gods
own heart, and he sinned; etc.

Quest. Let me ask you, Did ever Gods own heart sin?

Did you but know David's conditions; you may see, he desired God to take away
his first heart, and to create in him a new heart, and to renew his holy Spirit
within him.

And the Lord heard his prayer, Psalm. 119.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Psalm. 145, Psalm.
146. Psalm. 147. Psalm. 111.
but David went through many afflictions and many sufferings before; and spoke
his Experiences, how it was with him in all his Conditions, I bear testimony
to the same truth, through death; and when David had a new heart given him, It
was a perfect heart, and he said, O God my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
thanks with my whole heart, and then David's heart was filled with praises to
the Lord, as he says, O my soul, bless thou the Lord, praise him and magnify
him forever, and says he several times, oh that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness: Psalm. 108.1, 2, 3. etc. And says David, Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name. David was delivered out
of troubles, and says he, bless the Lord oh my soul, and forget not all his
benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals thy diseases, etc.
Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, but the world and Englands blind guides, and blind
watchmen, knows nothing of David's conditions to speak of them from inward
Experience, and they that speaks of them, and knows them not, by Experience
steals his words to trade withal, as also the words of all the prophets and
Apostles, but the Lord is against such.

And aa for that people which thou speak of, that say there is neither God
nor devil, and that the scriptures is much abused by them, I know none that do
so much abuse the scriptures, as thou, and such as thou do, that makes no
other use of them, then to trade withal for money, that you may deceive poor
people, by your Inventions and imaginations, and that you are the men that does
both deny God and dishonor him in your practice, but be you assured, that God
will be avenged of you, and all proud Boasters and heady highminded ones, and
such as Paul speaks of in the 2 of Tim. 3. and likewise al vain talkers and
such as in words profess God, but in works deny him, as in Titus, 1.16. for
thou shall know God to be a severe judge to judge the heathen in righteousness.

And that there is a hell also thou shall know, and all that does deny it, and
all that delights in wickedness, for the wicked and all that forget God shall be
turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17. Math. 25.41.

And the time is now already come, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. Hosea 4. Hosea 5.
that thou and all that are in the first nature cannot endure sound doctrine,
and that is the reason wickedness is grown to such an height, but thy Doctrine
is corrupt, and does not profit the people at all, as the Lord has said by his
servant the Prophet, in the Prophecy of Jeremiah, Jer. 23.32. and thou art one
of those that strengthens the hands of evil doers, as in Ver. 10, 11, 11, 13,
14.

And thou have watched in vain, for thy Ministry is corrupt, and thou show
forth thy folly, and thy madness, Repent and blush for shame, for thou art one
that turns the peoples ears unto fables, in these thy notionary Rabbles; it
is fulfilled now by thee, and such blind guides as thou art, that creeps into
houses, a Steeple-house, which is the Idols Temple, telling the people, as most
of you do, that it is a Church, and the House of God, which is a lie: for the
Apostle says, That God that made the world, does not dwell in Temples made
with hands; neither is he worshipped with men's hands, Acts 7.47, 48: Acts
17.24, 25. Isa. 66.1, 2.

Now such as thou art, creeps into one of these Idol Temples, and makes
merchandise of poor souls, and there you Sir Simons sits buying and selling the
Letter for money, and so deceives poor people, and keeps them ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; and as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, so do thou, and such as thou art, resist the truth, men of
corrupt hearts, reprobates concerning the faith; as in 2 Timothy 3.6, 7, 8, 9.

Thou, and such as thou art do seduce people, and draws them from the pure
light within, to observe dreams and fancies of your own brain; as those did
that the Lord sent to cry out against; as in Jer. 23.24, 25, 26, 27.

And in thy other particular branch or clause of thy book, where thou call
thy self Englands Watchman.

Thou say that false Prophets are now abroad; for there is a people thou
say in many places, that say Christ is in them; and would make them false
Christ's, and falfe Prophets.

Thou say that false Prophets are now abroad; for there is a people thou
say in many places, that say Christ is in them; and would make them false
Christ's, and falfe Prophets.

Thou blind Guide, and dim Light, thou here openly show forth thy folly,
and shows thy ignorance; alas, alas, poor, blind, mad Prophet, if the dumb Ass
did speak to thee, as it did to Balaani, thou would be condemned by it.

England may well be in blindeness and darkness that has such Watchmen as thou
art, and justly may the Lord complain, and send forth Plough-men and Tradesmen
to cry out against you, and say his Watchmen are all blind, as Isaiah did.

Thou here errest exceedingly, and shewst forth thy envy and despite to the
Spirit of Grace; the Lord rebuke thee, thou mad Messenger of Antichrist, that
thou should be so blinde-folded, and, hood-winkt; thou have eyes and see
not, thou here art ignorant indeed of the true Guide, and ignorant of the
Doctrine of the Apostles, and ignorant of the Scriptures, and would have all to
take notice, and to know, that Englands Watchman is a Reprobate: and thou art
to be holden, both thou and thy Doctrine to be accursed: for the Apostle Paul
says, That if any bring any other Doctrine, then what they had taught was to
be holden accursed. See Gal. 1.8, 9.

Now the Apostle Paul, who was the true Minister of Jesus Christ, and did abide
in his Doctrine, bad all have a care of such a deceiver as thou art; for thou
art contrary both to Christ and his Apostles, and shewst the spirit of error,
and art of Antichrist, and a false Prophet, which art to be taken notice of;
all that are enlightened by the Spirit of God, may see thy folly, and thy
madness, and the vengeance of God hangs over thy head, for thy hypocrisy and
dissimulation, and all such as thou art, Mat. 23.12, 13, 14, etc.

2. The Apostle Paul in his Doctrine, he said to the Corinthians whom he
taught, Examine your selves, prove your selves: he puts them both upon the
examination and proof of the thing, 2 Cor. 13.5.

And thirdly, says he, Know you not your own selves, how that Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates? and here thou plainly show thy self to be a
reprobate, and without God in the world, and art ignorant of the life of the
Scriptures, and the same Spirit that they had that spoke forth the Scriptures,
and art a blind guide, Englands Blind Guide, walking by a spirit of delusion,
and showing that thou art led by a spirit of error; All people, take heed of
such seducing spirits as these are, which will neither go into the Kingdom of
heaven themselves, nor suffer them that would to enter, as in Mat. 23.13. but
the woe is to such: These are they that Jesus Christ does forewarn you of: All
people, take heed of them, and be no longer seduced by them, Gal. 3.1. 1. John
2.26. Englands Watchman, salfly so called, but rather Englands blind Guide,
and blind he is indeed, both of the Doctrine of Christ, and his true Ministers.

2. For the Apostle Paul, who was a true Minister of Jesus Christ, and did
abide in his Doctrine, he taught the Colosians, and said to them, Great is the
Mystery of godliness, Christ in you the hope of glory: See Col. 1.27. herein
Englands Watchman, or rather blind Guide, shows forth his ignorance of the
Spirit of truth, and the life of the Scriptures, and that he is Guided by a
Spirit of error.

3. And the Apostle himself was made a Minister not by the will of man, but by
the will of God, who revealed his Son in him; as in G^l. 1. to 17. but thou
that say those are false Prophets, that say they have Christ in them, thou
art blind indeed, and teaches contrary both to the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, and thou and thy Doctrine is accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9.

4. Thou might as well say, that the Corinthians and the Colossians, and the
Apostle Paul himself, were false Prophets, as to say, that those are false
Prophets that say Christ is in them: herein thou art exceeding blind and
ignorant, and the Lord may justly complain, and say, his Watchmen are all
blind indeed.

5. Thou blind Guide, thou here contradictest Christ himself, who said, That
he would dwell in his Saints, and walk in them; and says to his Father, All
mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them: See John 17.10.
and says Jesus Christ in his prayer to his Father, Neither do I pray for these
alone, but for all them which shall believe on me through their word, that they
all may be one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be
one in us, that the world may believe that thou have sent me, and the glory
which thou gave me, have I given them, that they may be one, even as we are
one: I in them: See, here is Christ in his peaple; says he, I in them, and
thou in me, both the Father, and the Son dwelling in his Saints, and here is
perfection indeed, I in them, and they in me, that they may be made perfect in
one: See John 17.20, 21, 22, 23.

6. Here is not only Christ in us, but God the Father also, as he has said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and they shall be my people, and I will
be their God, says the Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. God is love, he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. See 1 John 4.15, 16, 17.

1. Herein thou show thy self to be out of God and Christ both, and so art
both an enemy to Jesus Christ and his, where he is made manifest, and art a
false Prophet, a Seducer, and an Antichrist, and Deceives both thy self and
others, and art guided by a spirit of error; and the God of this world has
blinded thy eyes, and the Prince of the power of the air rules in thee, and
all the children of disobedience; and thou and they makes lies your refuge, and
so forsakes the only Lord God, to delight in lying vanities: but it is but
that the Scripture may be fulfilled: wickedness is growing up to the height,
but the wrath of God is to be revealed in flames of fire upon all the children
of disobedience, and he will reward every one according as his deeds is,
tribulation and anguish to every soul that does evil, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9,
10. Romans 2.8, 9.

2. Thou art full of deceit, thou blind Guide, and full of confusion, which is
the Language of Babylon, thou that call thy self Englands Watchman, thou art
full of lies also, and takes the Apostles words, who was an Ambassador in bonds
for the truths sake; as in Ephesians. 6.2. but the truth suffers by thee, and such
as thou art, and thou art at liberty in deceit: and thou in the beginning of
thy Book speaks against a people that say they have no sin: and if they be set
free from sin, they have more cause to praise and glorify God for his
goodness: is thine eye evil, because he is good? and because thou live in sin
and deceit, will thou judge them out of thy evil thoughts? who makes thy self
apparent to be a reprobate, that denies Christ to be come into his people,
showing that thou art ignorant of him in thy self, and so makes thy self
manifest to be Antichrist, as in that place of Scripture, 1 John 4.1, 2, 3.

It is the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, that cleanses us from all sin, to
him be praise for ever and ever, who has sent his Son into the world to take
away our sin: it is his own work, and he is worthy to have the praise, who
washes and cleanses us, and justifies and sanctifies us by his Spirit. as
it is in 1 Cor. 6.11. and makes us perfect through his comeliness, as Ezekiel.
16. It is God that justifies us, who art thou that shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? Romans 8.31, 32, 33.

But thou art consused in thy writing, building up, and throwing down, and
daubing with untempered mortar, slattering titles, and fair speeches, and speak
against the apparent people of God, in whom he is made manifest in measure, to
take away sin, and says they are false Prophets, that say they have no sin,
thou may as well say, that Christ had been a false Prophet, if thou durst but
for an out ward law, for he was without sin, and he that abides in him sins
not faith John; and he said, as he was so was they in this present world, and
he that was born of God sinned not, see the Scriptures for it, 1 John 3.5, 6,
9. 1 John 4.16, 17. Herein thou art exceeding carnal, sottish, and ignorant of
the Scriptures, and shows the spirit of error.

And in the latter end of thy writing, that which thou have been speaking
against, thou take their words that were perfected to confute thy self
withal; and says as many as are perfect, let us be thus minded.

5 They that writ the Scriptures, they had the life of them, and was perfect
and complete in Christ Jesus, and thou may see that Scripture which thou
make use of in Phil. 3.15. may be a sufficient witness against thee, and let
thee see that thou art a thief, taking these words to speak of, who knows
nothing of the life of them that spoke them forth; John 10.1.
but this is to let thee see thy folly, and that thou may know that the day
of the Lord is coming to overturn thee and thy deceits, and to render vengeance
upon the head of the wicked; vengeance is mine, and I will repay it says the
Lord, fury to mine adversaries; and thus says the Lord, behold the day comes
and hastes greatly to overturn the works of darkness, and the workers of
iniquity, and it shall burn as an oven, and all that are proud, and all that do
wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall burn and consume
them up, and shall leave them neither root nor branch, says the Lord God
almighty, Mal. 4 1. Repent thou blind guide, and give over thy deceiving, for
woe and misery is thy portion.

ALL people mind your teacher within, and cease from all such blind guides as
this, who falsely calls himself England's Watchman, who takes your money for
that which is no bread, and fills your ears full of fancies, and your hearts
full of lies by his deceitful doctrine.

All the Children of the Lord are taught of the Lord, and in righteousness are
they established, Isa. 54.13, 14. Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.10, 11. Titus 2.11,
12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 9.15, 16 17, 18, 19. Act 20.32, 33, 34, 35, 2 Cor. 6. Gal.
1. 2 Cor. 3.
and the Lord teaches his to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
righteously, soberly, and godlily in this present world, and the teachings of
God are free without money, or without price, see Isa. 55. He that takes money
for speaking is a tradesman of the merchants of Babylon.

Paul said, necessity was laid upon him, and woe was to him if he did not preach
the Gospel, and he said, that it was better for him to dye, then to make the
Gospel of Christ burdensome, and he coveted no man's silver nor gold, he took
God to witness; but as he had received his doctrine of the Lord, he spoke it
forth to others, and he found Christ revealed in him, and he labored, striving
mightily by the power of God in him, to present every man perfect in Christ
Jesus, and they had the heavenly treasure in earthen vessels, and did preach
wisdom to them that was perfect, and he and they who were true ministers of
Jesus Christ, and did abide in his doctrine, did teach and exhort all whom they
taught, to come to know Christ in them, but this man, England's Blind Guide,
that describes them to be false Prophets that say they have Christ in them, he
is blind and knows not the truth, and is a seducing spirit, and does labor to
draw people from the truth, and is an Antichrist; therefore take heed of him,
and such seducing spirits as he is, for there are many of them abroad in the
world, but John has forewarned you of such; therefore beware of them all,
cease from them, and hold them not up, least ye be pertakers of the judgments
with them, and come out of the Idols worship; and come out of Babylon says the
Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. Rev. 18.4, 5.

1 Says John in his Epistle, 1 John 4.12. 2 Cor 6 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 6.19, 26,
Gal. 2.20.
search and try the spirits whether they be of God or no; try the spirits, and
believe not every spirit, because many false prophets are gone out into the
world, hereby know we the spirit of God, every spirit that confesses Jesus
Christ come in the flesh is of God, I witness him come into my flesh, ruling in
this earthen vessel, or tabernacle, as the Apostle did witness, and the
Corinthians, and said that Christ was manifested in them, and did dwell in
their mortal flesh: See 2 Cor. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

But this blind guide shows himself ignorant of this ministry, and of the life
of the Scriptures, that says they are false prophets that say Christ is in
them, and he shows himself to be a Reprobate. 2 Cor. 13.5.

2 Now see what John says 1 John 4.3. and says he, every spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God, and this
is that false Christ or spirit of Antichrist, whereof you have heard that it
should come, and now already it is in the world, See 1 John 4.3. and this
blind guide that denies Christ to come to rule in his Saints, is ignorant of
him that says, they are false prophets that say Chist is in them; take notice
of such a seducing spirit, all people, or you have great cause so to do: in 1 John 2 20. John says, ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all
things: And again, says he, in verse 27. But the anointing which ye have
received of him, which is Christ, dwells in you, and yeo need not that any
man teach you, but as the same anointing, which is Christ in you, says, he
teaches you all things: and it is truth, and is no lie; likewise see Joh.
14.16, 17. and 26 verses. what Jesus Christ says there; and this deceiver
teaches contrary both to Christ, and his Apostles, let him and his doctrine be
held accursed; for it is that the Scripture may be fulfilled, beware of him,
and such as he is, and hold them not up: down with them, down with them, for
the Lord is against them.

3 For see what John says, 1 John 2.18. Little children says he, it is the
last time; and ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there
many falls Christ's, or Antichrists, such as do not abide in the doctrine of
Christ, but seeks to draw people from the anointing within, these are
seducers and Antichrists, 1 John 2.18, 22, 26.

Now you have time, prise it, and mind the light of God in you, Exhortation.
that shows you sin and evil, and lets you see the vanity of your minds, and
the deceits of your hearts, as in 2 Pet. 1.19. and it will turn your minds
within, toward God, who is pure, and of purer eyes then to behold iniquity, to
set up his law in you, and his judgment there to condemn sin in the flesh, and
to work out the carnal part in you, that your bodies may be fit temples for God
to dwell in, that you may know him, to rule by his power in you, shaking down
the earthly wisdom, and cutting through the ground of imaginations, and renting
the vailes of darkness in you, making your earthly hearts to ache, and all your
bones to shake, and the Mountains in you to Quake, Heb. 12.21. Job 4.14. Job
21.5, 6. Job 37. 1. Ier. 23.9. Habac. 3.16. 1 Ioh. 3.9, 10. 1 John 5.18, 19,
20. 1 Ioh. 5.1, 2, 3, 3, 5, 6. 1 Ioh. 3.23, 24
and rent the rocks, your hard stony hearts, to work his own work in you, that
you may know God indeed, and not call him a Father, and Christ a Savior, and
you live and delight still in wickedness, that is a mocking of God, but be not
deceived, God will not be mocked; take heed what you do, and live not by
imaginations, and say you believe, you believe, but bring forth fruits of a
believer, or else your faith is but a dead faith, and will not profit you, but
fail you in the time of need; let it be tried by fire, and bring forth fruit
unto God; he that believes on the Son of God, is born again of water and the
spirit, and has the witness in himself, and eternal life dwells in him, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12, 13.

The Kingdoms of the world shall ere long become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and
of his Christ, and he shall rule all Nations with a rod of Iron; it is hard to
kick against the pricks; the Lord is setting up the ministry of his Son in the
hearts of his people, and nothing shall stand nor remain but his Own pure
being; The Lord one, and his Name one, even both Priest, Prophet, and King, The
Lord our righteousness, even God blessed for ever and ever, Amen.

Singing Hallelujah to the highest, the great and mighty day of the Lord is
coming on apace, and the Earth shall quake, and the Mountains shall shake, and
the Hills shall tremble, and the Isles shall fly away: Then shall the Saints
sing and rejoice in the Lord, and cry, Happy, Happy Day; Woe, we to the wicked.

Richard Farneworth.

FINIS.

