The SCRIPTURES VINDICATION Against the Scottish Contradictors.

By one JOHN STALHAM, and as he says, Preacher of the Gospel at Edenborough in
Scotland.

And the other tiled, A serious review of some Principles of the QVAKERS;
wherein error is discovered, and truth defended; By P. E. and written with a
pen at Edenborough, Printed in the year 1655, and a written name, as if it were
the Printer called Peter English, but no Printed name; and thus they shuffle,
but laid open to their shame, and truth in this short answer is defended and
cleared, and their error is discovered, and they ensnared.

Who both have manifested their Contradictions both to the Scriptures, and
their own writings, and so have not the people which they call Quakers.

For the wisdom of this World is foolishness with God, and as it is written,
the Lord takes the wise in their own craftiness: And again, the Lord knows
the thoughts of the wise that they are vain,

1 Cor 3.19, 20. Published by a servant of the Lord Jesus, in Yorkshire in
England, known to the world by the name of RICHARD FARNEWORTH.

LONDON: Printed for Giles Calvert at the black spread Eagle at the West end of
Paul's. 1655.

To the honest Godly conscientious READER.
READER, If thou would show thy diligence so far, as to take the pains to
enquire and get the Books which John Stalham has quoted in the margent of his
Book, and in reading them, and his, and also this, it will let thee see how he
has wronged them, and taken here a word or two, and there a word or two, and
mixed his deceit amongst them; but however the books of themselves are clear
and clears themselves of his slanders; and this for the simple ones sake have I
written, that they may beware of his deceits, and also that they may see and
take notice how his imaginations, though the spirit of deceit, has darkened his
understanding, and misinformed his mind, and through the working of the spirit
of deceit is his heart given over to lie, slander, and falsely accuse; and much
stuff there in his Epistle, which is made use of as a slander, but it stands
off from us, and that, with the rest of his lies, slanders, and false
accusations, is back upon him returned: And where he says, Light without
Scripture (in his 8 page) is no light to them; It is but as the rest of his
sayings, from that deceitful spirit that guides him; And if Light without
Scripture or letter be no Light to them, then he knows not the Light that was
before Scripture or letter was, and so is ignorant of Christ the true Light;
and it is no marvel that he so much opposes the truth, and the work of God,
that would not have God to be God, and Christ to be Christ* without the letter
of the Scripture, and if the Scriptures should be lost, he would have no God
nor Christ, that would have none without them, to wit the Scriptures: And he
says, Christ teaches them not to receive salvation, nor the word of life,
without the letter of the Scripture; and because one said, he spoke the word of
the Lord to them, as he says, and spoke not Scripture, (though he spoke not
contrary to Scripture) as in Edward Buroughs Book to Underbarrow, yet they
could not receive it, and says, without Scripture the word of the Lord could
not be spoken, or to that effect; here he would limit the spirit of God: And if
Samuel and the rest of the Prophets might have spoken nothing to the people but
what was in Moses writings before them, they might not many times have spoken
the word of the Lord to the people, because they spoke that which Moses had not
written; and if Christ and the Apostles might have spoken nothing but what they
found written in Moses and the Prophets writings, they might not have spoken
much of what they did speak, besides much which is not recorded, neither in
writing, much that they spoke, as the Scriptures witnesses; and if John in the
Revelation: might not have spoken any thing but what was written before, he
might not have spoken much of what he did; but God was not to be limited,
neither is he now so to be limited as vain men would have him; but he reveals
the deep things by his spirit, and teaches by his spirit, and sends forth his
messengers by his spirit, and guides by his spirit into all truth, such as obey
his Light and follow him, which light is perfect in its least measure,
according to the manifestation, and manifests the deceits of the heart, and is
the condemnation of those that hate it and act contrary to it, and it the guide
out of darkness into the Light of life, to such as follow and obey it, and the
spirit and power of God is the saints ground of acting now, as it was both in
the Prophets and Apostles, which the Scriptures declares of; and the Lord God,
and his spirit sent them to witness his truth; and (not the letter) Isaiah said,
The Lord God and his spirit sent him, and that was the ground of his acting,
Isa. 48.16, 17. The spirit of Christ which was in the Prophets did teach them,
and by it were they acted, and it did signify to them, and testified in them
before hand of the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow 1 Pet.
10, 11. and Christ gave command to his Disciples before he ascended to wait at
Jerusalem till they received power from on high, and then should they witness
him to the ends of the earth; and they had the letter before, but the spirit
was more sure, and the perfect rule in the Church, Acts 1. John 16 13. Romans
8.14. And the holy Ghost sent forth workmen, so did not the letter, Acts 13.
And the holy Ghost made ever seers in the Church of Christ, so did not the
letter; though the letter declare of it, Acts 20.28. and they that preached the
Gospel, preached it with the holy Ghost, sent down from heaven, 1 Pet. 1.14.
and Christ Jesus was both the Saints ground of acting, and the foundation of
the Prophets and Apostles, and not the letter, as they in Scotland affirm; yet
the letter declares of it, and contradicts their affirmation, witnessed in Ephesians.
2.18, 19, 20. etc. and Christ is the true light, and lightneth every one that
comes into the world, and it not natural, as they in Scotland affirm; But the
spiritual saving light to all that obey him, as the Scriptures witness,
contrary to their affirmitive, witnessed in Joh. 1.9. Joh. 8.12. Heb. 5.8, 9.
and the Scriptures in the letter only are not the true ground of the believers
faith, as they in Scotland affirm; but Christ is the true ground of faith, as
the Scriptures say, contrary to their affirmative, witnessed in Heb. 12.2. and
they have faith in God, and are upheld by his power, that abide in the true
faith; and the Spirit is not in the letter, nor given by it, as the Scots
affirm, but the letter declares of the spirit, and it was before the letter
was, and given by the Lord, it is his gift, and not the gift of the letter, yet
the letter declares of it, but God is the giver, contrary to their affirmation,
witnessed in John 14.16, 17. John 14.26. John 16.13. Acts 2. Gal. 4.6. 1 John
3.24. There it no spirit and life in outward bread and wine, neither is Christ
spiritually in it at the institution, as the Papists and Scots affirm;
Therefore they contradicts the Scriptures, and the late Act of Abjuration, that
so affirm; For Christ it the bread of life, John 6. (...) such as eat that
bread live in him, and he in them, Ver. 57, 58.

A VINDICATION OF THE SCRIPTURES, In Answer to the Scottish Contradictors.
I Received a Printed Paper that came out of Scotland into York and Yorkshire
in England, published by one John Stalham (and as he calls himself) Preacher
of the Gospel at Edenborough in the said Scotland; but he has manifested
himself, and his subtle and serpentine spirit, by his lies and slanders, for
all his glosses and covers, to be a Minister of deceit, and so of Antichrist,
as hereafter will more appear, who falsely accuses the people of the Lord, and
shows forth a bitter spirit of envy against them and the truth, which does
manifest his deceit, and though he be painted and decked with his notions,
implications, and contra distinctions, and gilded, colored, and borrowed, and
formed up imagined expressions; yet with the Light, which is not common reason
(as he calls it) but the true Light which discovers error and deceit, and
leads out of darkness into the light of life, John 8.12. such as obey it: with
the Light ( John. 1.9.) is he seen and known to be one that hates it, and also
bears record of himself against Christ, and his Apostles; and therefore he must
needs be an antichristian and a deceiver, and so to be denied and holden
accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9. For he calls the true Light the light of nature, and the
common light of reason, but cannot prove what he has therein said; Therefore
he is a liar, a false accuser; and liars and false accusers are antichristian,
so is he; Therefore let him be an Anathema Maranatha, and all such as he is, 1
Cor. 16.22.

To that which thou calls touching the Scriptures themselves.
John Stalham, Thou calls thy Pamphlet (or Book of lies) The Quakers
Contradictions; to the Scriptures, and to that which thou begins with, and
calls it, Touching the Scriptures themselves. First thou says, They say the
Scriptures are not the word of truth: I answer, That the Scriptures are words
that proceeded from the spirit of truth, we do not deny but own, and so they
are words of truth; and therefore thy saying is false, and in that thou art
charged to be a liar, and false accuser of the truth; but that the Scriptures
are the Word, God, and eternal Life, as thou would have them, thou can not
prove, nor all the Magicians to help thee; and that thou would have them to
be, and thou art seen to be a liar of them and the truth; and such as witness to
the word, and Gods power, they witness against thee. And where thou Queries
and says, How can the Scriptures be Gods witness if not true? I answer, That
the spirit of truth in the Prophets were Gods witness, and testified
beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and declared of in the Scriptures by
words that proceeded from that spirit of Christ, that in them did signify
those things, 1 Pet. 1. And the spirit of Christ, in the Apostles of Christ
Gal. 4.6. did carry them forth after they had received power from on high to
witness him forth, Acts 1. But the spirit is not in the letter, as thou in thy
22 page has said, neither is the spirit giby the letter, but by God and
Christ, of whom the letter does declare, being words of truth that proceeded
from the spirit of truth, Luke 11. 1 John 13. The letter proceeded from the
spirit, but the spirit did not proceed from the letter; and therein thou have
erred, not knowing the spirit nor power of God, declared of in the Scriptures.
Thou says, Another says the Scripture is not a standing rule, to you who
cannot believe; contrary to Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets for a
standing rule, thou says: Here let all the honest hearted judge of thy
deceit, who has perverted that Scripture for thy own ends, Luke 16.29. from
it raising a false doctrine; saying, You have Moses and the Prophets for a
standing rule, when the ver: says not so; here I charge thee in the presence
of the Lord to be a liar of the Scriptures, and so contradicts them, for if
Moses and the Prophets had been left (to all and for ever) for a standing rule,
as thou asserts, then Christ and the Apostles might not have been after Moses
and the Prophets for following examples, or rules; and therein thou brings the
old Covenant to contradict the new, and crosses that Scripture, where it
says, Be ye followers of God as dear children, Ephesians. 5.1. And they that follow
him in the Gospel, are led by his Spirit, and that is not the letter, though
the letter declare of it, Romans 8.14. etc. For God is that spirit, as says the
Scripture, 2 Cor. 3.17. But we follow God, who are guided by the Spirit, as
such did; and that is our guide and rule, to wit, the Spirit of truth, as
Christ has (since he promised it) appointed it, to be the rule and guide into
all truth, John 16.13. But thou that would have the letter to be the rule, and
Moses and the Prophets only; then thou would not have Christ and the
Apostles followed after; and so contradicts the Scripture also, which was
spoken after Moses and the Prophets, after the Law, under the Gospel, by a
minister of the same, who in his godly exhortation said, Be ye followers of me,
even as I am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. And that was not Moses and the Prophets,
but Christ and his Apostles there spoken of: Seeing then we are not under the
Law, but under Grace, the spirit of Christ is our rule and guide; and even unto
this day when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart, as says the
Scripture, 2 Cor. 3.15. But thou art reading and pleading for Moses to be a
standing rule, and so sets up the Law in stead of the Gospel, therefore the
veil is upon thy heart; but we witness the glory that exceeds, for if the
ministration of condemnation were glorious, much more the ministration of glory
exceeds, but thou art ignorant of that; and where thou have pleaded for Moses
and the Prophets to be a standing rule, saying, they have Moses and the
Prophets, let them heart them, Luke 16.31. Here thou says the Scriptures are
asserted by our Lord to be a more standing rule then Visions and Revelations;
thou have here raised a falls assertion, of the Lord, saying, he asserts it, and
the assertion is thine, and not the Lords, therefore thou art a liar and false
accuser of the Lord; for he says in Matthew 11.27. that no man knows the Son
but the Father, neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son (not the Scripture, but the Son) will reveal him; here
Revelation is the surer rule of knowing God, witnessed also Luke 10.22. And
visions are a way of God making known himself by, as was witnessed after Moses
and the Prophets, and thou contradicts the Scriptures, for the Lord spoke to
Ananias his messenger in a vision, and gave him commission to go with his
message, Acts 9.10, 11. and that was a more sure knowledge to him then the words
of Moses and the Prophets, and a rule that stood firmer to him then words of
other men: And Paul, he saw in a vision the man named Ananias come unto him,
ver: 12. and that was more certain then the words of others, as Moses and the
Prophets: And Peter saw in a vision thing; cleared to him, which was not
cleared by the writings of Moses and the Prophets, Acts 10.15, 16, 17. and
while Peter thought on the vision, the spirit spoke unto him, and gave him
commission to go to the Gentiles, ver: 19, 20, etc. but so did not the
Scriptures, then the Scriptures are not a more sure or standing rule, then
visions and revelations by the spirit of truth are, as thou says, therefore
thou art a liar and false accuser therein; for Paul knew Christ by revelation,
and received the Gospel by revelation, as he has certified to the brethren,
Ga. 1.11, 12. and when Christ was revealed within him, he went to preach him,
Gal. 1.15, 16. and that was a sure rule unto him, and more sure then the
Scriptures, for he knew much of the writings of Moses, and the Prophets, and
letter of the Scriptures, whilst he were a persecutor, but then he knew not
Christ revealed in him, which after he did, and went up to Jerusalem fourteen
years after by revelation, Gal. 2. and not by the Scriptures; therefore the
Scriptures are not so sure a rule as visions and revelations by the spirit of
truth are; and the Apostle knew how sure revelatitions by the spirit of truth
were, so he exhorted others to wait for the grace that was to be brought to
them at the revelatition of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. and the deep things of
God are revealed (not by the letter, but) by the spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. Therefore
Revelations by the spirit of truth are more sure then the Letter; for the
righteousness of God is revealed from faith unto faith, as faith the
Scripture, Romans 1. through the Gospel and power of God unto salvation, ver. 16,
17.

Thou says that one says, the Scriptures are other men's words, contrary to 1 Timothy 3.16. the Scripture is given by inspiration; And then by a piece of logic
thou would raise a falls accusation against Francis Howgill, and makes a false
conclusion to wrest the Scriptures to serve thy own turn, but cannot; as for
Francis Howgill saying the Scriptures are other men's words; thou sets down
truth defended, page 6. Let the wise hearted read that Book, and it clears him
from thy slander which by thy logic thou would cast upon him, because he
says the Scriptures are other men's words, that spoke them freely (and not for
set wages, or hundreds a year, etc.) And further I answer, Holy men of God
spoke as they were moved, so says the Scripture, 2 Pet. 1. and it does not
contradict the 1 Timothy 3.16. where it says, the Scriptures are given by
inspiration of God, then the Scripture was inspired, and that was by the
spirit, and spiritual men spoke forth those words; Therefore they were words
spoken by the men of God, and so words from the spirit of truth, spoken by the
holy men of God, (other men) that were holy and spoke freely, and not by you
that are sinful and pleads for it, and Preaches for hire the words of others,
as the false Prophets did; therefore the Lord is against you hireling Priests
in Scotland, as he was against such in your nature spoken of in Scripture: Read
those Scriptures to be witness against all those Scottish Priests, that Preach
for hire, and seeks for the fleece etc. and makes a prey upon the people, and
seeks for their gain from their quarter, Jerem. 5.30, 31. Ezekiel. 34. Micah
3.11. Isa. 56.10, 11.2 Pet. 2. Jude 11.

That the Scriptures are the words of other men, and not yours: Read the words
of the Preacher, the son of David, King in Israel, Eccl. 1. Read the words
also of King Lemuel and he was a man; read the Prophecy that his mother taught
him and she was a woman, Prove. 31. The song of songs which is Solomens, and he
was a man, Cant. 1. There is the words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, Jer.
1.1. To whom the word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah King of Judah in
the 18 year of his Reign; but a Printed Bible did not come unto him; neither
did he nor any Prophet or Apostle that thou can prove ever stand with a
Printed Bible in his hand and say, hear the word of the Lord: Then the word of
the Lord was declared and spoken without Printed Bibles, and before Printing
was invented; But if Printing had not been invented, what would you have
Preached by that knows not the word of life, which was before writing or
Printing was?

And where thou says (they say) you have nothing to try men's Doctrine and
spirit by, but the letter, and that your tryer is a chapter or a verse of the
Scriptures; no more you Scottish Priests have: for thou says the letter is
spirit, or the spirit is in the letter, and given by it; By this thou have
manifested thy Scottish tryer, and as for that saying, to the Law, and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to it, it is because there is no light
in them; but we speak according to it, and therefore there is Light in us; For
God who commanded the Light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, etc. 2. Cor. 4.6, 7. And where thou accusest James Nayler for saying,
the Law of the new Covenant is written in the heart, it is but to manifest thy
ignorance of it, and that thou art offended at James for witnessing what the
Scriptures do witness, and that the Law of the new Covenant is written in the
heart, Jer. 31.31, etc. Heb. 8 10, 11. And where thou says for any to call the
written word, which is the letter of the Scripture, carnal is blasphemy; Here
again thou have showed that thou regardest not what thou says, and art
ignorant of what the Scripture it self faith concerning the same, which
speaks of a carnal commandment; but that is all one with thy other, that
says the spirit is in the letter, and the letter is the word, but cannot with
all that thou have scraped together prove that it is the word which is eternal
life; and so the word that was in the beginning with God, and was God, John 1.1.

Thou accusest them for saying the saints ground of acting is not the outward
Letter, but the Spirit which gave forth the letter; and says, here they set
the word at distance from the spirit, and sets figurative glosses upon the
Scriptures; Here thou art blinded and knows not the Saints ground, and art
accusing them falsely that witness to it; and says, they set the word at
distance from the spirit: The word and spirit cannot be set at (difference nor)
distance except God could be divided, and that cannot be, for God is the word,
John 1.1. and God is that spirit, 2 Cor 3.17. Therefore the word and the spirit
are inseparable, but the Letter is not God, nor the letter is not the spirit;
therefore not that word which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. by
which word the World was framed, Heb. 11.3. and made, Heb. 1.2. In which word
is the life and the Light of men, which the Letter does declare of, but is not
the life and Light of men, neither were all things made by the letter that were
made, but by the word they were, John 1.1, 2, 3, etc. This is plain Scripture
without figurative gloss; the glosses are thy own, that with thy logic and
magic art would make the Scriptures God and Christ, but cannot; and would make
them the ground of the Saints actings, when they are not, but the Lord God and
his spirit is; for the Lord God and his spirit sent me says the servant of the
Lord, Isa 48. and the Lord teaches his that he so sends to profit, v. 16, 17.
and the manifestation of the spirit is given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7.
and says God, I will pour out of my spirit and your sons and daughters shall
prophecy, and such may speak of the things of God: Thy meanings I deny, and
the fancy is thy own, and the sure word of Prophecy we witness to, and do not
to it say no; therefore in that thou have further uttered thy lies, and
manifested thy deceitful spirit; as in page 7. Thou says, they say there is
no Scripture for the Trinity, contrary to John 5.7. which expressly says, There
are three that bear witness in Heaven, the Father the Word and the Spirit,
and these three are all one, here is Trinity thou says; here thou have
perverted the Scripture, saying here is Trinity, when it expresses no such
word in that nor any other Scripture as Trinity, but the Father Son and Spirit
which are one, that we witness; and as Christ has said, At that day ye shall
know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you, Joh. 14.20. The
Father Son and holy Ghost are one, but it does not speak of distinct persons
three, therefore thou art yet to prove a Trinity: The Holy Ghost is no person,
but dwells in persons or bodies of Saints, and he that abides in the
doctrine of Christ has both the Father and the Son, as says the Scripture in
the 2 Epistle of John 9 --

Concerning the Light, and Christ the way to the Father.
That Christ is the way to the Father is set down in Edward Buroughs Book to
Vnderbarrow, p. 4. and that the Scriptures witness and do not contradict, John
14.6. but thou have wrested Edward Buroughs words, and therefore thou art a
lier; there is not such a word as [purchased] in that page, and there lies the
weight of thy matter; but that Christ is the true Light that enlightneth every
man that comes into the World, the Scriptures witness, John 1.9. Therefore if
thou say the contray, the Scriptures thou therein contradicttest, (and not he)
take notice of that; and withal that Christ is the Light of the World, and a
saving Light to all that obey him as says the Scriptures; and such as follow
him the true Light are by him led out of darkness into the light of life, as
he has said, John 8.12. Heb 5.8, 9 and that word, magnify the Light thou puts
in; but if we do and as Mary did, we magnify the Lord (1 John 1.5.) and art
thou offended at that? therein thou contradicts the Scripture; where it says,
My soul does magnify the Lord, Luke 1.26. Luke 2.29, 30, 31, 32. and thou
also contradicts thy self, and lies against Christ the true Light, calling him
natural, and common, and lies of such as witness Christ, and the Light of his
spirit and according to the declaration of the Scriptures: And where thou art
offended at George Fox for saying the light of Christ is life, it is but to
manifest thy envy against the truth, and thy contradictions to the Scriptures,
for the Scripture says, Christ is the Light, John 1.9. and he is life even the
way the truth and the life, John. 14. and such as follow him the true Light are
led out of darkness (error and deceit) into the Light of Life, John 8.12. And
again thou accusest George Fox for saying the light is the word, but it is but
to manifest thy further contradictions to the Scriptures, for the Scripture
says God is the Light, John 1.5. and God is the Word, John 1.1, etc. Therefore
in that thou have manifested thy ignorance of the Scriptures, and knows not the
Light and the word; for as God is the Light and the Word so also is Christ,
John 8.12. Rev. 19.13. and the Father and Son are one, and such as abide in the
doctrine of Christ have the Light and the Word of God abiding in them, 1 John
2.12, 13, 14. and they may speak from it that have fellowship with it: And thou
says, they would send you to read the Scriptures in the creatures, quoting the
Book of parables; That Book shall witness for the truth against thee and thy
generation; and also let the wise hearted take notice that he that is in Christ
is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. and that they are Epistles written in one
another hearts, seen and read in one another that are such creatures, 2 Cor.
3. And there again thou have showed thy ignorance of those Epistles, and lied
of the truth with thy deceitful spirit, by twisting and winding about; but
thou may well lie of us that lies of the Apostle Paul, and wrests not our words
only but his also; for where thou speaks his words, where he says, It pleased
God by the foolishness of Preaching (and as thou says a Text a Doctrine a
Reason an Use out of the Word) to save them that believe; when there is not any
such words of his there as Text Doctrine Reason Use to save them that believe;
and here thou have lied of him, and thou would make the Letter a Savior, for
thou calls that the Word; and so thou would have a salvation without Christ
(except thou make the letter of the Scripture Christ) and there again thou
have contradicted the Scripture, which calls Christ the alone Savior, or
perfect Savior, being able to save all that come unto God by him, (not by the
Scripture) but by Christ the alone and perfect Savior of such, Acts 4.11, 12.
Heb. 7.25. which the Scripture declares of; and he that has the Son has
life, 1 John 5.12. (if he have not the letter) but he that has not the Son
has not life (though he may have all the Letter:) And where thou says that
Edward Borough calls the common light the corner stone, etc. Thou lies of
Edward Borough, and his Book to Vnderbarrow, p. 7. for there is not such a
word as a common Light there, stop thy mouth liar, for thou art taken with the
lie in thy mouth, and liars are for the Lake, Rev. 21.8 But the Scripture
says, Christ is the Light, and Christ is the chief corner stone, Act 4.11. 1
Pet. 2.6, 7. and so says Edward Borough; therefore he agrees with the
Scripture, and his saying (as thou says) is not contrary to Ephesians. 2 20. but
agree therewith; there again thou art taken with another lie in thy mouth,
liar be ashamed and blush: And where thou would slander Richard Farneworth
for saying, the Light is pure standing out of corruption; thy slander has no
weight nor does not harm, for God is Light, 1 John 1.5. and he is pure, and
discovers corruptions, and has no union with them; therefore his Light is pure
and stands out of them, and what communion has Light with darkness, as says
the Scripture, 2 Cor. 6.14. And thou brings that Scripture and says, if you
beleivers say you have no sin, you deceive your selves and the truth is not in
you, 1 John 1.8. But I say, and so does the Scripture, that he that abides in
Christ sins not, 1 John 3.6. But you Scotchmen abide not in Christ (that
thou calls beleivers) who plead for the Devil, and therefore are sinners; and
such as commit sin, are of the Devil, take notice of that, 1 John 3.6, 7, 8, 9,
10. but thou commits sin and so art a servant of the Devil; for thou goes on
with thy lies and says, James Nayler says that the common Light of every man
(which thou calls natural Light) being followed and obeyed will lead out of
the fall; I charge thee here in the presence of the Lord to be a liar of James
Nayler and his Book; for the words in it are not as thou says, thou liar and
false accuser be ashamed of thy lies; but James Nayler witnesses with Christ
who is the true Light, and such as obey the Light and follow Christ they are
led thereby out of the fall and are saved by him and that is not contrary to
Scripture but witnessed with it, which thou contradicts, and so sins against
Scripture and against Christ that calls him a natural Light: and to manifest
thy blindness and ignorance of the Scriptures, thou says, Where is there any
Promise in Scripture, of spiritual saving Light, to lead man out of the fall
and out of his natural estate? but a threatening thou says there is, etc. I
answer, If there were no Promise of spiritual saving Light to lead out of the
fall, man might continue in it, and under the curse; but there is Promises of
saving Light and saving grace anexed to it, and such as follow and obey the
same are saved by it, and led out of the fall; for by grace are we saved
through faith, and not of our selves, it is the gift of God, as says the
Scripture, Ephesians. 2. Not of works least any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.8, 9. That
there is promises of saving Light in Scripture; as God has said, I will give
thee for a Covenant of the people, for a Light to the Gentiles, and this Light
has grace anexed, that is a covenanting Light, and salvation to the ends of
the earth, the Light of the Gentiles, and the glory of the people Israel, Isa.
42.6, 7. Isa. 49.6. Isa. 60.19, 20. Luke 2.22, 23. Ephesians. 2.

Concerning the Law.
To that touching the Law and first Covenant of works, that the Mosaicall and
Leviticall Law was under that Covenant of works, and all thy twisting and
wresting cannot disprove it; and for thy saying Adam was under a Covenant of
works (and the same) thou can not prove it, nor Peter English to help thee,
but manifests your confusion therein; for Peter English in his serious reveiw,
says that God made Adam upright, p. 7. and in a state of perfection; for he
says, Adam was made in a state of perfection without sin; and yet to
contradict himself, and show his confusion, in p. 10 he says, that through
coveteousnesse the root of all evil, a breach of the 10 commandedement, he
fell (or brake) and transgressing dyed; see here how Peter English has
befooled himself; first says he, man was perfect and without sin; then says
he, he was coveteous and in the root of all evil, what contradictions is here
to himself, and to the Scripture, that says, before he so fell he knew no
evil: and the said Peter English (a Scotchman) says further to confute
himself and the rest with him, that it cannot be said that Adam in a state of
innocence was under a covenant of works, p. 9. for where there is no Law there
is no transgression, Romans 4.15. and the Law is not for the righteous but for
the rebellions, 1 Timothy 1.9. and so he says in a sense Nayler spoke true; but
Peter English going about to accuse Nayler, and after when he has cleared him,
he confutes himself, saying Adam was not under a covenant of works, as under a
Law, and yet says through a breach of the 10 commandment he broke the
covenant, and transgressing of which he died: here he has comed poorly off,
and lied of himself, and of the Scriptures, and of Adam also; for he said,
where no Law was there was no trasgression: but Adam had not the Law in which
the 10 commandments were given, therefore he did not transgress the 10th and
dye for that; for it were written (the Law with the 10 commandments) several
hundred years after Adam, and not given to him in the Paradise, therefore he
was not under that Law and Covenant of works; Liars stop your mouths.

Concerning Sin.
That all the children of Light are called to judge them Priests, and such as
you that say the children of God are found groaning under the burden of sin
all their life time, those are the words, though thou wrest them, (that is
warranted and not arroganted) for groaning under sin whilst it is working
out, that may be, but to say that the children of God they groan under it all
their life time, it contradicts the Scriptures, and the arrogant assertion is
thy own, contrary to Romans 8. etc. 1 John 3. Rev. 14. for thou says Paul all
along in Romans 7. from v. 14. speaks in the name of the regenerate to the end of
the chapter, and groans and sighs it out, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? here though Paul did cry out of the body of
death, he did not always groan and sigh as dissemblers [and Scots] do, neither
did he do it in the name of all the regenerate, as thou says, but spoke his
own condition there: therefore thou have lied grossly therein, and so art an
impudent liar: And Paul did not always groan under that body of sin and Law in
his members, but witnessed a redemption from it, for which he thanked God that
made him more then a conqueror, and others as well as he, and such did not
commit sin, 1 John 3.9. and then not always groaning under, that were
delivered from it, 1 John 3.1, 5, 6 -- And to manifest thy confusion thou
says, the children of God from their new birth puts of the body of sin, as to
guilt and reigning power, and yet sin easily besets them and presses down by
the remnants of filth (thou says) and that is thy condition; where it so
easily besets and presses down it reigns, but it easily besets and presses
thee and you Scotchmen, down that are in the filth of it; and therefore you let
it reign in your mortal bodies, contrary to Romans 6. and the new birth you are
ignorant of, and the hope that purifieth, even as he is pure, as such witnessed
that witnessed and witness that birth, and are Sons, 1 John. 3.1, 2, 3 --

Concerning Justification, and the end of the Righteous and wicked, or
unrighteous.
They deny that God Justifies a beleiving sinner, (thou says.) I answer, That
such as are born of God do truly believe, and faith in God purifieth their
hearts and gives them victory over the World, and so frees them from sin 1
John 5. And such beleivers are Justified from sin and ungodliness, and not in
sin and ungodliness; for by Christ such as are so born and believe, are
Justified from all sins, and such like things, from which they could not be
Justified by the Law of Moses; and so Christ is their Justification, who are
Sanctified and from sin by him redeemed; which sin thou art pleading for, and
so art an unbeleiver, and not redeemed, that says, It cannot be routed out
till body and soul part, and faith, then is sin plucked up by the roots; as the
root of a wild Figtree rooted in the joints of a stone wall, is rooted our
when the wall is taken down; but has no proof for thy saying but thy policy
and that is contrary to Scripture; for it is said, Mark the perfect man, and
behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37. But the
wicked shall be cut off, and the transgressors shall be destroyed together at
their end, Psalm. 37.38. And you that plead for sin till your latter end,
continues in wickedness, and so are unregenerated, and the end of the wicked
shall be cut off; you that continue in sin to your end, are wicked
transgressors, and such shall be cut off and destroyed together; as their works
are, so will their end be: But such as are sinners and transgressors to their
end their deeds are evil so will their end be, and the wicked and such like
shall be turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17. and the unclean and unrighteous shall
hot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, ye unrighteous Scots look to it and read 1
Cor. 6 9.10 Rev. 21.27 --

And for that saying of the Priests of New Castle that said Peter when he
denied Christ was in a state of Justification and that a man denying Christ is
in a state of Justification: both thy blindness and theirs is there seen, and
that Scripture which thou brings to prove Peter's being in a state of
Justification when he denied Christ is Luke 22.33. which speaks no such thing,
but of the Descipies enquirery among themselves who it should be that should
betray Christ: see how blind thou art, was Judas in a state of Justification
when he denied Christ and betrayed him no more then Peter was when Christ
called him Satan; but after Peter had repented of his denial of Christ and
wept bitterly, upon his return, and after he were united to the Faith, then
Christ prayed for him: And where James Nayler in the discovery of the man of
sin, page 29 where he asks the Priests of New Castle; if pleading for sin be a
discovering of the man of sin to strengthen the Devils Kingdom, and plead
for an upholding of sin, and seeking to make a cover for thy sins and theirs;
Thou wiests James words in thy 12 page and art ignorant also of that which
discovers the man of sin, that art making covers for him, and by thy policy
thou go about to make Christ a sinner, but in that thy folly is seen, and
contradiction to the Scripture, that says, He was make unto us; (sin excepted)
and such as are in him, are redeemed out of sin, and abiding in him, they sin
not, whosoever sins has not seen him, neither known him, 1 John 3.4.5.6.
and sin cannot be reconciled to God, nor any such imperfect thing, and that
does not contradict the Scripture, Revel: 21.27. And as for our meaning thou
speaks of, thou art without our mind, and so know not our meaning, by thy
Imagining; therein thou shows a spirit of error; And where thou say, they
say, he that beleiveth is borne of God without Scripture, and yet witnessed in
Scripture is contrary to James. 1.17. where it says, Of his own will begot he
us by the word of Truth; and to Peter, where it says, Being borne again by
the word of God, which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. But if
thou was not blind, thou would see that thou Contradicts the Scripture, and
not them; that attributes the work of regeneration and the new birth to the
Letter, which thou calls the word, and so therein denies God; who begets by his
own will, by that word which lives and abides for ever; which was in the
beginning with God, and was God; And where thou says they say, sin dwells
not in act where Christ reigns; that is true; for where Christ reigns, the
body is dead to the acts of unrighteousness, because of sin being destroyed,
and the Spirit is Life because of righteousness, Living and ruling; and here
thou art contradicting the Scriptures, and opposing the work of Christ, which
is to take away sin, and such as abides in him sins not, then sin acts not,
he that acts sin commits sin, and there Christ reigns not but Antichrist,
under whose Dominion thou art, that pleads for him and his work; but he that
is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not; and
he that acts and does righteousness is of God, but he that acts and does
unrighteousness is not of God, as says the Scripture; And where thou says
they say perfection of holiness is not reserved till after death, nothing is
added after death; and sets down James Naylers book, called, The Discovery of
the man of sin, Page: 28. Let all that reads that book see if there be such
words so expressed by James in that Page, and if not, as they are not so set
down by him, then let them take notice of thy deceitful spirit; And as thou
have lied of James, who witnesses purity as the Saints did; so also have thou
lied of the Apostle, and those spoken of in Hebr: 12. and contradicted his
words, where thou sets down Hebr: 12.23. saying from that, in contradiction to
James, that he contradicts that Scripture, when he witnesses with it, but
thou contradicts it that says, that the Spirits, that is, souls separated (as
thou says) from the bodies of Just men made perfect, in holiness: which is at
death, or at an Instant when the Spirit is separated from the Body; sin is as
the wild figtree thou says, rooted in the Joints of a Stonewall, and when the
wall is taken down, the stones cast asunder, body and soul separated, then is
sin (thou says) plucked up by the roots, as the roots of a figtree, and not
before; Thou subtle Serpent, and Scotch Politician, how have thou wrested the
Scripture? The Apostle says that the word of the Lord is quick and powerful,
(so is not the Letter of the Scripture,) to devide asunder soul and spirit,
Joints and Marrow, and is A descerner of the thoughts and Intents of the heart;
Heb: 4.12. Here soul and spirit is divided by the Living word, and the Ground
of sin shaken at the roots and rooted out of such, before their souls and
bodies part asunder; for those that thou speaks of in Heb: 12.22. did not say
it should be at an Instant of death, when their bodies and soul parted, that
they should be perfected; but they witnessed that then they was come to Mount
Sion, and to the City of the Living God, to the Innumerable company of
Angels, and to the spirits of Just men made perfect; and in the present Tense
they there spoke, and not in the future; and does it say, they was then parting
body and soul asunder, or that sin was rooted in them, as the wild figtree is
rooted in the Joints of a stonewall, and did they say, when the wall is taken
down, the stones cast asunder, body and soul parted, then should sin be
rooted out, and not before; or then they was in that state of perfection they
spoke of; but by this thou have manifested thy Scottish policy, and
Antichristian deceitful Spirit, and to be one that would uphold the Kingdom
of the Devil in people, and so art an enemy to Christ, and his work, which
is to take away sin here; and to sanctify by his Spirit, 1 Cor: 6.11. 1 John:
3, 4, 5. and so art against purity and holiness here; and therefore against
the Scripture, which says, As he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy
in all manner of conversation; But thou denies the holy call also, as well as
the holy conversation, that pleads for sin, to act, and press down, and make
you all your Lift time to sigh it our, and under it groan, but that is one of
your Scottish tricks of deceit, take notice of that.

And where thou have showed forth another piece of thy policy and serpentine
subtilty, from the words as thou says, in the short Answer, Page: 1. They are
not so set down there, and therefore thy policy has manifested subtilty, and
thy particular lies; But all thy pleading is against purity, yet Christ has
said, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Math: 5.8. then
there was and are pure in heart, as Christ said, and they are blessed, but thou
sees it not, that art of a corrupt heart, and pleading against Christ and his
doctrine, and so accursed; and thy witchcraft and deceit; that Loves not
purity in heart, nor the Lord Jesus Christ, and what he has therein said: And
where thou says thou art sure that the least degree of purity makes a soul
sensible of continual Impurities mixed therewith, That is thy own condition,
confirmed by thy assurance, and so thou Judges others by thy Continual
Impurities, and therefore thy Judgment must needs be false, and not true, and
that is thy Contradiction to the Scriptures, for such as witnessed the word of
God which endures for ever, and were begotten by it, they had purified their
souls through their obedience to the Truth, through the Spirit, which thou
denies, and so denies their doctrine, who said, Seeing ye have purified your
souls, (have purifyed in the present Tense) in obeying the Truth, through the
Spirit; See that ye Love one another with a pure heart, fervently; but thou
art against a pure heart also, and so against the Scripture, 1 Pet: 1.22.

And where thou says, one in Answer to M: Eaton, P. 14. says; Did ever Paul
deny perfection: Thou in Reply says, what thinks he or others of that, Phil:
3.12. I Answer, he is so far from denying it, that he pressed hard after it,
and said to such as had attained to it, press others on after it, and they
did; Heb: 6.1. and such obtained as so pressed after it; Heb: 12.22, 23. And
Paul obtained it, and preached wisdom amongst them that were perfect, 1 Cor:
2.6, 7. and said, Finally my Brethren, Farewell, and be perfect, but thou
denies it, and so contradicts the Scripture, and crosses the Apostles
doctrine, therefore thou and such are to be holden accursed, Gal: 1.8.

Thou says, The question asked of one G: Fox was, Have ye no sin? and his
Answer was no; I Answer, If it were, it was not contrary to such as were in the
eternal Life, and did abide in Christ; but he is in the Life of Truth, and
abides in Christ, and therefore his Answer did not contradict the Scripture in
the 1 John: 3.6. but agree therewith; and for that of the 1 John: 4.16.17. it
witnesses the same, though thou would wrest it, yet thy twistings is not
sufficient grounds, to overthrow the truth, for it will stand a witness
against all Gainesayers like thee, when thou art wearied with making opposition
against it; to manifest thy folly as thou have done.

And thou says in Answer to Samuel Eaton; Page: 19. They deny Saints to be
always in the warfare; if they do, they deny not the Scripture, but agrees
with it; for such as have overcome are more then Conquerers, and thou brings
that of Paul in the warfare, to contradict it, saying, ( Romans 7.23.) I see a
Law in my members warring etc. but thou brings not his after Experience, where
he says, the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ, has made me free; Rom: 8.
And where he, with the rest in that union with him says, they are more than
Conquerers through him that Loved them, ver: 37 and such as are carnally
minded, as thou art, are in death, but such as are spiritually minded are in
life and peace; and greater is he that is in them then he that is in the
world 1 John: 4.4. and such as have overcome the wicked one knows the father,
and are strong, because they have overcome, and are in union with him that
gives them victory; and the word of God abides in them* that have so
overcome; 1 John: 2.13 14. which thou art ignorant of and know not that
pleads for sin and so for the Devil; therefore his servant thou art expect his
reward, for doing his work.

Concerning Repentance.
They Question that Implies a denial of Repentance in such as make a trade of
sin; take heed and look to thy self, that art so hardened in thy sins and
pleads so strongly for them, least thou be given over to hardness of heart and
Repentance be hid from thee as from Esau it was, for we know that the
goodness of God leads to repentance and the Scripture witnesses the same
with us, therefore we contradict it not, but agree therewith and witness the
gift from the Goodness, Rom: 2.4. But take heed that thou harden not thine
heart, and treasure up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, ver: 5. And where thou says, we
disclaim a Godly sorrow, which thou calls remorse* there thou have uttered
another lie, but thou art accustomed to it, and it is hard for thee to leave it.

Concerning Reading, Singings and Prayer, Baptism and the Lords Suffer etc.
Thou would raise a slander, and cast it upon us from some words which thou
have wrested in the Book called the Standard of the Lord; by C: Athinson; Page:
22. as if we should deny the way and the means that God uses to reveal
himself to his people by, and through, but that is but further to manifest thy
lying and deceitful Spirit of error and deceit for Christ is the Light, to
lead out of error, and deceit such as follow him into the Light of Life Joh:
8.2. And he is the way to the Father and that we own, and none can come to
the Father without him and he reveals his secrets by his Spirit, even the
deep things of God 1 Cor: 2.10 and no man knows the father but the son, and
he to whosoever the son will reveal him; And this does not contradict the
Scriptures but are witnessed by them, Math: 11.27. Luke 10.22. But the
Scriptures are not Christ, then they are not the Spirit that reveals the deep
things of God; But God has sent the Spirit of his son into our hearts,
whereby we cry, Abba father, Gal: 4.6. and by his Spirit he tcacheth us to
profit, 1 Cor: 12.7. and to understand, 1 John: 5.20. and teaches us how to
read with an understanding, and how to pray as we ought, Rom: 8.26. 1 Cor:
14.15. and that does not contradict the 2 Timothy: 3.15, nor Rom: 10.17. nor Luke
11.13. nor James 1 6. for we know that faith is Given by the ministry of
Christ in the Spirit, and that God gives us his holy Spirit, 1 John 3:24. and
the wisdom which is pure, peaceable, Gentle, and easy to be entreated, James,
3.17. and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make
peace, James 3.18. for which we praise God, and own hearing, reading and
prayer, and the teachings of God, according to his promises; Therefore thy
slander and accusation harmeth us not; But your brain Imaginations we deny,
and sprinkling Infants with water, which thou calls Sacramental water; but
can thou prove it; yet the Baptism by one Spirit we own (1 Cor: 12.12, 13.)
into one body, where there is one faith, one Lord, one Baptism, Ephesians: 4.4, 5.
and such as are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; and that we
witness, as does the Scripture, which is not Contradiction, Gal: 3.27. But
sprinkling Infants is an Invention, and none of Christ's Institution; But thou
perverts the Scripture, Act. 2.38, 39. saying, Be baptized every one of you;
you and your Children; Here thou art a liar, It does not Command Children to be
baptized with water, neither did they ever so baptize them that thou can
prove, by one plain Scripture, and where thou says that one of them says,
The Lords Supper is a carnal Invention; I charge thee in that to be a gross
liar, I said that your Imagination was a carnal Invention, but the Lords
Supper I own, and witness that he is come in to supp with me, Rev: 3.20. And
the bread which we break, it is the communion of the body of Christ, and the
Cup which we drink, it is the communion of the blood of Christ; and as Paul
said so say I; Let those that are spiritual Judge* what is said; but thou
can not prove that Paul broke outward bread and drunk outward wine, with the
Corinthians, nor the manner how; and therefore it is thy reason that is so
weak; that says The bread which you break, although it be bread in the
nature and substance, yet it is Spirit in the Institution, etc. What blasphemy
is this, to say that the Spirit is in the bread, which is natural in the
substance, here is a Papisticall trick indeed, and thy reason is very weak to
carry thee out to utter thy shallowness and emptiness, of the body and blood
of Christ; that would make that bread which is natural in the substance, as
thou says, the Spirit and Life of Christ and so substantial in the
Institution by yon deceivers; oh, Horrible delusion! The Kingdom of God
consists not in meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and Joy in the holy
Ghost; and in that kingdom wheat bread, and red wine is not souls food; but
the precious blood of Christ, and such as eat him they live on hum and dwells
in him, he is my meat and drink and food for my soul to feed on, and for
such as are in him John 6. Who is the bread of Life. And where thou say we
are against public prayer these thon says are their very express words in
Answer to Samuel Eaton, P: 26. contrary to the order 1 Cor: 14 14. Here thou
have manifested thy deceitful spirit, and wronged the words in that Book by
turning them into a wrong sense, by thy filthy mind, to manifest thy mischeife
against the Truth* that is harbored in thy deceitful heart; for the words in
that page thou have cited is that we are against a public prayer which is in
the state of the Pharisee, which Christ forbids, and that does not contradict
Scripture, nor the counsel of Christ, but agree therewith, Math: 6.5. but the
praying with the Spirit we own, and those are the following words in that
book, and agrees with the saying of Christ in Math: 6.6. and with the order of
the Spirit, in the 1 Cor: 14. which is to pray with the spirit and the
understanding, ver: 15. Therefore thy lies and slanders harms us not; And thou
says, we are against all David's prayers, and prophesies, and singing contrary
to Scripture; and cites the Answer to Sam: Eaton, P: 26. Let that Book witness
for the truth, against thy deceit; singing of Psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs we are not against but own; and David's prayers and prophecies; But your
Poetry we deny, and teaching people to sing lies in hypocrisy; saying, they
are not puffed in mind, when they are puffed in mind, and saying, they have no
scornful eye, when they have, and much more of that nature, Be ashamed liar,
and give over lying.

Concerning Elders, Ministers Maintenance, Immediate calling, and Immediate
teaching, etc.
Ordaining of Elders thou says was not by man; Quoting the Discovery of the
man of sin, by James Nayler, Page: 38. Let the wise-hearted read that book,
and it will witness, and clear him, and the truth declared in it, but this I
say, The holy Ghost made Overseers, and so Elders in the Church, and that does
not contradict the Scripture, but agree therewith, Act. 20.28. and the holy
Ghost is not such men as you are; and he said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul
for the work whereunto I have appointed them, and they were sent out by the
holy Ghost, Act. 13. And he was not taught the Gospel which he preached, of
man, but of God, Gal: 1. and so taught immediately, and went, after Christ was
revealed in him immediately, to preach the Gospel; And thou says, They say
that God sends forth Immediately contrary to Gal: 1. and says, there Paul
speaks of a sending of man, etc but that Chapter may be a sufficient witness
against thee, and prove thee to be a liar of them, and of that book of the
warning to Vnderbarrow by Edw: Burr: from which thou says they pretend to an
Infallible Judgment, and to a calling, not by man but Immediate, as the
Prophets and Apostles had; whom God sends, say they, he sends Immediately, and
thou says that is contrary to Gal: 1. here let the Scripture be a witness
against thee, that he that was Immediately called and sent, does there witness
the same, and as for pretenses, we do not pretend to be Immediately called and
sent, but we witness that we are, and so witness with him that thou accusest;
and all thy Mediate calls and sendings will not prove thee to be as Paul and
Timothy was, that had the gift within him, and the testimony by the holy Ghost,
as they had, And for Rich: Farneworth, in that Book called, Light risen out of
darkness, P: 16. saying, The Apostle had a free spirit, and was chargeable to
no man, but preached freely, he witnesses the same, and said also that he
Coveted no man's silver nor gold, nor apparel, but preached the Gospel freely,
and his hands ministered to his necessities, That is truth, and will stand as a
witness against all proud, Covetous, selfe-seeking hireling Priests in
Scotland and elsewhere; and at the Truth which witnesses against your deceit
thou art offended: And where thou says we pretend to be Immediately taught:
we do not pretend so to be, as I said before, but we witness that we are so
taught, and according to the promise of the Lord; And thou that art not taught
of him, shows that thou speaks a vision of thy own heart and not from the
Mouth of the Lord; and for the true Prophets studying the word, that is thy
Imagination, and contrary to Scripture, for no prophecy of the Scripture came
in old time by the will of man, (then not studied) but holy men of God spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost, and the Scripture is of no private
Interpretation; but thou that denies immediate teachings and says the spirit
is in the letter and given by it; thou may well accuse us falsely that so lies
against God, and his Spirit, to manifest to all the children of Light that thou
art ignorant of him and never was called nor sent by him; but ran, as the false
Prophets did, and so does not profit the people at all, Jere: 23 Chapter.

Concerning Questions.
And as for Questions; The Novices shall stand for your scorners and deceivers,
who are puffed up in Pride and Conceits; And where thou says, They deny, or say
Questions are of the Devil; such Questions as are of the Devil we deny; But
we own Questions in their place, and therefore thou have cast that out as a
slander, but it is turned back upon thee again, receive it into thy old
bottle from whence it came.

To that of thine concerning Civil honor, etc.
Civillity and honor we own, and knows to whom honor is due, and to whom it
is not; for if I honor a proud man for his pride, I dishonor God in so doing
for pride is one of the abominations and if I honor a covetous man and an
oppressor for his covetousness and oppression I should offend God in so doing
or if I honor the Serpent and his seed; But all men that are joined to the
Lord, and walk in union with him, and his seed, I honor and love, and this I
speak in sincerity; and yet besides all this, I can love my enemies: But to
follow foolish idle fancies, to worship men with cap and knee, and flatteries,
as the Serpents feed do, and which thou pleads for, we do that deny, and
against it testify, and how can ye believe that seeks honor one of another,
and seeks not the honor that comes of God only, Joh: 5.44. and what the
Scriptures do allow, we do know, without thy ranking together, but where does
the Scripture say, put off your hatts, and flatter with your tongues, as proud
flesh, and deceit, and such as thou do; or where does it say, respect the
rich, and disrespect the poor: Are you not partial, and of them that have
men's persons in admiration, because of advantage, and have respect to persons
for selfe-ends, and so are Infidells and out of the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ which is not with such respect of persons, for selfe-ends, and carnal
considerations.

Concerning Oaths.
And where thou says, They take up the words of Christ, Math: 5.34. Swear not
at all; as they do other Scriptures, against his meaning, as if they did
absolutely exhibit all oaths, before a Magistrate whereas (thou says) he
forbids oaths only by creatures, heaven and earth a man's head, etc The same
meaning thou says has James; Thou says, Christ does not forbid all oaths
(but by creatures only, here thou art a liar of Christ, and his words bears
testimony against thee for he does not forbid swearing by creatures only, but
he forbids swearing by all things else, whatsoever, for he says, Swear not at
all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods Throne, nor by earth, for it is his
footstool; (and he that swears not by heaven must not swear by what is
contained in it, and he that swears not by earth, must not swear by what is
contained in it) but Christ forbids swearing by heaven and earth, and so by
things contained in them; and likewise the Apostle James says Swear not at
all, and if a man must not swear at all, then he must not swear by a book or
any other thing; And though thou plead against the doctrine of Christ; and
says, he does not forbid all oaths, but by creatures only, yet to confute thy
self and manifest thy contradictions thou says he forbids not swearing by
creatures only but all oaths, and here out of confusion thou have confessed to
the Truth after thou had contradicted it; And if thou had not made swearing
null and void by thy words, in confessing that all oaths are forbidden, The
very express words of Scripture would have been a witness clearly in the
second place against thee, James 5.12. And as for this saying, we take the
words of Christ contrary to his meaning; therein thou have also in that cleared
us, and contradicted thy self; for we take his words according to his mind,
and so denies oaths, and abides in his doctrine; But the Lord has suffered
thee to lay open thy folly, that by thy words thou may be judged, and known
to be in confusion, and self contradiction, and so Babylonish; Take heed of
uttering thy folly as thou have done.

Self Contradictions.
And where thou says, they deny the Letter of the Scriptures to be Scripture,
(that is one of thy lies) and yet thou says they stick to the Letter of the
Scripture, Mat. 23.8, 10. which says, Be not called Masters; here thou have
cleared them, and contradicted thy self again; but thou art offended that
they witness against thy deceit, and cuts of thy Mastership, by thy own rule,
though thou would cover it over, yet thy covers are seen and thou art left
bare: And thou says they say, he that believes has the witness in himself,
and if they say so, the Scripture says the same, 1 John 5.10. herein they do
not deny nor cross the Scriptures: Acknowledge thy lies, error and confusion,
and upon them own thy condemnation; for after thou have said that they should
say, They deny the Letter of the Scripture to be Scripture, to confute thy
self and clear them in p. 21 thou says that they say, the Scriptures they
own, to be true in themselves, as they were given forth by the spirit of truth,
which ruled in them that gave them forth, and for proof sets down, Light risen
out of darkness by Richard Farneworth p. 13. here both thy own witness and
that Book of Richard Farneworths does witness aganst thee: And thus thou have
cleared them from the slander that thou sought to cast upon them, and art under
the guilt, and the pit which for others thou diggedst, thou are fallen in thy
self, and caught in thy own snare and craftiness, take notice of that, and
see how thou have contradicted thy self: And where thou says one of them
says, you are ignorant of the life of the Scriptures that are ignorant of the
Letter, herein thou have manifested the same, therefore take thou the shame;
for the life from whence the Scriptures proceeded is not the Letter, yet the
Letter does declare of it; and such as thou art, that had the Letter but were
ignorant of the Life, Christ said, Search the Scriptures, in them you think you
have eternal life, they testify of me, but says he, Ye will not come to me
that ye might have life, John 5. 39, 40. And again says he, I am the Way the
Truth and the Life, Joh. 14.6. And he that has the Son has Life, but the Son
is not the Letter neither is the Letter the Son, yet the Letter declares of him.

Concerning the new Birth, and the word in the heart.
He that believes, they say, is born of God: I answer, so says the Scripture,
1 John 5. and that the word of Faith is nigh in the heart* is witnessed Romans
10.8. and he that believes and is born of God knows the seed of God within
him, as says the Scripture. 1 John 3.9. but he is not born of the Letter as
thou would have him, yet he is begotten by the immortal word, which endures
for ever, which the Letter declares of and that does not contradict the
Scripture: Therefore where thou twines about to raise a lie of them, saying
they say and unsay, that is thy own, as before is proved; for thou art he that
says and unsayes; and where thou says take the meaning of their words; that
have not the same mind, knows not the meaning, but wrests them, as thou
perverts the Scriptures, and so raises lies by thy imaginations; to manifest
also thy contradictions; for thou says, they say and say truly, (then they lie
not) neither do they say and unsay; and thou says they say truly because the
Scripture says so, then they agree with the Scripture, being of God and
speaking truly, 1 John 4.4, 5, 6. and they that are of God hear his word, then
they cross not the Scripture, neither do they say and unsay if they say truly
(and as thou also say,) But they say truly, therefore they do not say and
unsay, and so thou art taken with the lie again, and clears them thy self; and
where thou says they deny that in John 1.9. to be a natural Light, If we do,
we have warrant for it, for it is the Light supernatural, John 8.12. and if
one of them did say he lived in a natural condition before his conversion, is
that such a strange thing, such as were witnesses for God, as the Apostles and
others had been natural before they were spiritual, and when it pleased God
to reveal his Son in them, Gal. 1. he also commanded the Light to shine out of
darkness, to give them the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of
Jesus, and they had the heavenly treasure manifested in earthen vessels, 2 Cor.
4.6, 7. and if it had not been there in a mystery, Col. 1. 27. how could it in
them have been so after manifested (in them,) but that thou art mindful to
cavil on purpose against the work of God, to show forth the envy of thy heart
against the breakings forth of Light, whereby your deeds of darkness are
discoverd, and against testified: And where thou says they magnify the Light
and the Law written in the heart, to judge and condemn sin; then thou says,
the day of Judgment is come: I answer, Where Judgment is brought forth into
victory, sin is condemned in the flesh, and there is no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit,
and such have boldness in the day of Judgment; for as some men's deeds goes
before hand to Judgment others they come after, and therefore a day of
Judgment is to come, and that thou and the wicked will know to be a day of
torment (though the righteous may rejoice in it:) Again thou says, They
affirm that every man in his first estate may fee himse;fe to be natural, but
not able to judge of the things of God, citing particulers concerning the Law
by John Came, let that book be a witness to the truth, against thy ignorance
and sottishnes that sets thy corruptions and pleads for them; the light which
does discover the natural corruptions, is not not natural, as thou says, but
it is spiritual, and such as love it bring their deeds to be tried by it, and
with it the deceits is Judged, and such as dwell in the Light that Judges in
the particular, where it rules them, and they are united to it, may with it
Judge and discern betwixt truth and error; but such as with the Light have
the deeds of darkness discovered, and hates the Light, the Light is their
condemnation, as it is thine, and they that are in union with corruptions, as
thou art, they are not able to Judge of the things of God, but err in
judgment that judges with evil thoughts, as thou do, and have done,
therefore judgments is to thy head and crown of deceit, pride and vain glory:
thou says one of them says, the least degree of Light manifested in the
creature is perfect in its measure and in its self, few words, by James Nayler,
let that book also witness against thy subtilty, which is a witness against
thy generation, and thou goes on and says, if the Light be perfect both in its
measure and in its self, then it is perfect every way; thou have here
confessed, that if the Light be perfect in its measure and in its self, then
it is perfect every way; but thy imaginations cannot find out the highest
degree, that are not subject to the lowest, but acts contrary to it, and so to
be condemned by it; for it is perfect, both in respect of its truth, and
sincerity, power and authority, and condemns the haters and resisters of it;
but guides and leads such as love and obey it, into the life and power, that
they are able to comprehend with all Saints what is the height and depth and
length and breadth of the love of God, and they are in unity the highest and
lowest in their measures and degrees, according to the working of the divine
power of God, who works according to the good pleasure of his will, and he
that has his sins covered is blessed; but thy meaning is denied, and no other
Christ do we own, but Christ which is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, who does perfect them that he sanctifies; and the righteousness of Christ
is our righteousness, who are saved from our sins by him, and we witness him
to be the alone Savior of all that obey him; and perfectly able to save to the
uttermost all those that come unto God by him; But all thy scraped up stuff,
and thy twistings and windings we deny; who says, the spirit is in the letter,
and the spirit is given by the letter; and says, The true Light, to wit,
Christ, that lights every man that comes into the world with his light;
(which thou says is natural and common, and says, that no man could know
that he has the witness in himself, but by the Scriptures, and so thou would
have the Spirit to be bought and sold, if it were in the Letter, and to be
given by it; And thou would have a letter-Saviour, if the letter could give the
spirit and eternal life; And thou would have a letter-fulnesse, and no
witness of God without the letter, and if the letter should be lost, the
fullness and the witness would be lost, and so have God to be without
witnesses, and his people without supply and strength, according to thy
account; for thou says, that none could know that he that beleiveth has the
witness in himself, but by the Scriptures; and here thou sets the Scripture
in the room of God, and of Christ, and gives all the pre-eminence to the
letter of the Scripture, and not to Christ, and that is contrary to the
Scriptures; for he (to wit, Christ) is before all things, and by him all things
consist, and he is the head of the body the Church, who is the beginning and
first borne from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence,
for in him the fullness dwells, then not in the Letter, yet the Letter declares
of it; Colos: 1.17, 18, 19.

Concerning Quaking and trembling, and Growth in Grace, etc.

Thou says they profess Quaking and trembling after the manner of Moses,
Habbakuck, David, Paul, and other, and yet are some of them the most daring
creatures that ever (thou says) thou heard speak, or observed to put pen to
paper, and will stand in an evil cause before Magistraces, without Quaking or
fear, setting down Rich: Farnworth, Reply 2.5. I Answer, The same power that
made Moses, Habbacuck, David, Paul, and the rest to Quake, shake and tremble,
the same power we witness, and working out our salvation with fear and
trembling, God working in us, to will, and to do also, after his own good
pleasure, and this is no contradiction to Scriptures, but thou that speaks
against the power of God, that works effectually in his people, as it did in
them, that witnessed Quaking and trembling; and denies trembling and Quaking,
that proceeds from the power of God witnessed of in Scripture, thou therein
contradicts the Scripture; and for that saying, or falacy of thine, where thou
have shot out thy sting in thy tail saying, we will stand in an Evil cause
before Magistrates without Quaking or fear; herein thou art taught thy
gradations methodically in old Antichrists school to lie, slander, accuse
falsely and jeere, and cannot prove what thou have said; stop thy mouth
deceiver, and take in thy slander again; and as for being bold to witness the
Truth, against deceit, that does sore offend thee, and such Scotch deceivers,
and all deceivers, such as thou art; but the Lord makes the righteous as bold
as Lions; that he teaches to profit, and to grow from grace to grace, to set
forth his praise, glory be to him for ever; and where thou says they say they
witness the Saints Growth and the time of pressing on to perfection, art thou
offended at that; They that witness the same do not therein cross nor
contradict the Scripture; And where thou says they own the fruits of the
Spirit, art thou offended also at that, and does the old Serpent teach thee to
lie against the Spirit with the fruits of it and them that are guided by it
Rom: 8.14. and Gal: 5 1 John: 3. and falsely accuse them saying they walk in
the most manifest fruits of the flesh; in that all that fears God, and knows
their godly conversation may witness against thee; and herein thou have
manifested thy spirit of error and deceit and to be one that regards not what
thou says, (and as for scoffing at Scottish Priests or others that we deny but
your raising motives trials, points, reasons, and uses, out of other men's
words, and speaking a divination of your own brain, for your own ends, by
plain Scripture you cannot it justify; therefore against you and such
deceivers as profess Scriptures to be your rule, and act contrary to them, we
declare and against you testify and as for your forms of deceit we deny but a
form of sound words the Scripture does justify, being spoken by the Spirit of
truth, which we own: and now the time is come that deceivers and such as you
are cannot endure sound doctrine, but utters your folly, to make your selves
manifest; and what generation you are of, even of him, whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all deceiveable of unrighteousness in them that
perish, 2 These: 2. 2 Pet: 2.

Concerning Ordinances, Instructing of Children, and the Resurrection.

Praying in familyes (thou says) they say they own, with reading and
instructing of Children and bringing them up in the fear of the Lord, and
teaching according to the Apostles doctrine proved by a short Answer to 7
Priests P: 19. which thou have cited, and art thou offended at this; set thy
conceivings, that arises out of thy dark mind aside, and thy vain
Imaginations and close to the Truth, and stand not up to oppose it, wilfully,
least thou be found one of those that sins wilfully after grace received, to
whom there is no more sacrifice, for sin but a fearful looking for of Judgment
and fiery Indignation of the Lord which shall devour the Adversaries; and where
thou says they pretend to own all that is Gods, we do own that which is
Gods free love and mercy to us and all that is Gods, as Baptism the Lords
Supper* Church Fellowship, Sabbath: The flesh of Christ and the resurrection
and all that we own, and what thou have cited out of the book of James
Naylers, called Spiritual wickedness in heavenly places, or an answer to a
book entitled, Freedom of Religious Worship, or the Jubilee of Ordinances set
forth; Let the wisehearted read that book to further witness for the Truth, on
our behalf, and to be a witness against their deceit; and such as would
falsely slander and reproach us and the Truth; and where thou says, there must
be no Laws concerning Religion; yet says, they admonish Rulers to see that
their Laws be according to that in the Conscience; of every man; and then thou
says after thou have wrested their words, by this it seems there is no
Religion in the Conscience, or else why should there not be Laws according to
religion as well as according to the Conscience; Thou deceitful Spirit, how have
thou wrested the words set down about the Law of God, which answers his
Justice, and the Light in the Conscience, which answers the law of God which is
perfect, according to that in the conscience; Let the wise-hearted read that
Book, which thou have wrested, called, The Glory of the Lord, arising shaking
terribly the earth and overturning all, until righteousness be set up; being
an Encounter with the Ministers of the world, touching their Maintenance,
wherein they are beaten with their own Weapons; confuted by their own
Scriptures, and Arguments, and that will sufficiently witness against thy
lies; and witness against to the Law of God, which is for Establishing
Religion; and seeing thy lies are so made manifest, I shall leave this to the
simple-hearted that they may take notice of thy deceits, herein made manifest,
besides much filthiness in thy book of slanders* where thou deceifully have
wrested our words, by thy sorcery and witcheraft, but Truth is cleared, and
thou art ensnared and proved to be the contradicter of Scriptures, and not
those whom thou scornfully calls Quakers.

This is a Testimony against that Pamphlet (namelesse Author) called, The
serious reveiw of some Principles of the Quakers.
IN a paper called, A serious review of some Principles of the Quakers; one
that says, He has ceased from man, and is dead to Sects; and says, There is
many in this Age who do own in their judgment many parts of Truth, or several
sound Principles of Religion, as it were by peecemeal, who notwithftanding many
more things, if not in the most, do err: And as for error and deceit under
refined subtilty, that is the condition of die man that says, He is dead to
all Sects, but he is yet alive in the opinions, and stands on the ground of
fancies, and filled with conceits, and catching at truths in the notion, but
errs not knowing the seed of God, nor the Key of the true Knowledge, nor the
Spirit that stands before the Throne, the flaming Sword, nor the Cherub, but is
shut out of the ground of Truth, grinding and making meal, or provision for the
Lust, feeding with the Serpent upon dust; and yet with his high aerie notions,
and colored expressions, thinks to hide himself, but is bare to the single
eyed: He says, he shall lay down several principles of the Quakers, and as he
propounds them he shall refute them, yet shall speak of none of them but such
as be most known, that they may not have it to say that he wrests their words
and do belly them; but in the first place, thou wrests and belies the words of
J: Nayler, and G: Fox, let the wise hearted read Saul's errand and the 4th page
in the Answer to the perfect Pharisee, and the words are not as thou have set
them down, therefore thou art a perverter of them and a liar, and instead of
defending the Truth thou art laboring to uphold the Deceit, but those two
Books shall witness for the Truth, against thy fancy and whimsie amongst all
thy scraped up stuff; this is the weight or matter that thou stumbles at, as
if there should be something in man that is not creared; what is the seed of
God that keeps such as are born of God that they cannot commit sin, and that
which is born after the will of God, in whom that seed abides, which is as the
wind that blows, and no man knows by his will the manner of the work brought
forth by it but he that is not of the world, and what is that unction that
abides in such, which teaches them all things, and is truth and no lie; Is
that holy unction created, and is not that in the regenerate? And the holy
Ghost is that created, and is not that in such, and abides in them, and that
mystery of Faith which is held in a pure conscience, what is that, is it not
in man? and what is that which bruises the Serpents head, and the mystery of
godliness in man? And such as are so joined to that seed, and in union with that
one spirit, thou and the harlot are ignorant of them and that mystery, and
therefore thou may stop thy mouth, for thou have manifeded thy ignorance, and
knows not our Principles, they are not for thee to take up to carry about in
thy foul reason, and dirty mire imagination, words that proceeds from the
Principle thou imagins of, but knows neither the Principle nor the Power in
which we stand, that knows not that there is something in man that is eternal;
and therefore thou knows not the seed of God, the holy Ghost, the unction, the
life which comes down from Heaven, nor that God in Saints dwells and walks
according to his Promise, nor that Christ is glorified in them; and being
ignorant of the life of God in Saints, thou must needs err and lie, being out
of the living truth, and guided by a spirit of error and deceit, thou can do
no other: and as for the soul which thou puzzles thy mind about, thou art
ignorant of, that knows not the living word of God, which devides asunder
betwixt soul and spirit, as the Scripture declares, Heb. 4.12. and the
Serpent being head in thee; he is ranging and raking up stuff out of the
bottomless pit to hide and cover himself withal, but thou art seen and weighed,
and thou art offended at the Saints life, as the Serpents seed ever was, and
all thy wrestings cannot separate the Father and the Son asunder, and he that
has the Father has the Son, and eternal life abiding it: him, 1 John 5.11,
12. and abiding in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son,
2 John 9. and is changed from glory to glory into the same pure Image, which
thou art ignorant of, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. and he that has said, the Father and
the Son are one, and I and my Father are one, does not contradict Scripture, as
thou do, and also as J: Stalham does, who himself pleads for bread and wine,
as an Ordinance, to last till Christ come personally upon earth, and to be a
substantial Christ in that bread at institution, and to have a spirit in the
bread, and a spirit in the Letter and to be given by it, and to be born of the
Scripture, and such like stuff as that, being his conjurations, and without
bottom from the word; and so you are those that deny; Gods indwelling in
Saints, that knows not something eternal in them; God is not created; and he
has said, I will dwell in them and walk in them, 2 Cor: 6 16. and the life of
Christ is manifest in Saints bodies, 2 Cor: 4. and the Father and the Son are
in union together in them that are sanctified and preserved 2 John 9. and as
Christ has said, At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in
me and I in you, Joh. 14.20. and such may witness him; and great is the
admiration where Christ is glorified in Saints, 2 These. 1.10. and that the same
mind is in them that is in him, Phil: 2. Romans 8. and that God sends the spirit
of his Son into their hearts that they cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. wonderful
is the love of God to his children, and to be admired, 1 John 3. which thou art
a stranger unto, as thou have made thy self manifest: And to thy 2d, that the
light of Christ is the light of the world is witnessed; and the true light that
lights every man that comes into the world; and such as follow him the true
light, are led by him into the Light of Life which light is the condemnation of
such as hate it and act contrary to it and that accusation of thine before is
written to, in answer to J^^ Stalham, thy companion in the Evil, who are both
acting against the truth, and so serving the Devil, and for that Book of
James Naylor in answer to the perfect Pharisee It will stand as a witness
against you, and your generation and also all the other books which you
wrested, but cannot shake any child of Truth; they stand upon you and see you
painted harlots, to be decked and colored with the whores atire and you and
your stuff is fuel for the fire. And to thy 4th that some are come out of the
fall, that we witness and that the second Adam has redeemed, and is redeeming
what the first Adam lost and blessed are all they that wait for him but thou
art opposing the Truth, and scraping up Scriptures, to plead for sin, and to
prove that Adam in a covenant of works, before he fell, and contradicts thy
self therein, as before is proved, and makes thy self manifest to be in the
fall, and yet under the curse: And to thy 5th no sin nor such imperfect thing
can be reconciled to God nor enter into his kingdom, is true and witnessed,
which thou accusest James Naylor of; and to show forth thy deceit, thou says,
Reason would think that no perfect thing could be reconciled to God; and here
thy reason would join the seed of the Serpent and the seed of God together but
cannot: 1 Cor: 6.9, 10 Rev. 2^. 8.27. for it and thou art shut out with the
Light which thou art an enemy unto, and when thou have scraped up much stuff
to no purpose, then thou closest it up with 2 or 3 Scriptures, as if God and
sin could be reconciled together which cannot be; but Christ being manifested
to take away sin and destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John: 3.3, 4, 5. etc.
he is the way and makes way to reconcile such to God, Justifying them from
ungodliness; and sanctifying them, 1 Cor: 6.11. Heb. 2. for both he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all one, for which cause he is
not ashamed to call them brethren, ^.11. and so he that brings many sons unto
glory, v. 10. does take away their sins and sanctifies them, and presents them
blameles and perfect before God, Ephesians. 5. without spot or wrinkle or any such
thing, v: 26, 27. and where there is sin there is spot and wrinkle and such
like things; and that conclusion of thine is a false one, and from the spirit
of deceit, that would reconcile God and sin together, but that soul in whom sin
has dwelt, being separated from sin is made righteous, and the creature also,
and being sanctified is reconciled, which thou art ignorant of, and of the seed
in him, 1 John 3.9. that is born of God, and so sanctified, 1 Pet. 1.22, 23.
And the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of god, then such are not
reconciled, 1 Cor. 6.10, 11. Gal. 5.19, 20. And there shall in no wise enter
into it any thing that defiles; but sin defiles, therefore God and sin are
not reconciled, nor such as live and act in it, and plead for it; neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, (look to it ye unrighteous
ones) but such shall enter as are without sin, and are reconciled, being
written in the Lambs book of life, Rev. 21.27. To thy sixth, That Jesus Christ
is the only Light, and no other Light besides him to salvation; this is one
thing that thou seeks to oppose, and accuse J: Nayler for: Oh! that ever man
should be so blind, and carried on wilfully, to act the Devils part, as thou
art; thy scraped up stuff I turn unde; and witness against thy spirit, and I
witness that Christ is the true Light, and the way to the Father, and the
alone Savior of all that obey him, Heb. 5.8, 9. and perfectly able to save all
that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. without any thing, contrary to him, or
the invention and divination of thy brain, or such in thy nature, as further is
cleared before in Answer to thy partaker Joh: Stalham; But thou must needs
busy thy mind, to run over the same things, to show forth thy folly, and all
that knows God they know that there is no other way, nor Light, to come to the
Father by, and to salvation, but by Jesus Christ: and if thou can produce
another way besides him, and another Light, pretended by thee to lead to
salvation lets know thy shallownes in it, who has set thy self to invent, and
follows inventions, and conceits of thy brain; but I see by thy Eight that
thou as well as John Stalham, would have a Letter Light, a Letter word, and so
a Letter Savior; and calls Christ reason, as he calls him natural and common;
but for all the Scriptures you have ranked together, not one of them says,
that Christ the true Light is a natural and common Light, as John Stalham
says, who gives the Letter the pre-eminence, and not Christ; and so
contradicts the Scriptures; But thou have manifested thy Rantisme; and both of
you, you are found to be enemies to the Spirit and liars of the Scriptures
also; And after thou have winded about to cover thy self in the latter end of
thy eight, thou have left thy self bare, when all the Scriptures thou have
gathered together, and thy reason, will not nor cannot prove the Scriptures to
be eternal life; then not that word which endures for ever; nor the word by
which the worlds were made, nor the Spirit and power of life, nor Christ Jesus,
upon which the Prophets and Apostles were builded; but thou says (and says
falsely) that the Scriptures which thou calls the Word, is called the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, setting down Ephesians: 2.20. Now that very Scripture
witnesses against thee and confutes thee; for it calls Christ the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, and the chief corner stone in whom all the
building fitly framed grows unto an holy temple in the Lord; (not in the
Letter) but in the Lord in whom they was builded together, for an habitation of
God through the Spirit, (and not through the Letter) but through the Spirit,
Ephesians: 2.20, 21, 22. And say they through him (through Christ not the Scripture)
but through Christ; They both had an access, not by the Letter (as thou
affirms) but by the Spirit, Ephesians: 2 18. How have thou uttered thy folly, and
lied of the Spirit, that called Christ the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostle; and thou says, the Scriptures are, and in that thou have lied of the
Scriptures also; for the words that are left upon record witnesses against
thee, and both thou and John Stalham have showed your ignorance of Christ the
foundation, of the Prophets and Apostles, and your foundation is the words
which witness against you, and all liars, and thou have manifested the same,
that the Letter is your ground, for thou says it is the ground of your faith,
P: 12. and so your faith is not upon Christ, which is the Saints ground; for
they witness Jesus Christ to be the Author and finisher of their faith, Heb:
12.2. But the Scripture is your ground of faith, thou says and so no Scripture
no faith. no faith no salvation; and let all the wise in heart see if thou
would not here have a letter Savior, but it is good that fools utter their
folly that others may learn to be wise; And where thou art offended at thou
and thee, words of truth, and the Scripture Language: there thou crosses the
Scripture and contradicts them for thou can not show one plain scripture in
all the Bible that says you to one single person; and all thy twisting in the
9th is but to plead for deceit: and (...) and Civil honor, we are not to
learn that of one that is out of the counsel of Christ, as thou art, and
knows not the eternal Word; which thou and John Stalham have showed your
selves Ignorant of, and to be without the Spirit of Christ, to guide you, and
such are not his; And as for things that stands in the Counsel of Christ, and
agrees with his Word, we are subject unto, and own true and just Government,
and the authority: But your lies, flattery and deceit, and scraped up stuff
we do deny, and against you, and your deceitful Spirits dee we declare and
testify: And as for that Book, which is without a printed Name, that has P:
E: at it; this shall be as a witness against it, with the following words,
also, as a conclusion against your delusion; There is a Paper from the same
spirit of error and deceit, comed out of Scotland without a name, the Author
being either convicted in his Conscience that he has belyed the Truth, or else
some shame to own that for truth which he has published, or some such like
thing; but though his name be hid, his heart is uncovered to the single eyed;
(and if Peter English be his name) his spirit is weighed and tried, with the
light that manifests his subtilty, flattery, deceit, secret ennity, and
serpentine policy; and he and thou John Stalham are both in one mystery of
Iniquity, and because he has in effect or substance the same things scraped
up that thou have; This which I have written shall be as a witness against you
both, and the Light in your Consciences, as the book of Concience is opened
will remember you in the bed of torment, and be a swift witness against you,
and be your Condemenation, that hare it, and set your selves to work
wickedness, and that Light which convinces you of the evil of your ways,
will let you see your selves, as Conscience book is opened, to be the vilest,
and of the same spirit of wickedness (though under a refined subtilty) that
the vilest of men are, and that Light which yon now hate and scorn will
remember you* of what (against it and the Lord) you have acted and done, and
the thoughts and intents of your hearts, will be seen and discovered by it;
and you, and all that hate it, will by Christ the Light of the World be judged,
and rewarded, according to the deeds done in your bodies, and in the day of the
Lords fierce wrath you will know the Judge of hearts, and that you cannot hide
your selves from him, all your covers will be too narrow, in the day of wrath,
when you are cast into a bed of Torment; remembered you will be, now you are
warned, though with deceit your hearts will be filled, and with subtilty
against the Truth, you be armed; It is hard for you to kick against p ickes:
But for the simple ones sake have I written this, that they may be aware of
your subtilty, least they be deceived by you, and partake of the plagues with
you.

Written by a servant of the Lord, known to the World by the name of Richard
Farneworth.
From Balbie in Yorkshire the 22th of the 4th Month. 55. England.
FINIS.

