THE HOLY SCRIPTURES From Scandals are cleared. OR An Answer to a Book set
forth by the Baptizers; to wit, Henry Hagger and Thomas Pollard, Entitled, The
Holy Scriptures clearing it self of Scandals: But is scandalled or perverted,
and so scandalized by them, as in this Answer to theirs will further appear, so
by them Entitled, or bearing the Title of an Answer to a Book written by
Richard Farnsworth, called, Truth cleared, or Truth lifting up its head above
Scandals: occasioned by a dispute at Harliston in Staffordshire, between
Richard Farnsworth and Thomas Pallard, in the year, 1654. Also here is in this,
the heads of an Order, or late Act made at Coventry, by the Baptized People
there, subscribed with the names of seven Elders and Brethren, as they say, in
the behalf of the rest, and set forth; from them sent to Shittington in
Warwickshire, showing whom they denied to be Ministers and Members of Christ,
etc, which is set down in this and several Considerations or Observations, and
Answers thereunto. And something here is, in Answer to a false Prophet, called
John Griffith, set out by him and several others, in a false Prophecy or Book,
bearing the Title of True Gospel Faith, collected into 30 Articles: or in the
middle part called, A Voice from the Word of the Lord, with at least an hundred
lies numbered up out of the Books as aforesaid, being answered, such as are of
concernment; and they are with the other sent to them back in a bundle or
number, as herein will appear; and being cast out, now truth stands pure and
clear.

Pror. 18.18. The lot causes contentions to cease, and parts between the
mighty.

Written by a Servant of the Lord, in the sixth Month, 1655. by R. F.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the Black Spread-Eagle, at
the West end of Paul's, 1655.

To the Reader, and whom it may concern, etc.
READER, instead of an Epistle I shall lay down a few of the particulers, or
affirmatives in that act or law made by the water baptized people at Coventry,
and sent to Shittington, signed or subscribed at the end with the names of
Mannasses King an Elder and Jefford Youngbone an Elder, John Murdock, Francis
Blabby, John Fairbrother, George Copson, and Thomas Hardway, Brethren, who from
Coventrey say they subscribed it in the name of the rest, etc. And from them I
shall lay down some observations, or answers thereunto.

The second thing which in that Coventrey law or late Act, is that they say
they deny any to be Ministers of (Christ and) the Gospel, or to speak in the
Church, that say they speak from or by an internal light and prove it not by
the visible rule of the Scriptures, etc.

And by this rule and law though God be light, 1 John 1.5. and dwell within in
his people (2 Cor. 6.16. 1. Joh. 4.4.) yet he must be debarred or limited and
not suffered to speak in the Church, except he confine himself to the letter
of the Scriptures, and that is contrary to his former actings for to be
limited, and who are you that dare presume or offer to seek to limit the holy
one of Israel.

As much as to say though Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were endued with the
Spirit of God, yet except they could prove what they said by the words of Adam,
Enoch and Noah they might not be permitted to speak from the Spirit of God, in
the things of God revailed, and made known unto them thereby.

Though Moses, Aaron, Caleb, and Joshuah might be guided by the Spirit of God,
yet except they could prove by words from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, what from
the Spirit of God they had to declare, they might not speak of the things of
God, but be denied to be any Ministers or Messengers of God.

Though Samuel, and the rest of the Lords true established Prophets; that were
by him called and sent, and could witness that the Lord God and his Spirit did
call establish and send them; yet if they said so, and said they spoke from an
internal light, or the Spirit of God within; and could not prove by Scripture
or the writings of Moses and those before them, all that that they said, they
might not be suffered to speak, but be denied to be the Ministers and
Messengers of God.

Though the Ministers of the new Covenant, had the light and the heavenly
treasure within them; 2 Cor. 4.6.7, and were guided by the Spirit of God, Romans
8.14. who made them able Ministers of the new Covenant not of the letter but of
the Spirit: 2 Cor. 3.6. and they was not to serve in the oldnesse of the
letter, but in the newness of the Spirit: Romans 7.6, yet if they said they
preached from an internal light, or the Spirit of God within them, etc. and
denied (to prove all they said by the Scripture or) to serve in the oldnesse of
the letter; and not Minister from the Letter, but from the Spirit in which
their Ministry stood, they might not by these baptized people be suffered to
speak but be denied to be any Ministers or messengers of Christ though his
true Ambassadors, take notice you Baptizsts of your error herein, and
acknowledge the same, and own your condemnation thereupon,

And where you say you deny any to be members of Christ that either go
themselves or suffer others to go hear them that preach from an internal
light, etc.

Here you are against Christ the true light, and against the Ministry of the
Gospel, and against the Kingdom of Christ in the Spirit, against the new
Covenant and the doctrine of the Apostles also, that were Ministers from the
light, and the life of the Spirit within, which you deny, and they were
Ministers of the Spirit and not of the letter, and said to others try all
things and hold fast that which is good; 1 Thessa. 5.21. Here you are against
the Scriptures also, that would deprive people of a Christian liberty, that so
bind them by your law, contrary to the Gospel, and contrary to the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles; for the true Christ says, Preach the Gospel to every
Creature; but you would not have every Creature to hear it Preached, by the
Spirit in the power of light, in the endless life, that so denies them liberty
to hear those that are Ministers of the new Covenant, and not of the letter,
but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. so hereby your Spirits are discovered and made
manifest to be Antichristian.

Again, you say you deny liberty for any to object in the Churches either in
the time of speaking or after, etc. In this you have denied the true Spirits
order, who said, If any thing be reveiled (and that is not by the letter but by
the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10) to him that sits or stands by; let the first hold his
peace, and let the other speak: etc. 1 Cor. 14.30: But you say the contrary,
and therefore you have crossed the Scripture; and denied the true Spirits
order, to further make manifest your disorder and also your Spirit of delusion
and error.

And again you say God will judge the secrets of all hearts by the written
word, or letter of the Scripture, when the Minister of Christ says the
contrary, who says that, God will Judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ,
Rom, 2.16: then not by the lettet of the Scripture, and the Son says, All
judgment is Committed unto him, and the Father has given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the Son, but he has not given authority
to the letter of the Scripture, to execute judgment, because it is the letter
of the Scripture, and declares or testifies of the Son, but is not the Son,
then the Scripture is not the judge of all hearts, but the Son is so, to wit,
the judge of all hearts, as the Scripture declares, Joh. 5.22, and Joh.
5,26.27. Act. 17 31. Take notice how you would deprive Christ of his Kingly
office, and take the authority from him to put upon the letter: and has
again thereby further manifested your Spirit of error.

THE HOLY SCRIPTURES Are cleared of Scandals; OR AN ANSWER TO A BOOK, Written
by Thomas Pallord and Henry Hagger As they say, In Answer to a Book set ^orth
by Richard Farnworth; wherein they pretend to clear the truth of Scandals, but
are found Liars, and the Lies is sent them back in a bundle or number, that
they may see their deceit, and Spirit or Lies, Errors and Slanders.
THo: Pallord and Henry Hagger, who are mighty in the work of your Father, John
8.44. you pretend to clear the truth of Scandals, but of it are Liars and
Scandallers, and evil Speakers, and false Accusers; and therefore that you may
take notice of the fruit of your Fathers Spirit, by which you are guided and
taught to lie: I have viewed your work, or scandalous and deceitful Book, and
gathered out of it, being numbered up, the sum of (60 and odd, or) Threescore
Lies and more, besides many that I have passed by; these being sufficient for
to manifest your Spirit and the deceit of your heart; as also several lies
gathered out of a Paper, written or caused to be Printed under the name of John
Griffith, oue of the water Baptizers with you, or in your number,; and I hare
also sent them back amongst you into the liars Generation again: take them and
keep them, for they are returned back upon you, and into the liars generation
from whence they came, that Truth may be kept clear, and you appear in your
lying colors, or be laid open who are such great deceivers, unto your shame,
who has taken upon you to slander and revile the Lotds people (by you in
disdain called Quakers) and also to Prophecy or publish your lies in pretense
of the Lords Name: But to bo wort, I shall lay several of them down, and return
them back upon you from whence they came,

Tho: Pollard; Thou have set down things which I neither spoke nor writ, and
says, I affirmed them, when I did not; and therefore thy gronnds being lies,
that which springs out of them is so, as well as thy Grounds or Heads; but I
turn them under, and drive them back with the rest of thy Lies into the
Serpents seat ugain, and liars Generation from whence they came.

E^or or Lie the first
In thy third page, Thou says it is such a deceit, that they that say they have
no sin the truth is not in them; but thou cannot prove thy saying therein,
whose fallacy is laid down in that word [they] which includes any; when the
Scripture says not so, as thou do; and therefore, in that, thou have lied of
the truth and truths friends, as it appears. And here thou goes about to
prove, that Christ, and such as are in him, has no truth in them, and that is
contradiction to the Scripture and the Spirits Doctrine; for thou fetbheth
Christ in with them, and includes all in that word [they] saying, They that say
they have no sin, the truth is not in thom: as much as to say, They that are
without sin, are without truth, and have no truth in them, but Christ, and such
as are in him are without sin: Therefore if they say they are without sin,
there is no truth in them (as thou says) for that is contrary to thy proofless
Argument: Pollard or Hagger, whether of you laid it down, take notice of your
folly therein; here thou would [by that] have Christ, and such as are in him,
to have no truth in them: see what a trick the deceit has taught thee in that,
for first it is said of Christ, That he sinned not, and so was without sin, for
no guile was found in his month; and therefore he was without sin, and the
truth was in him, contrary to thy lying of him; for he is both the way, the
truth, and the life, Joh. 14.6. and is without sin, but full of truth, and such
as abide in him they sin not, as says the Scripture, 1 John 3.5,6. then such
as abide in Christ sin not, as the Scripture says, they are without sin, 1
John 3.9. and the truth is in them; for such said, That as he was, so was they
in this present world, 1 John 4.16,17. Pallard, take notice of thy Errors and
Lies, and also of thy contradiction of the Scripture; For they that did abide
in Christ, and sinned not, 1 John 3.6. they were so far trom being without
truth, or having no truth in them, that they were full of grace and truth, for
the Spirit of God was in them, which was truth and no lie, 1 John 3.24.

And secondly, the word of God was in them, 1 John 2.14. and they were strong
in the Lord and the power of his truth, for they had overcome the wicked one,
and the word of God were abiding in them; and so the truth of God abode within
them, for says Christ to his Father, Sanctify them with thy word, thy word is
truth, John 17.17. Then they that had overcome the wicked one, and were
sanctified through the truth, and were without sin, having also the word of God
abiding within, they were full of truth, and not without it, or no truth in
them: take notice of thy absurdities and lies, for they had the holy Unction
within them that were without sin, and that was truth and no lie, 1 John 2.20.
and 27. and greater was he that was in them, then he that was in the World, 1
John 4.4. take notice of thy lie, and that trick of thy deceit.

Error or Lie the second.
Thy second Lie] is that, thou says we boast of perfection: perfection in and
by Christ we own, else we should deny the truth and the work of grace
according to the working of the Spirit of God, as it is witnessed according to
the Scripture, and by the Ministry of Christ in the new Covenant, Math. 5.48.
and Ephesians. 4.11.12.13. 1 Cor. 2.6. Heb. 6.1. Heb. 12.22.23, but though we
witness to the truth and the work of the Spirit of Grace, yet boasting of
perfection, etc: that we deny and therefore thou have acted Antichrists spirit,
and told thy second Lie]

Error or Lie the third
In thy third Lie] thou says that we make it our whole work to turn away
poor souls from the truth, but art without proof for that Lie, for such as
are guided by the Spirit of truth, to turn people from the darkness to the
light, turns them to the truth, and not from it, (as thou says) Act.
26.16.17.18. and we being so guided are made isntrumental to turn people,
from the darkness to the light, and so from the power of Satan to the power of
God, and many souls that art turned to the truth can witness for us, and
against thee, and such thy disciples, who have herein manifested thy third Lie]
and so made it thy work to Lie, and business to sin and do evil, which is
the work of thy Father the Devil.

Lrror or Lie the fourth and fifth.
Thou says we turn people from the Scriptures: so did thou say to me at
Harliston, but could not prove it, and many reproved thee for it.

And in thy fifth lie] thou say we turn them from the ordinances or Christ.

Error or Lies the 6. 7. etc.
And in thy sixth Lie] thou says that we are proud, presumptious, and
selfwilled, but art to prove thy lying slanders therein, and all that fears
God, and knows our conversation, may witness against such thy absurdities or
thy gross Lies.

Lie the seventh] Thou says we strike at Jesus Christ, but such as are
obedient to him, do not strike at him neither are they self-willed nor proud
and as thou-saies, but we obey him that walk in his statutes, and keep his
ordinances as he has delivered them unto us, therefore t^ou art charged with
the Lies left behind, and they shall stand for thy self, and such in thy
nature]

And thy eight Lie] is where thou says that we are scorners: but scorning we
deny, and also striking at Jesus, or doing as thou says, and therefore thou
art charged with the Lies who makes lying thy refuge.

In thy tench Lie] thou says we are turned with the dog to his vomit, and the
sow that was washed to the wallowing in the mire: and that thou can not
prove, and therefore in it, art the Lier, as also in the other, accompanied
with the tenth Lie, to and in thy sixth page.]

The eleventh, Lie] is in page the seventh, where thou says we impudently
boast of perfection: but impudency, and also boasting as I said before that we
deny, and there in thou art charged with the eleventh Lie]

And in Lie the twelfth] thou says we judge all to be in darkness that
throws not away the rule of truth: But we judge all to be in the light, and
not in darkness, that are led by the Spirit of God, the rule and guide into
all truth, for they that are led by the Spirit of God are we Sons of God, Romans
8.14, etc. Joh. 16.13. Gala. 4.6: and there again thou art charged with
another Lie, which makes up the number a whole dozen, or twelve of thy Lies,
left without proof, take notice thereof and be thou ashamed and Haggar also,
who is thy backer or partaker therein, that has either acted the same or
joined with thee to carry on that deceit, wherein so many Lies are brought
forth and more also, which may be for your shame.

In the thirteenth Lie] Thou says we justify our selves: but
self-justification we do deny: and therefore thou art left charged with the
thirteenth Lie.

And thou says we judge rashly of all men that are not of our mind calling
them Devils, etc. But that is as the rest of thy proofless Lies] though thou
say thou can show it under some of our hands; I charge thee to do it, if thou
can, or else thou art left changed with the fourteenth Lie]

And Lie the fifteenth sixteenth and seventeenth with the other in page the
seventh; Thou says we glory in appearances appearances, having a kind of
voluntary humility, and says we go about to set up our selves, and not the
Lord: but self is by us denied, who walk in obedience to the commands and
teachings of the Spirit of the Lord: and voluntary humility that we deny, and
all false and fleshly appearances which is not the Lords, and therefore the
fifteen sixteen and seventeenth Lies] are left for thee, and shall stand for
thy self, take them in again, for they are returned back into the Liers
generation from whence they come.

And in thy 18 lie] Thou slandereth us with deluding tongues; and Lie the
nineteenth, with outside holiness; and in Lie the twentieth, with and for
throwing dirt in the face of truth.

And in lie 21, Thou says we destroy men by our doctrine, etc.

Lie the 22. Which had its rise from Hell as thou says, but these are but like
the rest of thy lies who art so accustomed to it, and therefore goes on in it,
to manifest thy deluding tongue, lying and hellish doctrine, etc. proceeding
from an Erroneous and deceitful Spirit, for lying and deluding tongues is by
us denied, who walk in obedience to the truth through the Spirit, as such did
2 Pet. 1.22.23. who were borne again and were of the incorruptible seed: and
all outside holiness which is not the holiness of God, is by us denied, and
throwing dirt in the face of truth, shall stand for thy self, who art such an
abominable liar; which is by us denied, and also, all doctrine that is from
darkness and Hell, arid thou can not prove what thou have said; thy witness
is but from darkness, and the corruptions of thy evil heart, and so of thy
self; and not true, therefore the 18. 19. 20, 21. and 22 Lies with the rest of
thy Antichristian work is charged upon thee, and left for thy self and such
as with thee in it, has taken thy part, take notice of thy errors or lies,
and thy Antichristian work.

And thy 23 lie] Is one of thy first heads or ground of thy book; where thou
says, R.F. said, he was a man wholly free from sin and not subject to any one
temptation, such words were not so spoken by me, though to the truth I did
witness as I do still, against thy deceit, and such as thou art, neither
can thou produce them, so set down together, in that my book which thou
pretends thine answer unto, therefore in that thou have made a lie thy refuge,
and grounds much upon it, but if thy first head, or that ground be a lie, then
the rest is but that which the lier has scraped together to guard it withal,
seeking thereby to uphold his deceit, therefore be ashamed that thou should
so utter thy folly, to make thy self manifest as thou have done; But such as
are wholly free from sin, are sanctified by Christ and them, and their
condition I truly love: 1 Cor. 6.11. Heb. 2.10.11. 1. Pet. 4.1.2. and they that
have suffered in the flesh and seized from sin, though they may be tempted, yet
if they be not subject to enter into temptations, they are upheld by the power
of God, and united to Christ, who though he was tempted in all things like unto
us, yet he were not subject to the tempter, neither did he enter into the
temptation; And it is no sin to be tempted, but to obey the tempter, and enter
into temptation that is a sin, and though Christ was tempted, yet he did not
obey the tempter, and therefore did not sin, and such as are united to Christ,
and abides in him, they do not sin as says the Scriptures 1 John 3.6: then
they enter not into temptation, that are so united, and abide with Christ in
that true union, but as he is so are they in this present world, as the
Scripture witnesses, 1 John 4.16.17: Rev. 14.3.4.5: and ant thou offended at
that, if thou be, it is but to show thy dislike to the work of Christ, which is
to take away sin, and thy contradiction to the Scripture, which also witnesses
the same.

And thy 24 lie] Is one of thy grounds or second heads, by which thou labors
to uphold thy deceit, in page the 8 which thou calls the second thing that
Farnsworth as thou says affirmed, that is as thou says, when Paul spoke those
words, in the seventh of the Romans, where he cries out of a body of death,
and of the warfare he had in himself, and to streng then thy lies] thou says
Farnsworth said he was not then converted: lier art thou not ashamed of such an
abominable lie, let the wise hearted search the book written by me, and see if
they can in it find such an affirmative: and thou pretends to write thine, in
answer unto it; and in page the 22 thou says, these are his principles he
says he ownes in his book: oh that a man professing godliness should no more
regard what he says, bur it is good that fools utter their sollie, as thou
have done thine thereby to manifest that deceit which long has lain hid within
thee, but the book shall stand a witness against thee; And that lie thou have
laid as a ground to build upon, but the ground being false the building cannot
stand, therefore thou art left with thy refuge of lies, and the burden thou
must bear who art so acting Antichrists Spirit, and being accustomed to do
evil how can thou do well? be ashamed for ever of thy bundle, or number of
lies] which are so prooflesse, and now are back upon thee returned, and in the
liers generation are left to remain.

And thy 25 lie] is in thy 8th page, which thou says is thy answer to that as
aforesaid, where thou says thou answered and said O man, mind thy error,
what Paul a messenger of the Gospel and so eminent Apostle of Christ and
unconverted! here I charge thee with this lie also, for I neither said that
Paul at that time were unconverted, nor thou made noe such answer then unto
me, and co say thou so answered when thou did not as many may wirnesse that is
gross deceit and double hypocrisy: therefore Pollard, thou therein have made
thy self manifest by thy lying Spirit to be a wicked lier, a gross deceaver,
and a double hypocrit: oh, man! see thy error lies and deceit, and blush, and
also be ashamed for ever: thou pretended to write thy book in answer to mine
but cannot prove such sayings therein, nor Hagger to help thee, yet you have
bended your tongues like your bows for lies, and made them your refuge but
truth sweeps them away or casts them out, turning them upon you, you liers
again, and into the liers generation from whence they came, and all that which
thou have scraped together and Haggar to help thee, for the backing of your
deceit and to manage your lies I pass over, and come to that which thou calls
thy third thing Farnsworth affirmed as thou says, which is thy 26 lie] saying
that where John spoke those words, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, etc. (saying, he said) John did not here speak of himself, but the
people to whom he spoke those words were unconverted.

That is but like unto the rest of thy lies, but thou can not prove such a
saying in my Book, and thou says, those was my principles which I stood by and
owned in my book; and saying so, but cannot prove thy saying therein* I pass by
the rest of thy stuff which thou have scraped together to back or strengthen
thy lie withal, and leave thee charged with that Lie also, which makes up the
number 26.]

And where thou says thou pleads not for a continuance in sin, thy lying also
therein is seen, who art so accustomed to it, and it is hard for thee to leave
it.

And where thou art speaking about trying the Spirits, page 11. Liars has
nothing to do to try them; but thou art a Liar, and has a number of lies
charged upon thee, and therefore thine is tried and known thereby to be a
lying, and so an erring spirit: But thou says, you may honestly argue that, If
they and they only be the friends of God, that walk in obedience to the
Commandments of God, then they must needs be enemies that oppose; but the first
is true, thou says: Then it follows from thy own argument, about the trial of
Spirits, that thou that opposes the truth, art the enemy, and the only enemy
and no friend; for he commands, That every one that names the Name of Christ,
should depart from iniquity, and that they should not lie, etc. 2 Timothy 2.19.
Ephesians. 4.22,23,24,25. but thou art strong in iniquity, and so pleading for it,
that such as obeys the commands of God, in departing from it, and thereby comes
to be freed from it, and be without it; thou would have such to be enemies that
are Gods friends, saying, They have no truth in them (if they be departed from
iniquity so as to have no sin in them) and thus thou crosses the Scriptures,
and obeys not the light, but acts in darkness and opposes the truth, and art
not subject to the commands of God, who art such a Liar, etc. who departs not
from iniquity, but lives in opposition to the truth, and continues in lying, as
is here manifest; therefore thy spirit is tried, and thou art found to be the
enemy of God; and also according to thy own saying, and self confusion:
therefore stop thy mouth, and be silent about speaking of the things of the
Spirit of God, by a lying spirit of error and deceit; for darkness speaks in
thee, and the Serpents head who is yet unbruised in thee.

And where thou art speaking to those thou calls dear friends, saying, Beware
least you be led away with the error of the wicked: Thou art led away with the
error of the wicked thy self, who art so given over to lying, as thou have made
thy self manifest; and being guided by a lying spirit, thou art to be denied;
but thou says, now is the hour of temptation: for if these be not wicked
errors, I know not what is: Yes, thy many lies, which before with the rest that
are set down are so) and the Scriptures which thou so much talks of, has not
kept thee for falling into them) but thou would put it off, and say they are
those which are laid down to their view, which Farnsworth did stand by to
vindicate, if his own testimony may stand.

Here again I charge thee to be a liar and a false accuser, and that they was
not so testified by Farnsworth, as thou have set them down, thinking thereby to
strengthen thy deceit; neither can thou prove them to be so in his testimony
or book, which thou have written thine in answer unto; and there thou art
proved the Liar in that as well as the rest, and therefore thou art left with
them charged upon thee, and there they are to remain: clear thy self if thou
can; for this book does not clear thee, but lets thy filthiness more appear,
neither does it at all weaken the book thou pretendest it against, but it
stands yet for the truth against thy deceit; as this does stand to witness
against thy lies, which in thine thou have scraped together or heaped up, to
manifest that thou art not builded upon the rock, and therefore thy building
cannot stand, who makes lies thy refuge, being set upon the sand, as thy lies
and confusion makes it manifest; for the tree is known by its fruits, as thou
art by thine, Matthew. 7.15. And where thou say to the Reader, that we deny the
rule of Trial to try the spirits withal, that is another of thy lies.

For in thy 28. Lie, page the 14. thou say, The rule of trial to try the
spirits withal, is thrown away by them.

And in thy 29 Lie, Thou say, it is become of none use to those men, except
it be for advantage: take notice of thy Lies, and also of thy own confusion
within thy exception (for that which is for a good use and right advantage) is
not thrown away, but made use of; but the trial or Tryer spirits is not by us
thrown away, though thou say it is, but made use of, according to thy saying in
thy self-confutation, and it is both advantageous and profitable for us, and
also to try your deceits; withal take notice of that, and take heed how thou
utterest thy folly as thou have done.

And where thou say many poor souls have been misled, as to say that which
men call sin does as highly honor God, as that which men call Prayers, and holy
performances, and faith; these things thou have heard uttered by mouth, and
seen in print, and has, as it were, cast it as a slander upon upon us; and
does accuse us with it, where thou say this is their principle; and how does
it open a door of looseness, page 14. Such Principles we do deny, and thy
slander also, and all that knows our Principles and practice may witness
against thee in thy filthy Slanders: And I charge thee in the presence of the
Lord, and also Haggar thy partaker, to prove that ever such things were ever
spoken or printed by us, or else be ashamed for ever, and own condemnation upon
your wicked lies and gross errors, who are so far misled, as to act Antichrists
part; making lies your refuge, seeking thereby to hold up your deceir.

And to thy fourth, That thou says Farnsworth affirmed that Christ had not a
visible Church in the world; for thou says they are his principles set down
in his book, that the Church was in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is
in his books: that he affirms, and the Scriptures witnesses the same, 1
Thessalon. 1.1. 2 Thessalo. 1.1. and that the Church is made of living stones
elect and precious, a spiritual house for God to dwell in by the Spirit, and
officers and overseers were made by the Holy Ghost, and he is not visible for
the world sees him not, neither knows him and that is in his book; and the
Scriptures witnesses the same, at which thou art offended, 1 Pet. 2.5.6. John
14 17. Ephesians. 2.20.21.22. Acts 20.28. And God is a Spirit and his Church is
spiritual, and they endured as seeing him who is invisible, which thou
appears to be ignorant of, and thou says to manifest thy darkness and
ignorance therein, because Farnsworth, tells of an invisible or spiritual
Church he thou says is no member nor officer in that Church because he is a
visible man: as much as to say, Paul that eminent Apostle, because he was a
visible man (as to the outward body) his visible or bodily absence did exclude
his invisible or spiritual presence from the Church; and that is contrary to
the Scriptures, and Crosses his experience, and spiritual doctrine also, who
him-self said that tho he was absent in body, yet he was present in Spirit
beholding their order, Col. 2.5. then it was a spiritual order, and rule or
government in the Church, and the visible and bodily absence of Paul did not
exclude his invisible or spiritual presence, but that thou art blind in the
things of God, the Spirit of God, as the Serpents seed ever was, and (according
to that former saying of thine) because Christ was visiblely ascended, far
beyond all Heavens, Acts. 1.11. Jesus of Nazareth could not be invisibly
persecuted by the contrary Spirits invisible men, etc. And that is cross to the
Scriptures, for after Christ was so visiblely ascended, he spoke to Saul that
persecuted his seed, and he said Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me: he said
Lord who art thou that I persecute? he said I am Jesus of Nazareth, and he were
ascended far beyond all Heavens, Acts 9.4.5.

When he were invisible by a contrary Spirit in a visible man, so persecured,
or his seed in his Saints, and such as were his Church that was chosen out of
the world, Joh. 15.18.19: which Church thou have showed thy ignorance of, and
thy blindness in.

That Farnsworth should say or affirm that all ordinances ceased when Christ
ascended and gave the Spirit; was never so spoken by him, neither can thou
find such a saying in that book which thou pretends to write thine in answer
unto: therefore thy ground or fifth head being false, so is thy scraped up
stuff, and turned under by which thou seeks to make a cover, and thou art also
left charged, with that thy 30 Lie]

And where thou have gathered many Scriptures in thy book, about the Spirits
teaching and Baptism, etc: thou says when thou instanced those Scriptures
before, which thou have set down, thou says Farnsworth said that was not
water Baptism: here thou have lied again, and that is thy 31 Lie] saying thou
did before mention those Scriptures when thou did not then mention them, and
thou says many can witness it, but then it must be against thee and thy lies
as I have done.

That one Scripture thou did mention, of Ananias going to Saul, and saying,
Arise brother Saul and be Baptized and wash away thy sins: whereupon I asked
thee if your water Baptism did or could wash away sins, and thou stood and
gave little or no answer therein, as many can witness; And if nothing can wash
away sins but the blood of Christ or the water of regeneration, then it must
needs be that the Baptism which washes away sins, is either by one Spirit
into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. and so into Christ, Gal. 3.27: and into the blood
or life of the Covenant, or else into the holy unction and water of
regeneration, where there is but one faith, one Lord, one God and Father of all
them that are borne of the Spirit, and so Baptized into that one Baptism, Ephesians.
4.4.5.6. But thou could not witness that your outward water Baptism did or
could wash away sins, then it is not that Baptism which does: and being
confounded in thy self, thou would have gone forth of the doors, but that I
took thee by the arm, and stayed thee awhile, and spoke to thee till thou
could not tell what to say for thy self, but said the letter (which thou
called the written word) and the Spirit were inseparable, and then said, the
letter was a History: And I told thee if I should have called it a History,
then others would have been ready to have called that blasphemy: and being put
to prove thy sayings thou could not, but to thy shame got from me, and went
away, and they of thy own company spoke to thee of it and were grieved to see
thy folly so made manifest, as many can witness; but in that I cease, and let
the other book witnese in that thing and the rest, further to, and for the
truth, against thy deceit.

And in thy 32 lie] Being so accustomed to it, thou says we wickedly speak
against Christ and his ordinances; But wickedness and wicked speaking we deny,
who own, honor and dearly love the Lord Jesus Christ and his ordinances: and
speaking wickedly against them shall stand for thy self and such liers and
false accusers as thou art, and that is thy 32 lie]

And in thy 33 lie] Thou says, that when I asked thee, whether thy water
Baptism did or could wash away sins, in thy book to make a cover and manifest
thy lying Spirit the more, (in that as well as in the rest of thy lies thou
have done) thou says thou told me such words as is expressed in thy 17. page,
when there was then no such thing by thee done, and therefore in that thou have
lied of thy self, but lying is thy work, and that Spirit which guides thee is
accustomed to it; And in page 19, thou says, we have a spirit of delusion
(that is thy 34th lie) coming from Hell and darkness; but cannot prove it; yet
that spirit by which thou art taught, of old Antichrist to delude, which has
caused thee to utter these lies, is such a one; and therefore what thou art
guilty of, thou would cast upon us; but we deny thy spirit of delusion and
lies, and testify against it and thee, and such hellish darkness as thou art
possessed withal, that regards not what falsely against us and the truth thou
ventest but it touches us not; and therefore turns back upon thee again and
is to be cast into the bottomless pit from whence it came.

Lie the 35] that spits out such venom against the ordinances of Jesus Christ:
that is thy own, and turns back upon thee again, for Christ Jesus and his
ordinances and worship in Spirit, and spiritualI ordination, we honor and own;
but spitting of venom comes out of thy breast, take it into thy old bottle, from
whence it came.

And for thy 6th thing or head, is another of thy lies, and makes thy number
36] such words as are there set down, was not set down in my book, which
thou pretends to write this in answer unto, therefore the absurdities spoken of
and also the lies, is turned back upon thee again, page 20. 21. For the
Scriptures I own, and that holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost: 2 Pet. 20.21. but liers like thee I deny and against testify, Ephesians.
5.11. and the Scriptures serves to be a witness against such as profess them
in words and walk contrary to them in life and conversation, but liers
slanderers and false accusers do so, as thou and Haggar and Griffith and such
like does; and therefore the Scriptures does witness against you, and your
generation and seed of evil doers; And such has the benefit and comfort of
the Scriptures, as are guided by the holy Spirit into the life and power from
whence good Scripture words proceeded, yet the letter is not the life, Joh.
5.39.40. and power of God to salvation, but Christ and the Gospel is, which the
letter or Scriptures declares and testifies of: Joh. 14.6. 1 John 5.12: Act.
4.12. Hebr. 5.8,9. Romans 1.16.

But thou seems as if thou would have a letter God, a letter Christ, a letter
Spirit, and a letter power to salvation, or set the letter (or Scripture) up as
God and Christ and power of God to salvation, for thou says faith comes by
hearing (the Scriptures preached) which thou calls the Gospel; and if by it,
thou says, then not without it: and so according to that, no Scripture, no
faith, no salvation: for without faith it is impossible to please God (and be
saved) but according tothy saying or false doctrine; no Scripture no faith; and
so making Scripture the moving cause of men's salvation: for if there can be no
says without the Scripture, then Christ might not be the author of it, neither
upon that account could he give faith if the Scripture were wanting, and if
there an be no faith without the Scripture, thou would not have Christ to be
the author and finisher of it, but the letter, and so sets the Scripture in the
room of Christ, saying, take away the Scripture, which thou calls the cause,
and then the effect thou says cease: so, no Scripture, no savtation upon thy
account, as much as to say the Scripture is the cause of man's salvation, (and
not Christ) and rake away the Scripture, the cause and the effect cease; mind
your Error or Lies herein
Christ cannot give faith nor save without them, and by that means or
according to that saying or false doctrine (of Haggars and thine, for he has
backed thee in it) no faith without the Scripture, though Christ be the way to
faith and the moving cause of it; and so both the beginning and ending, or
author and finisher of it, as the Scripture says, and says Christ, without
me you can do nothing, then not believe without him, for he is the way to the
Father: Joh. 14.6. and so to faith who is both the author and finisher of it:
Hebr. 12.2, and here thou have showed thy ignorance of the Gospel, and moving
cause of faith and salvation, and thou have contradicted the Scriptures and
preferred them before Christ; and without them thou would have no salvation,
and so would not have Christ to be (a perfect Savior without them nor to be)
perfectly able to save to the uttermost, all those that come unto God by him,
though he be as the Scripture witnesses Hebr 7.27. neither is there any
salvation, without him, Act. 4.12. and as he is the author of faith so he is
the author of eternal salvation to all that obey him, Hebr. 5.8.9. And thou
says, to destroy the ordinances of preaching the Scriptures (for that is thy
drift) by which faith comes, must needs tend to destroy faith, thou says, and
then please God who can? That is thy saying, but thy design (instead of these
men) is weighed, that goes about to give the Scripture all the pre-eminence,
and set it up as God and Christ, and no salvation without it, but thou art
contradicted by it, who says also that the Scripture brings to Christ: then it
must needs be the ground and cause of faith and salvation if so: but thou have
therein erred, and lied, of Christ and the Scriptures in that thy 37th lie] for
Christ and the Scriptures will both contradict thee in thy lies and errors,
for Christ brings to understand the Scriptures: Luke 14.32: and says, without
me ye can do nothing: then he is the ground of faith, and knowing God, who
gives an understanding to know him that is true, etc. as the Scripture
witnesses: 1 John..20; and the Spirit reveals even the deep things of God:
but thou says if they can once bring a poor soul into this condition to
disowne the Scriptures, when he stands most in need of it, to bring him to
Christ, and show him how he ought to walk so as to please God, etc: Here thou
have confirmed thy former saying and strengthened thy deceit with thy lies,
and set the letter of the Scripture, in the room of the Spirit, for the Spirit
does guide into all truth, Joh. 14.16. Joh. 16.13. and show things to come, and
so how to walk to please God, for they that are guided by the Spirit of God
are the Sons of God: Romans 8.14. etc. and walk in the Spirit, whereby they
please God Romans 8.1. for God has sent the Spirit of his Son, into the hearts
of his Children, Gal. 4.6. to teach and guide them, 1 John 3.1. Romans 8: and
show them how to walk to please him: Gal. 5.22.23.24. etc: which Spirit of God
and his teachings thou have showed thy ignorance [in, and] of, now as well as
before, that said the letter (which thou calledst the written word) and the
Spirit were inseparable, and said the scripture were a History; and that book
which thy lies has not weakened, stands still with this to witness against
thee and thy deceit, and such as thou art.

the 37. Error or Lie
The Scripture thou says is a perfect rule to walk by: that confirms thy
other lies also, page 22. Here thou contradicts the promise and doctrine of
Christ: Joh. 14.15.16,17. who promised and gave his Spirit to be a perfect rule
to walk by and guide into all truth, Joh, 16,13, Gal. 4.6. Romans 8. and here
thou have manifested another error, or thy 37 lie]

Again thou says, the Scriptures is the guide into the way of truth and
peace, and so has put the letter to guide instead of the Spirit, which Spirit
Christ calls a guide, to guide into all truth: John 16.13. and so into the way
of truth and peace, Joh. 14.20.26. and here thou have lied of Christ and the
Spirit which is the true guide, and has set the letter of the Scriptures to
guide into the way of truth and peace: but they have not guided thee out of
error, lying and deceit, nor into the way of truth and peace that art charged
here, with thy 37. or 38 lies] besides what follows after: and therefore thy
Spirit is tried and known to be the Spirit of error; who has made lies thy
refuge, which thou art found in, and so out of the way of truth and peace; And
where thou says thou have given them his principles, thou might have said,
thou have laid them down thy own errors, to wit the lies and slanders, which
I have left charged upon thee in several particulers.

And where thou seems to be offended, because I said that thou came on purpose
to the meeting at Harleston to cavil: that thou did, as thy fruits and lies
made thee manifest, and many may witness the same.

Secondly, thou says, I say thou told of a visible Church in the world: that
is not denied but witnessed unto as it stands in my book.

Thirdly, thou says, I say in my book that thou said the letter etc the Spirit
was inseparable. And that the officers and overseers in that Church which
Christ had purchased with his blood, were made by the holy Ghost; I do not
deny, but witness unto: Act. 20.28 and thy shuffles, does not prove what thou
would compass by thy reason, to have a temporal or carnal Church and
temporal, or carnal officers therein for that which is seen is temporal, but
that which is not seen is eternal and they looked not carnally at things which
were visible and seen, as thou do, as they do witness, 2 Cor. 4.17 18. who
said, For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us, a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things
which are visible, or seen, but at the things which are invisible and not
seen: and 2 Cor. 4.17. and 18: for we walk by faith and not by outward and
visible sight in the things of the Spirit of God, etc: 1 Cor. 5.7, which are
spiritually enjoyed, and the holy Ghost who is invisible dwells within; Joh.
14.17. and is invisible where the world sees him not, to guide into all truth,
such as obey and follow the same, and though Paul and the rest (as to the
outward) were visible men, yet their knowledge were not after the flesh as
thine is, neither did they look carnally at the things of God as thou do,
who argues so carnally, for they knew no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16.17.
and as their knowledge stood in the Spirit and spiritual things about the
worship of God, ( Joh. 4.23) Phi. 3.3. in the Spirit, so their offices were in
the Spirit and overseers made by the holy Ghost, and they preached by the
Spirit Act. 2.4. and 2 Cor. 3.6. and prayed with the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14.15 and
went forth to preach by the Spirit, in the power of the holy Ghost, Acts 1.8.
Act. 2.4. Act. 6.10, Acts 7.54.55. Acts 6.3. and Act. 13.4. Gal. 1.11.12. and
15 16: and the Spirit had the rule and government, in the Church: and the
spiritual man, but not the natural, because the things of the Spirit of God
are and were spiritually discerned and reveiled, 1 Cor. 2.10. and where thou
says Farnsworth, folly is discovered in thy 24 page, instead of his it is
thine, that art so ignorant of the work of the spirit, and the hidden man of
the heart, and knows not the office of the holy Ghost, that would ascribe his
work to the outward man, when such as were endued with it, said that though
their outward man did decay, yet their inward man were renewed day by day, and
as the worship of God stood in the spirit, so the offices and government in the
Church were by the Spirit and spiritual, and he that was spiritual Judged all
things, 1 Cor. 12.15. and not he that was natural and carnal as thou art, and
would have it, who wants salt to savor withal, and therefore art good for
nothing but to be cast out and trodden under, etc: And that saying shall stand
thy self: where thou calls me a Child of the Devil, in page 24] who thy self
art the lier in such a measure, and so of thy Father the Devil: Joh. 8.44. and
thou continues doubling thy lies, saying, I should say all ordinances ceased
when Christ ascended: that is but one of thy former lies renewed over, who may
see plainly (as thou says) from whence thou art sent, and whose errand thou
art going on, not of Christ's; who art such a lier, etc: but of Antichrists: and
it is plain that thou art of thy Father the Devil, who was a lier from the
beginning, and he has taught thee thy gradations in his Antichristian school,
and made thee his Nuntio, or publisher of lies, and in lying he has taught
thee to be cunning and deceiptfull in the work of that sort, as thy book of
lies errors and standers makes it appear.

Thou demands of me, where ever any of the words of Christ, or his Apostles
are called letter, and to answer thy own demand by thy busy mind, and show
thy folly or self confutation in the same, page 25] where thou speaks of the
sufficiency of the Ministers of Christ in the new Covenant, thou says God made
them able Ministers of the same covenant, not of the letter but of the Spirit:
there is thy own answer, and words called letter by Christ's Apostles: 2 Cor.
3.6. which serves for thy confutation, and says Paul, an Apostle of Christ, to
the Galatians, Ye see how large a letter, I have written unto you: etc. Gal.
6.11.

And what are writings but letters? Paul wrote to the Corinthians, but not
without letters: 1 Cor. 5.9. and 11. and John wrote not a new commandment;
when he wrote with Paper and Ink, such a letter; 2 Epistle of John, 5. and 12
verses, and the writings are Printed and set down in letters: but that the
fool must needs utter his folly, in that foolish demand which a wise man
would not have done, but it is good that presumptious proud fools utter their
folly and the deceit of their heart, that others who truly fears God may
learn to be wise least they do, as in this filthy standerous book, Thomas
Pollard and Henry Hagger has done.

And where thou says page 25] thou art sure if Paul and the other Apostles
were alive, you would call them Pharisees, etc.

But in that, thy assurance is false and thy imaginations has misinformed thy
mind, and taught thee to lie and speak falsely, in that as well as the rest: to
manifest thy number or 41th lie] in thy book of slanders.

And in thy 26 page] Thou utters more of thy lies saying we reject the holy
Commandment and ordinances of Christ; (because we submit not to your will
worship) but the holy Commandments and ordinances of Christ we do not refuse
nor reject who are subject to his power, and obey his commands, and the truth
through the spirit, whereby our souls comes to be purified, as such, that were
subjects to Christ, was, 1 Pet. 1.23.23. therefore the slander shall stand for
thy self, which is thy 42 lie] And where thou says, O you scorners how long
will ye delight in scorning, to call the holy scriptures deaa letter, and
carnal as you do: but scorning and delighting in it, that we deny, and
therefore thou have added thy 43 lie] And the Scriptures calls themselves,
letter, and speaks of a carnal Commandment, and if thou be offended at that,
thou seems to be offended at the penmen and writers of them for calling them
so in their writings: Gal. 6.11. 2 Cor. 3.6. who served not in the oldnesse of
the letter, but in the newness of the Spirit, Romans 7.6. Romans 2.29. in the new
Covenant, which Christ did establish Heb. 10.9. who was made the Saints high
Priest, not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an
endless life: Hebrew 7.16.

And in thy 44 lie] thou says we speak reproach fully against the Gospel of
Christ: but all such as obey the Gospel of Christ, which is to them the power
of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. and are sufferers for it, such do nor reproach
it, but are reproached as we are by thee and such like, as the Saints were, but
we are called, not only to believe but also to suffer, for his namessake,
Philip 1.29. which is our joy in that he has counted us worthy: And where thou
says that I said, thou called the Bible a History, so thou did as many can
witness, and how thou would put it off with a lie, saying thou said, what will
you call it, a History History? when thou did not so say, except it were
after, and there thou have told thy 45 lie)

And then thou says, if there be a mystery in the Scripture, there must be a
History, and thou goes about to prove a mystery and so a History, to uphold thy
deceit withal; but thy covers are too narrow for thee, they will not hide
thee, but leaves thee bare: for when thou have labored to prove a mystery, in
thy conclusion thou finds it in man, for thou says, great is the mystery of
godliness Christ in you the hope of glory, citing Col, 1.27: then Christ in
man is the mystery, and man is the History in which he is kept according to thy
saying, take notice of that: but yet thou art left with thy saying, and has
not yet cleared thy self with thy shuffle, but goes on in lying, saying, dear
friends, these men destroys not the ordinances of Christ only, but Gospel
order also. But Gospel order we own, and honor the ordinances of Jesus Christ
in our souls, and they are kept by that power that preserves them for being
destroyed, and therefore thou have in thy slanders told other 2 lies which
makes thy number amount to the sum of 47 lies) to and in thy 27 page)

And where thou art speaking of Christ's coming to John to be Baptized of him,
saying it became them to fulfill all righteousness, etc. If John and Christ
fulfilled all righteousness in that administration and dispensation, what was
there left behind for you to fulfill in it? But passing by that, I come to thy
48 lie) page the 29. passing by many in the 28 page, saying we go about, to
destroy order, and that we will not come into the prophetical office, etc: but
these and the rest of thy lies proceeds from the same spirit of thy Father,
John. 8.44. who says thou dare be bold to say we are Ministers of Antichrist,
etc: so art thou bold to go on in lies as thou have done, being led by a lying
spirit, as the Jews were bold to call the master of the house Beelzebub, but it
was not so, because a lying spirit led them to say so, neither are we so (as
thou says) because thou lier that has uttered so many lies art by a lying
spirit led to say so, and has no proof for the same, but instead of proving
proving what thou have falsely affirmed, thou goes on boldly to lie, without
proof still, saying, without question if Peter were now alive, you would say
he were an hypocrite, and one that rested in the letter: but in that (as well
as the rest) thy imaginations, has taught thee lie without question; and so
added one more to thy number of lies] And Peter when he went to preach to the
Gentiles did not rest in the letter, for the Spirit bad him go, and gave him
commission which thou art a stranger unto, and continues in lying, which both
the letter and the Spirit forbids, if thou had any regard unto either thou
would not do as thou do and herein have done, but the lying Spirit has
possessed thee and thou art without a bit or bridle for thy tongue, and so thy
religion must needs be vain; And (being given over to lie) thou asks where
our pity and tenderness is, toward any that are not (as thou says)
blackmouthed as you are, to rail against the Scriptures and ordinances as you
do, page 29. That stands for thy self where thou have added 2 lies more which
makes thy number 49. lies] which is by us denied and against testified, because
we can have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness but rather
reprove them: Ephesians. 5.11.; And to that, where thou says thou art slandered, in
saying that Christ had not judgment committed to him whilst he were on the
earth, that was so spoken and also pleaded for by thee, as many can witness,
and therefore no slander is cast upon thee, but the same that came from thee in
that, which is left upon thee the slanderer, there to remain; who would be
unburdened, but thy burden thou must bear, that would cast it off, but cannot:
and there is added thy 50th lie]

And the 51 is in page the 32] which shall stand for your selves that make it
your work to slander, falsely accuse and so to lie, who (as thou says) make it
(instead of theirs) your work to draw away souls from the word and ordinance
of Christ, (in the Spirit, etc) but what will you do at that day (as thou
says) when he comes to render vengance upon the ungodly, and all liers falls
accusers and such like that obey not his Gospel, who still continues in thy
lying, saying we say we are past the eternal judgment, and justify our
selves, but cannot prove it, and self justification we deny and own the
eternal judgment, as such did Hebr. 6. but saying we are past; it, that is a
wicked lie, whereby the lying Spirit has taught thee to add 2 more, which
makes up thy number 53]

And where thou says my ignorance is seen, in judging all without making a
difference, (which I do not) and that is thy folly and ignorance, to speak
so rashly and unadvisedly, and cannot prove thy saying, therefore thou art left
charged with the 54 lie]

And where thou says, thou gives all men to understand that thou ownest not
the word of God for thy rule, that shall stand for thee, for liers and
false-accusers must needs, disown the word of God for their rule, because it
testifies against them and judges them, but thou art a lier etc fals-accuser,
and charged here with 55 lies] besides what follows and therefore the word of
God is not thy rule, to guide into such deceit, but with it thou art reproved,
and with the light of God and his word, art thou lier and fals-accuser judged
and to be condemned, and in that saying of thine and denying the word of God
for thy rule in condemning all that follow the ordinances or Christ, equally
with those that observe traditions of men in the worship of God, as Pope,
prelate, and other sprinklers do, I set thy lie aside and turn it into the
number of thy 56 lies] and Pope, prelate, and the sprinklers shall stand for
thy self, that art in the nature and deceit of that wicked seed, as those are
that denies ordinances of Christ in the Spirit, and observe traditions, etc:
take notice of that, whose lying Spirit has led thee to utter thy folly and
lay open the wickedness of thy heart, in venting so many of thy mischeivous
lies and envious slanders, which are turned back upon thee again, for here is
no room for them with us: truth casts them out, because it delights to be
kept pure and clear.

And where thou says, thou shall answer briefly to that saying of Paul, Christ
sent me not to Baptize but to preach: the weight of thy answer is in thy 2
argument, where thou says, it Paul was fit to be employed in the greater then
I am sure this lesser is required. But Paul was employed in the greater, that
is to say to preach the Gospel, then Baptism which is the lesser is of him
required: that is thy answer and proof, which stands upon thy own witness,
where thou says, thou art sure of it, but does not prove it by that: for if I
argue in the contrary it, will overturne that, if such as (are and) were not
sent by Christ for to Baptize with outward water, were (and are) not by Christ
required so to do, then they that are not sent by Christ for to Baptize with
outward water, are not required so to do; but Paul was not sent by Christ for
to baptize with outward water, or required so to do: and where is thy
selfassurance, once? For Paul has confessed and said, that Christ sent him not
(then required him not) to baptize; but to preach: 1 Cor. 1.17.

But thy breife answer is not to the ground of the question by me propounded,
saying in my other book, where was Paul sent by commission to baptize, and why
was there a necessity laid upon him for to preach, and not to baptize, seeing
the care of the Church was committed to him, and he knew the whole counsel of
God: 1 Cor. 9.16.17.18. 1 Cor. 1.17. Acts 20.28.29.

And where did he, in declareing the whole Counsel of God, preach up water
baptism, as the door by which all must enter; and the foundation upon which all
must build, or else no Church fellowship, nor salvation without it? as some
water-baptists (and they at Soylby) did ignorantly affirm; but could not prove
their saying therein, and yet is to prove, and the question to answer in the
ground and true meaning, which thou have but made a poor shuffle in.

Error or Lies 58. 59 60.
But to come on to turn thee thy lies back upon thee again in page, the 38.
there is thy 58. 59. and 60 lies] where thou says, as the Pharisees were
without mercy, so are you: but thy testimony is false therein, and where thou
says, you look for justification by the law, and by following the imaginations
of an evil heart in you.

And thy 60 lie] is where thou says, you are now through unbeleife departed
from the pure way of the Lord; those lies shall stand for thy self, for the
pure way of the Lord, which is Christ the true light, we are not departed from,
but walk in, Joh. 1.9. Joh. 14.6. Joh. 8.12: And such as say we are departed
from the pure way, when we walk in it, they must needs be guided by a lying and
an erring Spirits, as thou art: and as we walk and so abide in him, he keeps
us, and teaches us also to show mercy to the objects of it, and being
merciful, we obtain mercy and are blessed, as to such Christ in his doctrine
has said, Mat. 5. verse the 7th] but we are taught also to reprove the deceit
and to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5,11. at
which thou and the Serpents seed are offended, as they were at Christ our
example [in mercy and way to the Father] who called them a generation of
vipers, and said, how shall you escape the damnation of hell Mat. 23.33] And he
who is our peace and way to the Father [to wit, Christ Jesus] is our
justification, and sanctification also, for by his blood are we justified and
by his life are we saved ( Romans 5.8.9.10,11. 1 Cor. 1.30) and not as thou
falsely says: therefore thou art left charged with those three lies that I have
here answered, which makes thy number 60)

And being given over to lie, thou art doubling or trebling them, where thou
art slandering and accuseing us falsely, for thou says; As the Pharisees
boasted more of themselves, then any other people (that shall stand for your
selves, that stick in the shadows, as they did after the substance was come)
but thou says, so are these men boasting of perfection; But, boasting we deny:
yet we witness to the truth as before is said, and therefore thou art here
charged with another lie, so making thy number 61) and thou says, we boast of
perfection, as the book declares: but the book does not say or declare that we
boast of perfection, perfection, and therefore thou have belied the book as the
wise hearted may see, and that shall stand for thy 62 lie)

And going on to lie, (making it thy work so to do) thou says they make it
their whole work to overthrow the rule of the Scripture, and all the ordinances
thereof; but we do not as thou says, and therefore thou art left charged with
other 2 lies which makes thy number 64) The Rule or ground of the Scriptures,
is that from which they did proceed; but the holy Scriptures and ordinances
thereof, proceeded from God and his Spirit, and to say that God and his Spirit,
and so the rule of the Scriptures, etc: can be overthrown, that is absurdity
(or mere blasphemy) and we do not seek to do it, neither is it any part of our
work to do as thou says, therefore take notice, and be for ever ashamed of
such thy absurdities (or blasphemy) and lies, that makes it thy business to
lie and-goes on in it; saying, they throw aside all the Laws and Ordinances of
the Lord Jesus, that is but to fill up thy number of lies and makes it amount
to 66) and many more which I pass by, which is not here mentioned, but these
may serve to let thee see thy folly: and that others may see by what a lying
and erring Spirit thou art guided and led, that makes it thy business to lie,
and so to sin and serve thy Father the Devil, Joh. 8.44. Romans 6.16. and see
thy portion for thy Fathers work: and remember that liers are for the lake,
Rev. 21.8. And where thou would raise several lies upon me, from what is
written in the beginning of my book, about the worships of God, etc: it is but
as the rest of thy lies and deceitful work, and therefore lies having no
force in them to weaken the truth, the book shall and does clear it selie of
thee: And this shall be a witness or further testimony against thy lying
refuge, which truth sweeps away, or turns back upon thee and thy partakers
again: and keeps it self pure and clean, so for to remain.

Take notice of another trick which the deceit and that lying Spirit has
taught thee, where thou art speaking against the plain and proper language (of
thee and thou) which thou says is a proper language to any single person, and
afterward says it is not binding or to be performed. If the wicked used it as
well as the godly, in former ages, what a poor shift is that, for thou says
if in all ages we find the Lords people useing this term (and proper language
of thee and thou to a single person, etc.) and they only useing of it, then
(thou says) it is granted that you err, in that thing (if you do it not): but
if the worst of men used it as well as the best of men, then it is not binding,
or to be performed, thou says.

As much as to say; though truth be truth, and right and proper, and ought to
be obeyed and walked in, yet because wicked men and enemies to it profess it,
as well as the godly and upright (that in obedience to the Lord do practice it)
then it is not binding and to be walked in, etc. Oh horible delusion!

And as much as to say, because the Devil and his disciples made use of the
Scriptures (for their own ends) as well as the godly did, for the truths
defense, yet according to thy argument they are not binding to be walked in,
etc. because the Devil and wicked men made use of them; as Christ and his
disciples and the best of men did, etc: And so thou says the term thee and
thou, is the proper (or true and right) speech to any single person, yet
because the Devil and the worst of men used it, as Christ and the best of men
did, therefore it is not binding, to be performed and practiced (thou says):
oh, horible deceit!

Though I pass by many of thy lies, yet I cannot but put thee in mind of some
more of them, and turn them back upon thee again, in page 29) first thou art
Quering and says Quisitively, is not your mercy and pity, turned into
bitterness and hatred? etc: here thou shows thou knows not, but art quiering
by thy dark mind into the things: then presently after in the same page thou
adds 4 lies as thy proof after thou hay fasly affirmed the same; which makes
thy number of lies (70 or threescore and tenn) Thou in thy false affirmative,
raised from thy dubious dark quisitive, says that our mercy and pity is
turned into hatred and bitterness, that is one lie] and as appears by your
words calling the Church of Christ, Antichrist, that is a third lie and calling
Saints deceivers, that is two lies] and thirdly your calling the Gospel letter,
that is a fourth lie] and calling thy Ordinances Carnal, that is thy fifth
lie) which increases thy number, to one more: here thou brings four lies to
back thy false affirmative from thy dubious dark qui^tive before mentioned, and
so thou all along has made lies thy refuge, as in this book appears: but
where thou have out of dubiousnesse and darkness asked the question in saying,
is not your mercy, etc: turned into bitterness toward all men, etc: instead
of letting us have answered therein, thou affirms falsely in thy slander, or
answer to thy self: saying your mercy is turned into bitterness etc: and thy
proof for the same is four lies as aforesaid; But we call not the Church of
Christ Antichrist as thou have said, for we call it the body of which Christ is
head as the Scripture witnesses: Ephesians, 1.22.23: and therefore that lie turns
of from us and back upon you again: secondly we call not Saints deceivers, but
we call them the beloved of God: 1 John 3.1. and the friends and brethren of
Christ; as the Scripture witnesses even the faithful in Christ Jesus: Ephesians. 1.
Colos. 1. Joh. 17.16.17, Joh. 15.15: and Hebrew 2.11] Thirdly we call not the
Gospel letter; but we call it glad tidings: and also the power of God to
salvation as the Scripture witnesses, Romans 1.15.16: and fourthly, we call not
the ordinances of Christ carnal, but spiritual; therefore Hagger and Pollard,
and such deceivers, your lies are turned back upon you again and they shall
stand for your selves and such as you are, and being turned back into the liers
generation: that they may there remain and tarry with you and the Serpents
seed from whence they came, and so your lies does not prove our mercy and
pity, to be turned into hatred and bitterness, for hatred and bitterness we
do deny, but mercy and pity we own, and therefore the hatred and bitterness
shall stand for your selves, and liers such as you are; and where thou says,
so by your words, page the 39. we may easily see what your hearts be full of
instead of mercy, malice, that stands for your selves and makes your number of
lies 71] and instead of pity persecution, that is 72] and that also stands
upon you, for instead of persecuting, we are (for our love and faithfulness
to the Lord Jesus) by such as you persecuted, and therefore malice and
persecution turns off from us, and runs into your ground, and into the
Serpents seat where it is found; And where thou tells of persecuting with the
tongue, saying it is a weapon that strikes deep; that shall stand for thee
Pollard, and Hagger, and for liers and fals-accusers like you, who bend your
tongues like your bows for lies, to shoot your slanders and arrows of
reproaches, at the innocent, and Children of light (which you in scorn call
Quakers) and such hands thou says thou shall suspect would per^ecute with
weapons as thy words implies, page 39] if they had power, out that slander
turns off from us, take it in again, and keep it with thee whose heart is
seen (and as thou says) ^led with malice, but there is thy deceit hatched
and brought forth out of thy malicious heart, and thy ground of judgment, is
false suspicion, who have made a lie thy proof and grounded it upon deceit,
thereby to manifest the malice and wickedness of thy heart, and thy judgment:
and slanders being false, turns back upon thee again, from whence they came,
with the rest of thy lies, which I do not here name, but those that searches
thy book and Haggens may meet with the same, therefore passing by much of thy
filthiness and deceit that: it may remain from whence it came, I shall come
on after a while to Henry Haggers considerations and Queries, or rather lies,
fals-accusations, and wicked slanders, and I shall speak something in answer to
them.

AN Answer in short to Henry Haggers consideration, and Queries as he calls
them, with a reproof to his lies and slanders, also: and for joining with the
lier and slanderer in his deceiptfull book, which this is in Answer unto.
HEnry Hagger, that pretends his Queries to search and try Spirits, and shows
his deceiptfullnesse, and forwardness therein, before he had propounded them,
he might have answered us those that Pollard has left: unanswered, and also
the Queries that we sent to the baptized people, at Lough-borrow side,
Earlshilton, and Coventry side, to his Brethren there which they never yet sent
us an answer of; though we answered theirs, by or from Fairbrother, that were
sent unto us, that so by the answer to them, and those sent in the end of the
book to Coventry side, his Spirit might have been a little more manifest and
tried, as theirs was that subscribed their late act, with the names of six or
seven Elders and brethren in that Coventry law, in which the baptized people
said that they denied any to be Ministers of Christ, that preached from an
internal light, etc: and so denied the Ministers and ministry of Christ in the
new Covenant therein, and shut themselves out as in the answer I showed them,
and there error therein.

And secondly, in that late Coventry law, the baptized people there said that
they denied any to be members of Christ, that either went themselves or
suffered others to go hear them that preached from internal light, etc: and
so showed their darkness and Crossed the Scriptures and ministry of the new
Covenant therein: but that was in the same book answered, wherein their Spirit
was tried, who in that Coventry act did also, deny liberty in the Churches for
any to object in the time of preaching or after, etc.

And they said also that the secrets of all hearts should be judged at the
latter day by the written word, or the letter of the Scripture; so taking the
ministry and judgment, from Christ and the Spirit to put upon it the Scripture:
but therein their weakness and error was seen, and their spirit was tried;
and the written book in answer to those particulers will manifest the same; as
did and does to their shame, in so much that some of them denied or were
ashamed; of what therein by them was done though he had subscribed it as the
rest did, with his own name: and the Queries about that and the rest, were
never answered and sent yet unto us, to manifest the more what therein they had
done or brought forth by them. And seeing they have not answered them, let
Henry Hagger ask for them all, and return us an answer if he please: But
however, Godwilling, I shall to stop his boasting return in short an answer to
his, only spareing the labor of setting most of his down, but those that
would compare the answers and Queries may take his book and see them, and in
this see an answer to them: for the boaster Henry Hagger, in his proud
challenge, faith thus much by Henry Hagger and as he says a setvant of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the congregations of the Saints, which a desire of an
answer, by any who will or can. But this I say, that liars, slanderers and
false accusers, and such as joins and partakes with them, helping Antichrist
to carry on his design in such an evil work of falsehood and deceit, and by a
number of lies, (70. and odd) makes opposition against the truth; they are no
Servants of Jesus; for he does not employ his in such an evil work, neither are
they sanctified, and so of the Congregation of Saints, but enemies to them, and
the work of sanctification, etc. Yet such a one is Henry Haggar, who has
joined himself with Pollard, and backed his number of lies, slanders, and false
accusations; and therefore he is no Servant of Christ, but of Antichrist; and
the Congregations of Saints (are ashamed of him, and denies him and Pollard,
and) also denies the works of their hands proceeded from their evil hearts,
which long has lien hid; but now is brought to light, which manifests their
Antichristian spirit, in their book of slanders, with the number of lies, as it
does appear, and is left to the view, that others may thereby take warning and
fear.

And further, it is considered and known, that false Apostles were, and are
deceitful workers in that work of iniquity, etc. so are liars, slanderers, and
false accusers, etc. But such are Thomas Pollard, and Henry Hagger, and
deceitful workers, etc. as it is manifest by their book of lies and wicked
deceitful mischievous slanders: therefore they are false Apostles, that so acts
Antichrists part under a refined subtlety, and are such false accusers, and
deceitful workers, 1 Cor. 11.13. etc. Romans 1.29. etc. 2 These. 2.7 etc.

2. Consideration; I answer, that it is considered and known, that the false
Prophets that come to deceive did as you do, preach the words of others, and
say, thus faith the Lord, when he never spoke to them, Jer. 23. and they
preached the Letter as you do, and their brain imaginations: but knew not the
spirit and word that were as a fire and a hammer, Jer. 23.29. etc. which were
within in the true Prophets, and were as a fire in the bones, Jer. 20.9. which
words within, you being ignorant of, you preach the Letter of the Scripture,
and others words, with your brain Imaginations added thereunto, and are not
guided by the same spirit from which it did proceed, as your lies makes it
manifest: and therefore you ate like the false Prophets also, that as thou
says, pretended to come in the name of the Lord to preach their lies, as you
have done yours; and therefore in that you are considered, and known to be as
the false Prophets were, that said, thus says the Lord, when he never spoke to
them.

And as John Griffith in that Book, called the Gospel-faith, collected into 30
Articles, and subscribed with the names of Thomas Lover, John Foxwell, John
Parret, Francis Smith, John Griffith, who in that Book called (the Baptized
Believers Faith, or) a Voice from the word of the Lord etc. has taken upon him
to prophecy lies in the name of the Lord; and the ground of his Prophecy is
from the imaginations and corruptions of his own heart, who speaks from that,
and from the Letter, and the words of others, and not from the voice of the
Lord unto him; and where did any of the true Prophets take upon them to go and
prophecy to a people from another writings, when they were not called by the
Lord, and sent so to say by his spirit and word within; for they spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost, and that was from the spirit and word within, 2
Pet. 1.21. and the spirit of Christ was within them. 1 Pet. 1.11. and they were
not sent by a printed Book to preach and prophecy; but by the Lord God and his
spirit, Isay 48.16.17. and therefore they spoke and prophesied truly, that were
so taught, called and sent by the Lord God, and his spirit moving in them; but
the false Prophets took the words of others without them, and spoke from them a
divination of their own brain, as John Griffith has done: and spoke not from
the word and voice of the Lord God, and his spirit within; and therefore they
prophesied lies in the name of the Lord, and were reproved for it, etc. as this
John Griffith the false Prophet is: that speaks the brain imaginations and
divinations of his own heart, from others words, and not from the mouth of the
Lord, as the false Prophets did; and therefore the said John Griffith is a
false Prophet as such was, which the Lord was against: therefore he is against
him that has prophesied lies in his name as they did, Jer. 23.21. and 30. 31,
32. verses.

The beginning of John Griffith's false Prophecy, where he prophesies lies in
the name of the Lord; saying, thus says the Lord to thee, Oh Quaker, thou art
fleshly minded: John Griffith, that is thy lying spirit that has told thee so;
and thou that pretends to speak so from the Scriptures without thee, and calls
thy saying a word from the voice of the Lord: I charge thee in the presence of
the Lord, to show that Scripture, that faith, O Quaker, thou art fleshly
minded; or else I charge thee here to be a lier, both of the Scripture, and of
the Lord; for such as walk in obedience to the word and spirit of the Lord, are
not fleshly and carnally, but spiritually and peaceably minded, Romans 8.6. Phil.
2.5. 1 Cor. 2.15.16. But they that walk in obedience to the word and spirit of
the Lord, and are born again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible by the
word of God which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.22.23. and are in
Covenant with God, though reproached (by the name of Quakers, etc.) 1 Pet.
4.14. for the name of Christ, etc. are spiritually and peaceably minded, and
not as John Griffith has said: therefore he has taken upon him to prophecy
or publish a lie in the name of the Lord; And the said John Griffith in his
second lie and false Prophecy page 2. says, Oh fleshly minded men, whom the
God of this world has blinded, that is a third lie, because you believe not,
that is a fourth lie; for such as walk in the light of the Gospel, 2 Cor.
4.4,5,6,7. and are born of God, and in the faith which purifies the heart, and
overcomes the world, as such was, Act 15.9.1 John 5.4.5. etc. they ate not as
John Griffith falsely says; and these Scriptures and the faith and birth
spoken of in them, and the light we also own, who walk in it, and are not as
John Griffith says: therefore he has prophesied or spoken other three lies,
and more also in the name of the Lord, and has manifest thereby his false
Prophecy: and himself to be a false Prophet, as it is considered of, and known.

And he goes on with his lies, and speaks them in pretense of the name of the
Lord, saying (and says falsely) thus says the Lord, ye have said it is in
vain to serve God, and what Profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances; etc.
John Griffith, when did thou hear us say so? here thou false Prophet, that
art without proof for thy lies: I testify unto thee from the witness for God,
that the Lord never so said unto thee, nor sent thee to prophecy those lies in
his name, neither did thou ever hear us (and the righteous seed) say as thou
falsely has done; and therefore thou art one that prophecies lies in pretense
of the Lord, who never said, that he would fire root and branch of the
righteous seed, though reproached by the name of ( Nazerens, or) Quakers, etc.
as thou says; and so thy lies and false Prophecies has laid thee open, and
made thee manifest to be a false Prophet.

And we who fear the living God, and serve him, that keep his Ordinances, and
walk humbly or mournfully before him, do testify against thy lies and false
Prophecies, whom thou and the Serpents seed revilest and reproachest under the
nickname of Quakers; And since we knew God and his word, Oracle, Worship, and
Ordinances, never said that it was in vain to serve him, and therefore thou
have added thy fifth lie.

Neither did we say, that are in Covenant with God, that it was in vain to keep
his Ordinances, since they were delivered unto us: God is our witness, which
witness is greater than the witness of men. 1 John 5.9.10. etc. therefore in
that thou have prophesied falsely, and added thy sixth lie.)

Neither did we say, (nor ever declare it to thee) that it was in vain to walk
humbly, or mournfully before the Lord, in that, as well as the other, God is
our witness before whom we appeal; and to the truth of it his spirit does
witness with ours that obey him, and walk humbly before him, Romans 8.14,15,16.
And therefore John Griffith, thy prophecy is false, and in that thou have added
thy seventh lie, in thy false Prophecy.

And therefore from the spirit of the Lord, in obedience to the word of the
Lord: this do I declare and testify, which shall stand a witness against thee
and thy lying, and false Prophecy, wherein thou says, we are spiritually
proud, when we are not; for that is by us denied as well as all other pride;
and therefore in that thou have prophesied falsely, and added thereunto thy
eighth lie.

Wherein thou goes on in lying, saying, that we are proud Pharisees and
Hypocrites, etc. but has not so proved it: therefore thou have added thy ninth
lie.

Thou says that we boast of our light within; but boasting we deny, and all
Pharisaicallism and Hypocrisy, and that is thy tenth lie.

Yet the light we own and follow, else we should deny Christ, who is the light
of the world, that lights every man that comes into the world, John 1.9.
and such as follow him, as he has said, are by the light led out of darkness
into the light of life, as the Scripture declares, which we witness with Col.
1.27. John 8.12.

Thou says in thy false Prophecy, that we neglect the weightier matters of the
Law, that is thy eleventh lie.

And the Law it self: that is thy twelveth lie, p. 3. For righteousness, mercy,
and true judgment, etc. is the weighty matters of the Law; for he has showed
it unto us, and therefore walking humbly before him, and doing justly, loving
mercy, etc. Mica 6.8. we do not neglect: neither the weightier matters of the
Law, nor the Law it self, Romans 8. for the righreousness of the Law is fulfilled
in us, that walk not after darkness and the flesh; but after the spirit and
spiritual light, and Law within, which does condemn unrighteousness and sin,
Romans 8.2,3,4. as the Scripture witnesses.

And thou says, amongst the rest of thy lies, that the Scriptures is the Rule
of faith and conversation; when Christ and his Spirit is both the way and guide
into all truth, John 14.6. John 16.13. and so into faith, Heb. 12.2. and a holy
Converstion; for without me, says he, ye can do nothing, then not believe
without him, and he is both the Author and finisher of faith, that calls
also into an holy Conversation; for says the Apostle, as he that has called
you is holy, so be you holy in all manner of co^versation, 1 Pet. 1.13,14,15.
Take notice of thy contradiction to Scripture, and thy error in that; who has
thereby added thy thirteenth lie.

Thou says, we err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor power of God, that shall
stand for thy self; which is also thy fourteenth lie.

For the Scriptures are they that testify of Christ, and that we know, as they
also witness of themselves, where Christ says, search them; but he is the
life, and ye will not come to him, that ye might have life, that are such
enemies to him, like their example, that were liars and false accusers, like
you. And as the Scriptures testify of Christ, John 5.39.40. so do they also
testify of the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. which power we know,
and witness unto, and in, with the Scriptures, that testify of it, and
therefore thou John Griffith, has told that fourteenth lie.

And thou says, we are they that perish, page 3. but such as are kept by the
power of God, and are thereby saved, do not perish; which power and salvation
(by and in it) through the Lord Jesus we witness, and so do not perish, as thou
falsely says, and therefore thou art charged with that lie, which makes the
number fifteen.

Thou says, that the Scriptures, without faith in Christ; (for thou leaves
that out) is able to make a man wise to salvation, and to furnish him
thoroughly to every good work, page 3. when it is Christ that does it, and thou
have belied the Scriptures; for thou have left out the chief and moving cause,
to wit, Christ, and faith in him, and says, the Scriptures are able to do it:
when the Apostle tells Tymothy, that the holy Scriptures were able to make him
wise to salvation etc. Through faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15,16,17. and he
says, that Christ is the giver, and so both the Author and finisher of faith,
Heb. 12.2. and the Apostle prayed, that the Colossians might be strengthened,
and so furnished, according to the working of his glorious power, giving thanks
unto the Father, which made them meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the
Saints in light; for they were complete, and furnished in and by Christ, the
head of all principality and power; for in him (and not in the letter of the
Scripture) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Colos.
1.9.10,11,12. and 29. Col. 2.9.10. and here again take notice, how thou have
lied of the Scripture, and showed thy spirit of error, in this thy sixteenth
error or lie.

Thou ^aith, we are perverters of the word; but that is by us denied, and
stands for thy self, who art a wrester, and so a perverter of the Scripture,
which thou calls the word, and thou art there taken in thy own snare, where
thou have added thy seventeenth lie.

And after thou have given the pre-eminence to the Scripture, so taking it from
Christ, and contradicting it therein, Col. 1.18. saying, the Scriptures are the
rule of faith, (when Christ is the rule and Author of faith, Heb. 12.2.) and
saying, the Scriptures are both the rule of faith; and also, able to make the
man of God wise to salvation, and furnish him thoroughly to every good work,
page 3. (without Christ and faith in him, the moving cause, both of faith and
salvation etc.) for thou have left faith in Christ, and that, out; and so there
in that page, thou have been laboring to set the Scripture up in the room of
Christ, and belied it also; and to confute and contradict thy self in thy
confusion, and self-contradiction: that it may appear, thou have made it
manifest: except thou would make the Scriptures Christ; and Christ the
Scriptures: and if thou would do so, that would be contradiction upon
contradiction, and more make manifest thy self-confutation.

In page 12. where thou art writing or speaking to those thou calls Saints:
thou therein says, that Christ is Gods treasury; and if Christ be Gods
treasury, then fullness is not in the letter, or Scripture, but in him; for in
him thou also says, (to wit Christ) are hid the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, if in him, then not in the Scriptures, except thou make the
Scriptures Christ; and here thy own words serves to be thy own confutation,
which is manifest in thy self-contradiction; for thou says, it has pleased
the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, (to wit Christ) and if all
fullness dwell in Christ, then not in the Scripture, take notice of that; and
how does it also cross thy third page, where thou have manifested thy error.

And after thou have confessed, and said, that all fullness dwells in Christ;
thou says, where then shall we go for wisdom and knowledge, but to Christ?
page 12.

If all fullness dwell in Christ, and there be no whereto go for true wisdom and
knowledge, but to him: then it is he that furnishes thoroughly to every good
work, and also makes wise to salvation; and then how does it cross thy other
sayings, where thou says, the Scriptures are the rule of faith, and the
Scriptures are able to make wise to salvation, and able to furnish thoroughly
to every good work; and here thou have contradicted all that; except thou would
have the Scriptures to be Christ, and Christ to be the Scriptures; and then
thou again contradicts that* for thou says, life is in the Son; but the
Scriptures is not the Son: therefore the life is not in them; for thou says,
that Christ is the life of Saints, then the Scripture is not their life,
because the Scripture is not the Son; and thou tells those thou calls Saints,
if they forsake Christ, they forsake the life, page 12. and then thou goes from
the Son, and so from Christ to the letter; and therefore from the life,
according to thy own saying in thy confusion, and contradicts those sayings of
thy twelfth page, in page 13. For there again thou art run from Christ to the
Letter, and says, the Scriptures are able to make wise to salvation, and must
be the rule in point of faith and conversation, and if they must be so, then by
that necessity, thou would not have Christ to be so.

yea thou says, the Scriptures they will furnish unto every good work: And if
they must do it, and will do it, then Christ must not, and does not, except the
Scriptures be Christ, and that is not so; for they do but testify of him* Joh.
5.39.40: and thy 13 page does cross and contradict thy 12: and thy 12 page
does confute thy 3 page: therefore after thou have prophesied many lies take
notice how thou have run upon two rocks, even self contradiction and self
confutation, and here it is to be observed that it is thee that errs, not
knowing the Scripture and power of God, and not the Quakers, as in thy false
Prophecy thou did affirm, and there thou have even split thy self upon such
Rocks; [even] self contraction, and self confutation-

Here take notice of your folly, and remember what you have done, for it is
considered and known; That such as say they write and speak from the word of
the Lord, and Prophecy falsely, and writes, and so speaks lies and self
contradictions, must needs be false Prophets; But John Griffith in that book,
called, A Voice from the word of the Lord, he has so done, therefore John
Griffith he is a false Prophet, as it is considered and known, as well as
Thomas Pollard, and Henry Hanger, are false Apostles, as before is proved; And
by their books of lies and slanders is further against them made manifest; Oh
lier, thus says the Lord, the lake is prepared for thee, and all liers take
notice of that and read, Rev. 21.8: to witness here, with me in the same, and
thither must the false Prophets and liers be cast as it is written, Rev. 22.15.
and Rev. 21.8.27. Rev. 20.10. to be tormented day and night, etc: And thine
Henry Hagger (as well as John Griffiths) is considered and you are found to be
those, that refuse the light of Christ; and walks after the jmaginations of
your own hearts, and not the light within, who despise the light and word of
the Lord, that are such liers and false accusers, doing such deceiptfull works
and so are works of iniquity, (under a refined subtilty) which Christ says he
knows not, according to thy saying or third consideration and Math, 7.22.23.

And you are they that preach and publish lies, (as your number makes it
manifest) and not the word of God, for it witnesses against liers like you,
who are such as those in thy 4th consideration, and the deceivers shall stand
for your selves, that are such liers, and therefore deceivers as in thy 5th
consideration.

And where thou in contempt to the light (and so to the truth) thou says Paul
did not commit th^e to the light within th^e, to the which I answer that lie
did commit them to God, and he is light, 1 John 1.5. and was within them, for
greater was he that was in them, then he that was in the world, 1 Ioh. 4.4. 2
Cor. 6.16. and as God who was light, was within them, so was his word nigh
them, for the word of faith and so of grace was within; in their hearts, Romans
10.8. and 1 John 2.14: And Paul committed them to God and the word of his grace,
which was able to build them up, and give them an inheritance amongst them that
were sanctified, even by the Spirit of their God, 1 Cor. 6.11. and that was
also within them, Gal. 4.6. 1 John 3.24. and therefore Paul did commit them to
the power of God, and his light and word also within them, for says he, the
word is nigh thee, in thy heart, even the same word of faith, and so of grace,
which we preach, and God has said, that he will dwell in you and walk in you
says Paul to the Corinthians, as in the Scriptures above mentioned; And says
John in his Epistle to the friends of God, let that, says he, abide in you
which ye have heard from the beginning, if that which ye have heard from the
beginning, shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the
Father, 1 John 2.24, and the light was in them: which thou so much despises,
so was the holy unction, which thou shows thy self to be ignorant of: 1 John
2.27: that art such an enemy to the light as by thy book does appear, who art
so blind in the things of the Spirit of God, as the Serpents seed ever were,
that makes lies thy refuge as they do and did.

To thy 6th, thou says thou observes, that they, that pretend to walk by the
light within them, were in the greatest darkness, to the which I answer that
they that did but pretend so to do, and did not, they were in darkness as thou
art, but such says Christ as follow me, and so the light in them, Colos. 1.27.
they shall not walk in darkness, but have the light of life, Joh. 8.12: and
such as did, and now do obey, and so follow the true light that lights every
man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. they are led into the light of life:
and so are called out of darkness into the mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.7.8.9.

And in thy 7th, thou says, God has sent forth his light and truth to guide
men to his holy hill, and then says in the latter end of it, the light is not
able to lead unto happiness: see thy confusion, that light, which leads to the
holy hill, leads unto happiness, which light is Christ, and thou says after,
to confute thy self, that Ghrist the true light: Joh. 1.9. who is in man,
Colos. 1.27. is not able to lead into happiness; But therein thy darkness is
seen, who would put the letter for the light, and take the authority from
Christ, and his Spirit, saying the light in man is not able to lead to
happiness; but the Scriptures, which thou calls the word, is able to save your
souls, thou says, if you receive it with meekness, citing, Jam. 1.21. and if
thou knew the word, that James there speaks of, thou would know it within, to
be an ingrafted word, not in Paper and Ink: but deviding assunder betwixt
Spirit and soul, Heb. 4.12: but thou that says, the light in man (it he obey
and follow it) is not able to lead to happiness, thou art a contrary witness
and messenger to the former witnesses, and messengers of God, if Christ and his
Spirit be light and not darkness, and be in man, then according to thy saying,
though Christ and his Spirit, which is light, and not darkness, be in man, yet
they are not able to lead out of darkness and into the light of life and true
happiness; but Christ says such as follow him the true light, shall not walk
in darkness, but have the light of life, and so true happiness: for he is the
author of eternal salvation to all that obey him, Heb. 5.8.9. but so is not
the letter though it declare of it, therefore take notice of thy deceit, and
be ashamed of it.

And to thy 8th, the Commandments of God that are pure enlightening the eyes
of the understanding, are (pure and) spiritual, and was in them before they
proceeded forth, and the same Spirit does now enlighten our understanding, and
the entrance of the word of life that devides betwixt soul and Spirit, give
light and understanding, which word is not the letter, though the letter
declare of it, yet witnessed unto by it, which word gives us an understanding,
dwelling within us as it did them, that witnessed the same: Heb. 4.12. Romans
10.8. 1 John 2.14. and 1 Ioh. 4.4. 1 Ioh. 5.20: And therefore we being
enlightened with it, having an understanding given thereby, we do not speak
against the law, and testimony, 1 Ioh. 3.4. Romans 8.2.3.4. Rev. 19.10: but
according to them, because there is light within us: Isa. 8.20. 2 Cor. 4.6,7,
as in thy 8th consederation.

Consideration the 9th, that the true Prophets did not follow the imaginations
of their own hearts, yet the light and Spirit of God with them they did follow,
as those people does that thou in thy 9th seeks to cast thy slander upon, but
it turns off from them and stands for thy self who forsakes the light within
to follow the imaginations of thy heart which makes thee to accuse falsely, and
slander, and so speaks not acco^ding to the law and testimony therein, because
darkness has blinded thy mind; And where thou says in thy 10th, that the
false Prophets was eminent in that work, and says it is an evident mark of
the false Prophets so to do, (to lie and speak fasly as you do) but not to
follow the light as thou would have it, except thou would make false Prophets
of the true: for they was eminent in following the light and Spirit of God
within, and said, To the law and testimony, if any man speak not according to
them, it is because there is no light in him: Then they that spoke and now
speak according to the law and testimony, there is light in them, so was there
in the true Prophets, and they was eminent in following the light within them,
but so did not the false Prophets, thou art to prove that, for such as did not
follow the light and Gunsaile of God, they were false Prophets, and false
teachers, as thou art, and all liers, slanderers, and false-accusers.

And to thy 11th: That all those teachers now, that come after God has sent
the light of the Gospel, and his Spirit to guide into all truth such as obey
and follow the same, Luke 2.32: Ioh. 8.12: Ioh. 16.13. Romans 8.14: Gal. 4.6: and
all people from the light and the teachings of the Spirit, to follow carnal
inventions, and despise and undervalue the true light, and spiritual
teachings, and stick in Paper and Ink, and are Ministers of their
brain-imaginations, from the letter, and are not of the new Covenant, and light
and Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. 2 Cor. 4.4.5.6.7: they are false Apostles and false
teachers that are such liers, slanderers and false-accusers: as Thomas Pollard,
Henry Hagger, and John Griffith are; though they may have a form of godliness
from the letter, yet denying the light and life or power of godliness in the
Spirit they are to be turned away from, and denied.

Thy Queries and considerations, differs something in the name yet little in the
nature, or matter, but to them I shall return this answer, as follows.

To thy first that the light which is of the Spirit of God in man which does
convince him of sin, the transgression of the law, 1 John 3.4. if it be obeyed
and followed, it will lead (as it does us) him out of darkness and sin; into
the light of life, Joh. 8.12: and so into the life of the law, and not from it,
(which is the end of thy Queries for the righteousness of the law is fulfilled
in such as walk not after (darkness and the flesh) but after [the light and
so after] the Spirit, Romans 8.3,4. or in short, and to thy Question, in breife,
that the light of God in man, does not lead him, contrary to his law and
testmony in the Spirit. But according to it, and so through the law into the
Gospel, so that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. and therefore thy
lie and slander in thy first Querie turns back upon thee again, and also
those in thy second, who art given over to lie and speak falsely as thou have
done.

And to thy second, such as despise the light of the Spirit and the living
truth, and undervalue the light of life, Joh. 8.12: preferring the letter
before it, and set the letter above the Spirit, they must needs be in darkness
and so the God of this world has blinded their minds [as he has done thine,
and such liers and false-accusers of the light and the truth] least the light
of the glorious Gospel of Christ which is the image of God, should shine unto
[you and unto] them, 2 Cor. 4.3.4. But the Scriptures we do not undervalue as
thou says, nor despise: these are two of thy lies] neither do we walk in
darkness no more then such did that preferred the light of the Gospel above
the letter, and were Ministers of the light and Spirit within, and not of the
letter; 2 Cor. 3.6: and they preached not themselves but the light and the Lord
Jesus as we do, and said God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness,
did shine within them, even in their hearts, as it does in ours, to give us the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and this treasure
have we in earthen vessels that the excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us; And they that preached the light, and the Lord Jesus, they had the
same light, etc: within them, which thou being in darkness stumbleth at, 2
Cor. 4.5.6,7: Colos. 1.27.28.29.

3. That true light which is of God, in man, the Scriptures declares of and
according to Psalm. 119:130: where it says, The entrance of thy words gives
light, which words had entrance, in David before he spoke or writ them: then
the words that gives light or the teachings of the Spirit of God that gives
an understanding is within, as David witnessed, who said, Light was sown for
the righteous and gladness for the upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. and the law
of his God was within him, even in his heart, Psalm. 37.31. and the word were
hid in David's heart, Psalm. 119.11. which word were as a lamp, and so a light
to him, even the word of God in his heart, but thou would have the letter to be
the word and the light, and there thy design and also deceit is seen; And in
thy 5th, thou asks what that light, which is in any man, teaches him more
then the Scriptures teaches him? I answer, that the Scriptures witnesses with
the light and the teachings thereof, yet the light teaches such as obey it,
when they have not the Scriptures or Printed Bible to look on, and teaches
such as obey, if they be not book learned, and teaches them more then the
Scriptures yet has taught thee, that art given over to lie, as in thy latter
part of that Querie also, where thou says thou have seen an end of all
perfection; then an end thou says of that light that these men pretend, etc:
The light that we do not pretend only, but witness also, is that light which
is without end, and was in the beginning with God, Joh. 1.1.2,3,4,5, which
light darkness cannot comprehend, therefore take notice of thy slander and
lie, if thou have seen an end of that light, have thou not seen an end of
God, who is light: 1 John 1,5. and also of his work; When thou have considered
of it, acknowledge thy rashness and folly, for the light which is our witness
will witness against thee for it, and reprove thee in secret, for acting and
speaking so contrary to it, which light is the condemnation of such as hate it:
which light does reprove and forbid thee for doing evil; which light the
Scriptures witnesses with, as in thy 5th, yet the letter is not the light as
thou would therein have it, and though the Scripture be profitable for doctrine
for reproof for correction for instruction in righteousness that the man of
God may be perfect and thoroughly furnished unto all good works: it is through
faith in Christ Jesus: and so through the light, Joh. 1.9. Joh. 8.12. as the
first and chief or moving cause: and therefore the light is more then the
letter, take notice of that: for the light and Spirit, is the convincer, and
guides such as obeys it into all truth and shows things to come, revealing
also the deep things of God, so does not the letter do, that which is the
work of the light and Spirit of God, though it declare of it, and witness
unto it, John. 16. 1 Cor. 2.9.10.

Thy sixth is; whether there was not a greater light in the Lord Jesus, then
ever was in any man else, or ever shall be; and thy seventh is, whether he did
not declare it, and make it known by his words and actions, more then ever any
man else could do.

I answer, that Jesus was the true light, and is, according to those two
Scriptures which thou have cited, John 1.9. and John. 8.12. And as he is called
the light of the world, so did he call them that saw with his light, and were
in it, the light of the world also; as in Mat. 5.14. and for manifesting it,
more by actions, etc, he said, that it was the Father which was in him, that
wrought the works, John 14.10. and he said also, that what he did, some should
do, and greater works also, John 14.12. and there was great works done by
others, from the same light and power, or working of the Father in them; and
for words, there was such spoken, after he had sent them the Holy Ghost, that
the adversaries were not able to resist the spirit by which they were spoken,
as the Scripture witnesses; and behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and
he will dwell with them, Rev.. 21.3. and the Lord God and the Lamb is the
light, and the Nations which are saved shall walk in it, Rev. 21.23,24. so the
light, according to the manifestation of it, is the form that it was, and as
Christ has said, At that day, ye shall know that I am in my Father, and you in
me, and I in you. John 14.20. but thy drift is to set up the letter of the
Scripture, instead of the light; and here thou says, in thy 8th, did not the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus, declare and testify the same things to others,
that they hear and say, who shunned not to declare to others the whole Counsel
of God: yes, and in that the Apostle John said, that the Message which they had
to declare, was the light, 1 John 1.5. which thou seems to be so much offended
at; and Paul that Apostle declared and said, that God (which John called light)
would dwell and walk in his people, 2 Cor. 6.16. and he also declared of the
light, and the glory of God, and the heavenly treasure within, 2 Cor. 4.6,7.
and of the life of Christ, to be manifest in mortal flesh, (verse 10. 11.) and
and the mystery of Godliness, he said, was great, and also within, Col. 1.27.

But thou being blind, and ignorant of the things and workings of the light,
and the spirit of God; thou would have all without, in the letter of the
Scripture, which does but declare of them; for in the 9th, thou asks, whether
you can know the things which Christ and his Apostles did; but by the
Scriptures? If thou know not, thou knows not the Father dwelling in thee, that
so wrought by his power and spirit in them, John 14.10.11,12. Gal. 1. Col.
1.29. And so if thou be in doubt, and question the thing out of ignorance and
darkness: thou shows, that thou knows not the same spirit of Christ within,
Gal. 4.6. to bring to rememberance what Christ has said, John 14.26. which is
the guide into all truth, and shows things to come, John 16.13. And being
without the life of the spirit of Christ, and of God to rule and guide in thee,
Gal. 4.6. Romans 8.14. which spirit searches and reveals the deep things of
God 1 Cor. 2.10. which in the Prophets did also testify before hand of the
sufferings of Christ, and does now witness with them, 1 Pet. 1.11,12. and thou
that knows not the spirit to guide thee, and reveal the things of God now, as
they did then; thou art not of the spiritual, but carnal minded men, and so
knows not the glorious light of the Gospel of Christ, that shines within, as
such did, and do; that witness the power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. and
the holy unction within, whereby they knew all things, 1 John 2.20. But thou
would have the Scripture to be the same which thou queries of and about, in thy
tenth and eleventh Queries, and therein thy design is seen, who thy self, that
follows not the light, walks after the dictates, or (evil) sayings of thy own
heart, which is (as thou says) deceiptful and desperately wicked: yet it is
known, and with the light reproved, which thou art offended at.

And it is no better then folly and madness in thee, and such like that would
put the letter of the Scripture for the light and Gospel which is the power of
God to salvation: which light thou says, is not sufficient to lead to
happiness, etc. And so denies Christ the true light, to be sufficient to lead
unto happiness, and denying the true light, thou denies the true guide, that
leads into true comfort such as do follow the Counsel of it; and that light
which leads the obedient into true comfort, it therefore leads them into true
happiness; and such did witness the consolation, and so the happiness within,
that said, As the sufferings of Christ did abound in them, so their consolation
also abounded by him, 2 Cor. 2.5. and the light which shined in the face of
Jesus, through the new Covenant, did shine within them; and the glory and
heavenly Treasure as well as the light, which the Scripture declares of
therein, was revealed within them; and so the true comfort and comforter was
within them, who did experience the sufferings before, Romans 8.18. John 14.26. 2
These. 1.10. 2 Cor. 3.17,18. and 2 Cor. 4.5,6,7.

But the Letter is not that light, etc. as thou would have it, though it
declare of it, etc. which light of the glorious Gospel thou art a stranger
unto; for thy dark reason cannot comprehend it, who art in those (and so thy)
brain expectations (thou speaks of) and art out of that Covenant which thou out
of darkness art quering after; and about; that art such a liar, and false
accuser; and with the liers and false accusers, art a partaker, as this Book
makes manifest, which stands a witness against thee and them, etc. Henry
Hagger, that refuses the glorious light of the Gospel of Christ, and would set
the Letter up instead of the light, spoken of, or queried about in thy 11th,
refusing it to follow, or walk by (as thou says, instead of his) thy own
imaginations, or dictates and sayings of thy evil heart, which is so deceitful,
and desperately wicked, the heart thou speaks of in thy Query.

And now according to thy 12th, such as thou art (being, found out after query
or search) that has so lied and sought as thy Brethren has done, to set up
the letter of the Scripture, instead of the light and spirit, or power of God
unto salvation, which is the Gospel of Christ, and refusing, the light within,
also; and that which Paul and the Gospel Ministers witnessed in them, who
called it the glorious light of the Gospel of Christ in the face of Jesus,
which was in them, and shined within, in their hearts, 2 Cor. 4,4,5,6,7. in
which light the Nations that are saved, shall walk, Rev. 21.23,24. which light
we choose to walk by and in, as Paul and the faithful in Christ did, giving
thanks unto the Father of lights, James 1.17. who of his own will begot us with
the word of truth, James 1.18. who has made us meet to be partakers (of what
the Saints does inherit) of the Inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1.12.
And so we are required to hold such accursed, as denies Christ within, which
Paul preached, and said to the Colossians, great is the mystery of godliness,
Christ in you, whom we preach, etc: Col. 1.27.28.29: and such we are to deny as
denies the light within, which the Gospel preachers witnessed in them, 2 Cor.
4.6.7. which thou opposes and stumbleth or art offended at; as the Serpents
seed ever was; But the light and the Spirit of truth we own, to be within us:
which is not darkness as thou would have it, but being obeyed, leads out of
darkness error and deceit into the light of life, Ioh. 8.12. Ioh. 16.13: and
so into the truth of the Gospel, spoken of in thy last Querie, and that slander
of the undervaluing of the words of Christ shall stand for thy self etc: that
speaks against and undervalued the inward spiritual and true light which
leads into true happiness happiness such as follow and obey it, and so it
leads out of darkness error and deceit into the light of life, though thou
lier say it do not, therein thy testimony is false and not true, and thou art
found to be a false witness of the light and the truth: and thy testimony is
denied, and against testified as is required, Ephesians. 5.11.

And thou that would have the words as they are printed in the Bible there, to
be Spirit and life, as in thy last Querie. But thou shows by that, that thou
art ignorant of the eternal word: and so of the word of life, and knows not
the true spiritual life, that would put the letter for the life; And where
thou says, how can ye know that the dead shall rise and come to Judgment, but
by the Scriptures: page 54.] I answer, even as they knew the things declared of
in the Scriptures, by that Spirit of God that reveals the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 2.10. and also shows things to come, as the Scripture witnesses,
Joh. 16.13.

That the dead shall rise and come to Judgment, is one of the deep things of
God; And also a thing to come; But the Spirit of God reveals and searches or
makes known the deep things of God, (without the letter, as the letter
witnesses,) which Spirit also shows things to come, as the Scripture
declares; Therefore the Spirit of God, so revealing and making known even the
deep things of God, could make known the day of judgment and things to come,
as the Scripture witnesses, but the blind like thee, sees it not, who stumbles
at the light, and knows not the eternal word, not yet the work of the Spirit
of God, as thy book of slander makes manifest.

Where did any true Prophet or Apostle of the Lord Jesus, go either to
prophecy or preach with a printed Bible in their hand? and from that say, Thus
says the Lord etc. And if printing had not of late been invented, what would
you have preached here in England, who knows not within you, the eternal life
and word of God.

Therefore they being out of the truth, and false accusers, they must needs be
also cut of Gospel Order; And in that thou have told another lie: and Thomas
Pollard, when thou had accused Richard Farnsworth falsely, at the meeting at
Harliston, Hugh Read said unto thee, why would thou stand charging things upon
him which thou could not prove and Humphyry Beeland, who had been a teacher to
the Baptized people, he said to thee Thomas Pollard, Instance any one
particular and prove against him, which thou taxes him withal, etc: but thou
then made no answer as to prove any one thing which thou had falsely charged
upon him, and accused him withal: and therefore art a false accuser of him and
the truth; and thy lies, heads of deceit, and false accusations are witnessed
against, by some that were present at the meeting at Harliston that time by
name Hugh Reed, Anthony Briklay, Humphey, Beeland, and John Smith.

If there want any of thy number of lies, it is but for want of setting them
down: for I have as many numbered up in writing out of John Griffiths and
thine, as amounts to the number of one hundred fifty and four lies, etc. Which
fruits may cause you to blush, if you consider thereof and serve to be a shame
to your profession, that are attended with such a company of lies: cover your
faces with shame, and learn to amend: bring forth better fruits, even such as
are meet for amendment of life, and make not lies your refuge as you have
done, for it makes you manifest that you are not yet come into John's doctrine;
and, so instead of fulfilling all righteousness, you are adding one lie to
another, and sin unto sin, being fulfilling deceit or filled with all
unrighteousness, etc: Romans 1.28.29.

THE END.

