THE BRAZEN SERPENT lifted up on high, OR Truth cleared and above the deceit
exalted, and as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: even so must
the son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish
but have eternal life. Joh. 3.14.15. Here is also Laid down in this treatise
something, concerning election and and predestination, which is so much spoken
of, and how they may know their election, something concerning Christ being the
way to the Father; and how, and concerning Christ, the Mediator of the new
Covenants, and the end of the old, and how tithes are ended. Also, Concerning
Justification, Sanctification, and Redemption, and the condition of
unregeneration and regeneration, the mystery of the Cross, and how God will
plead with all flesh, the resurrection of the just and unjust; with many
precious things for the good of the thirsting soul, as the understanding is
open in the reading, for to read and not to understand is as if they did not
read at all. Lastly, Here is part of a dispute, held between two chief Priests,
and two men that came and met with them, and the people at Chadwitch in
Worcestershire; the ground and manner of their meeting and most part of the
dispute, with some demonstrations to clear the truth from accusations, held
forth by those men that the world scornfully calls Quakers.

Written in Worcestershire, the beginning of the first month called March.
1655.

LONDON. Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's. 1655.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
In this little ensuing treatise, there is some precious truths laid down, and
as thy understanding is kept open, in the reading thou (...) ^ee the some,
having thy eye single, here is something concerning Election, Redemption,
Justification, and Sanctification, the change also and end of the first
Covenant and Priesthood, so an end of tithes and how, as thou may see in the
reading of this over, and the truth cleared from among slanderers, and exalted
above over the deceits, something of Christ being the way to the Father and how,
also the resurrection of the just and unjust, besides many other things which I
shall not now name in particular, but I have written them for the clearing of
the truth to the honest hearted, as in the reading thou may further see, and
also a meeting of the men called Quakers scornfully by the word, two of them,
and some Priests at Chadwitch in Worcestershire, and the manner of their
meeting, and part of a dispute, and also how they ended, with some clear
demonstrations to clear the truth from accusations that may falsely be
occasioned against it by some, either in Bromsgrove or elsewhere, that are
opposite against the truth, as such were, but I shall let that cease, seeing I
writ to William Cook, and William Filt, and Humphrey Potter, and the opposers,
as the writings to them will such things further clear, and the Queries that
was sent to me I answered, but the Queries sent to William Cook, William Filt,
opposers of the are yet by them unanswered, several Queries also to Priest
Trusterom, and some that was sent to the Priest Oasland, and several other
Priests and opposers, which upon them does remain, and the blazing star, if
Rob^^^ Gardler have a hand in it, in this treatise thou ^^yst also take notice
of what he is, even an accuser of the brethren, and so remains, but I leave
thee to the reading of this, and let truth clear it self, who am a servant of
Jesus that suffers for the testimony of a good conscience, and rejoices with
my fellow sufferers, for the testimony of Jesus, whom the world scornfully
calls Quakers.

March the 3. day, 1655. R. F.

The Brazen serpent lifted up on high.
THe truth cleared and (above the deceit) exalted, that as Moses lifted up the
brazen serpent in the wilderness, for such as were bit and stung with the
fiery serpents, to look upon it and live. Numb. 21.6, 7, 8, 9 verso shall the
son of man be exalted, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish but
have everlasting life: as it is written and witnessed in Joh. 3.14, 15. and
here (to be short) the truth of the gospel is, cleared to the single eye, and
lifted up above, or exalted over the deceits that some is ready to cast upon
it, which is the wicked serpents work to lie, accuse falsely, slander,
(reproach the truth also) and bite behind, seeking thereby to, stumble some
that are possessed with slavish fears, and doubts, and to wound the consciences
of some that are weak, and so sting them with the sting in their tails, by
venting their venom and envy against the truth, shouting forth their sting,
and biting at the heel behind, with lies, false reports, slanders, reproaches,
and false accusations, but for a remedy to such as are so bitten and stung with
such wicked spirits or fiery serpents in their bewildered condition, and to
stay the minds of poor weak creatures out of such salse accusations (as
proceeds from the serpents generation) and also to stay the minds of the honest
hearted, the truth is here in brief cleared, concerning the great battle,
fought (with the sword of the mouth only) at Underwood hill, belonging to
Chadwitch in Worcestershire, the 21 day of the 12 month 1654. Between two chief
Priests (and their party) to wit; Priest Oasland, Pastor so called, to an
independent company at a place called Bewdley, and one Andrew Trusterom Priest
at Clent, the battle with the sword or the mouth or dispute the day aforesaid,
was between them and the two men, that the world scornfully calls Quakers. (
R. F, and F. G.) this battle was hot and sharp against the deceit, and the man
of sin; from midday, till toward night (or till toward the going down of the
evening sun) yet the son of righteousness were above and went not down but
were exalted in (some) the hearts of saints, that day; praised be the Lord, and
truth prevailed, against the deceit at that battle, fought with the sword of
the spirit which is the word of God, Ephesians. 6. 12. to the 18. that is sharp for
the cutting down of error and deceit praised be the Lord, Heb. 4.12. and
those that are offended at reports concercing that great public meeting that
were the fourth day of the week being the 21. day of the 12. month in
Worcestersh^re; at underwood hill belonging to Chadwitch as aforesaid, let them
return to view this little treatise, and weigh the truths of things in the
balance of equity, so will they be satisfied, concerning the same, that are
honest minded, seeing the truth of things clearly demonstrated, to take away
lies slanders evil reports and false accusations that some are ready to cast
out against the truth; for the clearing thereof I shall first lay down a few
particulars of the truths given forth from one of the men scornfully called
Quakers.

And secondly, I shall lay down the ground and manner of that meeting, the
priests and people there assembled that day and the too men called Quakers as
aforesaid; And thirdly, the dispute held between the priests and the men they
called Quakers, in the latter part of the day; and fourthly, I shall clear the
accusations, to the honested hearted, that truth may stand pure in its place,
as it is, and that it may stand a witness also, against lying spirits, and
against error, delusion and deceit.

For the spirit of truth being come, teaches (us) all things, and guides (all
such as obey it) into all truth, according to gospel discipline and promise,
and brings all the things of Christ to our remembrance, according to the
working of his divine power, and the good pleasure of his will, praised be the
Lord for the riches of his love John 14.26. John 16.13.

First: Some particulars laid down, or declared, hear by one of the men, which
the world scornfully calls Quakers; which are as follows hear set down for
the honest mind, to consider of, and weigh in the balance of equity, and so to
enter into the allowance, through the good consent into the sincerity, that it
may be stayed in the integrity out of the evil surmisings grudgings and false
reports and look at the truth above them, to walk in it, and be freed from
them, etc.

Concerning Election; and Predestination.
Touching election; God sees not, as man ungenerated sees, for men in that
state and condition sees naturally, and so discerns nor the things of the
spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned, 1. Cor. 2.14. but God
sees spiritually; and with that spiritual eye, sees althings, as they are,
whence they are and how they are, and those that he did and does predestinate,
he fore-knew and saw into the mystery, which was, and is in such revealed, and
revealing in which mystery (in the creature) he did, (and does) in that mystery
with his all seeing eye, see something good, which afterward in his due time
were through Christ in them, and is in such revealed, (and revealing) according
to the working of his divine power, and had not God foreseen that, how would
it, as it was, (and is in such) have been manifested, and revealed, according
to the working of his power, that through their love and obedience to the
truth, according to choice in the royal acception, through their obedience to
the truth upon manifestation through the spirit, and continuance therein, after
that they were sealed, their souls was also purified, and that which so sealed
and purified their souls, was revealed and known working within, in the
mystery, and the pure love enjoyed through the unsealing or opening of the same
within them, who were born again, and the seed of God was within them, and in
that seed, were their souls, through the obedience to the light and truth,
purified, and elected stablished and confirmed and they therein and by the
working of the divine power joined to the Lord, and so both Jew and Greek,
Barbarian, Scythian bond and free, male and female, come into the unity, of all
so^ts that obeyed the truth and walked in the way Christ Jesus, the light of
the world, they came thereby, to the father and so knew the ground where
election stood, according to predestination and foresight of God, which were
manifested according to the working of his divine power, and after the good
pleasure of his will, and that in the dispensation of the fullness of times he
might gather them into Christ, through their obedience to the light in the
eternal truth, in whom also we have obtained an inheritances being
predestined according to the purpose of him, who works into unity and the
election, joining the soul to the seed, after the counsel of his own will,
that we (as they was) should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted
in Christ, the foundation of choice and election, in the ordination, in whom we
also trusted after that we heard the word of truth. Romans 10.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 1.9,
10, 11, 12. the gospel of our salvation. Romans 1.16, 17. in whom after that we
believed, we were sealed with that holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. which God
foresaw within in the mystery, and to be good which were in them revealed, and
is in such revealed, who obey the light and walk in it. Col. 1.27, 28. 2 Cor.
4.5, 6, 7. and through the obedience to the same light and truth, what such
enjoyed in and through the same way, light and obedience to the truth, others
may, and to have their souls purified, as such had and have, who are begotten
and born again, as they was. 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. and says Christ, other sheep I
have which are not of this fould, them also I must bring in. Joh. 10.14, 15,
16. Rev. 22.17. 2 Heb. 9.10. Christ in dying for us is our example in
sufferings and way to the Father.

For Christ in dying for sinners and ungodly died for all; for was not all
sinners and ungodly guilty of Christ's death, but it is by his Blood that we are
justified and by his Life that we are saved, in following his council, the
light manifested within; and obeying him the true light that lights every man
that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. and such as obey and follow him are led
out of darkness by him through their obedience and so into the light of life,
Joh. 6.12. it is by Christ's life that we are saved, in following his council
and obeying him, through the cross with slayes the enmity, as he became
obedient to the death of the cross who is our leader, and example, and is the
Author of eternal Salvation to all that obey him, but none else, and he that
will follow Christ, must deny himself and take up his cross daily as he is
required and through his obedience to the cross which slayes the enmity, he
comes to know life and peace to his soul in the eternal unity; Romans 5.8.9.
Luke 9.23. etc. Mat. 10.38. etc. 1 Pet. 4. 1 Cor. 1.17.18. Ephesians. 2.16.17.18.
Heb. 5.8.9.

Justification by Christ alone, who died for our sins and rose again for our
justification we are justified by faith in his blood, or life through the
obedience to the cross, whereby the enmity is slain and the election witnessed
in the reconciliation through the cross; which ministry in the cross is the
power of God to such as are saved, and witnesses justification by faith in the
blood or life of Jesus, as such did Romans 5.1. 1 Cor. 1.18. Romans 5.8, 9. 1 John
5.4. etc. and we bear about in our body the dying of the Lord Jesus, as such
did, that the life of Jesus may more and more be manifested in our mortal
flesh, who by his spirit quickens the mortal body, dwelling within us, so
saving us by grace and makes us to sit together with him in heavenly places 2
Cor. 4.6.7. to the 12. Romans 8.10.11. to the 20. Ephesians. 2.4.5.6.7. therefore being
justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and not only so but we glory in
tribulation also, knowing that tribulation makes patience, and patience
experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love
of God is shead abroad in all our hearts, and in some the glory shines as
Christ has said, all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in
them. Romans 5.1.2. to the 6. Ioh. 17.10. and being dead with Christ we are dead
to the world, and worldly honor, and to the fleshly worships and fleshly
ordinances also, Col. 2.10, 11, 12. to the end, and such as are risen with
Christ and has a fellowship with him there, they seek not the things that are
below, but has their affections on things above. Col. 3.1, 2. Whose
conversation is in heaven. Phil. 3.20. Luke 17.21. Praised be the Lord, for the
riches of his eternal love, which no man can take away. Romans 8.32, 33. to the
end. 1 Ioh. 4.16, 17.

Christ is the way to happiness and the author of eternal salvation, to all
that obey and follow him, and is the light of the world, and does lighten ever
man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. Joh. 8.12. Heb. 5.8, 9.
happy for ever are all that obey and follow him, but woe from God is the reward
of all that continue in their sins, and take pleasures in unrighteousness, and
will not obey nor follow him, to be led out of darkness, error, and deceit,
into the light of eternal life. Romans 2.4, 5, 6,7, 8, 9. Ioh. 14.

Seeing that Christ is the way to happiness, and the author of eternal
salvation to all that obey him, and the light of the world that does lighten
every man that comes into the world, and they that follow him they shall not
walk in darkness, but have the light of eternal life, here Christ is the way
to the Father, and to Election, Redemption, Justification, and Sanctification,
and also to eternal salvation, to such as obey and follow him, then they that
do not obey but refuse to follow him, such sleights mercy tendered in Christ,
and their destruction is of themselves, therefore God is just in all his ways,
who has given gifts unto the rebellious, Romans 5.6, 7, 8. Isa. 42.6. and all
that obey him finds mercy of him. Isa, 55.1, 2, 3. to the 9. Romans 2.6, 7. and
Christ he says, he that comes unto him he will in no wise cast off, and he is
perfectly able to save all that come unto God by him. Heb.7.25. Come to Christ
poor souls, come out of your pride and vain glory poor creatures, for Christ is
not there, come out of your self-love and self-righteousnesse, and out of your
will-worships he is not there, seek not the living amongst the dead, come out
of your Idols, temples, and Idolatrous worships, and come out of confusion, cut
of Babylon, least ye partake of her plunges, wherefore be separate and come out
from amongst them, that the Lord may own you, and be your God. Rev. 18.4. 2
Cor. 6.15, 16.17, 18. Come out of self and self actings, life is not in the
nature for your poor souls, come to Christ, poor souls and obey the light which
shows you sin and evil checks and calls for purity, obey that call and come out
of your wills all, come in at the door, the true light, Christ he is the door,
and he is the true light that lights every man that comes into the world.
Joh. 1.9. and they that come out of self, and follow him, the true light and
way to salvation, they shall not loose their reward, nor walk in darkness, but
have the light of life. Romans 2.6, 7. Joh. 8.12. therefore come all you that are
weary with your will-worships, come out of it, to Christ the true light, and in
him learn to worship within in the spirit, God who is a spirit and seeks such
to worship him. Ioh. 4.23, 24. Ph^lip. 3.3. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. you that are weary
of your Priests, and beggarly rudiments, come off from them, and touch not
their unclean things, their unclean doctrine that stands in their wills, come
and learn of Christ, you are called now to come, the light in your consciences
shall answer, come learn doctrine, all ye children of the Lord shall be taught
of the Lord, and they shall be stablished in righteousness. Isa. 54.13, 14.
therefore obey the light within you, that shows you unrighteousness, and come
out of it, and wait in the light to receive the pure righteousness, which is
the gift of God, Romans 5.17. take heed you do not reject the counsel of God,
obey that of God in your consciences which answers the call, and come off from
your hireling and tything Priests, they have long deceived you for their own
ends, and that in their consciences tells them so, and that they never was sent
of God, but of old wicked Bishops which had their first rise from the Pope,
your worship is the worship of the beast that stands in that nature turned from
the light, and is out of the truth of Gods, like that spoken of in the Rev. 13.
it will never redeem your souls, come out of it to Christ's ministry in the
spirit, and wait for the opening of the mystery within you. Col. 1.27. come and
learn of God,

Jews, take heed that you be not found in the selfish nature, and will worship,
worshipping you know not what. Joh. 4.21, 22. let that in your consciences
answer, and refuse not to obey it, now it is drawing and calling you to come
out of sin, and out of your will worships, and wait upon God for teaching, as
Christ has said it is written in the Prophets, and ye shall all be taught of
God, every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto
me. Joh. 6.44, 45. therefore incline your ears and heart within, your teacher
is within you, if you obey, but if you refuse and disobey, then judgment
follows for your disobedience. Isa. 1.19, 20. and the light within you, that
shows you sin, and evil deeds will teach you to forsake the evil and show you
the way to the Father and to salvation, if you love and follow it, but it will
condemn you if you disobey and hate it, Col. 1.27. Joh. 3.19, 20. Now you are
warned and all left without excuse, and that in your consciences is my answer,
come out of your rebellion, the light in you lets you see it, follow the light
and follow not your wicked thoughts, devises, nor rebellion, and wickednesses,
you have served sin long, and so the Devil, plead not for it, but forsake it
and come out of it, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, he that commits sin is
the servant of sin, and son of the Devil, read Romans 6.16. Joh. 8.34. 1. Joh.
3.8. hearken to the light within you, that checks and reproves you for sin, and
obey that that will not deceive you, but if you obey and follow it, it will
teach you when such as does draw you from the teachings or Christ within, such
does seduce you. 1 John 2.26, 27. come to the light to be led into the holy
life and into the pure worship of God in the spirit, obey the light, take up
the cross to your wills, and come to Christ, come out of your false churches,
and of from your proud Priests, and off from your false Pastors, to Christ the
true shepherd and bishop of the soul, and the true Pastor and feeder of his
flock, and come to the church in God. 1 These. 1.1. Heb. 12.22, 23. and their
overseers made by the holy Ghost. Act. 20.28. is known, and elders in Christ. 1
Pet. 5. and there is no constraint, nor for filthy lucre, and such as dwell in
the power knows the voice of the Father and the Son, to speak in the Church,
and amongst such. Ioh. 10.4. Gal. 4.6. Luke 12.12. Act. 2.4. Mat. 10.20.

Take heed to that which is pure of God in your consciences, and obey it, that
which calls for a pure conversation. 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16. and let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good conversation, and come
out of your sprinkling of infants, it is no ordinance of Christ, come follow
the light and come out of your false baptism all, that you may be buried with
Christ, in the true baptism. Romans 6.1. in the suffering, and witness that
through the cross, and so a fellowship with him in the new life. ver. 3, 4.
and be baptized into Christ, so put him on. Gal. 3.27. and by one spirit,
witness that baptism into one body 1 Cor. 12.11, 12, 13. where there is one
Lord, one faith one baptism, and so of such one God and one Father of them
all, who are of the household of God, in that church which is the pillar and
ground of the truth. Ephesians. 4*4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 Timothy 3.15.

Come all you that are weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28.
says Christ, and I will give you rest, obey the light, and come out of your
sins, take up the cross and deny your wills, and forsake your iniquities, 2 Timothy, 2.19. and Christ will receive you and elect you, he is the foundation of
election, obey him that you may be laid on him, and builded up into the
election. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5. and give all diligence to have the assurance of
calling and election. 2 Pet. 1.9, 10. Christ Jesus he is the light and the way
to the Father, and the author both of election and salvation; to all that obey
him; Ephesians. 1.10. Ephesians. 2.7, 8, 18, 19. Ephesians. 3.9, 10, 11. Heb. 5.8, 9.

Now Christ Jesus he is the true light, that lights every man that comes into
the world, and with his light you see darkness in you, and rebellion and
wickedness, and he the true light cal^s you by his light, to forsake
darkness, wickedness, rebellion, sin, and evil, and he calls you with his
light, to come out of darkness, 1 John 1.5.
and follow him that gives you light, that with it you may be led on to him
Christ Jesus to the Father of lights, and into the mavelous light. 1 Pet.
2.9.10. And now that you are called and persuaded by the light to obey and
follow it, if you will not obey and follow the same, but continue in their
wilfulness, sinfulness, and rebellion, taking pleasure in wickedness, and so
love darkness rather then the light, and disobey the truth to take pleasure in
unrighteousness, then great will your condemnation and damnation be, Ioh. 1.5,
9. Ioh. 8.12. Ioh. 14.6. Ioh. 3.19, 20. 2 These. 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and 2
Thessal. 1.8, 9. Romans 1.18. Revel. 20.10. Rev. 21.8, 27.

Election and Predestination stands in the counsel of God.
Those things concerning Election and Predestination stands in the counsel of
God, and are hid from all the wise and prudent of the world, Isa. 29.10, 11,
etc. 1 Cor. 1.20, 21. 1 Cor. 3.19, 20. Col. 1.26, 27. Isa. 29.16, 17, 18, 19,
22, 23, 24. Rev. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 1.18. Ephesians, 2. 1 Cor. 6.17. Heb. 2.10,
11.
yet the secrets of God are with them that fear him, and he is pleased to
reveal his counsel, and such things to babes, and those babes are born again
contrary to the will of man. Ioh. 3.6, 7. Ioh. 3.10, 11, 12. Ioh. 1, 22, 23.
and such as witnessed election and predestination, were such as were born again
of water and the spirit (that the Scriptures speaks of) and knew the
mysteries opened in them, and to them, and saw what God fore knew to
predestinate, and what to reprobate, learn to deny your selves, and obey the
light, that you may be taught of God to know the same, and to know the two
seeds (within) and learn to see and know, that except you be born again you
cannot enter into the kingdom of God, nor witness assurance of the eternal
inheritance nor of election, therefore busy not your minds about those things,
in your wills and fleshly natures, for from such and the serpents seed are they
hid, praised be the Lord, Mat. 11, 15, 26, 27. But ye have a light to the which
ye do well to take heed unto, to obey and follow the light of Christ within in
your consciences, which checks and reproves you in secret, for sin and evil,
and if you love and obey that light, it will teach you and guide you to the
sword, to know the power to cut and bruise the serpents head (within you) and
so through the cross to witness a suffering with Christ, in the mystery
through the ministry in the cross, and so know a bearing about in your bodies
the dying of the Lord daily, that the light of Christ may through the cross,
by slaying the enmity, be manifested to your souls and in your mortal flesh. 2
Cor. 4.6, 7. to the 12. that through the obedience to the light within, and the
eternal truth through the spirit, your souls may be purified. 1 Pet. 1.22.23.
and the seed raised up by the power of God, which Christ takes upon him, and
not the nature of Angels, and so to witness the birth and bearing up over the
world, and through the quickenings and working of the divine power, to know
your souls joined to the seed, and so to God, by being changed from glory to
glory, into the pure holy image, by the spirit of the eternal God, to know
election in the ground, and truths as they are in life and power thereof
enjoyed, through the obedience to him and his light guide, Mat. 25.28, 29, 30.
Mat. 25.41, to the end. 2 These. 1.8, 9.
and spirit, to witness the salt seal savoury discerning, and holy unction
which teaches all things. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. 1 Ioh. 2.20. and 27. Otherwise if
you rebel and reject the counsel and teachings of the light, and gift which
should teach and guide you to God the good giver and father of lights, for your
rebellion and sloathfulnesse, God can take his gift and light from you for your
negligence and disobedience, rebellion and wickedness, as the talent was taken
from the unprofitable servant, and after cast soul and body into hell, to be
tormented for ever, and then woe and misery: therefore all now while you have
time, prize it. Matthew. 25. The fear of the Lord is to depart from iniquity,
pride, arrogance, and every froward way, and the manifestation of the spirit is
given to profit withal. Pro. 8. 1 Cor. 12. Romans 1.19. then such as willingly
and knowingly after conviction, do continue in pride and envy, self-love,
covetousness, oppression, vain glory, and wrath, malitiousnesse, self-love,
arrogance, frowardness, and wickedness, and do not deny themselves of those
things, and depart out of the iniquity, but continues in their
unrighteousness, making covers and excuses for sins, such as are rebellious
children who do reject the counsel of the light of God in their consciences,
which does convince them of sin, and checks and reproves them for the same, and
though they make many prayers, and offer sacrifice in that nature which
departs out of the true fear, and so continue in their pride, arrogance,
frowardness, and wickedness, God does not accept of them nor their service,
no more then he did of such in their nature, which he sent to cry against, and
said his soul loathed their sacrifices and services that stood in that nature,
and they were abomination to him as the prophet then said, and so say I from
the Lord the same to all such, and Christ Jesus does say such as be workers of
iniquity, though great in profession and show, yet he will disown them, and say
he knows them not, as may be read. Pro. 6.16, 17. Isa. 1.10. to the l6. Isa.
3.11, 12, and so on, Matthew. 7.20, 21, 22, 23.

Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, and has this seal, the
Lord-knoweth them that are his, and let every one that names the name of
Christ depart from iniquity. 2 Timothy 2.19. they must either depart from
iniquity, or else depart from Christ, that continue in the work of iniquity,
then it is the duty of every one that does profess the Gospel of truth, and
the name of the Lord Jesus in the Gospel ministration, to depart from iniquity,
and obey the light and truth of the Gospel, that they may be accepted of God,
and builded upon the foundation of the prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus
being the chief corner stone, in whom the building fitly framed, grows into
an holy temple in the Lord, and that such may also be sealed with that holy
spirit of promise, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18, 19. Matthew. 7.21. and 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29. Ephesians. 2.18, 19, 20, 11. Ephesians. 1.11, 12, 13.

And seeing it is so, then those that continue in pride, covetousness, envy,
maliciousness, lying, swearing, drunkenesse, vain talking, foolish jesting,
pleasures, and wantonness, consening, cheating, deceiving, and dissembling,
wantonness, usurpation, vain glory, oppression, earthly-mindedness, scorn and
dssdain, these and the like of that nature, under what cover and pretense
soever, being practiced, delighted, and walked in, and not denied, loathed,
cast off, and forsaken, and declared against, else such has not yet learned
their duty toward God, and does not forsake iniquity, but continue in it, and
pride, lust, and excess, dissimulation, and hypocrisy, and such are not
builded upon the foundation, as aforesaid, nor sealed, but are under the woes,
the curse, and the wrath, profess what they will, and except they repent and
amend by forsaking their sins, they are all like to perish. Isa. 5. Luke 6.
Isa. 30.1. Isa. 28.1, 2, 3. Romans 2.5, 6. Tit. 1.16. Romans 1.18, 19, 22. and 28,
29. ver. Rev. 21.8, 27. 2 These. 1.8, 9. Rev. 9.12.

What repentance is, and how to be known. etc.
Repentance is a forsaking the evil, and turning from darkness to the light, to
obey and follow it, out of sin and ungodliness, into grace, purity, and
holiness, for the grace of God which brings salvation, being obeyed through
the goodness and walked in, it teaches to deny ungodliness, and wo^ldly lusts,
and to live righteously, soberly, and godlily in this present evil world, and
such are the fruits of repentance, by turning from darkness unto light to obey
grace, and walk in the light of the Lord, and in a holy and pure conversation
which he calls unto. Romans 2.4, 6, 7, and 10. Act. 26.16, 17, 18. Tit. 2, 11,
12. Ephesians. 5. 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. But such as are convinced o, sin and
evil by the light, and does not obey the light that comes from the Lord Jesus
to forsake the evil, and come out of darkness, sin and iniquity, error and
deceit, such are unprofitable, and in the works of darkness, loving the evil,
and haters of the light, and this is their condemnation that light is come, and
they love darkness rather then the light, because their deeds are evil. Joh.
3.19, 20.

Some grounds of truth laid down as follows, and duties.
1. duty That Christ Jesus is the true light, which does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, and they that follow him the true light, are by it
led out of darkness, error and deceit, into the light of eternal life. Joh.
1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Joh. 8.12.

2. Then it is the duty of all that profess the gospel of truth, and desires
the knowledge in the enjoyment of eternal life, and to be redeemed out of
darkness, error and deceit, to take heed of sinning against the light, or
disobeying the same after conviction and manifestation, least they be lest in
darkness, error and deceit, and through their sloathfulnesse, negligence and
disobedience to the light, and truth manifested, they be cast with the
unprofitable servant into utter darkness, where is weeping, and wailing, and
gnashing of teeth Mat. 25.28, 29.30.

3. That Christ Jesus is the way to the Father, and to salvation, and able to
save to the uttermost all those that deny themselves, follow the light, take up
the daily cross, and so come unto God by him, and the^e is no other name to be
saved by under heaven, nor no other way to the Father but by the Lord Jesus,
according to the declaration or the Scriptures, and the working of the spirit
of truth, which spirit according to gospel discipline, doctrine and promise, is
the perfect guide into all truth. Ioh. 16.13. Act 10.42, 43. Act. 4.11.12.

That the Lord is the teacher of his people in the new covenant, according to
his promise, made by his servants the prophets, who prophesied before of the
coming and sufferings of Christ, as it is written and witnessed. Ier. 31. to
the 35. Isa. 54.13, 14. and Christ when he came, confirmed what the prophets
had said concerning the same, saving, no man can come to me except the Father
which has sent me draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day, it is
written in the prophets, and they shall all be taught of God, every man
therefore that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me. Ioh. 6.44,
45. Heb. 8.10, 11. Heb. 10.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15. Exek. 11. to the 17.

4. That Christ Jesus the anointed of God, is the saints high Priest and
teacher in the new covenant and royal priesthood, and he is the end of the
first covenant, and that priesthood which took tithes and offered sacrifices
both for their own sins and the sins of the people, but could never make the
people perfect thereby, but Christ Jesus is the end of that priesthood and law,
by which they were made priests, and by which tithes were commanded for their
service to them to be paid. Heb. 3.1. Heb. 2.17. Heb. 8.6.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and
he who through the eternal spirit offered himself to God the Father, has by
his own blood put an end to the Leviticall priesthood, and the law (by which
they were ordained or made Priests) and by which tithes were commanded for
their service to them to be paid, and he who through the eternal spirit,
offered himself to God, the Father has changed the Priesthood and law, and
ended both law and priesthood, by which Priests were then ordained, and by
which to them for their se^vice therein. Numb. 18. Tithes under that priesthood
were paid. Numb. 18.20, 21. so the priesthood and service therein being ended,
tithes are there ended also, for the priesthood being changed, and that
covenant taken away, there was made of necessity a change of the law also, so
an end of tithes, with the Sacrifices burnt offerings, and the things there
spoken of, and Christ Jesus is the everlasting offering and saints high Priest,
and the mediator of the new covenant, the end of the old, and sum of all the
things and substance of all types, shaddows and figures of him, and tithes
being a thing in the covenant and priesthood which Christ has ended; therefore
tithes by him are ended, and for proof to confirm the same, read at large the
7, 8, 9, 10 chapters to the Hebrews.

Those that take tithes, etc. are not in the new covenant.
Then such as profess faith in Christ, and acknowledge the new covenant and
gospel ministration therein, which is upon better promises. Heb. 8, and 10
chap. and in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Col. 2.9. Such as
this do profess, and either take tithes or pay tithes, are out of the substance
and out of the new covenant, that do not deny upholding what Christ Jesus has
shed his blood for to put an end unto, that he might bring in a better hope,
and to be made perfect, pure, and complete in him the substance and fullness.
Heb. 7.11, to the 20. Heb. 7.22, 23, to the end. Col 1.26, 27, 28. 1 Ioh. 3.3.
Col. 2.9, 10. Ephesians. 4, 11, 12, 13. But such as profess themselves to be Christ's
ministers in the new covenant or gospel ministration, and takes tithes, or
compells people to pay them tithes, such are enemies to the gospel of Christ,
and dishonours the Lord Jesus by so doing, for such are upholders, and causes
others to uphold that which Christ Jesus has shed his blood to put an end
unto, with that priesthood and service. Numb. 18, 1, 2, to the 8. In which
priesthood, and for which service the tithes were paid. Numb. 18.20, 21. and
the priesthood and service for which the priests had tithes, is ended and done
away (to christians) by Christ; and Christ's priesthood is not of Aarons tribe
that took tithes, but of the tribe of Judah, that took no tithes, nor had no
command for the same, so not Christ's ministers, for it is evident that the
first priesthood and covenant is changed and ended, and that our Lord sprung
out of Judah. Heb. 7.11, 12, to the 18. which had no command to take tithes,
but in him they with that first priesthood ended. Heb. 7.22, 23, to the end.
Heb. 8.1, 2, 3, to the 11. Heb. 9.11, 12, to the 18, and Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. to the 21. then such as take tithes, upholds the first priesthood, which
Christ has ended, and such as do so deny Christ come in the flesh. 1 Ioh. 4.1,
2. to put an end to those things in the Scriptures concerning the first
priesthood beforementioned, spoken of, and in their works are against him.
Tit. 1.16. and so Antichristians, but the Priests of the world that takes
tithes are such, so enemies to the cross of Christ. Philip. 3.18, 19. and
enemies to the gospel of Christ, therefore Antichristian ministers, and not the
ministers of Christ nor the gospel,

5. That Christ Jesus is the mediator of the new covenant, and the end of the
old, for he has taken away the first, that he might establish the second upon
better promises, without sacrifices and burnt offerings, so without tithes, and
this Jesus who is the mediator of the new covenant and end of the old, he is
perfect^y able to save to the uttermost (without tithes and burnt offerings, or
man's inventions) all those that come unto God by him, and he is the author of
eternal salvation to all that obey him. Heb. 12.24. Heb. 7.22. Heb. 9.15. Heb.
10.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, to the 19. Heb. 5.8, 9.

6. That the true worship of God in the new covenant, of which Jesus is the
mediator, and the saints high priest in the royal priesthood. Heb. 3.1. 1
Pet. 2, 5, and 9. Is in the spirit and the truth, as he has said. Ioh. 4.23,
24. and God is that spirit which we worship, and beholding with open face as in
a glass the glory of the Lord are changed, according to the working of his
divine power after the good pleasure of his will, from glory to glory into the
same pure image as by the spirit of the Lord. Philip. 3. to the 3 verse. 2 Corinthians. 3.17, 18.

7. That the ministers of Christ and the new covenant, are made able ministers
thereof, not by man. Gal. 1.1. but by the Lord. Gal. 1.11, 12, and 15, 16. and
such were able ministers of the new covenant, not of the later, but of the
spirit. 2 Cor. 3.6. And the ministry of Christ in the new covenant, (or gospel
ministration) is for the perfecting of the saints, to build them up into the
unity of the faith, and to lead chem from faith to faith into the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, and to a perfect man in Christ Jesus, as is witnessed in the
Scriptures, both by Christ's own doctrine declared of, and the declaration of
the doctrine of Christ's Apostles and ministers. Mat. 5.4, 8. Phil. 3. Ephesians.
4.11, 12, 13. Romans 1.16, 17. Heb. 6.1. Heb. 12.22, 23. Rev. 14.3, 4, 5. 1 Ioh.
5.11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 2, 6, 7. 1 Ioh. 4.16, 17.

The false ministry and ministers.
Then those ministers that are made by the will of man, and such as are
ministers of the letter, and not of the spirit, such are not taught of God,
neither are they the ministers of Christ, nor his gospel, and such as have a
form of godliness, and wants the power, are to be denied and turned away from,
and that ministry which does not lead up to perfection, but keeps people ever
learning, and never able to come to that perfect measure of the knowledge of
the Son of God, and the eternal truth, and to a perfect man in Christ Jesus,
is none of Christ's ministry, but the ministry of the world, and of Antichrist,
therefore not the ministry of Christ, nor the gospel, but such a ministry as
that which is spoken of, that keeps people laden with sins, and led away with
diverse lusts, and saying (under it) they cannot be freed from their sins whilst
they live, that is such a ministry as Christ has not ordained in the new
covenant, but is shut out, therefore that ministry is a contrary ministry to
Christ and his Apostles in the new covenant, and to be holden accursed, also
the ministers thereof as it is required. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Gal.
1.8, 9.

Who the false prophets are, and how to be known, even by their fruits as
Christ has said. Mat. 5.15, and 20.
The false prophets, idol shepherds, and blind watchmen were, (and are such)
as bears and bore rule by their means, and such as sought, and does seek for
their gain from their quarter, greedy dumb dogs, that never had (nor never)
have enough, but were and are such as sought and seeks for the fleece, and
then made, and now makes a prey upon the people, and preached, and does preach
for hire, and then went, and does now go in the way of Cain, who received and
does receive the wages of unrighteousness, Balaam like, and such the Lord was,
and such the Lord is against, and sent and does send to cry out against them,
but the priests of the world are such, and has such fruits whereby they may
be known to be the false prophets, idol-shepheards, blind watchmen, and greedy
dumb dogs that are never satisfied, but either petitioning, or crying to the
people, and crying out to the magistrates, to help them with one thing or
another, and if they might but have their wills, they would show forth their
cruelty, doggednesse, persecution and tyranny, as many of them have already
done, so they are out of the example of all the true prophets and true Apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ, therefore to be cried out of and declared against,
and the woe is unto them for their reward, as it was to such. Jer. 23. Isa.
3.11. Ezekiel. 34. Jer. 5.30 31. Isa. 56.10, 11. Mic. 3.5, and 11. 2 Pet. 2. Iud.
11.

The Resurrection of the just and unjust.
That there is a resurrection of the just and unjust, and the saints shall be
raised up to be glorified, and enter into the eternal joy of their Lord, but
the wicked to be terrified, and the just has boldness in the day of
judgment, 1 Ioh. 4.17. and are accepted, but the wicked, and all the nations
that forget God, are to be turned into hell. Psalm. 9.17. and thither goes the
disobedient and cursed to be tormented eternally, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power. 1 Cor. 15.12, 13, 14, 15, to the 30.
Matthew. 27.52, 53. Rev. 20.6. Matthew. 25.41. to the end. Rev. 20.10, 11, 12. to
the end. Rev. 21.8, 27. 2 These. 1.8, 9.

The Lord will plead with all flesh.
That the Lord will plead with all flesh, by his sword, and by fire. Isa.
66.15, 16. and the terrors of the Lord is to be known to all flesh, and upon
all the wicked and ungodly. Mala. 4.1. Zeph. 1.14, 15. therefore happy are they
that obey the light which comes from the Lord Jesus, which light does convince
them of, and reprove for sin and evil, that through their obedience to the
light, they may be led out of darkness, and know judgment, and vengeance to
consume the wickedness and seed of the serpent in them, and know the power of
life to work in them, that through their obedience to the light and truth, they
may have their souls purified, as such had who obeyed the truth through the
spirit, and have. 1 Pet. 1.22, 23. and bodies washed with the water of the
word, through the sanctification of the spirit. 1 Cor. 6.11. and so know their
souls joined to the divine life through the eternal spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17. and
through their obedience to the light, and ministry in the cross. 1 Cor. 1 18.
that they may give all diligence (here) to make their calling and election
sure, that so an entrance may be ministered abundantly into the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 1 John 1.9. Ioh. 8.12. Heb. 5.9.
2 Pet. 1.10, 11.

There is no place to be purged in betwixt heaven and here, therefore plead not
for sin, etc.
No unclean thing shall enter, nor the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19.20. and there shall not in any wise
enter into it any thing that defiles, nor that which works abomination, or
makes a lie. Rev. 21.27. then such as continue in sin unseparated, and are not
purified from it here, their case is dangerous, for the unclean shall not enter
into Gods kingdom, and there is no place betwixt heaven and here to be purged
in, and the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God, therefore be not
deceived, for such as dies in their sins and unrighteousness, coming so to the
judgment, then woe and misery is their portion eternally, take warning betimes,
and read. Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. Rev. 20.10, 11, to the end. Rev. 22.11, 12, 13,
14, 15. Rev. 21, 8, 27.

The difference between the natural and spiritual estate, and condition: and
how the soul comes to enjoy fellowship with God, and partake the sweet gospel,
grace, and virtue.
Men naturally knows not the things of the spirit of God, because they are
spiritually discerned. 1 Cor. 2.14. And in a state of unregeneration, they are
dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2.1. but alive in the evil pride and vain
glory, serving diverse lusts and pleasures. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. so in deaths reign, and
all their actings, in their wills in that nature turned from the light, is out
of a selfish principle and in that self-seeking nature, thinking thereby to
merit something by their own self-actings in that nature turned from the light,
so setting up their self-actings and performances that stands in their wills,
thinking to get life and peace (or salvation) thereby, but all that is seen
with the light, to be out of the true ground, and not in the life of truth,
which stands out of the light in the man's will, and with the light which calls
the mind within, and crosses the will in the ground, is all that with the
light discovered, reproved, and with the light judged and condemned, and peace
comes into the soul, as the light is submitted to and obeyed, and so through
the obedience to the light, the will and will worship is denied, and with the
light is the heart searched, and the reigns tried, and so the light b^ing
submitted unto it, judges the selfish principle, and cuts down the fleshly
wisdom, which light reproves and judges the ground of the deceits with its
fruits and effects, which light being obeyed, opens the understanding, and
also shuts out the pride and vain glory, and the light crosses the ground
of self and self-actings, and judges all that is acted in the man's will and
fleshly wisdom, which light being submitted unto and contained in, it works
into a reformation, and changes the heart, begets a love to the truth, and
a hatred against the deceit, which light guides out of self unto the power of
light, which through the workings of the eternal spirit, puts out of self,
and begets a pure will, and an earnest desire after the goodness, and so
working into the sincerity, the desire is real toward the Lord, to seek after
him in his own way, contrary to the will of man, and according to the pure mind
and will of God, which light being obeyed, loved, and yielded wholly unto, it
leads out of corruptions into purity, out of nature into grace, to witness the
regeneration, and be made partaker of the divine nature, being led by the light
out of the corruptions and corrupt nature, as before, and so out of darkness
into the mavelous light, and works into the patience and pure zeal, the
light being loved and followed, it leads to the power which through the
eternal spirit works through the understanding into the endless love, and
so joins the soul to the divine power, through the obedience in the spirit;
whereby it receives eternal joy and comfort in the Lord: who teaches such, to
deny self, self-love, self-joy, self-praise, vain glory, and self acting; and
to act in the love and joy of the Lord, from the light and grace received
(against and contrary to the corrupt will and fleshly wisdom of natural man)
in the power of life and love, from and according to the grace received, so to
act from life in the quickenings and strength of the Lord, according to the
working of his divine power, and the assurance of the fathers love, in the
measure, according to the working of his divine power, and the enjoyment in
that measure and manifestation; so growing in the life of the eternal truth,
and so perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, and salvation by degrees,
in obedience to the truth through the spirit; and there is the true
understanding of it according to measure and manifestation: and the true
knowledge of the degrees and passages in the inward man; working up also to the
sense of the outward, or the creature man; through the Cross by which the
enmity is slain, and the enjoyment of the divine love known, and so the
natural members of the man's body is washed with the water of sanctification,
and bodies cleansed from corruptions, whereby the members are made instruments
of righteousness unto holiness, and bodies and souls offered up to the Lord
as a reasonable sacrifice, to do him service, being bought with a price and
redeemed to purity again, through the working of the divine power into the
enjoyment of the riches of the love of God, whereby there is a growing from
grace to grace, from faith to faith, from glory to glory, into the eternal
unity, and so into the fellowship with the father and the son; and to, be
partakers of that sweet grace and virtue. Joh. 14.20. Joh. 17.9. Romans 1.16.17.
1 Cor. 6.11. Romans 6.11, 12, 13. Romans 6.18.19, 20, 21, 22. Romans 12. 1 John
1.2.3. 1 John 5.20. 2 Cor. 3.17.18. 2 Pet. 1.3. 1 John 4.16.17.

Those that fellow Christ must take up a daily Cross, and follow him through
the sufferings.
All who follow Christ must follow him through the sufferings, for such as will
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution 2 Timothy 3.10.11.12. then
they that are persecutors are none of Christ's followers, take notice of that,
but such are the Priests of the world, and many of their members or hearers,
therefore they are none of Christ's followers: they that are such may read
themselves in Isaiah the 59. and 2 Timo. 3.1.2, 3. to the 10. and likewise in
the 13. verse. and Isa. 1. but thus faith the Lord to such; when ye spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when ye make many prayers
I will not hear: your hands are full of blood; Isa. 1.15. and woe to you that
are persecutors, and to the wicked, it shall go ill with you, Isa. 3.11. but
blessed are they that are persecuted, and suffers for righteousness sake,
their reward is great in heaven, read Math. 5.10, 11, 12. and Luke 6.22.23. And
as Christ has suffered in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same
mind, for he that has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin, that he no
longer should live the rest of his time in the flesh the lusts of men but to
the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.1.2, etc. And if ye be reproached for the name of
Christ happy are ye, the spirit of grace and glory rests upon you: 1 Pet.
4.13.14. And all who follows Christ must take up the daily cross; and such
as loves any thing more then Christ, he is not worthy of him: and says Christ
he that will be my disciple must deny himself, and take up his cross daily,
and follow me, Luke 9.23.24. to the 28. Math. 10.37, 38, 39. No crown without
the cross.

The Cross in the Mystery, and what it cuts down and raises up, as it is
taken up daily etc.
The Cross in the mystery, Colos. 1.26.27.28. is known to such as obey the
light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, which light does convince of sin,
and unbelief, self-love, self-righteousnesse, pride and vain glory, and all
iniquity, and reproves in the conscience for such, which light shows the
lusts and evil of the heart, and the light is within that does so; which light
manifests corruptions, and the natural estate: which light checks and
reproves for sin and evil, and being obeyed, teaches to forsake sin and the
pride of the flesh, and all evil desires, lusts and devices of mischief, the
light where it is obeyed crosses them and judges them within, in the ground
from whence they do arise; Which light that so convinces of evil, and where it
is submitted unto, crosses the ground of enmity, and judges deceit in its
appearance within; the same light moves upon the conscience, and works men
into the knowledge of sin: And such as incline to the light may know it calling
them daily to come to repentance; which light being attended upon persuades
man's heart to turn from the evil to the good, and in persuading his heart,
persuades him (to wit the creature man) against sin; and to turn from the
iniquity, and he joining to the light: his lusts, natural corruptions, and
inclinations to the evil, is thereby (to wit by the light) not only
discovered, but also crossed, judged and condemned. So the creature man obeying
the light, and serving the good, he forsakes the evil and becomes a servant of
righteousness, yielding up his members to the light, as instruments of
righteousness unto that which is holy, that he may serve in the new life, and
so witness the change and the new creature, as it is written Romans 6.11.12. and
the 17.18. to the 23 verse. 2 Cor. 5.17.

Which light as aforesaid, within in the conscience that reproves for sin being
obeyed, and upon the discovery and manifestation to the view of the
understanding, submitted wholly unto, it crosses and crucifieth lusts and all
evil of what sort soever, as it does arise: so condemning sin in the flesh, and
also quickens the soul, so easing it and redeeming it according to the working
of the divine power, and thereby freeing the soul from the bondage of
corruptions wherein it was held; which corruptions are purged out of the soul
by the ministry in the cross: 1 Cor. 1.18. throng the obedience to the light
and truth in the spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22.23. 1 Pet. 2.9.10. and so the soul is
through the obedience to the light, and by the operation of the divine power
raised up from under the bondage wherein it had been held, into a spiritual
enjoyment of the fathers eternal love; and wrought through the obedience to
the light and truth in the spirit, into the new life and spiritual worship,
Romans 6.1.2.3.4. Ioh. 4.23.24. Rev. 22.17. Philip. 3.3. whereby the heart
through the obedience to the light and the eternal spirit, is circumcised, the
body of sin put off, and the soul baptized into the endless love: so into
Christ the fullness: whereby it puts him on, and so stands complete in him
the fullness; and being baptized by one spirit into unity in that one
spiritual body, so into the new covenant entered, sealed, and confirmed, and
there the soul sits under the vine receiving of the virtue from the fullness;
and drinks in that one spirit, where there is one covenant, one body, one
bread of life, one spiritual reck for souls to be refreshed at, and in, one
faith, one Lord, one baptism (which is not carnal but spiritual) and so
there is no confidence in the flesh, nor fleshly worships, but a rejoicing in
Christ Jesus, and being of the spiritual seed, in the spiritual worship and
covenant. There is a glorying in the Lord the justifier, and in the spiritual
circumcision, baptism, breaking of bread and prayer; and the glory communion
and fellowship into the covenant and doctrine, is known by the preaching of the
cross, and the ministry of the spirit; through the cross, which crucifieth
the worlds nature, and the creature to the world, and there my glorying is
where the old things are passed away, and the new things enjoyed, for if any
man be in Christ he is a new creature. Old things are passed away, and behold,
all things are become new; as it is written and know with such as enjoy the
same. 2 Cor. 5.16.17. Rev. 21. and Colos. 2.9.10. Galat. 3.27.28. 1 Cor.
12.11.12.13. Ephesians. 4.4.5.6. Ioh. 6.53.54.55.56. 1 Ioh. 5.20. 1. Cor. 10.15.16.17.


Shaking, Quaking and trembling is no new thing, which is despised in this
generation, but witnessed in the Scriptures amongst the people of God, then as
the Scriptures declares, etc.
And though the serpents seed do revile the people of God by names of reproach,
yet thus says the Lord, Hearken unto me ye that know righteousness, the
people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproaches of men, neither be
ye afraid of their revilings, for the moth shall eat them up like a garment,
and the worm shall eat them like wool; but my righteousness shall be for ever,
and my salvation from generation to generation; read Isa. 51.7.8. And though we
be reproached and called by the name of Quakers reproachfully, yet the power we
witness and the salvation: which power in other generations was witnessed
amongst the people of God, that witnessed both shaking, trembling and quaking,
according to the declaration left for a witness upon record in the scriptures.
For Moses the servant of the Lord did exceedingly fear and quake, as for proof
you may read Hebr. 12.21. and Act. 7.22. and it Moses had been here now and
witnessed such a condition of quaking, the Priests and people of England many
of them would have been ready to have reproached Moses and have called him a
Quake, as they do reproach the people of God under the name of Quakers.

Secondly, David's flesh trembled, Psalm 119.120. and he roared by reason of the
disquietnesse of his heart, Psalm. 38.8. Psalm. 22.1.

Thirdly, Job says that trembling took hold on his flesh, Job 21.5.6. And at
this says he, my heart trembles, and is removed out of its place, Job 37.1.

Fourthly, The Lord sent Isaiah to the people to speak his word, saying, Hear
the word of the Lord all ye that tremble at his word, Isaiah 66.5. and Isaiah
and those trembling people, and such as the Lord had given him, were for signs
and wonders in Israel; Isa. 8.16.17, 18.

And if any witness a trembling condition now, as such did then, they are
reproached and hated, and are for signs and wonders in England, and (by them
reproachfully and scornfully called Quakers.

And if Job, David, and the people with Isaiah, Math. 9.10.11.12. Luke 6.22.23.
1 Pet. 4.13.14.
had been here now, and witnessed such conditions of shaking and trembling, the
people in this generation and the Priests, might have had as good ground to
have called such Quakers, as they have to call the people of God Quakers now,
who witness the law of God written in their hearts, and the power that works
salvation, but such as so reproach and revile the people of God by the name of
Quakers, are ignorant of the life of the Scripture, and the power which works
out salvation with fear and trembling. Philippians 2.11, 12, 13.

5. Habakkuck the Prophet of the Lord, his belly shook, and his lips quivered.
Hab. 3.16.

6. Jeremiah his heart within him was broken, and his bones did shake. Ier.
23.9. and see what he says. Ier. 5.22. and Ier. 30.56.

7. The word of the Lord came to Ezek'ell the prophet, saying, son of man eat
thy bread with quaking. Ezek'ell, 12.18.

Daniel he trembled, and the men that was with him, a great quaking fell upon
them, so that they fled to hide themselves. Dan 10.8, 11.

If Habakkuck, the Prophet of the Lord had been here now, and his belly had
shook, and his lips quivered, as he says they did, and had Jeremiah the
Prophet of the Lord been here now, and his bones had shook, and he have been
like a drunken man, and had Ezekiell, Daniel, and the men that were with him
been here now, and done so, trembled and quaked, (as the Scripture witnesses
of them. Ier. 23.9. Ier. 5.22. Ier. 30.5, 6. Hab. 3.16. Ezekiel. 12, 18. Dan.
10.8, 9, 10, 11.) the Priests of England and their people would have been ready
to have said these men had been deluded or mad, and have been ready to have
reviled them, and to have called them Quakers.

Yet they can take such men's words to profess, and trade withal for money, but
despise their conditions, and magnify themselves against the people of God,
that witnesses their conditions, and that power which they did, and such are
now by the Priests of England and their people reproachfully called Quakers,
but you that reproach the people of God, and magnify your selves against them,
read what the Lord will do to you, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Luke 6.22, 23. 1 Pet. 4
13.14.
and such like as is spoken of in the prophecy of Zeph. 2.9, 10, 11.

And though we be reviled and reproached by the name of Quakers, yet we can
gladly rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer reproach for the name of
Christ, and to us reproaches are great riches for Christ's sake, as they was to
the holy men of God, and to Moses who did exceedingly fear and quake. Heb.
11.25, 26. Heb. 12.21.

The ground and manner of the meeting.
The meeting at Chadwitch in Worcestershire, on the 21 day of the 12 month,
between the 2 men by the world scornfully called Quakers, and the 2 Priests, to
wit one Priest Osland Pastor to an independent company as they say at Bewdley,
and one Andrew Trusterom Priest at Clent.

To the 2 Priests that were at the meeting and others of their party the day
aforesaid, some passages laid before them to look on and take into
consideration, and the manner and ground of our meeting in brief as follows.

The meeting at Chadwitch in Worcestershire the day aforesaid, we) whom the
world scornfully called Quakers) had appointed that day set apart to meet with
the people there abouts, that used there to meet with others that might come
into us that day, not knowing any thing of your being there, till we came at
the place, where the meeting was appointed, and when we came at the meeting
house, we found you 2 Priests got peaking up Pharisee like, and had been
laboring to incense the people against us, crying our against false prophets
and seducers, and p oved to be those same your selves, whom some of the people
had opposed before we came, and so finding you peark'c above them and jangling
with them, (out of the envy and pride of your hearts) before we came, so seeing
that I pressed in amongst the people to get in to stand before your faces, as I
was constrained, and moved, and with much pressing (the throng was so great) I
pressed through the throng, until I came and stood before you the 2 Priests,
whereupon you made a speech, that all the people would be silent, but I, that
you and I might speak together, etc.

But I was not free in my spirit to have the spirits of others tied up by my
promise, therefore I opened my mouth to speak as I were guided by the spirit of
my Father, Mat. 10, 20. and said unto you also, that the room was very throng
so for the truths sake, and for the good of the people there gathered
together, and for conveniences sake also, it would be better to go forth of the
doors upon the green hill, that all people might hear, and be kept cool, but
that you refused, and then would not but said, if that I would ask you a
question you would answer me, or if I would you would ask me a question and I
would answer you, or if you not be interrupted you would speak, or to the
effects, or if I would speak, you would hear me, etc.

Whereupon, to that I told you again, I had appointed that meeting with the
people, and had something from the Lord to declare to that people there
gathered together, so be silent till I have done, or declared what from the
Lord I have here this day to declare to this people, and then if you would have
me to ask you a question, that I shall do afterward, if God permits, whereupon
to that yon (2 Priests) granted and sat down, so by your promise you were bound
to hear me, and be silent till I had done, as aforesaid, if you had regarded
your word, and also after that you were bound accordingly, from your own
proposition and by your promise to answer my question, which was to propound
unto you.

So after that silent, I stood a while, and a woman bad me to speak and speak
up aloud, but I to her answered and said, woman, I am not to be commanded by
thee, but by the Lord, and as he pleases, so I shall speak, whose power I am
subject unto, and to be ordered by and also disposed of according to the good
pleasure of his divine will, in whose counsel I now do stand.

Then after that, according to the good pleasure of the Lord, who had ordered
and did order to his praise, and according to the assistance of his holy
spirit, and the working of his divine power, I did declare the truth of God, as
it were witnessed, to the witness of God in all consciences, that were present
and heard, and shall be witnessed before the judgment seat of Christ, for my
speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power, etc. 1 Cor. 2.3, 4. Romans 2.16.

And blessed are they who continue with patience in the well doing. 2 Cor. 6.
Romans 2.7. that obey and follow the light, and counsel of the word of truth,
answered within by the light of Christ in their consciences, through the
mystery of godliness. Col. 1.27, 28. But such as are contentious and disobey
the truth to obey unrighteousness, their portion will be grievous woe and
misery: 2 These. 1.6.7, 8, 9. 2 These. 2.7.8.9.10.11.12.
then indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, Romans 2.8.9. whether
Priest or people. But though the truth was that day declared in much power, and
many (of your party) at the first, and others were pricked at the heart, and
were much tendered and convinced, and many did secretly (and some openly
confess to the truth) and your selves confessed to that which you said I held
forth concerning mortification of sin, and the resurrection, and other truths:
till your practices were touched, and the worlds churches, tithes, preaching
for hire* bearing rule by their means, seeking for their gain from their
quarter, and such like things were declared against: at which you (the Priests)
startled, who before were convinced of the truth declared, and had sighed,
sobbed, and groned in your spirits very often; as many can witness: and as
that in your consciences which is my witness for Gods truth declared, and
answer (against your deceits) does know.

Yet when you saw that the truth did prevail upon the spirits of many, and that
you must either yield up to it and take your shame, or else to stand up
contrary to that in your consciences to oppose it, and resist it, as Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8.9.
and sought to harden the peoples hearts against him, lest they should have
believed and obeyed the truth: so after I had spoken about an hour and a half
or two hours, you sought to resist the truth, though clear truths according to
scripture, as that in your consciences (and others of the servants of God) can
witness, and you labored much to have got me and the truth silent; and broke
your own engagement by promise. But what are the words of Priests, but words of
false-hearted self seeking and deceitful men, as you and others do know: yet
truth prevailed, and would not be silent: for flesh and deceit truce breakers
like your selves and such spoken of, in 2 Timothy 3 chap. That did not regard your
own word and promise that time: you broke your own order (and word bond) or the
present engagement, whereupon I told you the sum and commanded your silence
for your words sake, and still spoke to the people (this is not self
justication; but a witnessing to the truth against the deceits and deceivers,)
and to clear it from lies and danders; and though you (the Priests) did so seek
to resist the truth, contrary to that in your consciences, and so stirred up
envy in the hearts (of some of the ignorant people) against the truth of God,
and the messenger of God, etc. yet the cause I commit to the Lord, who will
carry it on against gainsayers and opposers, like you and such in your nature;
and will also case himself of his enemies, and be avenged of his adversaries.
Isa. 1.24. And the Lord will avenge himself of you? except ye repent, and
acknowledge your fault, and to the people declare against your error, own your
condemnation thereupon, and take shame to your selves. And to this the light in
your consciences is my witness, and answer the judgments upon you it wills to
be just; and if you do not repent and give over deceiving the people, and cease
your opposition against the truth, or else eternal vengeance you cannot
escape: be silent all flesh, the light is my answer and witness, beyond and
against your wills: Happy are you if you obey it in all things, but woe to you
if you disobey it and act contrary to it. Now you have time prize it, remember
D^ves end; and also take warning and remember that in your life time you have
been warned; as to you I said by the spirit of the Lord.

And when you (Priests) could not have your wills as you would, who had before
in part, bound up your selves by your word and promise, but broke your bonds;
whereupon I told you the same, and I was bound to clear my conscience before
you and the people, to lay open your deceits; and for the truths sake, because
that yon (and others also of the Priests your brethren) had so much cried out
against false prophets, and the like. I said toward the latter end of my
speech, declared by the spirit of the Lord to the people that day at Chadwitch
in Worcestershire as aforesaid: That you (the two priests) was bound by your
word to hear me what I had to say, and after that to answer my question also:
whereupon keeping you chained or tied up by your own word, then I proceeded,
and went on to lay open before you and the people who the false prophets were,
and how they might be known even by their fruits as Christ has said, Matthew.
7.15.16. and 20.

So by your fruits are you known, and all such, as the true Prophets of the
Lord was sent to cry out against, as than I laid open by description and
fruits: also proving the same by scripture, which now I shall not much mention
because I laid you and such so open before your faces; and such like as speaks
a divination of their own brain, stealing the true prophets and true Apostles
words to trade with all for money and selfends; (which they spoke forth freely
as they were moved of the holy Ghost, and as the spirit gave them utterance, 2
Pet. 1.19.20.21. Act. 24.) therefore such as steals their words to trade
withal for money, are the thieves and false prophets spoken of in Jer. 23. but
the Priests of the world are such, therefore thieves and false prophets as by
their fruits they are known, and such as bear rule by their means, and seeks
the fleece and makes a prey upon the people, and seeks fort heir gain from
their quarter, Jer. 23. 23. Mic. 3.5.11. Isa. 56.10.11. 2 Pet. 2.
such priests as preach for hire, like those that the true prophets were sent
to cry against, such are the priests of the world, therefore false prophets,
and to be cried against as such was; Jer. 5.30.31. Ezekiel. 34. And such proud,
covetous, selt-seeking men, as agrees with a people beforehand, to pay them
20.30 40.50.60.80.100.200. or 300 pound per annum; faying they are ministers of
Christ, sudh does speak falsely and are lying false prophets never sent of the
Lord, they cannot find their example in scripture, neither amongst the true
Prophets nor true Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, Micah 3.5.11.
but such are amongst the hirelings, and such as are greedy dumb dogs never
satisfied, Isaiaeh. 56.10.11. but seeking for their gain from their quarter,
and making a prey upon the people. Ezekiel. 34.1.2.3. and amongst such (or under
Tythmongers) tytheing Priests as thou Andrew Trusterom art, (and said thou
would prove it to be lawful, but did not, and the other would not meddle
about tithes, so I bad him then cry them down.)

For thou, and such as takes tithes, professing your selves gospel ministers,
(are liars and deceivers as I told thee) and have not one example for so doing,
amongst all the gospel ministers (nor Judahs tribe, which you can prove by
plain scripture) to take tithes by command. Oh, shame, Andrew Trusterom, and
all tything priests like thee, you dishonor the gospel, and are out of the
gospel way and order: be ashamed, and blush, and all hirelings, and also
tything priests like thee, you that take tithes do not the work nor service
that such did as bad the tithes, a peculiar gift for their service only,
during the legal ministration. You tything priests what are you Aaronitall and
Leviticall, or Pharisaicall and hypocritical; where are you, and where is your
holy garments, water of purification, your altars, fire and incence and
burnt-offerings, and sacrifices: where is your circumcision, and where is all
the service required under the Aaronitall and Leviticall priesthood, done and
performed by you? Tithing Priests, that was done by Aaron and Levi, who had the
tithes, a peculiar gift only for their service under that priesthood, Numb.
18.1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6,7. and Numb. 18.20.21. And you tything priests by the same
Law are to do all the service required, as well as take tithes: else you are
dissemblers with God and man, taking tithes and leaving the work undone, and
there never was any gospel allowance, stop your mouths. But seeing you do take
tithes, where is vour store house, to put the tithes in, Malac. 3. Let that be
known, and where it is: that the gates may be set open in every place of the
nation, that the poor, the widows, fatherless and strangers, may come thither
to be filled and satisfied; (that is, to have out of them food and raiment)
(that there may not be a beggar in England, but be relieved and satisfied, and
have food and raiment out of the tithes:) as there was not to be a beggar in
Israel but to be relieved, filled, and satisfied out of the tithes: as may be
read, Deuir. 14.27.28.29.

But do you not you tything priests in England, take tithe of the poor, the
widows, fatherless, and a so strangers: if servants come and be shangers in a
place, or sojourners doing service from one year to another, some of you take
tithe out of their earnings or wages; here you manifest your cruelty that so
do, and are even binding, and have bound heavy burdens upon the poor: but woe
is your portion that do so. Math. 23. Never such gospel ministers was known,
that ever the scripture makes mention of; but you are those thieves and
robbers that Christ speaks of, which never came in by the door, as it is
written Ioh. 10. chap. And you are robbers of the poor, and do not what the law
requires of you, that commanded tithes to be paid to the Leviticall Priesthood:
but you are so far from the gospel order, that you are transgressors of the
law; and instead of keeping it, you break it, and take tithes contrary to the
law of God in the first covenant, and priesthood; and take tithes contrary to
the law in that covenant: for the poor the widows, the fatherless and
strangers instead of paving tithes under the law, was to be filled and
sat^sfied out of the tithes according to the law. Deuteronomy. 14.27.28.29. but you
that are tything priests in England, take tithes of the poor, and many widows,
and fatherless, and strange^s, for in many places the priests tithe servants
wages, taking a farthing at shilling, and as their error is. Oh, wicked
seducers, deluders and deceivers! but woe to the wicked and to Gods adversaries
for it shall go ill with them. Isaiah 3.11, Isaiah 1.24.

And you hold up that which Christ came to put an end to, who has fulfilled
that law and covenant, by which that, the first priesthood was ordained, and by
which tithes were commanded to them to be paid; and the priesthood being
changed, so he changed the law by which the priests were made, and tithes paid:
so an end of the priesthood that received tithes by a law, therefore an end of
tithes the reward for your service; and Christ is the sum and substance of
all the things there spoken of, who is of the tribe of Judah, that took no
tithes; neither did he take any, nor his masters of the new covenant under the
gospel; therefore stop your mouths a bout your tithes, and also take shame to
your selves, restore to whom you have wronged, by taking tithes, professing
your selves ministers of the gospel; and restore four fold as Zaccheus who had
been an oppressor, upon his conversion did; and also read Hebrews 7.8.9. and
10. chapters.

So in brief, I leave that, and come on to let you know by bringing things back
to your remembrance, etc. That when your deceits (and the deceits of the
priests of England) were declared against that day, and laid open to your
understandings, and in your presence that it even cut you to the heart, who had
so often that day sighed and groaned to the hearing of others, and then thou
Andrew Trusterom Priest of Clent, went out of the room, being accused in thy
conscience, and pricked with it, but that which did accuse thee does accuse
thee, and will be a swift witness against thee, thou cannot flee it, to the
grave and the pit it will follow to witness a against thee, and upon thee;
answer it will the judgments of God to be just, if it thou hate and still
disobey, therefore be advised I warn thee, and give over deceiving the people
for their own ends.

But to come on, having left thee without excuse as well as the rest, this is
to bring to remembrance, and let thee and the rest know, that when thou was
fled and going out of the room when the meeting was, I then ceased, declaring
to take away slanders and prejudices, and otherwise might have been raised, and
I turned me about toward the other Priest Osland Pastor to the independent
company at Bewdley so called) that be might have some time to answer my
question, and object what he or others had to object, that truth might be
cleared, and according to my promise, I propounded to him a question after I
had ended my speech to the people, and therein had laid open your deceits, and
the deceits of the priests of the world to the people, which question was this.

The beginning of the dispute.
What death it was that had reigned over those that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, and what it was in mankind that such a death
had reigned over, how he could witness in the inward ministrations, through
deaths reign, through Moses or the judgments, and through the prophecyings to
John in the wilderness, and how in his burnings and shineings to the least in
the kingdom, what the soul and spirit of man was, and how to be known asunder,
because the word of the Lord divides asunder betwixt the soul and spirit, as
it is written. Heb. 4.12.

But to this question, I received but only a shuffle in stead of an answer, and
be said call in my brother, which was priest Trusterom, and thou coming in,
seemed as though thou would answer it, but yet it is from you without its
answer,

Then it follows, that you either could not answer the question propounded,
and so acknowledged the same by your fleeing from it, and leaving it without
its full answer, or else that you would not answer it, and so to further
manifested your lies and lying spirit, saying you would answer it, and did not,
but left it, and yet it remains without its true and full answer, to manifest
your lying false spirits, and hereby know we the spirit of truth, and your
spirit of error asunder, and that it is the last time, as John faith; Little
children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time,
Ioh. 4.1, to the 7. 1 Ioh. 2.18. and that you are of the Antichristian ministry
and the Antichristian ministers.

Then you had a speech seeingly to justify, guard, or defend your pulpits of
wood, but fled from the guard and left them for another to defend, your great
plea or defense for your pulpit of wood was that Ezra had one, but you was to
prove that any of the ministers of the gospel had one, and said you would but
did not, so further manifested your lies and Antichristian doctrine, for liars
are Antichristian, and of old Antichrist their father. Ioh. 8.44. when you was
put to read that place of Ezra's pulpit, spoken of in Nehem. Nehem. 8.1, 2, 3,
4, 5.
8. it was proved that his pulpit was not in a steeple-house, but in the
street, before the street called the water gate, and yours is in
steep;e-houses, and not in streets, therefore not as Ezra's was. And secondly,
Ezra's pulpit of wood was but only for the reading of the Law book from morn
till midday, but yours is constant and in idols temples? not for the reading
of the Law only, but for the preaching of the gospel, as you say, therefore
Ezra's pulpit guards not yours, he was a priest under the Law in the first
covenant and priesthood, and the Law is changed by which Ezra was ordained
priest, and legal preacher in his wooden pulpit, in the street that was before
the water gate, and the Law and priesthood being changed and ended, so Ezra's
pulpit, and you could not prove yours, by or from the example of any gospel
ministers, but left it and would not plead for it so lost its guard, proved
your selves liars and unskilful soldiers, or pulpit leaders and commanders,
and let your pulpit be routed and disguarded, therefore to be guardlesse and
now disregarded, not to be pleaded for, but to be proclaimed against, then we
bad you own your condemnation, also upon that your error, so you left that,
and went on to another thing, even to prove your mastership.

Which ching you could not prove by gospel rule, and example of gospel
ministers, but Scribes, Pharisees, and hypocrites which Christ cried woe
against, and by command, said to his gospel ministers, be not ye called of men
masters, for one is your master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren he that
will be greatest let him be your servant, and they obeyed his doctrine given
forth to them by command. Mat. 23.8, 10, 11.

And there was neither Master Peter, nor Master Stephen, nor Master Philip, nor
Master Andrew, nor Master Barnabas, nor Master Paul, but he said he became
servant to all, as may be read. 1 Cor. 9.18, 19.

Then such as disobeys Christ's command, professing to be his ministers, Mark.
10.43.42.44.
and are called masters, abides not in his doctrine, and so has not God. 2
Ioh. 9. but are Antichristian, and the priests of the world are such, therefore
Antichristian ministers, so one of you to wit priest Osland, would not plead
for it, but said if men would call him so, he could not help it, or to that
effect: he presently answered the thing and said, it was God that wrought both
the will and the deed of his own good pleasure, so the first act of grace is of
God, and then from him, so from grace received, and we bad him disclaim it, and
declare against it, therefore you left that, and lost it, so your mastership is
routed with your pulpit, and now Antichrists kingdom begins to fall and tumble
down, praised be the Lord.

And when we bad you to acknowledge your error, own your condemnation
thereupon, and take shame to your selves, who like the Gentiles had exercised
Lordship, and authority in your proud nature, (and such like) over others
contrary to Christ's counsel, commands, and gospel discipline and doctrine,
Mat. 23 8.10. Mar. 10.42, 43, 44. But woe is to such. Mat. 23. chapter Mar. 12.38,
39, 40. as the Scripture and as Christ has said, and the woe is to you that
walk in such steps as those that Christ cried woe against, at to you I said,
then you fret, and were vexed, and said, I had had taught false doctrine, which
then you said you would charge me withal, but could not prove it, which false
doctrine you said was this, that I said men might not act for life, but from
life or grace received, and sought to cover your selves with this, (saying you
will not come unto me, that you might have life) and so said there might be
acting for life, and then Andrew Trusterom Priest of Clent, to confute his
saying, and answer himself to the accusation laid against me, therefore
according to Andrew Trusteroms saying, that God wrought, both the will and the
deed according to his own good pleasure, if he had seen that it was instead of
confuting or contradicting my doctrine, a more confirmation of the same, and
confuting himself to his shame, for God working both the will and the deed
according to his own good pleasure, then he is the first mover and actor of
grace and life in the soul, therefore the first motion to goodness, and the
first act of grace is of God, working the soul into the obedience, and the
creature to the performance of the same, so that he acts not for life and
grace, but he is acted by the divine power according to the good pleasure of
the Lord, and so acts of love, and performance of the same, is from life,
through the quickenings to motion, and from grace and strength received, to
proceed into action, and so grace and peace is multiplied unto us, through the
knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord, according as his divine power has
given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the
knowledge of him who has called us to glory and virtue. 2 Pet. 1.2, 3. Ioh.
6.44, 45. 2 Corinthians. 3.5, 6.

2. You (the Priests) said the light was not sufficient of it self without some
other helps, to lead into all truth, etc.

I answered and said, that the light being obeyed with and through the spirit,
was, and is sufficient to lead into all truth and to salvation, for Christ is
the true light, that lights every man that comes into the world, as John and
his record does witness of him, who was sent so to do, and testifies the same
in the record that God gave of his Son which is true, and no ly. Ioh. 1.5, 6,
7, 8, 9.

And every man being lighted with this light, Christ Jesus he has said, that
such as obey the light, and follow the same, they shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of life. Ioh. 8.12. and he spoke true, and could not
ly that so said, who is the light, and the author of eternal salvation to all
that obey him. Heb. 5.8, 9.

And his spirit is the guide to such as follow the light and obey it, from
whence it comes, to lead them into all truth, as the Scriptures witnesses,
that bears record of Christ, and as he himself has said, who is to be trusted
and believed in, read Ioh. 14.26. Ioh. 16.13. which spirit speaks within, and
shows things to come, so teaching saints, and glorifieth the Son, and
brings souls into the perfect knowledge or enjoyment of the Father and the
Son, Ioh. 14.20. in the holy unction. Job. 2.29, and 27. which teaches all
things, to such as the light and spirit obey, and walks in, as it is written,
and witnessed by such as knows and knew the holy unction in them, and the
word abiding within them. 1 Ioh. 2.13, 14. and the heavenly treasure within 2.
Cor. 4.6, 7. and we know that such as are guided by the spirit of God, are the
sons of God. Romans 8.14. 1 Ioh. 3.1. and God has sent the spirit of his Son
into our hearts, whereby we cry Abba Father. Gal. 4.6. and we know that the Son
of God is come, and has given us an understanding that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is
true God and life eternal. 1 Ioh. 5.20.

And we preach not our selves but Christ Jesus the true light, and our Lord,
for God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness. has shined (within)
in our hearts, to give us the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus, and this treasure have we (within us as they had) in earthen vessels,
that the excellency of the power may be of God and not of us, and the message
that we have to declare is this, that God is light, and in him is no darkness
at all, and Christ is the true light that lights every one that comes into
the world, they that follow him, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life, and he is the author of eternal salvation to all that obey
him, which is witnessed through the opening of the mystery within. Col. 1.27.
and by obedience to the light in the eternal power of truth through the
spirit, as it is written and witnessed, and according to the outward
declaration of the Scripture, but enjoyed according to the inward manifestation
of the spirit (the gift of God) which is given to profit withal in the spirits
ministration and mystery, 2 Cor 12.
to know the fellowship with Christ in the glory. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. Ioh. 1.9. Ioh.
8.12. Heb. 5.9. 1 Ioh. 1.5. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. Romans 8.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Gal. 4.6. 2 These. 1.10. Ioh. 17.10.

Then remember that you (the 2 Priests) would go out of the room toward the
latter end of the day, it was so hot and throng (though you would not go
before) so we went into plain upon a green hill, and most of the people stood
below in the valley, and thou Andrew Trusterom Priest of Clent, and I stood
together on the hill, where I begun to lay open the things as aforesaid
concerning the light and Spirit, being sufficient according to the working of
the divine power of the Lord, and the good pleasure of his will, through
theobedience to the light, and teachings of the spirit of grace, to lead to
salvation and unto all truth, whereupon thou said that was granted, before we
came out of the room: so for the better satisfaction of the people I would have
laid it open to the people there, but thou yielded up to that truth, only I was
to return to the people on proof concerning that the Scriptures fore saw that
God would justify the heathen through faith, preach the gospel unto Abraham,
saying, in thee shall all nations be blessed which Scripture is this. Gal. 3.8.
which is witnessed in Christ. Gal. 3.18, 29. and according to the Scriptures,
the declaration (of him and the word) Luk 1.1. Act. 1.1 Ioh. 1.3. the word is
God, and eternal life. Ioh. 1.1. 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 Ioh. 5.6, 7, 11, 20. Heb.
4.12. Romans 16.6, 7, 8. Rev. 19.13.

Then after that thou Andrew Trusterom Priest of Clent who was the mouth most
for the Priests, that day thou would have maintained thy (call) being put upon
it there on the hill, but could not prove it to be according to any gospel
minister, though thou had thy proof and witness without thee, written in a
paper in the end of thy book as thou knows, and could not remember thy call
(nor thy proof and witness, without thy written paper in thy book end, to turn
to other men's words, that thou were out of the life, as I then cold thee, and
said also, that such as thou were made tradesmen at Cambridge or Oxford, or
from under such as had (yours and) their rise from the old (wicked) Bishops,
and such Bishops from the Popes generation, and they from the Pope; and the
Pope from old Antichrist, and so Antichristian ministers, and not the ministers
of Christ, nor the gospel.

For I told thee the ministers of Christ and the gospel, was not made by the
will of man, but of God were they ordained, and was sent by Christ Jesus and
the holy Ghost, and received not their gospel nor call of man but of God,
neither was such that were so called, taught of man but of God, as it is
certified to the Brethren, and left upon record in Scripture, and such as were
so called and taught, made not their gospel burdensome, but free. to be examples
also for others that come after to follow, and such gospel ministers as were so
called, ordained, gifted, and sent forth, they sold not their gift nor
preaching the gospel for money nor tithes, but preached freely, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17,
18, 19. Act. 20.33. 1 Cor. 11. i.
not for tithes as the priests of the world do now that follow not their
example, neither had any gospel minister 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100,
200, or 300 pound per Annum, as the priests of the world have now, but such
gospel ministers as were ordained, called, and sent of God, went to turn people
from the darkness to the light, from the power of Satan unto God. Act. 26.14,
15, 16,17,18. Gal. 1.1, and 11,12,15,16. verse. and such coveted no man's silver,
nor gold, nor apparel, but labored with hands, and preached the gospel
freely, who were made able ministers of the new covenant, not of the letter but
of the spirit. 2 Cor. 3.6. Act. 20.28, and 3.3, 34,35. verse. Act. 13. Mat. 10.
1 Cor. 11.1. verse.

Then such as go to trades at Universities, and learns old Authors, man's
inventions, to add a divination of their brain to the Scriptures, and are
taught of proud, covetous, self-seeking men (of such Arts) and are called by
such, and are called of men master, and has tithes are called by them to great
benefits, 20, 40, 100, 200, pound a year, such are not according to the gofpel
minifters, but are Antichriftian. and deceivers, and such are the Priests of
the world, therefore Antichristian ministers, seducers, and deceivers of the
nations, then thou Andrew Trusterom the Priest as aforesaid, thou seemingly
would have denied thy call and ordination, from the old (wicked) Bishops, but
could not, from that ground had thou thy rise, and upon it yet stands in the
nature turned from the light, as such was, and arta proud man called of men
master, takes tithes, and so art out of Christ's doctrine, and such has not
God, as John says, that abides not in the doctrine of Christ, as in the 2
Ioh. 9. Math. 23.
and such Christ bids beware of, and pronounces great judgment upon them.
Mar. 12.38, 39, 40.

I asked thee when the priesthood of England renounced their first ordaination
from Bishops, and past an act against it: but to that thou gave me no answer,
but said, thou wast called to the ministry by Elders; but it is as I say by
(Elders) such as are old in deceit, and the mystery of iniquity. For gospel
Elders, and such in the eternal truth, they never called a tithe monger, as I
told thee, for such, dishonor the gospel: neither did such Elders ever call
any that sought for their gain from their quarter. Isaiah 56.10.11. nor a proud
covetous self-seeking man called of men master, like thee, and the priests of
the world, who are constrained, by tithes silver and gold, 20 40 100 or 200
pound by the year, as Englands priests are; so contrary to gospel call and
Eldership, and none of those gospel laborers but vain deceivers, as thou and
such art.

Such as were made Elders of the flock of Christ and overseers thereof, were
not called to that work by the will of man, but were called and made overseers
by the holy Ghost, Act. 20.28. and such was to take the care of the flock, not
by constraint, but of a ready mind, and not for filthy lucre. 1 Pet. 5.2. 3,
etc. And they that were called by Elders in the power of truth, were to be
blameless as the stewards of God, 1 Timothy 3.1.2. etc. Titus 1.7, 8. And such as
were called by the Elders, and were Elders, they coveted no man's siver nor
gold, Act. 20.33, etc. neither did such man's hay nor corn, lambs, nor wool,
eggs, geese nor pigs, nor money neither for meares not foals, kine nor calves;
nor money for gardens, bees, and smoke passing up peoples chimneys: never such
as these did they choose nor call, they are a scandal to the truth, and a
burden to the gospel, therefore fore stop thy mouth (and all hirelings) and
tithing priests like thee. Such as were called, chosen, and set apart for the
work of the ministry of the gospel, and appointed thereunto by the holy Ghost?
and sent out by the laying on of hands, they preached freely, and were not
chargeable, nor coveted no manssilver, nor gold, nor apparel; but were
blameless as the stewards of God. Act. 20.28. and 33.34.35. Act. 13. 1 Pet.
5.2.3. 1. Tim. 3. Titus 1.

And when I read that place of scripture in the Acts to prove how Paul gospel
minister, that was one that was appointed by the holy Ghost for that work? and
sent out by the laying on of hands, as in Act. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, and that he
coveted no manssilver, nor gold, nor apparel, but labored with his hands to
be an example for others to walk by, and follow after. Act. 20.33, 34. then
thou Andrew Trusterom Priest of Clent, said thou would confute me out of that
same place (but thou was a liar) I said do then if thou can, then thou asked
me what place it was, and where it was, and I said again therein thou showed
thy rashness and forwardness, speaking so unadvisedly, and how would thou
confute me out of that same place, and knew not where it was: so thou showed
thy forward rash mind, and to be without a bridle for thy tongue, therefore
thy religion is vain, as such that James speaks of, and I bad thee search the
place and prove thy saying, but thou did not, it remains for thee yet to do, it
may be was, because thou had not that place written down in the leaf end;
quicken thy memory if thou can, and see what thou can do, it is in the Acts,
the 20, and 33, 34, 35 verse.

For as concerning the same (besides many other things) thou yet lie under
the censure of a liar, and such are of the Devil read Joh. 8.44. and so of
such a society or fellowship, as are partake^s of the table of Devils, and in
union with those that drink of that cup, as in, and with that Scripture I left
thee, when thou fled and went off from the hill, read it and judge your selves,
both thou and such like as drink that cup, and are partakers of that table,
spoken of, in 1 Cor. 10.20, 21, 22.

As for the other thou art yet to prove, as I said, that it was ever once acted
or done (and the manner how also) by Paul according to thy saying, 1 Cor. 11.
for thou did not prove it then, but left it without the proof therein,
aforesaid, and thou said the word was not damnation, where it is said, he that
eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not
descerning the Lords body. 1 Cor. 11.29. Thou said the word was not (damnation)
but judgment and the Scripture says in that place, not (judgment) but
damnation, what a wretch art thou to ly so as thou did, but read what is thy
portion for thy reward and all such. Rev. 21.8, and 27. Rev. 22.18, 19.

Thou shuffles and seeks to hide and cover, Eth. 5.3, 4, 5, 6.
least thou be found guilty of that sin, in giving damnation to people that
thou sets to eat and drink, not discerning the Lords body, for liars, swearers,
drunkards, proud ones, covetous ones, scorners, malicious ones, vain tarkers,
foolish jesters, back biters, slanderers, false accusers, reproachers,
disdainers, couzenours, cheaters, dogs, swine, such as those spoken of in 1
Cor. 6.9; 10. Pro. 6.16, 17, 18. Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Romans
1.28, 29, 30, 31. 1 Ioh. 3.15. Rev. 21.8, and 27. Philip. 3.1, 2. Rev. 22.15.

Such as those before mentioned, and as those Scriptures speaks of, such do
net discern the Lords body, 1 Cor. 2.14. but are of the serperits seed, as such
are spoken of. Mat. 23.33 and if such be not partakers of the table of Devils,
and in that fellowship of Devils spoken of in Scripture, who are, and do not
thou and such as thou art feed, flatter, and nourish such serpents, but let me
tell you this, you that do so, and are such, you cannot serve the Lords table,
that serve the table of Devils, you cannot drink the Lords cup, and the cup of
Devils, as to thee Andrew Trusterom (Priest of Clent) I said at parting,
therefore repent (and all such as thou art, and as you are) of your idols and
idolatrous ways of worship, as I said, and turn from your wickedness, least
you die in your sins arid perish eternally, for the wicked and all that forget
God shall be turned into hell, as you may read. Psalm. 9.17. Rev. 20.10, and 15.

And the Independent Priest Osland of Bewdley, he said the Devil was guided by
the holy spirit, to call Jesus Lord, this is witnessed by John Higgs, Tho.
Good^^r, Tho. Chanler, and others.

What wicked blasphemy is this, and a gap to profaneness? If so that the devil
was guided by the holy Spirit to call Jesus Lord, then every drunkard, thief,
whore monger, and profane person, may say they are guided by the holy Spirit if
the devil was, for such are his servants, and he their master. But the devil
was not guided by the holy Spirit to say so, to wit, as aforesaid, no more are
they, therefore Oasland thou art a perverter of the right ways of the Lord, as
Elymas was, Acts the 13. and so full of all mischief, and a child of the devil,
as he was, verse 8. and 10. and taught to blaspheme and lie by the spirit, of
thy father the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth, because there is no truth in him, (then not the holy Spirit of truth
for him to call Jesus Lord by, as thou said he did,) for he speaks lies,
and when he speaks them he is the father of them, they are his own, read John
8.44. to be a witness against thee and all such. Elymas was not guided by the
holy Ghost when he withstood the truth, but he was guided by the spirit of the
devil, as thou wast, when thou so blasphemously said: but Elymas was smitten
by the holy Ghost for opposing the truth, and judgment came upon him for it:
and Ananias and Sapphira were slain by the holy Ghost for lying against him.
Acts 5.

And thy case is dangerous, but smitten thou art by the light in thy
conscience, and this is a b^ot and stain to it, and to thy profession, and
judgments will pursue thee and overtake thee, and vengeance from God for the
same, except of it thou speedily repent, and openly declare against that thy
blasphemy, own thy error therein, and thy condemnation upon it, and take shame
to thy self, stop thy mouth, and cover thy lips. Simon Magus was not guided by
the holy Spirit when he would have bought it with money, but was in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, as thou art, that so lies against the truth,
Act. 8.18.19.20.21. And as no man can call Jesus Lord but by the holy Ghost,
then such as have not the holy Ghost guiding them, cannot by it so call him:
but the devil and his angels have not the holy Ghost, therefore they that have
it not, cannot (with it and by it) so call him. And Christ himself says to
some, Why call ye me Lord? Lord, and do not the things that I say. Luke 6.46.
Such as disobey Christ's counsel, doctrine, and commands, cannot by the holy
Ghost call Jesus Lord, in truth: but the devil and devilish men disobey
Christ's counsel, doctrine, and commands, and keep not his sayings, therefore
they are not guided by the holy Ghost, nor cannot by it and with it, call Jesus
Lord; so the gap is hedged up by the holy Ghost. But the wicked and such as are
deceived by the devil are to be with him cast into the lake of fire, to be
tormented for ever and ever, Rev. 20.10. and such as have not their names
written in the Lambs book of life, are to be cast into the lake of fire, Rev.
20.15. and such as those spoken of Rev. 21.8. and all such are shut out from
God and to be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power, as are spoken of, Rev. 21.27. Rev.
22.15. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.9.

Thus has your folly been made manifest, as the resisters of the truth before
you, and as yours is that are resisters of the truth now, like such spoken of,
2 Timothy 3.1.2.3. etc. verse. the 8. 9. And thus are your deceits discovered, your
wickedness also, but they are comprehended, chained, and with the light
condemned, therefore silence deceivers.

But it is good that you have uttered your folly, that it may appear to your
view, which has lien hid in your old bottles and dock bottomes, which now is
uncovered, and you seen to be painted harlots and serpents; like such spoken of
Matthew. 23. the 25.26. to the 34. read your hearts with the light, see also your
lies and confusion, and stuff, of such sort: acknowledge your errors, own your
condemnation to be just thereupon, give over deceiving the people, and take
shame to your selves: though the dark see you not, yet the children of light
does you, and all such as you are both see and comprehend, and all your
pernicious ways, praised be the Lord, who has raised up a light in his
people, to see your nakedness from the truth, (covered but not with the Spirit
of the Lord) and so to uncover your skirts, your covers will not hide you, but
leave you naked and bare, to the single eyed, or children of light; also read
that commandment which is for you, oh Priests, it is in Malachy 2.1.2. to the
10.

Some short and clear demonstrations laid down concerning the light.
Some short and clear demonstrations laid down as follows, and proved by
plain scripture, to show the honest hearted, the truth of that pure light of
the gospel of Christ, which is so stumbled at, with dark minds, which may also
further serve to clear the accusations that were against the truth that day,
and before in Worcestershire at Bramsgrave and other places, concerning the
light that truth may also stand pure in its own place and pure being, and stand
a witness against lying spirits, seducers and deceive s, who live in error
and deceit, 1 Pet. 2.6.7.
that stumble at the light now, as the Jews and chief Priests and their party
did before.

Wherefore it is contained in scripture, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner
stone, elect, precious, and he that believes on him shall not be confounded,
unto you therefore which believe he is precious, but unto them which be
disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head
of the corner. 1 Pet. 2.6.7.

First demonstration, etc. Christ he is the light of the world, and the true
light that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, and he has said
that such as follow him, (the true light) they shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life, as Christ himself has said, see his own words of
truth, and John's words that bare record of him, for proof to demonstrate and
show, and also witness to the same grounded truth, which is so much stumbled
at, read Joh. 1.9. Joh. 8.12.

Secondly, Seeing that Christ is the light of the world, as he himself has
said, who is to be beli ved and has also said that such as follow him the
light of the world, they shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light
of life: and John that bare reco d of Christ the light of the world, he has
witnessed in his record of him, and said, that he is the true light that
lights every man that comes into the world: then such as say every man is
not lighted in some measure with the true light, they deny John's record of
Christ, and deny Christ to be the true light that lights every man that
comes into the world; and such as say every man has not a light to lighten
them, they deny the scripture, and would make John a liar. But such as say so,
and would do so, they are enemies to the truth and the true light, so enemies
to Christ and the gospel; and are false accusers of John that bare record of
Christ, and so lie against the record that God gave of his son; but John's
words of truth and the record that God gave of his son, shall be witness
against such to demonstrate, show, and confute their lies by plain scripture,
without consequence, read as aforesaid Ioh. 1.9. Ioh. 8.12. and 1 Cor. 12.7.
T^tus 2.11.12. Isa. 42.6.7.9. Act. 26.18. and Galat. 3.28.

Thirdly, Light shines in darkness, but darkness comprehenceth it not, as it
comprehended it not then, John 1.5. yet light is there where it is not walked
in, nor obeyed. Such as hate the light, or sit and walk in darkness, with the
light they see darkness, for whatsoever manifests darkness is light, Ephesians.
5.13. And they do not walk in darkness because they have no light, but because
they have the light checking and reproving them of evil: and they do not
forsake their sin by obeying and following the light, therefore do they walk in
darkness, for such as follow the light are are led out of darkness into the
light of eternal life, 1 Ioh. 5.6.7. and such as had been in darkness and
alienated from the life of truth, as the Romans and Ephesians were, it was not
because they had not the light, but because they walked not then in it, for
that which may be known of God says the Apostle to the Romans, is manifest
within; Romans 1.19. and even as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them over to themselves; Romans 1.28. etc. And such as had
been alienated from the life of truth as the Ephesians were, whilst they walked
in darkness yet they had light, which did to them discover the darkness, and
the fruits of darkness; but by obeying and following the light, such as so
did, were led out of darkness and out of the fruits of darkness, and were led
into the light of life; so that then they walked in the light of the Lord, as
they have witnessed, and may be seen Ephesians. 5.8. to the 14.

Fourthly, And such as were called out of darkness, had the light when they
were in darkness, and by the light were they called out of darkness into the
light of the Lord, as the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia,
Capadocia, Asia, Bithinia, such as in time past had not been a people (for
God,) after they were called out of darkness into the mavelous light, were
then the people of God, and such was to demonstrate, or show forth the praise
of him who was the true light. Ioh. 1.9. 1 Ioh. 1.5. and they by obeying and
following the light, were led into the mavelous light, and as they were,
others by so obeying may, but they were therefore for proof read, 1 Pet.
2.9.10.11.12. 2 Pet. 1.19.20.21.

Fifthly, And this is the condemnation of the world, (not that light is not
come into the world to show men their evil deeds,) but because light is come
into the world and men they loved darkness rather then the light (not because
they have it not to demonstrate or show them their evil deeds, which is
contrary to the light) but because they have it to demonstrate, and show them
their evil deeds and they hate the light that discovers their evil deeds; and
do not obey it to forsake their evil deeds which is reproved by the light John
3.19.20. Ephesians. 5.13. therefore are they condemued by it.

Sixthly, But all such as love and obey the light does truth, and comes to the
light, that their deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God, and
this light is within which they do well to take heed unto, as unto a light
which shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star does
arise (within them) in their hearts: by which light and spirit in the
prophecyings, teachings, workings and counsellings, such as follow and obey the
same, are led out of darkness, (error and deceit) into the light of life and
so into all truth, according to gospel discipline and promise. Joh. 3.20. 2
Pet. 1.19, 20.21. John. 14.20.26. John 16.13.

Seventhly, Then such as say the light and spirit is not sufficient, (without
some other help of man's wit or the like) to lead men to the knowledge of the
truth; and to salvation through the obedience to the truth through the light
and spirit of truth according to the fathers teachings only: such as say so
show not only their ignorance of the workings of the light of life, but their
ignorance of the guidance of the spirit of truth, and the fathers teachings in
the new covenant, and gospel ministration likewise, and they also seem to lie
against the holy Ghost, and resist the truth, as such spoken of whose folly did
appear, as theirs does, therefore the case or condition of such is dangerous,
as so do, like such spoken of, Romans 1.18.19. and 28.29.30.31. verses. 2 Timothy
3.8.9. Math. 12.31.

Eighthly, And seeing that Christ is the true light, and he said such as follow
him shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life: and he has*
said also that the spirit shall reprove the world of sin, unbelief, etc. and
that he shall guide and lead such as follow the guidance thereof into all
truth; and such as so obey and walk in the spirit, should in that day know him
in the Father, and he in them, and they in him. John 14.15.16.17.20. and 26.
And this spirit (should not be a lying spirit nor an imperfect guide to the
followers thereof, but the true spirit of truth, and) should dwell within, to
guide and lead them into all truth. And he has said also, that he the spirit
of truth should not speak of himself, (but from him and his father) and Christ
has said of the spirit, that whatsoever he should hear, that he should speak,
and he should also show them things to come, and says Christ, he shall
glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you; and he
shall teach you all things, (so be the saints teacher, and he shall bring all
things to your remembrance concerning me, so the spirit is both the saints
teacher, their guider, and remembrancer) about the things of God: and thus they
come to know all truth, as Christ has said; which truth (in the full knowledge
and enjoyment of him and his father) does make them free. Ioh. 16.1.2.3. to the
16. Ioh. 14.20. Ioh. 17.10. 1 John 2.20. and 27.

9. Then such as say the true light and the spirit according to the Fathers
teachings only, is not able to teach all gospel truths, nor sufficient to lead
to salvation, such as say so are liars against the truth, the true light and
the spirit of truth, therefore enemies to Christ and the gospel.

For the Lord Jesus has said that he is the light of the world, and those that
follow him shall not walk in darkness, but have the light of life, eternal
life, and so assurance of salvation, who is the author of eternal salvation
to all that obey him, the light and the way to the Father, and the true light
of the world, that lights every man that comes into the world. Ioh. 1.9.
Ioh. 8.12. Ioh. 14.6. 1 Pet. 2.9.10. Heb. 5.9.

Tenthly, But such has say the light of the world which is the true light
Christ Jesus, that lights every man that comes into the world, is not
sufficient to salvation, being obeyed and followed (without some other help)
such as so say speak they know not what unadvisedly, and such questions the
power and authority of the true light Christ Jesus and knows not that he is
perfectly able to save to the uttermost all those that come unto God by him,
and the author of eternal salvation to all that obey him only. Heb. 7.24, 25.
Heb. 5.7, 8, 9.

Eleventhly, Such as say the light which is Christ by his spirit opening the
mystery, is not able to teach all the perfect knowledge of the truth, such as
say so are against Christ's doctrine in the gospel ministration, and against him
Antichristian, for he who is the true light, and lights every man that comes
into the world, says, that all that obey him the true light, shall be saved by
him only, and that all that obey him the true light, shall not walk in
darkness, but be led out of darkness into the light of life, and so into
eternal life by him the true light, and perfect Savior to all such, for he is
perfectly able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him, the true
light Christ Jesus, and to such as obey him, he is the author of eternal
salvation, who is the true light, and lights every man that comes into the
world, but is the condemnation of such as after manifestation do wilfully sin
against love tendered and mercy proffered, who do hate the light and love their
evil deeds, and darkness rather then the light. Ioh. 3.19, 20. Heb. 10.25,
26. 2 Thessalonians 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Jude 4. 2 Thessalonians 1.12.

Twelfthly, Christ Jesus the light of the world has said, who is the true
light, and lights every man that comes into the world, that the Spirit of
truth coming to be manifested within, should guide them and teach them all
things being obeyed, and bring all things to remembrance, and guide into all
truth. John 14.16, 17, and 26. John. 16.13, 14.

Then such as say this spirit is not sufficient to teach all things being
obeyed, and such as so say, and say it is not sufficient to guide into all
truth, being come and walked in without some other help, such questions the
authority of the spirit, and affronts the Lord Jesus by contradicting his own
sweet gospel discipline, doctrine, and promise, but such as do so and b^ing a
contrary doctrine, who love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let them be Anathema
Maran-atha, accursed with a curse. 1 Cor. 16.22. Gal. 1.8, 9.

Therefore blessed are they that obey the true light, and follow the counsel
and teachings of ^he spirit of truth that they may know the spirit of the
Father speaking in them, and through them, and so know the free love of the
Lord wrought in their souls by the working of the divine power, according to
the good pleasure of his will in the spirits teachings, and sweet gospel
ministration through the riches of the Fathers love, sending the spirit of his
son in their hearts, whereby they cry Abba Father, Luke 12.12. Mat. 10.20. 2
Corinthians 6.16. 2 Peter 1.2, 3. Galatians 4.6, 7.

Such as aforetime did obey the light and the teachings of the spirit, were
made able ministers of the gospel of Christ, Act. 2.4. 2 Cor. 3.6. Joh. 19.19,
20, 21, 22. Act. 4. chapter Act. 7. chapter Act. 1.22, 23, 24, etc. Heb. 8.10, 11.
in the new covenant of grace, according to the Fathers teachings (though some
of them outwardly were ignorant and unlearned men) so that they confounded the
great Rabbis and Greek, Latin and Hebrew scholars, and the Jewish chief
Priests, so that they cried out to the magistrates, counselors and governou
s, to cause them to be persecuted, beaten and abused, imprisoned, and threatened
to speak no more in the name of Jesus, and the great rabby, docto^s and
chiefest of the English Priests, if they might have their wills, would do so
now, to such as have been with Jesus, and they seek to quench the light and
spirit, but shall not be able to do it, for it will powerfully appear in sons
and daughters, in the spirits ministration and the teachings thereof, and so
thereby they may take notice, that the scholars of Christ are brought up at
Emanuels school, taught of the Lord according to his promise, Act. 4.12, 13.
Isa. 2. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
and have been with Jesus for counsel, the Emanuel, God with us and in us, the
everlasting Father, and the mighty God wonderful counselor. Isa. 9.6. Joh.
6.45. Joh. 4.20. 2 Cor. 6.16. as he was in them that were taught by his spirit,
though some were shepherds, ploughmen, tradesmen, and some ignorant and
unlearned in the great schools of humane learning, and Paul denied his learning
that he had received of man, when he was made an able minister of the gospel
which he preached, he had not received it of man, neither was he taught it of
man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, as he has certified to the
brethren. Gal. 1.11, 12, and 15, 16. and now is the Lord teaching his, and now
is the Lord sending the law forth of Sion, and making and sending forth
ministers to declare his truth, and publish the gospel freely without the help
of proud covetous self-seeking men, ever praised be the Lord, they that obeyed
the light and walked therein, they witnessed that by it they were led out of
darkness, to walk in the light of the Lord, and as they did come out of
darkness through the obedience to the light, according to the doctrine of
Christ, to walk in the light of the Lord by so doing others may, for Christ is
the true light and the way to walk in, the way that leads out of darkness into
light, out of sin into grace, out of bondage into liberty, out of unbelief into
the life and power of faith, out of error and deceit into the life and power
of truth, and so into the holy unction which teaches all things without the
help of fallen man, or his fleshly wisdom, as it is Written: ye have an unction
from the holy (...), and ye know all things. 1 Ioh. 2.20. and this is witnessed
within, by obeying the light that leads to the unction and into the anointing,
and so witness to the power, and in it the life of faith, hope and election,
predestination and sanctification, by the teachings through the spirit, in the
opening of the mystery in the spirits ministration that leads to the unction
and the anointing. Col. 1.26, 27, 28. 1 John 2.20, and 27.

Lastly, they that obeyed the light, and followed the same according to the
doctrine of Christ, and the ministry in the spirit, they were through the
obedience thereunto, brought out of darkness into the mavelous light and
knowledge of the glory and eternal excellency, that though they had been in
darkness, yet through their obedience to the truth through the spirit, God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, did gloriously shine in their
hearts, and was manifested within to break down darkness through their
obedience to the truth, the pure light led them to such a full attaintment or
knowledge of God, in the enjoyment thereof, that they knew Gods glory and
excellency revealed in them, and they had the heavenly, treasure within them
and they were changed from glory to glory, into the pure image, or divine
being, in the glory and excellency, so as by the spirit of the Lord, and as by
the obedience to the light and truth, through the spirit they did attain to the
assurance and knowledge of the divine glory and eternal excellency, according
to the working of the divine power of God to salvation and the knowledge
thereof by and through Christ the true light, others so may and no other way,
but they did so attain to the knowledge, therefore harden not your hearts
against the truth, and take heed, least there be not found in some of you that
are resisters of the truth, an evil heart of unbelief, and so you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin. Heb. 3.12, 13. 2 Timothy 3.8, 9. then woe and
misery. Hebrews 10.25, 26.

Something to clear the truth from some lies, slanders, and false reports that
may occasionally be cast falsely upon it, by Robert Gurdler postmaster in
Birmingham, or any that he makes use of, to write, print, declare, or carry
about any lies, slanders, and false reports against the truth, held forth by
those men that the world scornfully calls Quakers.
For the said Robert Gurdler is full of envy against the truth, held forth by
the servants of the Lord, and against them that are reproached under that name
as aforesaid, but such as are honest hearted, will not be offended at his
reports that knows what he is, although formerly he have been a teacher
amongst the water baptized people, and now cause the truth by some to be evil
spoken of, by reason that he is so full of pride and vain glory, and turned to
the priests again, and is given over to lies and falsely does slander and cause
the innocent to be slandered, but it were better that a a millstone were
hanged about his neck then that he should offend one of the little ones that
believes in the Lord Jesus Christ.

But I shall be short, only let the honest hearted know that I write not this
as an accusation against him nor against any, but for the truths sake that it
may be kept clear, and withal that they may know that this said Robert Gurdler
does falsely accuse and slander the people of God, that are reproached under
the name of Quakers; and I going into Birmingham heard of it, whereupon I sent
a letter to him, either for him to come to me and some others with me, or to
appoint a place for us to come to him, that he might either clear himself, or
else bear about with him the badge of a backbiter, and false accuser of the
innocent, and expect the judgment that is due to such, etc.

A copy of the letter sent to Robert Gurdler, postmaster so calied in
Birmingham is as follows.

The letter to Robert Gurdler, I coming into this Town to visit some friends.
Whereas I am informed that thou Captain Gurdler should give out words, that
the (people of God) whom the world and the wicked one does scornfully and
reproachfully call Quakers, should be deceivers, and guided by the spirit of
the devil, or words to that effect; which can be proved by some inhabiting in
this town. Which if thou did, it is not becoming any professing Christ, to
slander, accuse, and bite behind, serpent like: and if thou did not, clear thy
self, and let shame cover the face of the liars, slanderers, backbiters, and
false accusers (of the innocent:) I being one that the world and wicked one
does in scorn reproachfully out of disdain call Quaker. So being one that
suffers (with the people of God) under that name of reproach, I look upon my
self to be concerned therein, and to be one, that thou, as I am given to
understand, or the wicked one in thee, slanderest, backbitest, and falsely
accusest, and take upon thee to speak evil against, as the serpents seed ever
did; and judge of us with evil thoughts, and out of an evil heart. If so,
then I demand of thee professing thy self a Christian, that thou come up unto
us this day, and either clear thy self, or bear thy shame and guilt about upon
thy breast. Come, and if thou can convince us, and make it appear that we are
deluders, and guided by the devils spirit, do, and let it be declared against
at the market cross, or else acknowledge thy error therein, take shame to thy
self, and own thy condemnation to be just upon thy false accusations, and false
judgment, that thou censurest (the people of God withal,) and bear about with
thee the badge of a backbiter, slanderer, and false accuser, and deny thy
profession lest the Lord be dishonored by thee, and so take vengeance upon
thee with the wicked and seed of evil doers.

Come to us either to Lieutenant Powels, or William Bayleys, or a convenient
place where this day thou may appoint us to come to thee, and if thou be
able to judge and try spirits, thou art permitted to lay open the ground of
delusion, error, and deceit, with its fruits and effects, how it enters, and
by what to be prevented: and also how the devil had his first beginning and
entrance into mankind, and how thou can make it appear that we carry his
image, and by what (where it is) to be defaced, he dispossessed, and trampled
underfoot.

Send thy answer to Lieutenant Powels by this bearer at the white Bear in
Birmingham, this thirteenth day of the twelfth month, 1654.

R. F.


The letter as aforesaid was sent, but the said Robert Gurdler did neither come
to us nor appoint us a place where we might go to him, but writ a few words
that were lies to us again: but no proof for his sayings neither by scripture,
fruits, nor practice: Whereupon I writ a note back to him again, at that
present by his bearer, also acquainting him in it, that there was to be a
meeting of the Lords people that night, by the world scornfully called Quakers,
acquainting him where also, very near at the end of Deritton, and withal I
urged him to come to the meeting, to prove before witness what he had falsely
accused withal; but he would not come to bring to light what in darkness he
had acted, by lying against the truth, and the servants of Jesus whom the world
does scornfully call Quakers. Let all the children of light judge of this man's
spirit. I also after that writ a large epistle or letter to him, which shall be
a witness for the truth and against his deceit, and envy against the truth,
and servants of the Lord Jesus. Which letter appears upon record to witness
for the truth, which truth seeks no corners, and besides all that, I stayed a
week in and about Birmingham, or some nine days: and was there three meetings
at Derrittend, but the said false accuser, and slanderer Robert Gurdler, as
aforesaid, would not appear to clear himself, but lies under the guilt as
aforesaid, and must bear his own burden. And let all take warning that they do
not appear like the false accuser as aforesaid, lest judgment be their reward.
Now truth stands clear, and Robert Gurdler does nakedly appear to be an enemy
to the truth, and cannot clear himself of the lies slanders, and false
accusatitions, cast out by him, therefore upon him now they do remain and into
the liars generation, are they turned back from whence they came, and now, let
him the said Robert Gurdler and his partakers in the envy against the truth
stop their mouths for speaking evil of those that they call Quakers.

etc.


For proof, David he saw and felt his sins, when he said mine iniquities are
gone over my head, Psalm. 38.4.
as a burden too heavy for me to bear. and he that has a burden is not
unsensible of it, but feels and knows it: when a man has a sack of corn or a
weight upon his back, he feels it and does understand or know the same: so do
such as are burdened with sin, when Adam had sinned he saw his nakedness, and
knew what he had done, and his sin separated him from the Lord, and such as say
God does not take any notice of their sin, whom he once leaves, etc. I answer,
he once loved Adam, but Adams sin caused God to take such notice of it, as that
he put him out of Paradise for it, and remember that you that sin, your sins
makes a separation between God and you, as Adam and such spoken of in Isaiah
59. did, and Cain when he had sinned he knew it, and said his punishment was
greater then he could bear, and you that do evil remember that Cain is your
way, and Judas when he had sinned in betraying Christ, he knew afterward that
he had sinned and done evil, and was accursed and separated from God, and
destruction was his end, sin is such a thing, that it is the cause of woe,
misery, eternal destruction, to such as continue in it. Romans 7. Romans 8.
1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21.8, and 27. Paul he saw a body of sin, and so felt or
understood the same that he cried out and said, Oh wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body (or substance) of sin! and he knew when he was
delivered of the same, and thanked God, and Christ says unto such as are weary
and heavy laden, come unto me, Mat. 11.28. Romans 3.19, 20. Romans 7.6, 7. to the
13. Act. 3.13, 39.
now such as are weary and laden with sin feels the burden, therefore sin is to
be seen, felt, and understood, or known to be sin, and so a thing, and such as
are laden with sin, feels it as the Apostle speaks of. 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. But
Christ to such as obeyes the light and comes to him, does undo their heavy
burdens and justify them from all ungodliness, and those (things) or sins
which the law of Moses could not justify them from, and who shall lay any sin,
or such like (thing) to the charge of Gods elect. Romans 8.32, 33, 34. 1 John
34. Acts 13.39.

FINIS.

