A Plain-dealing, and Plain-meaning SERMON, Preached in the Parish Church of
St. Nicholas, Bristol, April 6. 1660. Being the day appointed by the Parliament
for public Fasting and Humiliation for the sins of the NATION, etc. Together
with a prefatory Epistle, and subsequent Vindication both of the Sermon, and
Author. Wherein (besides an Apology for home and plain-preaching) you have
something offered to allay the heat of their stomachs, and to temper the
tongues of those, who (being ignorant in Scripture) reproach and revile
Presbytery and PRESBYTERS. With some hints at SATAN'S subtlety, and the mischief
of those people, who brand Zeal for God and Truth (in free, home, and faithful
preaching) with the reproachful names of Anger, passion, and Railing.

Ezekiel 33.30. Also thou son of Man, the children of thy people still are talking
against thee by the walls, and in the doors of their houses, etc.

Psalm. 35 11. False witnesses did rise up: They laid to my charge things that I
knew not.

Matthew. 5.11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall s^y all manner of evil against you falsely for my names sake. Rejoice
and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you.

LONDON, Printed by S. Griffin, and are to be sold by Thomas Wall by the
Tolezey in Cornstreet in Bristol, 1660.

To the strenuous Assertor of his Countries Rights, Will: Pryn Esquire, a
chosen Member of the High Court of Parliament.
Sir,
I Am now upon an Appeal to the World, but not to all the world; for all are
not competent Judges. But in my judgment I take you for the fittest man in the
world to determine, whether I have spoken against the King, or his coming in,
in this ensuing Sermon. You whom the late King honored with the title of the
Cato, (the impartial Cato) of this age: You whom neither fear nor flattery, nor
persecution can by as from the truth: You who have militated more, and
conquered more in the Kings behalf by your pen, then many Regiments of
soldiers by their pikes and muskets; To you I appeal in this matter: were it
matter of Doctrine, I durst make you my Vmpire, for I know your ability that
way; Witness that excellent Book of yours of the Perpetuity of a regenerate
man's estate. But my appeal to you now is upon matter of fact and discretion,
whether my discourse were scandalous or unseasonable. Sir, you are acquainted
with the Topics and proper seats of argument in all kinds, deliberative,
demonstrative, persuasive. You can discern whether I have sinned against the
law of the Preacher. Had you been in the Country, this Sermon had waited upon
you for your Deleatur, or Imprimatur, before it had gone unto the Press: But
mine and the Booksellers apprehensions that your greater and manifold
occasions (now that you are in London) would not offer us such a time of
leisure with you, as to peruse it beforehand, has with held me from that
attempt. Yet I could not withdraw from my resolutions to crave your just
decision. If you find me guilty, strike out your name, and disown the
dedication, which would be a sorer blow to me, then all the opposings of my
Calumniators: But if you find me innocent, then let my Sermon (with its
Appendices) go forth with your auspicious tutelage. I have one thing to beg of
you, and that is, That the good old Cause may not be forgotten. And I shall beg
of God (whose cause it is) a blessing upon you, and upon the great Council,
whereof you are a chosen Member, that the Lord would make you repairers of our
breaches, and restorers of our paths to dwell in. These are the desires and
prayers of him who is

Sir, Yours most ready to serve you in all Christian Offices R.A: FARMER.
From my house in Bristol. April 30. 1660.
A Prefatory Epistle to the Reader.
ITS not the least part of our work who are Ministers of the Word to suit our
Texts and Subjects: And in both (in a good sense) to observe that direction in
Romans 12.11. (as the Vulgar Latin reads it) to serve the time; That is, to suit
our discourses to the season, to the occasions, times, and persons wherein we
live, and to whom we are to preach. Solomon the wisest Preacher that ever was (
Jesus Christ, the wisdom of God himself excepted) tells us, that words spoken
in season (i. e. according to the time, occasion and condition of the persons
spoken to) are like apples of gold in pictures of silver, very good, very
pleasant. Prove. 25.11.
And he also tells us that Preachers who are wise, and would teach their people
true and saving knowledge, they must be heedful and careful not to utter (as
many pretended Enthusiasts do) quicquid in buccam venerit, but to seek out,
compose, and to set in order what they are to treat on: Eccles. 12.9,10.
And to find out acceptable, delightful, taking, winning words and matter. In
the Hebrew it is (...) verba voluntatis, i. e. such words and matter as might
captivate and take the wills and affections of their Auditors: And (as the
Apostle phrases it) 2 Cor. 10.5.
bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. And this I
conceive (in great part) was that (...), that craft; subtlety, and cunning that
the Apostle (in preaching) used to catch the Corinthians. 2 Cor. 12.16.
Being crafty, I caught you with guile. He carried himself so both in matter
and manner, that he drew them on, and brought them over to that he desired. In
sum he did what he told them elsewhere, He became all to all men, that he might
save some. 1 Cor. 9.22.
In the Greek the word [men] is not. In the Original it runs thus; (...), I am
made (or become) all to all. I apply my self to all times, and all persons. I
use all means to save some, in and by the exercise of my Ministry. And truly
this has always been in my eye, and this way I have ever approved of; And to
(my poor ability) followed in the course of my Ministry: having finished a
Text and Subject, it has sometimes put me to as careful thoughts what to
preach next, as how to preach: Especially upon special and extraordinary
occasions. I have been sollicitous to take all advantages that might bring and
win over those I preach to, to the truth to be proposed. And being invited to
the observation of the last solemn Fast, I accordingly made choice of the Text
which was the subject of the Sermon following: How apt and pertinent, let wise
men judge, I looked with a sad eye upon our manifold breaches, and our more
sins, (the cause of those breaches.) And yet considering the Lords gracious
dispensations (in the wonderful and unexpected turns of providence) I was
under some hopeful expectations that the Lord would also heal our breaches,
if our wilful obstinacy and impenitence did not hinder and withold so great
a mercy. And the people in general, and my self in particular, being in an
apprehension and expectation of the Kings being brought unto the throne, I
thence took occasion in my discourse to suggest such things as I conceived
might be profitable and conducent to what I intended, which was to in vite them
to repentance. But as he said of Books, Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata
libelli, According to the understanding of the Reader, so do books find
entertainment: So may we say of Sermons; According to the understanding of our
Auditors, so are our Sermons accepted or rejected. Nay not only according to
their understanding, but many times (and with most) according to their
ignorance, humors, fancies, interests. It was always so, even with Christ, and
his Apostles: Some believed their preaching, and some mocked and derided. Some
reproacht, belied and slandered both them and their Doctrine.

Thus it has fared with me not only at other times, but also at this time:
And it is some comfort to me that I am not alone; But that my betters find no
better entertainment from their Auditors, it makes me think it is not our
fault, but theirs. And because it does so much quadrare (so suite) with my
condition, I will make so bold, as to lay the complaint of a most eminent,
able, and godly learned Preacher, (in his own words) before you, not being able
to do it in better language. It is the Reverend Dr. Gauden, in his Sermon
preached in St. Paul's Church London, before the Lord Mayor, Lord General, etc.
Feb. 28. 1659. Being a day of Solemn Thanksgiving, etc. Wherein (intending to
deal faithfully and plainly, Having proposed his Text, after a few words, he
makes this entrance in page 2, 3, and 4. of that Sermon to this purpose. He
seems very apprehensive of the danger and difficulty of free preaching in these
times, wherein (as he observes) people are not only impatient to be touched
freely, and searched thoroughly, but are also prone to plead (as the Devils in
the Gospel) who had possessed the poor man now a long time) against all health
and recovery. Many men being like Cantors and Lazors (Canting beggars) in love
with their wounds and ulcers: As getting their living more easily by keeping
them open, raw, and running, then if they should quite heal them up. And he
takes notice of the tenderness of many men's minds, who are only for lenitives
and oils, for soft, smooth, and supple applications even to their most
desperate hurts: But he professes, to choose not to preach at all, then to
preach timerously and precariously, as if he should ask men leave to be honest,
or were afraid to speak the word of God to them. And he further says; When he
is called to speak in Gods name, he must be Parrhesiastes as well as
Ecclesiastes. I am (says he) to do it as a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, either for his ignorance, or cowardice, or indiscretion. And whether
men will hear, or forbear, the whole counsel of God must be delivered in its
season, so as becomes the words of soberness and truth: For the Church and
Pulpit must not be a sanctuary for insolency, nor a Burrow or retreat for
rudeness. No, however men become our enemies for speaking the truth, yet it is
better so, then to have God our enemy for smothering it, when it is just and
seasonable: And such it is when necessary and sovereign to heal the hurt of a
Church or State. Thus that reverent person. And then complains, It has been
his fate frequently to offend some men, when he has been most intent to serve
them, by Texts and Sermons, which he thought most apt, useful, and innocent;
And then gives in three Texts which he preached upon on 3. several great and
special occasions. One before the King, another before the long Parliament, the
third elsewhere. And of all three (says he) though wholesome and innocent Texts,
and I hope accordingly handled; yet I heard some unpleasing eccho's and
reflections. The sore and itching ears of some men in all ages are such, that
they will not endure (...) healing, or sound and wholesome doctrine, though the
pain arises from the sores and inflammation in themselves, and not from the
plaster and hand which honestly applies it. Yet they are prone, as in fell
boyls and acute tumors, when but touched (though but gently) to fly upon those
that are next them, and cry aloud, O you hurt me, when the hurt is within, and
from their selves, and their sound parts will endure free and rough handling;
such as are unfound do most want it. And therefore if we will be faithful to
God, to our own souls, and our hearers, we must not flatter their sores to
their ruin: but rather choose to heal them, though at present we be thought to
hurt them. Nor (says he farther) shall our labor of love be in vain, either
in the Lord, or before good men, who at length will find by experience that the
wounds of a friend (which let out the putrified matter of painful tumors) are
better then the kisses of an enemy, which do (infidis cicatricibus cuticulam
obducere.) Skin over with unfaithful scars, the ill-searched, and ill-purged
Ulcers of men's hearts and lives. I hope this worthy person will pardon me, that
I have made so bold with him, as to borrow so much from him, I shall pay it him
in those respects and honor I owe unto him for his noble disposition and
temper. And I rather choose thus to do, as hoping his worth will add more
weight, then if it had been delivered in my own words.

And see, what is here delivered in the Sermon, was but as a prophecy what
befell this good man and good Preacher afterward: For in his Epistle
Dedicatory to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Court of Common Counsel (who gave
him thanks for his Sermon, and entreated him to print it) he tells them, he
heard some more offended at the plain-dealing he used, which possibly (says
he) was from their over-rawness, and soreness, more then from my roughness. As
I aim to do things faithfully, personally; so decently, and discreetly. Nor do
I think I am to learn of those Censorious Cato's how to preach, any more then
they will learn of me to buy and sell, or how to fight and war. And he says, No
man may wonder, if he dare to reprove those sins which some dare to do; or to
approve, but dare not hear of, or repent. And that his parrhesia and freedom
of speech, as a man, a Christian, and a Preacher, was such, as became his
feeling of the public miseries, the desire of the Public tranquillity, and
the sense of that fidelity he did owe to God, his Country, them (to whom he
preached) and his own soul.

And the Lord knows my own soul can, and does attest the same, in my poor weak
labors and endeavors also; Though infinitely short in worth of this most
reverent person: To end with him, he tells us, These are not times to palliate
and speak smooth and soft things: Never age had fouler humors, or tumors,
more felt and more painful; more hard, and less mollified: And says; No, as
he would not injure any man, or fester the times: so he abhorred to flatter
them; which is the greatest injury a Preacher can do to Church and State.

And now I must confess the subject of my discourse was not of so high a
nature, nor had I to do with so high an Auditory. Nor am I fit for such an
undertaking; nor have I quoted all this to any such purpose.

But to let our petty world (here at home) know, that plain, free, home, and
(as this worthy Doctor phrases it) personal preaching, is not such a sin as our
Ignaro's would make it. And that though people be angry with us for such
preaching, we must not cease to secure our conscience in the faithful (though
unpleasing) discharge of our duty: And good Reader, know, That as a necessity
is laid upon those who are sent to preach; So a necessity is likewise laid upon
them to deal punctually and particularly with the personal sins (I don't
say naming the persons) of those they preach to; which if they do, they shall
be sure to hear on it, If not with persecution of the hand, yet with
persecution of the tongue.

And whereas some may say this, or that, in such or such a Sermon might have
been forborne, Perhaps we may say so too. But if we (whom the Lord has sent to
do his work; And (in our Studies applying our selves unto it) having besought
the Lord to teach us what to speak, and how to speak, as may be most for his
glory, and the peoples good; And it be suggested to us, that such, or such
expressions would be most taking; or best remembered: Our discourse thus and
thus clothed in language, would be most effectual and conducent to the end
intended. If we are thus persuaded in our Consciences, How shall we refuse it?

Obj. It may be 'twill offend, displease some? They Will cavil at it?

Ans. It may be so; We hope not; We know no reason for it. We Will pray they may
not. But is it a necessary truth? Is it useful, and seasonable? Is good like
to be done by it? (which is our errand and business.) Must we forbear that
which God in our Consciences (according to his Word) tells us will do some
people good, because it will offend others? Truly friends we ( Preachers) many
times offend (yea hurt) others, when we know it not, nor ever meant or intended
it. But is it our fault, or theirs? We mean the whole Congregation good. If
any do not understand, or mis-understand, or mis-interpret, or pervert our
words, or meaning, Is it our fault? I tell you Sirs, this great truth, and
mind it; Much hurt (yea more hurt then good) is many times (nay most times)
done by our Sermons. And we (Preachers) in that, not to be blamed, but are
accepted of God therein, and shall be rewarded. It Is a sad word (too true to
many) that we further their damnation by our preaching. That one place (2 Cor.
2.14,15,16. ver.) fully proves all this. And whence all this? But because
people do not heed (as they ought) what we say: Or they don't understand it, Or
they will not practice it, Or (which is worst of all) they withstand, gainsay,
pervert, or wrest it. And what? must we therefore forbear preaching? Must we
forbear the truth, because they abuse it? And (perhaps) us for it? I trow not.
And let me put another Case. It may be God by his Spirit (for we hope we are
not without his imbreathings and suggestions) according to his word convinces
and persuades me, that such or such a truth (as before) is very seasonable and
useful: And in steps self, and tells me, This truth is teo tart, and it may
create me trouble, I may hear ill, and bear ill for speaking it; What shall I
do in this case? Why truly, Self is sometimes to be hearkened to: For we are
not to create to our selves trouble unnecessarily. But (as before) it is a
truth necessary and seasonable; May I (for fear) forbear it? Will you read what
one (no phanatick, or of a factious or turbulent spirit) says, A man of great
parts, learning, and judgment, Dr. Jackson; Dr. Jackson heretofore President
of Corp: Christi College in Oxford, In his Treatise of Justifying Faith, sect.
2. cap. 15. page 279
Ministers of the Gospel (says he) may deny Christ, or manifest their
ashamedness of his Gospel as directly, by not laying his Law as closely to the
great Herod's of the world ( as John Baptist did ( supposing the case to be as
notorious, and as well known unto them (he means the Ministers, as Herod's was
to John Baptist:) In this case they may as directly deny Christ, or be ashamed
of his Gospel (in not dealing plainly and reproving) as if they had been afraid
to confess him, for fear of being put out of the Synagogue, etc. And he says,
were John Baptists kind of preaching used in many Kingdoms, though by such as
profess the same Religion with the Potentates, whom they should offend with
their boldness, I think (says he) it would prove matter of Martyrdom in the
end. And he farther says; In that any age since Christian Religion was first
propagated, has wanted store of Martyrs, it is more to be a tributed unto the
negligence, ignorance, and hypocrisy, or want of courage in Christ's
Ambassadors, or appointed Pastors, then unto the sincerity, mildness, or
fidelity of the Flock, especially of the Bel-weathers, or chief Ringleaders.
And now friend! sare we (Ministers) thus in danger? what shall we do? Truly we
have more need of your pity, and your prayers, then your censures and
reproaches. But jacta est alea, It Is better obey God, and fear God then men,
and please God then men, Or our selves either; for in so doing, we shall have
peace with him, and in our own consciences, which is better then all the peace
and comforts the world can afford us. And therefore we will bear it patiently,
comfortably. But yet because Satan makes no small advantage of those
reproaches that are cast upon the Ministers of the Gospel (of which farther in
the vindication) I shall once more appear in Print (though much aginst my
purpose) to stop the mouth either of prejudice, or wilful calumny, or sottish
and sleepy ignorance, or byast interest, which will pervert any thing, be it
never so innocent and harmless. And this not without the advice and counsel
of some worthy friends, and well-wishers who have been very sensible of those
unworthy rumors that have bin raised and spread by occasion of this ensuing
Sermon, which I shall now (good Reader) lay before thee, according to mine own
notes, and the best I could get of those who noted after me. Possibly this
trouble might be brought upon me, that some may reap benefit by this Sermon (or
appendant discourses) printed, as I have some cause to hope some did, when it
was preached. To which end I commend thee and it unto God, beseeching him to
bestow upon thee and me the spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. For which thy prayers are desired at the Throne of Grace (if thou
have any interest there) by him, who is

Thy faithful friend and wel-wisher, RA: FARMER.

POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
IF thou be one of the simple ones, let me advise thee: Shoot not thy bolt too
suddenly, but receive information from those who are wiser. If thou be a person
of judgment and discretion, make use of it, and do not read by snatches, and
then censure, but read all. And where thou possibly may stumble or doubt
(having read the former Epistle) favor me so far, as to read also my
Vindication after. And I suppose we shall part friends, notwithstanding all
evil surmisings.

Farewell.
HOSEA 6.1. Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will
heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up.


We have here a repenting people; and they the people of Israel, Gods people.
Now repenting supposes sinning; for repentance is not but for sin. If there
were no sinning, there were no need of repenting. Now, All sin, for there is no
man living that sins not, as 1 Kings 8.46. Particular persons sin, and
people and Nations in general sin. All sin, even Gods people, his peculiar
people sin. And if his people sin as well as others, they shall suffer as
well as others: Nay, Because they are his people, therefore, if they sin, they
above all others shall suffer. Thus the Lord by the Prophet Amos, Chap. 3.
verse. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I
will punish you for all your iniquities. Well, Gods people sin, and Gods people
suffer for their sin: so these here. We may read of their sin both before, and
after the Text. In the Chapter before the Text, there you may read of
multiplied, complicated sins, impudently, wilfully committed. Both Princes, the
house of the King, and Priests, and all the people they had been nets and
snares to betray one another into sin, Verse. 1. of the foregoing Chapter. And
in the 2d. Verse. Those revolters were profound to make slaughter; slaughter of
men, and slaughter of sacrifices. They would kill, and commit murder, and yet
pretend unto Religion. And in this they were profound notable hypocrites, deep
dissemblers. For though they will not frame their courses to Gods mind, verse. 4.
Yet they will go with their herds and their flocks to seek the Lord, verse. 6.
Oh! they will be hugely religious, they will not spare for cost, they brought their
herds and their flocks to make sacrifices: But yet for all that, they shall not
find the Lord, ver. 6. God will not accept of such impostors, such pretenders, he
has withdrawn himself from them. He will not countenance, protect, or secure
them, in the same verse. Nay, if they go on in their sin, and go further from
God, God will go yet farther from them; I will go and return to my place, ver.
the last. God will not appear amongst them as he was wont by his wonted
mercies, and gracious providence; Let the Assyrian, and King Jareb help them
if they can. Those Physicians of no value, to whom they fled for refuge and for
healing, when they were smitten and wounded. If they serve false gods, let them
when they have need go to them whom they have served.

This was the state and condition of the Princes of Israel at that time: But
how was it with Ephraim? how was it with the people? (for so does Ephraim
sometimes signify.) Why, like Princes, like people. Being broken in judgment,
(a sottish, base, cowardly company) they willingly walked after the
Commandment. An Idolatrons command went forth from cursed Jeroboam: And the
people being oppressed and overborn by power, they willingly walked after the
commandment, verse. 11. Oppression makes men base and cowardly; and like
Issachars Ass to couch and lie down under every burden. And thus by their
joint and general sinning, they draw down a general judgment: And that is
verified, Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi.

And now God being gone, all their shifting cannot help them. In vain is
salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains, Jer.
3.23. Great men, men in high places, men in authority, that are as mountains
and hills, these cannot save Truly in the Lord God only is the salvation of
Israel, In the same verse.

True, Salvation is in the Lord, but he is withdrawn and gone; he is returned
to his place, and hides himself, he will not save, we cannot find him. Oh!
foolish people and unwife, thus to forsake God, and to cause him to forsake
you, and to leave you naked to your oppressors, when there is none to help,
none to deliver.

But is he clean gone? will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable
no more? has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender
mercies? Psalm. 77.7. No, though Gods people forget him, yet he will not forget
them, Isa. 49.15. But if he will not forget them, why does he withdraw? why
does he hide himself? why does he not come in for his peoples rescue, their
aid, their help and succor? And how long will he hide himself in this our
affliction, distress, and misery? Why? he is withdrawn, and returned to his
place, he hides himself as it were in heaven, till we acknowledge our
offenses, and by true repentance and unfeigned faith seek his face and favor;
God does withdraw to this purpose, that by his withdrawing he might draw us
after him. He hides himself till we acknowledge our offenses, and by a lively
act of faith fervently seek his face. For surely (says the Lord, if they be
not altogether senceless) in their affliction they will seek me early,
diligently, seriously, Chap. last, verse. last. Come therefore, and let us
return unto the Lord, etc. Come let us, Us that are here this day, Come let Us:
And oh! that all the Nation might hear this Call, and answer it: Come let us
return unto the Lord, for he has torn and he will heal us, he has smitten,
and he will bind us up. After two days he will revive us. In the third day he
will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.

We have in the words, First, an invitation to repentance. Secondly, an
encouragement thereunto.
The invitation, Come let us return unto the Lord. The encouragement, He has
torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up.


The Text may be taken as the Word of God, by the Prophet, put into the peoples
mouths; Or as a direction and prescription from God to his people, showing them
what to do in a sad afflicted state and condition. And beloved, this is no
strange notion, And it is a comforting and encouraging consideration: God, he
is so willing of his peoples returnings, that they might enjoy his favorable
countenance, as that, even when his afflicting hand is upon them, he not only
nvites them to it, but he even teaches them what to say, and in what words to
address themselves unto him, that they might prevail with him; so gracious and
tender a Father is he. This you have most sweetly and fully in this very
Prophet, Hosea 14.1. O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen
by thine iniquity, take with you words; (what are they? why those that follow)
say unto him, Take away our iniquities, and receive us graciously, and so will
we render the calves of our lips. (And then it follows) Ashur shall not save
us, etc. And when his people take this advice, and return unto the Lord, then
will the Lord heal their backsliding, and love them freely, then will his
anger be turned away from them, etc.

Oh beloved! what precious mercies, and unexpressible kindnesses does God offer
to a repenting, a returning people: So tender a Father is he, that he does not
only invite to repent, but teaches them how to demean themselves, and puts
words into their mouths, to come unto him withal. As a tender Mother, that
desires to have her Child to go, stretches forth her hand to it, bids it come,
gives words of encouragement to it that so it may come; Even so, God the Lord
calls, invites, incourages his people to come unto him by unfeined repentance.
Nay, not only so, but (as I said) he teaches them with what words to come unto
him. So here; Come let us return unto the Lord, etc. Beloved, it is a great
encouragement to poor, distressed, afflicted souls, that the Lord is so
desirous of our repentance, as that he not only invites us to repent, but also
teaches us how to repent, and return to him. Come therefore let us return unto
the Lord. Us of this Land and Nation, Us of the three Nations, Us of this City,
Us of this Congregation, Let us return unto the Lord.

Return unto the Lord! Why? have we departed from him? or can we depart from
him? how can we depart from him? Is not God present every where? Pray sirs read
what David tells you in Ps. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or
whither shall I fly from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art
there: If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the utmost parts of the
sea, even there shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand sustain me, How
then can we go from God? and consequently return to him?

To this I answer: It is one thing to depart from (and consequently to return
to) Gods essential and all-powerful presence; And it is another thing to
depart from, and return to his gracious and most merciful presence. There is an
essential presence (a presence of Gods power and might,) And there is a
gracious presence; a presence of his mercy and protection. Now, Gods essential
presence is never withdrawn from his Creatures; For in him they live, and
move, and have their being. But then all who partake of his powerful presence,
do not partake of his gracious presence. God is said to be near or far off a
people, and they are said to be near or far from God, as they are in his grace
and favor. When in mercy he extends his grace and favor to a people, then is
he said to be near: unto them.

Now beloved, There is one thing makes a distance and separation between God
and a soul, or between God and a people: and that is sin, Isa. 59.1. Behold
the Lords hand is not shortened that he cannot save, neither his ear heavy that
he cannot hear; but your iniquities have separated between you and your God:
Your sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear. By sin we go away
from God, and then God goes away from us: not by his power, that he cannot do,
for he is present so every where, But he goes away, in withdrawing his grace,
his love and favor, his most merciful providence, protections, and special
preservations from a people; That Is Gods going away. And we by further sin, go
away further from God, and make the distance greater. And as by sin we go away,
so by repentance we return again to God, and so God returns again to us, and
receives us into grace and favor.

And now, sirs, Let me ask you; Have we not sinned, and gone away from God? Do
not our iniquities testify against us plainly, to our faces? And has not God
departed from us, and left us to run unto the Assyrian, and King Jareb?
Interpreters do give various Interpretations of that word what is meant by King
Jareb; but yet all agree in this, that it signifies vain helps. Friends, all
helps and refuges are vain, when God forsakes a people: And by the vanity and
insufficiency of all our helps and helpers that have all failed us, is it not
very manifest that God has hitherto left us? And why is it? but because by sin
we have left him, and departed from him. Will you give me leave to be plain,
(and why should not I at such a time as this is?) Have not our Kings and
Princes heretofore, and our princely Priests and Bishops been as snares upon
Mizpah, and nets upon Tabor? (their high places and great offices) have they
not tyrannized too much? Have they not revolted, and been profound to make
slaughter, notwithstanding they have been reproved and admonished? I beseech
you sirs, let not the apprehension of our present greater sufferings cause us
altogether to forget our former iniquities. People are apt generally to
complain of the present burden, and murmur and forget what is past. And
indeed, the greatness of our burdens may make us willing to be rid of them;
But yet let us not be such sottish asses, as not to remember our former gal'd
backs. In this day of our Humiliation, when we are seeking for establishment,
let us not forget the cause and ground of our unsettlement. It was a sore
Judgment that we were removed from our old foundations, but we must remember
who it was that removed us. Friends let us consider who it was that broke us,
was it not the Lord? Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has smitten us,
etc. Whatsoever be the hand that gives the stroke, or whosoever be the
instruments, yet it is God that guides it. Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in
the City, and the Lord has not done it? Shall there be evil in a City, in a
Nation, in the three Nations, and the Lord has not done it? By evil, I
understand the evil of punishment. Now I say, is the evil of punishment in the
Nation, in the three Nations, or upon any particular person, without the evil
of sin? will you say that the righteous Judge of heaven and earth has not done
right? When he has brought the evil of punishment upon a Nation or person,
will you say that the evil of sin was not the preceding, and the procuring
cause? I know well that God does sometimes punish the sin of Princes in and
upon the People, and the sin of People in and upon the Princes: but then both
of them have sinned. And though it may be the sin of the one has been more
provoking then the sin of the other; yet when God comes with sweeping
judgments upon all, surely all have had a great share in sinning. And whether
the sins of our Princes, or the sins of the people, have brought these heavy
judgments upon us, God the Judge of all the earth best knows: I shall not take
upon me to determine it; for what am I, that I should step into the Chair of
the Almighty? but yet let it be considered, From that very time that those
three eminent men stood in such a disgraceful and opprobrious manner upon a
pillory at Westminster like Rogues and Cutpurses, Let me tell you, since that
time, neither the King, nor his party prospered; I mean those three worthy
professors of the three noble Sciences, Divinity, Law, and Physic. But yet
surely the sins of this Land were ripe for judgment, or else the judgment
would not have been so universal and general. Has not that dreadful judgment
threatened and denounced of old, been most sadly fulfilled upon us? Isa. Chapter 3.
begin. Behold, the Lord of hosts does take away from Jerusalem and from Judah
the stay and the staff, the whole stay of bread and the whole stay of water:
the mighty man and the man of war, the Judge and the Prophet, and the prudent,
and the ancient, the Captain of fifties, and the honorable man, and the
Counselors, the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator: And I will give
children to be your princes, and babes shall rule over them: And the people
shall be oppressed every one by another, the child shall be have himself
proudly against the ancient, and the base against the honorable, etc.

Has not this been, and is it not this day sadly verified? Is not contempt of
Magistracy and Ministry grown to an insupportable height? Has not this I say,
been sadly verified in these our days? And is it not because our sins have
been universal? We will not (...) the fault upon one head, but take it upon
all, for we have all contributed to the common heaps of sin, and its infinite
mercy that we have not been involved all in the common destruction: And have
not we, we of this City, Magistrates and Ministers, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, have we not all had a hand in the provocation more or
less? Can we forget that torpor, indifferency, lukewarmnesse and neutrality in
our Magistracy, that heretofore gave occasion to that flood of Heresy and
Blasphemy to come in amongst us, and to make their seat here, to the poisoning
of the Country round about us?

And as for the people of this City, let me not be unfaithful toward them.
Sirs, you complain that your Trade is decayed, and that you are ready to break,
many of you, and I think you don't lie. Your Trade has so forsaken you, that
you are ready to forsake your Trades. And what is the reason? Surely God does
not leave a people but upon some occasion. Truly when God forsakes Tradesmen,
no marvail if they forsake their Trades; without God none can prosper:
Tradesmen may work hard, and fare hard, and go mean in habit, rise up early, go
to bed late, and cark and care, and get nothing unless the Lord be with them.
Unless the Lord keep the City, the watchman watches in vain, etc. Psalm. 127.
Why now, a general forsaking of God, will cause the Lord to depart generally
from you. And beloved, that I may not dwell altogether on generals, not to
mention that drunkenness and profaneness, Sabboth-breaking, blasphemous
Oaths, and bitter Execrations, Pride, contempt of Magistracy, and undervaluing
of our Superiors, which upon this loss of government is now sadly returning
again upon us, I say to let these alone (which yet do too evidently stare us in
the face) and not to speak to them: Do not the people of this City in general,
and have they not for a long time departed from God, and forsaken him in his
Ministers and servants whom he calls and sends forth into his Vineyard? I will
not now enter upon that common place of that comfortable and honorable
encouragement that is due to the Ministers of the Gospel: It Is so clear a
truth, that in plain reason you cannot gainsay it. And yet how infamously
famous is this City above all other Cities in this Nation in this particular?
Beloved, let me not be counted your Enemy for telling you the truth, (as you
know I do) and dealing thus plainly; Surely sirs, it is forsaking God, to
forsake his servants, and he will not take it kindly. I might mention other
sins whereby we have gone away from God, and so caused him to go away and
forsake us. And if God forsake us, no marvail if we be in a broken and
distracted condition. See this 2 Chronicles. 15.1,2,3. The spirit of the Lord came
upon Azariah the son of Obed, and he went to meet Asa, and said unto him, hear
me Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin, the Lord is with you whilst you be with
him: If you seek him he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you. And see then their sad state after. Beloved, when God goes away
with the honey of pity and mercy, he leaves such a sting of wrath and judgment
behind him, that it shall vex and torment the very souls of a people: And then
shall they find that it is a sad and a bitter thing to forsake the Lord

And now beloved, what remains, but that we having forsaken the Lord, we return
again unto him. Come, let us return again unto the Lord, for he has smitten,
and he will heal, etc.

Come let us return. Returning is nothing but repenting, and both of them do
intend amendment. He that amends, repents, and he that repents returns; you
shall find them often put together in Scripture. So Ezekiel. 14.6. Thus says the
Lord, repent and turn your selves from your idols, and turn away your faces
from all your abominations. So in Chap. 18. of the same Prophecy, Cast away
from you all your transgressions whereby you have transgressed, make you a new
heart and a new spirit, for why will you dye O house of Israel? If you repent
of the evil of sin, God will repent of the evil of punishment: And if you
return from your evil ways, God will return to you in mercy, and tender
compassion. Come then let us return. Return, return, O England, Return O
Bristoll, Return O thou my soul, and all you beloved that hear me this day,
Return unto the LORD our God, for we are broken by our sin, Chap. 14 1.

Watchman what of the night? says the Lord by the Prophet, Isa. 21.11,12.
Watchman what of the night? He answered, the morning comes and also the night,
if ye will enquire, enquire; Return, Come. Sirs, there is a night and a
morning, this I see. If you put this Querie to me, Watchman what see thou? I
say the morning comes, and also the night. We have a night and a morning in
our Text, and so also in our Nation if we neglect it not. We have had by Gods
chastising hand upon us (and oh, that it may be a reforming hand) nights of
tearing and smiting, the Lord has torn us, and he has smitten us. The hand
of God upon us has been a dark night of terrors and sorrows. Dark and black
dispensations has the Lord exercised us with: He has smitten us, he has
broken us, these are our nights. The morning now we hope also comes: He will
heal us, he will bind us up, that is the morning: And oh! Let that happy
morning of Englands joy and deliverance make have, and not tarry. It may be,
beloved, as we have been under the curse, and judgment formerly mentioned,
Isa. 3. So we may also see that happy morning of joy and reviving that is
promised by the same Prophet Isay 1.25,26. I will turn my hand upon thee, and
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. Do you expect a
settlement? Truly then your sins must be purged away, and then I will restore
thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning; Afterward
thou shall be called a City of righteousness, the faithful City: Sion shall
be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness. Oh beloved!
for such a happy day, when God the Lord shall delight in us, and in mercy shall
bestow upon us that blessing here promised, of a righteous, just, and lawful
Government. And though God should not do it in such a way as we expect, yet he
will do it in such a way as is best for us, if we please him, which let us
leave to him and our Superiors. Let us then return unto the Lord, and leave it
to him for our establishment and settlement. Let us I say, turn unto the Lord.
Truly sirs (will you give me leave to open my heart unto you) my heart trembles
to think of some men's turnings, and of some turnings which some men look for;
not a turning to God, but a turning further from God. Many people expect a
change, not that they might change their lives, or manners; No, beloved, they
would have a turning, not to God, but to the Devil. Oh! how would some men
turn to the Devil of drunkenness? how would some men turn to the Devil of
swearing? to the Devil of Sabboth-breaking, and all manner of profaneness? That
they might live and sin without control. Friends is this the turning that God
looks for? Surely sirs, these people (if they might have their wills) would
bring in a night, a sad and dark night in stead of a light and gladsome
morning, a sadder night then ever yet England saw; For if the Lord should
establish us, and we make use of that establishment to establish our selves in
sin, and so provoke the Lord to go further from us, and leave us, we have just
grounds to fear that the Lord would then never come again amongst us.

Do these men turn unto the Lord? how many of them probably are in the Tavern
at this time? how many in the Alehouse at this very time? At this time I say,
wherein (as one would expect) we should all as one man join together in our
earnest prayers, to implore a blessing from heaven upon the Counsel of the
Parliament, shortly to be assembled, that the Lord would make them instruments
for our settlement and establishment now after all our breakings and shakings.
But where are they? Do these men walk in Gods ways? Do these men look for a
change that may be for the better? Do these men look for establishment, and
that the Nation should be settled upon their desires, and upon their endeavors?

There is a place, that I hope in all things does not run parallel, but in this
is to our purpose. It is in 1 Samuel 12.19. All the people said unto Samuel, pray
for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not, for we have added unto
all our sins this evil to ask us a King. Now I say, I do not conceive that
the Text runs parallel with our case in this particular; therefore mistake me
not. But now mark, Samuel said unto the people, fear not, ye have done all
this wickedness; yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the
Lord with all your hearts, and turn not aside, for then should you go after
vain things that cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain. It was not so
great a sin in them, but that desiring and having a King was consistent with
serving the Lord: Nor had they thereby so sinned as to forsake God. Turn not
aside (says he) from following the Lord, but serve the Lord, etc. But then go
on to the two last verses: Only fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all
your heart, for consider how great things he has done for you: But if you
still do wickedly, you shall be consumed both you and your King

People think, Oh I if they had a King, all shall be well, their state and
condition shall then be prosperous, and they shall be all safe. But beloved, If
men go after vain things, if they do wickedly, it cannot be a King that can
help them. The people of Israel they had a King according to their desires; But
what, was that enough to secure them? Surely if the Lord forsake them, it could
not be their King that could help them: and therefore says the Prophet, verse.
22. The Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake, because it
has pleased the Lord to make you his people. If the Lord has once assumed a
people to be his, he will do much for them, and bear long with them ere he
will forsake them. And therefore as the Prophet there, verse. 29. would pray for
them, so also would he teach them the good and right way. Fear the Lord, says
he, and serve him in truth, with all your hearts, for consider how great things
he has done for you, verse. 24. And beloved, has not God done great things for
us? What great hopes has he given us of a settlement after all our fears and
confusions? And we expect a King: But if ye still do wickedly, ye shall be
destroyed both you and your King. Mark, That which the hearts of the people
were set upon, was a King, nothing would please them but a King, yea you shall
have a King; But yet do not go away from God, and follow after vain things, for
if you do, you shall be consumed and destroyed, both you and your King
together. Beloved, there is nothing that so surely brings ruin and destruction
upon a King and Kingdom, as wilful and reiterated sins and wickednesses: If
you still do wickedly, you shall be destroyed both you and your King. You did
wickedly before, and what became of your King? was it your wickedness or his?
Many of you will not say it was his. And if you still do wickedly, the next
King (for ought I know) may fare as he did, therefore take heed of sin.
Beloved, I propose this one thing to you, it was either the sin of the King
(the Father) that brought the evil upon him, or the sin of the People, or both
together. If his own sin, then the judgment was just upon him as to God,
though not in them who did it; But if it was the sin of the people, let me ask
you, will not that which ruined the Father ruin the Son? If you still do
wickedly, you shall be destroyed both you and your King.

Surely Kings, Princes, and chief Magistrates are least beholding to drunkards,
to murderers, to profane persons, to unclean lascivious persons, to those that
wallow in the stinking puddle and nasty dunghill of sin: Kings and Princes are
least of all beholding unto them, for they draw down judgment upon the whole
Nation. These persons, though they look for a morning of joy and gladness upon
the Nation, yet will surely bring a dismal night of sorrow notwithstanding
their expectations.

And therefore, Come let us return unto the Lord, that as he has torn us for
our sins, so he may bind us up; and as he has broken us for our
transgressions, so he may heal us upon our returning: Here Is encouragement,
which is the second part of the Text. Of which a little.

Friends, none but he that smites us can beale us; none but he that tear's can
bind us up. All other Physicians, all other Chyrurgions, they are but mere
Quacks and Empericks. We may say of them as Job of his friends, Job 13.4. Ye
are forgers of lies, ye are physicians of no value. And beloved, have we not
found it so in our State- Mountebancks, who have set up their Stages, that they
might pick our Pockets, and made us bow down, that they might ride over us?
Have we not found that of David verified? Men of high degree are a lie, and men
of low degree are altogether vanity? Are they to be trusted in? Is there any
more weight in them then in the dust of the balance? O let us return therefore
unto the Lord, for he has broken us, and he will heal us, he has smitten us,
and he only can bind us up: He has here promised it, if we return (as
before) unto him: And beloved, consider this, as God wounds and smites by his
instruments, so he also heals and binds up by instruments. The enemies of Gods
people, God makes use of as the rod in his hand to chastise and correct his
Children for their sins: and he also raises up instruments to deliver them from
their sufferings. In Esaias 58. there you have a promise made, that the just and
righteous shall build the old waste places, shall raise up the foundations of
many generations, and shall be called the repairer of the breach, the restorer
of the paths to dwell in. Do you look for happy days in England? Would you
have the Old waste places built, and the breaches repaired? Why, then see what
the Lord requires of you: Read that place fore-quoted, Isa. 58.6. Is not this
the Fast that I have chosen? etc. This is a day wherein you fast and humble
your selves to seek establishment. Well, will you see what Fast the Lord
requires? Loose the bands of wickedness, undo every heavy burden, let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every heavy yoke; It is to deal thy bread
to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house;
When thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self
from thine own flesh: Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and
thine health shall spring forth speedily, etc. And verse. 12. They that be of
thee shall build the old waste places, thou shall raise up the foundations of
many generations, etc. Though our government has layn in the dust these many
years, and though we have had a dark and black night upon us, yet God can
cause our light to break forth as the morning; he can raise us up some to build
our waste places, to be repairers of our breaches, and restorers of paths to
dwell in.

But I say, the promise is to good and righteous men; These are the men, if
any, that must lay the foundations: not profane loose wretches, enemies to all
righteousness, the Lord in mercy keep such out of that great Assembly of
Parliament: And if any get in, the Lord in his wisdom find out a way to cast
them out again. Beloved, nothing but justice, and truth, and righteousness,
and mercy can heal a broken Nation, let us then this day, and every day else
beg of God, that he would graciously be pleased to be present with, and to sit
President in, and over that great Council of the Land, that they may break off
every yoke, and take off every heavy burden, and keep off all unjust yokes and
heavy burdens that any whatsoever would impose upon us. That so that great
Assembly may be a repairer of our breaches, and a restorer of our paths to
dwell in. Let us pray that both they, and all we may be more careful to bring
King Jesus into our hearts, then K. Charles into his Throne: Not as if I looked
on these two as contradictory, opposite, or destructive the one unto the other;
But thus, I tell you King Jesus is to be preferred before any mortal creature
whatsoever: And if he that shall rule be careful to rule according to Truth,
and under King Jesus, If God and the great Council of the Nation shall think
fit, Let him come and welcome.

But sirs, let me tell you, King Charles cannot save your souls; but if King
Jesus rule in your hearts, he can and will save you: What would it advantage
you, if all of you had your hearts desire here? If things go even as you would
wish? and yet when Death comes, you should be dragged to Hell, to endless
torments, what would it advantage you? Be not then so mad as to pursue worldly
concernments, or worldly comforts with such eagerness: But above all seek and
pursue after things of everlasting concernment: And I tell you no mortal King
can save your souls, and therefore let us most look that King Jesus his reign
and government may be established over us. See his sweet and gracious
government, Isa. 32. begin. Behold a King shall reign in righteousness, and
Princes shall rule in judgment, and a man shall be as a hiding place from the
winds, and a covert from the tempest as rivers of water in a dry land, and as
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land, etc. There Is a description given of
a blessed and good King: He shall be a shelter, a covering, he shall be all in
all to a distressed people. Jer. 23.5. there it is said, Behold the days come
says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King
shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment and justicein the earth; in
those days Judah shall be safe, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the
name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness. This is spoken of
the Lord Jesus Christ, he that is the King of Kings, he shall rule in
Righteousness. And he or they that Rule under him, must rule in Righteousness;
Let us not then look so much (as most do) after wordly peace and freedom, and
temporal deliverance from present burdens, as after spiritual peace, and
freedom from everlasting torments; not so much to enjoy perishing comforts, as
to have the comforts of everlasting enjoyments: And then may we expect the
performance of what is promised in the close of our Text. After two days will
he revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his
sight; We shall live not only temporally, comfortably and happy, but a life
heavenly and everlasting, we shall be happy to all eternity. Then (as it
follows) shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, more of Gods mind,
and of his mercies, and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the early and
latter rain upon the earth, which being parched with drought, receives it in
readily, fructifieth, and brings forth abundantly. Come then, let us all
return unto the Lord, for as he has torn, so will he heal, and as he has
smitten, so will he bind us up.

FINIS.
Here Is my Sermon, now where is my sin? What Is my Charge with which I have been
so (I cannot say whether more) ignorantly or maliciously traduced: why its
threefold; I have preached against the King, and the coming in of the King: So
some, My whole Sermon drives at this; The coming in of the King would bring in
profaneness; so others. A third sort say, I am angry. Now to answer to these
distinctly. And first, I have preached against the King, and his coming in, I
ask wherein? how does that appear? I will come as close and as speedily as I
can to my Charge, I mean to that part of my Sermon from whence they might
suppose me criminous. I shall therefore pass over almost one half of it, for
that was but by way of Explication: And it concerned others, Israel. That
troubles not, no preaching at a distance, and speaking of other men's faults,
and reproving them, that bites not, as much as you will of that: But this
home-preaching, and treading too close upon our heels, This gauls, this vexes
this troubles us. Why, what is the matter? what is the matter? Did not you say.
That because by our sins we had left God, therefore God had left us? And did
you not say, That our Kings and our Princes heretofore, and our Princely
Priests and Bishops had been as snares upon Mizpah, and as nots upon Tabor
(their high places and great offices). And how have they not raged and
tyrannized, etc. And did you not beseech us, that we should not let the
apprehensions of our present greater sufferings, cause us altogether to forget
our former iniquities? And did you not advise us, that upon that day of our
solemn Humiliation, wherein we sought to God for settlement, that we should not
forget the cause and ground of our unsettlement? Here Is enough to answer at
once and together, and I think this is my greatest charge. And now what of all
this? Let me ask you by your cavilling against this, Don't you discover your
ignorance? Is it not plain you are not acquainted with the Scripture? Or that
you take no notice, or understand not what you read, or hear? That you are mere
strangers to the nature and manner of a true Fast? Is not a fasting day
(especially public, general, and such solemn Fast days) a day wherein to
humble our souls before the Lord by a hearty, sincere, and impartial
confession and acknowledgement of all our sins? And being a general day of
Humiliation through the whole Land, to confess and be humbled for the sins of
the whole Land in general. And in such a day are not the sins both of Princes
and People both past and present to be remembered and acknowledged? And that not
only in general terms (which is mostly slight and overly) but punctually and
particularly, of those sins they were guilty of, and lay under. This is (if you
know not, as it seems you do not) for your better information and (as I desire)
Reformation; Do but read the instances of the Solemn Fasts recorded in
Scripture, and you will be wiser hereafter. I reser you for this more
particularly to those three most Solemn Fasts which are there recorded, Ezra 9.
Nehem. 9. and Dan. 9. And see and observe the manner of the celebration, and
whether their particular sins were not enumerated, confessed and bewailed. And
had we of this Land and Nation no sins to be remembered? to be confessed? Are
you so forgetful? or were you ignorant of them? Are we not unsettled? Are not
our foundations of government overturned? Do not the pillars of the Nation
tremble? Is it not a Judgment? Do I not say so much? And what were there no
sins that are the causes of it? Do such great, and heavy, and general
judgments befall a Nation (both King, Princes, Priests and People) without sin
procuring them? you dare not say so? And were there no sins in England but the
sins of the people? What was the Popish Match? and the building of Houses and
Chapels thereupon for Idolatrous and superstitious worship? What was the
countenancing and exercise of that false worship, even in the Kings own
dwelling? And were not our Communion- Tables turned into Altars, with
superstitious cringings and bowings toward them? and in some places wax Tapers
set upon those Altars? and second Service (which the people could not (...))
there performed? How was the zealous profession of Religion (under the nickname
of Puritanisme) discountenanced and disgraced? How did the Court-Bishops
(especially the Bishop of Canterbury, Dr. Laud) vex, perplex, and ruin men in
their High Commission Court, and Star Chamber? How would drunken and profane
Ministers (if but zealous for Ceremonies) give the check to (and upon the
least occasion) trouble and sue the best Knights and Gentlemen in the Country
even for trifles, and be therein upheld and countenanced by those
Court-Bishops; Insomuch, that when the Knights and Gentlemen were assembled in
Parliament, and had opportunity to be revenged upon them, they ding'd them
quite down without mercy or consideration.

I need not tell you what courses were taken that the King might be maintained
without Parliaments, and so with out the love of his Subjects, and redness of
their grievances, I could name much, more; you that lived in those times, and
were able make observation know it. If you don't, others do. And are not these
grounds of unsettlement? And upon a special solemn Fast (such a one as this
especially) wherein we sought to God for establishment and settlement) would it
not be proper, that these things and such the like might and should have been
remembered and mentioned, the more to consternate our spirits, and promote our
humiliation: But you see I did not, I lightly past it over in Generals.

Oh! But you said, since those three eminent persons, professors of those three
most noble Professions, Divinity, Law, and Physic suffered upon the Pillory
like Rogues and Cutpurses in such an opprobrious and disgraceful manner. That
the K. and his party never prospered, did I say so? and did I not say true? Did
not their Cause go every day backward? I say, their Cause, the King and
Bishops, for they I meant, I put them both together. There is a saying, In
nomine Domini incipit omne malum: And every man that was acquainted with the
Transactions of those Times, cannot but acknowledge, that that was the source
of all our miseries: So dangerous a thing is it for Clergymen to leave their
Calling, and turn Courtiers. Men whose riches lie in their heads, will be
always tampering. It Is good therefore they be kept to their proper business.

For say, was it not a pretense of conformity and uniformity in Religion that
began all our quarrel? Not that I think an Uniformity an evil (what ever
others say) but rather a good, and by all good ways to be endeavored, and I
suppose till then we shall not be well settled: And sure the quarrel began
there, I could wish the settlement began there; For upon true judgment I speak
it, though it be a shame and a matter of sadness: Most of the troubles and
combustions in Civil States have been either begun or fomented by men of our
profession, I mean of the Clergy, and was it not so with us? Our first War
intended, was it not against the Scots? and wherefore was it? who began it? Was
it not called generally Bellum Episcopale, the Bishops War, I put the King and
Bishops together, with respect to this: The Bishop could not begin a War (I
mean arm the people) without a King. And the Bishop having so great a power and
influence upon the King, prevailed with him to raise Arms against them (the
Scots.) And the immediate Prodromus and forerunner of this War, was it not the
most horrid and reproachful standing of these eminent persons upon the Pillory?
I do profess (the persons, and every thing considered) it was the saddest
sight (next to the Kings beheading) that ever (especially for many generations)
was seen in England. I saw not the latter, but I did the former. And I well
remember Mr. Burtons words when upon the Pillory; Mark it (says he) little do
we know what this dry tree (pointing to the Pillory) may bring forth. And
speedily after, the next news from Scotland was; If the Englishman loose his
lugg, the Scot would lose his cragg, meaning against the rage and tyranny of
the Bishop: For having dealt thus barbarously with these three so eminent
persons, he then thought the terror thereof would have daunted and cowed the
Scottish Nation, when as this did but heighten their indignation, and raise
greater opposition against him.

Yea, but were not the Scots too blame in this matter? It may be so, but I know
it not, for I am not acquainted with the Laws, Rights, and Constitutions of
their Kingdom, and therefore I say no more to it. But I ask this question; Was
their not entertaining Episcopal Government, and the Service Book a sufficient
ground to embroil two Nations, two Christian Nations in War, to shed the blood
one of another? And if (for conformities sake with England) Scotland must have
a Service Book, why could not our own English Service Book serve the turn? but
there must be diverse alterations, more conform to Romes language, then in our
own Liturgy; of which Mr. Prins Book to that purpose can give you information.
But the Scots abhorrid it as Swines flesh, and it would not down with them. And
no doubt, could they have been beaten into it, to have dined on it, we should
have been forced to have supt on it with them. But hereupon, on goes the War
against them. And how well this Holy War was like to succeed, you may guess by
the beginning; for even those rude and ignorant Soldiers, who were led against
the Scots, to kill them into conformity, in our own Country (as they past
along toward Scotland (in despite of their Commanders) broke into diverse
Churches, pulled down and burnt the rails about the Communion Table, and tore
the Surplices, and the Common Prayer Books: These things were notorious, and
not done in a corner. It would be too much beyond my de sign to mention all
that followed: Plain it was, nothing prospered after. And is this now such a
heinous offense to say so? Or was it not rather a matter to be acknowledged as
a sin, to be confessed, and for which deeply to be humbled, and to repent of? I
might have mentioned the cruel usage of Dr. Layfield, who at the instigation of
the Bishop, after a long imprisonment in the Fleet, was whipped from thence to
Westminister, where raw (as he was) he stood upon the Pillory, his nostrils
slit, and burnt in the cheeks or forehead. But did I charge this evil, or any
other, upon the King, as the cause either of his or our suffering? Nay, did I
not disclaim that bold presumption, in the words even immediately foregoing,
saying, Whether's sins were greater (ours, or our Princes) God the Judge best
knows: For what am I, that I should step into his chair. This I concluded on,
and I think none can deny it, If our sins had not been universal, the judgment
would not have been so general? And I do profess, I dare not judge the Kings
sins to be greater then the peoples, because he drank deeper in the judgment:
But if I had charged the sin of the King upon himself, or his Father, why
should these men pretend to be so angry? it would not have been to reproach
him, or triumph over him, but to have been humbled with him, and for him (as
well as for our selves) for our pardon, reformation and amendment: So that I
hope this is not to speak against the King, or his coming in.

And I suppose, they will not show themselves (my Reproachers, I mean) so
ignorant or sottish as to say, That I spoke against the King (or his coming in)
by telling them, that their Wickedness might be a means to destroy both him and
them: For which I quoted that place, 1 Samuel 12.19. and so on: Much less, did I
speak against the King, in advising them to be more careful to bring King Jesus
into their hearts, then King Charles to the Throne; and telling them, That they
may be undone with him, yea, and by him, both temporally and eternally: But
that King Jesus will assuredly save them, if he rule over them. I hope you will
not say this is a crime? if you do, the Lord make you wiser. And this I think
is all you have to charge me with in this matter; and how wisely, justly,
charitably, Christianly, let all wise men judge. Confident I am, what I
delivered, might have been spoken even in the Kings presence, and he would not
have been offended: What would these captious hearers have said, had I used
such plain language as was spoken unto him at his Coronation, in the Coronation
Sermon? Coronation Sermon preached at Scoon, Ian. 1651. by Mr. Rob. Douglas.
Printed at Aberdeen, 1660.
That his Father set himself in a hostile way, to overthrow Religion,
Parliaments, Laws, and Liberties; and in page 27. of the same Sermon, they
charge his Grandfather King James with foul defection; and that he peresecuted
faithful Ministers, and that he laid the foundation whereupon his Son ( our
late King (says he) did build much mischief to Religion, all the days of his
life. And he tells him, that the guiltiness of the transgression lies upon the
Throne and Family; and that is one of the sins for which he had professed
humiliation very lately, and advises him to take warning. And in his
Exhortation to the King, page 32. he tells him, There is too much iniquity upon
the Throne by his Predecessors, who framed mischief by a Law: such Laws as have
been destructive to Religion, grievous to Gods people. and page 36. he may say
it freely, That chief cause of the judgment upon the Kings House, has been
his Grandfathers breach of Covenant with God; and his Fathers following his
steps, in opposing the work of God, and his Kirk, within these Kingdoms. He
says, They have broken the Covenant with God, and men have broken Covenant with
them. Most cruelly and perfidiously (says he) they have invaded the Royal
Family, and trodden upon all Princely Dignity: And therefore charges him in
Christ's name, not to break Covenant; if he do, he assures him, The Controversy
is not ended between God and his Family, but it will be carried on to further
weakening if not to the utter overthrow of it. Here Is plain dealing, now what
would our men have said to this matter? Surely never a villain in England would
have preached such a Sermon: and yet such foolish sots have we in England, to
say so of a Sermon that has none of all this (nor any thing like) in it.

But now Sirs, to convince you of your perverseness, and to let you see, how
like you are to those noxious creatures (the Flies) that flie-blow wholesome
meat, so are you. It is usual with them, if there be any bruised place, they
are sure to light upon that first, and there to suck and feed themselves: But
if there be none, they flie-blow so long, till they have made it fit for their
purpose: So do you flie-blow discourses. For whereas you charge me to be
against the King, and his coming in, did I not say, It was a judgment that we
were removed from our ancient foundations? And what could I mean, or did I
mean? But the changing our government. And did I not quote that place, Isay 3.
to the end of verse. 8. as a dreadful judgment most sadly fallen upon us? And
did I not afterward say; That as we had been under that curse and judgment,
so we might see that blessed morning promised to Gods people, in the same
Prophet, Chap. 1. ver. 25, 26, 27. Do but read the places, and let any man say
what could be thence intended? And did I not pray for the hastening of that
happy morning? And when I quoted that place in 1 Samuel 12.19. to the end, did I
not in express words say, That that place in all things did not run parallel
with our condition? But that in something it was pertinent to my purpose; which
was in the later part only, in that the peoples wickedness would destroy
themselves, the King, and Kingdom? And did I not in plain words say, That that
portion of Scripture held not parallel in that very particular, in that it was
said they sinned in desiring a King? with more to that purpose, as you may see
in the Sermon. And did I not say, That if it were the late Kings own sins,
(which I did not, nor dare I determine) that brought that judgment upon him, it
was not just in them who did it. And when I advised you to be more careful to
bring King Jesus into your hearts; then King Charles into the Throne, did I not
expressly, and in these significant words say; That the one was not opposite,
contradictory, or destructive to the other? But only that King Jesus was to be
preferred before him? And that if he (King Charles) be minded to rule for him,
and under him; did I not say, If God and the great Council see it fit, let him
come and welcome? Well, the Lord forgive you, and make you wiser, and more
discreet and bonest. And I cannot pass by, but must reprove you for one most
abominable lie of some of you; That I should pray in my Prayer, That as the
Lord had delivered us from one Devil, so he would deliver us from another; and
that hereby I did mean the King. Good Lord! what a lying malicious Devil has
possessed these people. No, these and such like profane and ungodly wretches in
an humane shape are the Devils I prayed against. I prayed, That as the Lord had
graciously in a good measure delivered us from the devil of Hersie and
blasphemy, so that he would also keep us and deliver us from the Devil of
profaneness: And the God to whom I prayed knows, that these ungodly wretches
are all the Devils I prayed against, and no other; not having any thought,
apprehension, or imagination of the King in this particular. And so much to my
first charge.

2 Now for my second, in which I shall be brief. My Sermon, say some, drove all
at this, The bringing in of the King would bring in all profaneness; But did I
any where say so? Truly I needed not, Profaneness is in already in the Nation;
nor did I think the King would bring it in, and I hope he never will. But this
I think, all the ungodly and profane people in the Nation have a very great
and strong desire of the Kings coming in, as hoping to have as much liberty to
be profane, and to exercise it, as they had before. Oh! how has the
Parliament Acts and Ordinances hampered and chained, and fettered these beasts;
They cannot swear, or be drunk but they must pay for it. Taverns, Innes, and
Alehouse must be shut on the Lords day, all day long, that they cannot tipple,
and be drunk. They must not walk in the streets nor in the fields on that day
under a penalty, and many of them have been sued and indicted for it, and the
like. And oh! How like wild Bulls in a net, have they fretted, and vexed, and
raved at it? Oh! that blessed book (think they) that most excellent book for
sports on the Sabbath; That was a good, a blessed, a merry time with us. These
people are like those, Jer. 44.16,17,18. As for the word that thou have spoken
unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: But we will
certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth, to burn incense
unto the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have
done, we and our fathers, our Kings and our princes in the Cities of Judah, and
streets of Jerusalem: For then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and
saw no evil. But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven,
etc. we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by the
famine. Well sirs, think as you will; For my part I think that accursed book
was none of the least provocations that drew down the judgments of God upon
the Nation. And yet how glad would many be of this licentious liberty
re-introduced: And oh! for some good Court Bishops to help us in this
particular against the Roundheads, and these puritanical Presbyterians.

Beloved Reader, I charge this upon the Court Bishops only; For confident I
am, there were many good and godly Bishops in the Nation who abhorred that
execrable thing, and yet this is the thing these miserable wretches look for.
And here let me not be mistaken, or mis-reported, as if I thought that none but
profane and godless persons look and long for the Kings coming. No, far be it
from my soul; For I am assured there are many godly and honest hearts, sober
and discreet persons who earnestly desire it, and would be glad to see it, But
as for profane and ungodly persons, ( drunkards swearers, whoremongers,
Sabboth-breakers, despisers of Religion and godliness in the power of it) upon
what good account can they desire him, I leave it to any reasonable man to
judge. Do they desire it either for the Kings good, or their own good,
certainly no? But they are sure, if one party (whom they how hate) should
prevail, they shall still walk in their chains and fetters; but from another
they hope (at least) for freedom. And should they be hampered and restrained
by that other, they would hate both alike. For it is not this person or that
person, this party or that, which is the quarrel or offense. But the old enmity
of opposition and hatred between the two seeds of godly and ungodly. And if the
King be, as by some he is reported, (which God grant) godly, and shall show it
by his curbing their wickedness, they will not like him long, but would be
weary of him. And clearly the observation and information of their profaneness
the last Fast day, is to me (yea, and to any considering person) a sufficient
argument of their ungodliness: and these only are the men I spoke of, and
desired to consider the vanity of their expectations. That (if it had been the
will of God) I might have been instrumental to undeceive but some one of them,
and see how they requite me for my labor! But I shall not lose it.

And truly, although these be the persons I chiefly aim at (as most worthy of
reprehension: Yet since I am now discharging my conscience in this way (of
writing) which I think not to do again. I would beg leave to advise some of our
more civil and moderate opponents in one particular. It Is too easy and
familiar with many of you (upon the least provocation, sometimes without it) to
return upon us, with the word Presbyterian by way of reproach as a Nickname,
and to inveigh against Presbytery: But Sirs, do you understand what you do?
It Is true, the Bishops have a long time kept the name (and thing) in a kind of
silence under hatches. But will you (without passion and partiality, and as in
the presence of God (for so I desire to deal with you) be informed in the
truth? Then I must tell you this one thing, the Scripture speaks more of, and
for Presbyters then Bishops Not that I bring this as an argument to prove
Presbytery to be more sacred then Episcopacy; For I think them both so alike,
and I intend not to handle that controversy. My design is, to let you know
(if the Scripture may rule you) you may as well speak scornfully of Bishops as
Presbyters; and of Episcopacy, as of Presbytery; For I tell you again, the
Scripture makes oftener mention of Presbyters then Bishops. Now for your
information, and to clear this to you, you must know, that the word presbyter
(though we by use make it English) is a Greek word, which we in our English
Bibles have always translated by the word Elder. It comes from (...), Senex,
one that is old. And (...), is Senior, one that is Elder. And this word is used
in Scripture sometimes in a natural sense, to signify one elder in age: and
sometimes in an ecclesiastical sense, for an Officer in the Church of Christ.
Now it was my purpose to have examined all the places in the Greek Testament
where the word Presbyter is used, and to have observed how many times it was
used in an ecclesiastical sense, signifying a Church Officer: But the day
before the writing hereof, there came very happily to my hand a Book lately
published by one, whose other works praise him in the gate, and this not a
little, scil. Mr. George Lawson, Politica Sacra, which saves me some labor,
which I am willing to embrace at this time for hast-sake, especially from such
an Author. And he tells me page 139. of that Book, that he finds the word
Presbyter in an ecclesiastical sense and notion about sixteen times in the New
Testament. And now as for the word (...), which is sometimes translated an
Overseer (as Acts 20.28.) and sometimes a Bishop, I could quickly number them,
for it is but five times used: and one of them is spoken not of an ordinary
Church Officer, but of our Lord Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 2.25.

So that I say the Scripture makes more use, and more often mention of the word
Presbyter then Bishop, and therefore not so to be slighted and reproached, or
to be used as a term of disgrace to any man, unless you have a mind to
disgrace the Scripture which thus honors Presbyters and Presbyterians above
Bishoips. Yea, but Bishops are above them; How know you that? They were so, and
so have a long time; that is true. But did the Scripture put them there? Good
sirs let no man be angry with me, if I express my mind freely. I mean not to
make a quarrel of it, nor contend with any man about it, for I have better work
to do; then nodum in scirpo quaerere. But where does the Scripture put a Bishop
above a Presbyter? Let any man in the world show me the place, Shall I ask you
one thing? According to the usual apprehension, and among us in England, what
was the office and business of a Bishop? And what is the office and business
of a Presbyter? You Will say, the office of a Bishop was to rule and govern, for
so they did. And the office of a Presbyter or Elder is to teach and feed the
Flock. But now, does the Scripture thus distinguish and put a difference? No,
but if there be any to be found there, it is on the other side the leaf, That
puts the honor of ruling upon the Presbyters (the Elders) and the business of
teaching and feeding upon the Overseers, the Bishops. 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders
((...), the Presbyters) that rule well are worthy of double honor. And the
Apostle in Acts 20. puts the business of feeding (one part whereof is
teaching) upon Bishops. For verse. 28. Take heed (says he) unto your selves,
and to all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you ((...)) Bishops
(so in the Greek) to feed the Church of God. See here, you are made Bishops to
feed. Elders to rule, and Bishops to feed. So that by this it seems in the
Apostles times the Bishop was not the better man. But beloved, are you willing
to know the truth? and will you not kick against it, when it is laid plainly
before you? Why then know, that then (in the Apostles time) Presbyter and
Bishop were all one. And that (as the before-commended Mr. Lawson has it)
whatsoever some of late have said to the contrary, Presbyter and Bishop were
only two different words, signifying the same Officer. And for evidence
undeniable, do but read the 17. verse of that Chapter ( Acts 20.) and there you
shall find who those persons are whom he calls Bishops or Overseers, even the
Presbyters (the Elders) of the Church of Ephesus, put both together, and it
runs clearly thus. St. Paul said to the presbyters (or Elders) of the Church of
Ephesus, Feed the flock of God, over which the holy Ghost has made you
Bishops. I wonder why our last Translators of the Bible did not render it (
Bishop) here, but [Overseer] which they have not done in any other place where
this word is used. But I know the mystery, and I could give you some account,
as I have been credibly informed.

But to be short, compare 1 Timothy 3.1,2,3, etc. with Titus 1.5,6,7, etc. and you
shall find the qualifications of a Bishop, and of an Elder (or Presbyter) to
be the same. And in that place to Titus, if you compare in 5. verse and the
7th. you shall find the Apostle using Elder and Bishop as synonimous,
signifying the same. This is plain, the Apostles themselves were not the only
Bishops even in the Apostles times.

And to close all in this particular, let that place 1 Pet. 5. beginning be
considered, where St. Peter writing to the several Churches (as appears Chap.
1.1.) in that 5th. Chap. he exhorts the Presbyters (or Eldrs) to a faithful
discharge of their duty (which is a diligent feeding their Flock, without
lording it over them) much less over their fellow Elders, verse. 2, 3. of which
he professes himself to be one in verse. 1. The Elders (or Presbyters, (...))
which are among you, I exhort, who am ((...) also a Presbyter (or Elder) a
fellow-Presbyter, or a Presbyter together with you Feed the flock of God which
is among you, taking the oversight thereof, so we read it; but in the Greek it
is (...), playing the Bishops, or doing the work or business of Bishops. So
that then, Bishop and Presbyter, both name and thing, Title and employment was
all one, without any domination according to the rule and Canon of their Lord
and Master, Mar. 10.42. where a request having been made in the behalf of some
of his Disciples for domination, he calls them to him, and says, Ye know that
they which are accounted to rule over Gentiles (or Heathens) exercise Lordship
over them, and their great ones exercise authority upon them: But so it shall
not be among you, etc.

Much more might be said, and is said by others in this matter. And if any
desire further information and satisfaction herein, let them (without
prejudice) read Mr. Baxters five Disputations of Church Government and worship,
and there they shall find these things plainly and truly stated and discussed.

What then (will some say) you would have all leveld and equal. And you would
have every Minister (every Presbyter) a Pope, to domineer and Lord it in his
own Parish? Friends, be not too hasty, I do not say so, nor would I have it so.
I would not have all equal, all are not fit for every thing. I am not of their
opinion who say, all things requisite to government and discipline in the
Church are fully contained (I mean punctually and particularly) in Scripture.
Nor do those who say so, make it good in their practice, nor can they. And I
say further; That opinion has been the mother and nurse of much schism and
faction, I grant that much here must be left to prudence, and that not of
single or particular Pastors, Presbyters, or Bishops; but to the consideration
and determination of the most godly, learned, grave, and able in the Nation, to
which I would have all to conform. If any like it not, they are at their
liberty. Unity and order is more precious, then to be destroyed for the
satisfaction of such as will never be satisfied, as not well knowing their own
minds. And as for Lordly dominion, and Poping it in our Parishes, I do
profess I do abhor it under every form. I as much adhominate a lording
Presbyter, as a lording Bishop; no name, title, or pretext whatsoever gives us
any such authority: And I would beg (as I do desire) that we might be kept to
that which shall appear to be our proper business; which if those of our
profession had been, England had not been in so sad a condition as it is this
day. I like not the Scotch Stool of Repentance, nor would I have excommunicate
persons driven into the Church again by the secular power: As by Writs de
excommunicato capiendo, or the like. It may force men to an hypocritical
acknowledgment of some kind of penitence, but it cannot produce true
repentance. I would have Church Censures, reach no further, nor cut any deeper
then their spiritual sword will penetrate. I approve not rigid compulsions by
the arm of flesh, in such things which are the only work of the spirit; as is
true and unfeigned repentance. Of which, if people by constraint make a feigned
profession, it does but harden them in their sin, and make them impudent; which
(as I have been credibly informed) is too manifest in some places of the world,
notwithstanding the strictness of their discipline. I would have Church
affairs (in this respect) so managed, as if the Civil Magistrate were no friend
to Religion, farther then that those who profess it, and live peaceably, may
be protected by him from outward violence.

No, let the beauty, excellency, benefit and necessity of the communion of the
Church, with the privileges thereof be clearly laid open to the people. Let
the hazard, danger, and mischief of just excommunication be declared and urged
upon them. And let all Christians with draw all countenance and unnecessary
lessowship and society from them, according to the Scriptures. And if the
sense, shame, and grief thereof (with other such considerations, (set on by the
spirit of God) will not humble them: Let them alone till the Lord comes.

But then, I would not have those who are by just excommunication cast out of
one Church or Congregation, received in into another, for this were the way to
make Conventicles of Heretics, Schismatics, blasphemers, and all manner of
profane and ungodly ones: And in this I conceive the Civil Magistrate is much
concerned (especially being a Christian) For it is found too true by sad
experience, that factions in the Church beget fractions in the State. And
therefore my soul longs for such a happy day, wherein by the favorable aspect
of Christian Magistrates, all ways of faction, separation and division may be
fore-cluded: And if men be otherwise minded, let them sit still and be quiet.
Or if they will be doing, it were good if they would go and gather Churches
among the heathen, and not intrude themselves into other men's labors.

This which I have now declared, was and is only to allay the heat of those
men's stomachs, who (being altogether ignorant of what the Scripture has and
says in the behalf of Presbyters and Presbyterians) do so slight and vilify
them, as to make the name and thing a reproach unto them. You may as well call
a man prick-eard Christian, as prick-ear'd Presbyterian: And I have done this
to give you timely warning, and to prevent your profaneness. If you will not
leave it, know, however you scorn them, the Scripture honors them; and take
heed of kicking against the pricks: Your profaneness is that I complain of, and
if you will go on, Dominus venit.

And now I have one thing more to speak to, and then manum de tabula; and it is
to fore-warn (or rather after-warn you (for it has been too long practiced) of
another evil: and that is, reproaching zealous, home and plain, downright
preaching, with the odious names of passion, anger, and railing. And let me
tell you, this is no other then Satan's subtlety to render our preaching unto
you unprofitable, and ineffectual. We confess we are men subject to passion
(yea and sinful passion) as others are. Iam. 5.17.
Instances might be given from Scripture of the Lords most precious Saints and
servants in this sad particular. But what then? Is plain and home, and
downright preaching passion and railing? Take heed of that. Nay, is it not
lawful sometimes to be angry and in passion? Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry and sin not. A
man may be angry, and not sin. Nay, it is a sin not to be angry sometimes. Is
not the Lord himself said sometimes to be angry? And can he sin? It Is true,
St. Paul would not have a Bishop (or Presbyter) soon angry; Tit. 1.7.
not suddenly, lightly, hastily. But does that infer he should not be angry at
all? Nay rather, does it not infer the contrary? He may, he must be sometimes
angry? Would you be drunk, and swear, and curse, and profane Gods Sabboths,
and hate and scorn strict profession of Religion, and openly declare your
enmity, and shall not ( must not) we be angry? Must we not reprove you sharply,
cuttingly? So the word properly signifies ((...)) I Will tell you sirs, That
which you call anger, and passion, and railing, is in Scripture called zeal.
Tit. 1.13.


I could be large in this particular: but there is so much in this kind done to
my hand already by a worthy and reverend brother, and that in print, in a
little book, called Elias Abatement, or Corruption in the Saints; Being a
Sermon preached by Mr. Thomas Case at the Funerals of a godly Minister, (one
Mr. Gualter Roswel) I say this being so excellently and fully done to my hand,
I shall forbear the further prosecution from my own thoughts. Only because
every one has not that Book; and some may meet with this, who possibly may
never meet with that: And for that prejudice against Ministers upon this
account, is so great a mischief to them, especially to their people (being as I
said) a device of Satan to hinder the entertainment of their Doctrine) I shall
take so much pains as to lay before you some of that which that Reverend Author
has to this purpose, and which he did in vindication of that deceased brother,
who it seems was changed to be a man passionate and choleric.

In the first place he confesses; he was a man in whom the black adust humor
of choler had predominance in his natural constitution, (and who can help
that?) And he says, that many times gave a tincture to his discourse and
actions; which standers by, more censorious then candid, interpreted to his
unjust prejudice. Then he gives him a high commendation for his eminent gifts,
parts, and abilities, comparing him (in his measure) to Elias, and John the
Baptist, in many things. Amongst others he says his Ministry was a thundering
Ministry: and I would to God (says he) we had more of them, there is need of
them. And because it is so good and pertinent, take more. Thunder (says he)
purges the air: And if so, we have need of more such sons of Thunder amongst
us, and not such as will sing Placentia unto people: Sow pillows under their
elbows, and sing men to Hell with sweet Lullabies of peace, peace, when there
is no peace. Our air is pestilentiously infectious in the sense of our
spiritual Physicians, and our Climate is mortally infected with the pests of
heresies and blasphemies, and with the putrid stench of all manner of poisonous
lusts, which is the fatal source of all our plagues both in Church and State:
and this our precious brother (says he) was deeply sensible of: And hence it
was that his spirit was warmed within him to a more then ordinary degree of
zeal in his Ministry.

And he says his courage was rival with his zeal, he feared not the face of any
man, but would boldly reprove (as Elias) even the highest. In all the Changes
that went over his head, in all the Controversies of the times, wherein he
exercised his Ministry, he was a most strenuous assertor of the Truth, and a
most courageous opposer of error and innoviation: and that even, while some
higher then others by head and shoulders (in their own eyes) did basely and
unworthily betray their cause, he feared not the face of man, in the cause of
Jesus Christ: He durst tell the greatest person he had to do with of their
faults, upon just occasion in the worst of Times. He was a hammer to beat down
error and blasphemy, wherever it met him. He could not bear with them that
preached down Paedobaptisme, the Christian Sabbath, Universities, Schools of
Learning, Ordination, and other ordinances and institutions of Jesus Christ; 2 Timothy 4.3.
as it was prophesied, that some would not endure sound Doctrine, so he would
not endure unsound Doctrine. He says, he could not bear with seducers, nor
they with him, so that by this means he became a man of contention. And yet he
commends him for a man of a tender spirit, mortified to the world, free and
liberal, much in fasting and prayer.

And yet he says, he had his share in the persecution of the Times wherein he
lived, from his very first entrance upon his Ministry, according to the
prophecy of our Savior, Mat. 5.11,12. And truly says he, It had been a wonder
if he should have escaped it. For (as our Lord subjoyns the reason to his
prediction of the Apostles sufferings, ver. 13.) his Ministry was salt. He was
salt in his life, and salt in his doctrine: Not only savoury, but quick and
corroding, smart and searching, which corrupt times, and ulcer'd consciences
could not bear, 2 Timothy 4.3.

And this says he enraged and inflamed the spirits of unsound men, and raised
much trouble and persecution against him, wheresoever he came, which occasioned
him often to flit from one place to another, to avoid the fury of unreasonable
men. And he says, other of Gods saithful Ministers have had their share with
him in this kind of persecution, Matthew. 10.23. The world cannot bear the
plain-dealing of Gospel Ministers. None so hated as the reprover in the gate,
Amos 5.10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate, and they abhor him that
speaks uprightly.

And now, as to the thing it self (which some call anger and passion, but
indeed is zeal and faithfulness) I cannot leave till I give you in, what this
Reverend man has to that purpose, and it is hugely considerable and
advantageous. He asserts, That the affection of anger rightely qualified, and
managed, is of singular use and advantage in the life and work of a Christian,
especially of a Minister of the Gospel; which ought in no wise to be branded
with the usual scandal of choler and passion. They are his words all.

I make no question (says he) the false prophets, and their seduced
proselytes, stuck not to blast the holy Prophet (he means Elias) in my Text,
with the same reproach, a furious man, a man of an intemperate and unbridled
spirit, that valued not men's lives, but in his anger would not stick to call
down fire from heaven to destroy an hundred men at a time, etc.

But says he, let me mind you of this in the general. The passion of anger,
with other affections in nature, at what time the person in whom they are is
regenerate, they do change their nature, and become regenerate too. And being
baptized with the blood and spirit of Jesus Christ, they receive divine
impressions, and so pass into the catalogue of gracious affections and
dispositions, and become instruments of exceeding honor and service in the
hand of Jesus Christ, who is pleased to make use of them in his own work.

And then instances in diverse; and among the rest, Passion (says he) born
again of water and the spirit, becomes the grace of zeal, and holy jealousy
for God, and for the interest of Jesus Christ.

Anger sanctified is that to the affections, which edge is to the instrument,
which varnish is to colors, which wind is to the sails of a Ship. Judgment
is the ballast, but zeal is the full gale. It is as mettle to the horse. It is
the activity of every grace, every affection red hot for Jesus Christ, which
much water cannot quench, neither can the floods drown it. Cant. 8.7.


In a word, Passion refined and spiritualized, is every faculty of the soul,
acting to its height for the glory of God. Psalm. 69.9.
The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. To be short; Sanctified anger in the
Saints of God, is not that which the world takes it to be, a short madness, but
a grace of the spirit of God. Yea, it is a compound and temperament of all
graces, acting in summo gradu, in the height of intention for the promoting of
the concernments of Christ's Kingdom.

I told you before, that Elias was a useful man, though he was subject to
passion. I shall tell you more now: He was therefore so useful, BECAUSE he was
subject to passion. His anger and passion being sanctified, made him so
abundantly active for God, and the reformation of the public worship,
doctrine, and Ordinances in his generation. Had he wanted his passion, he had
wanted some of his zeal for God.

And so was it (says he) with our worthy brother deceased; That which an idle,
wanton, loose, lukewarm generation of Professors, as well as profane persons
(for the palliating of their own hypocrisy, and Gallio-like indifferency in
matters of Religion) called passion and choler in him, was indeed and in truth
nothing but his zeal and courage, and activity for Jesus Christ, which truly
did even consume him.

Alas! In this apostate generation, all things have lost their proper names.
The Devil appears in Samuels mantle, Satan in the form of an Angel of light:
And sin puts on the habit of virtue, that it may deceive the more safely.

Thus lukewarmness and cursed neutrality in Religion passes abroad for
meekness and sweetness of spirit. Carnal policy for Christian prudence. Cursed
compliance with the lusts of men, for moderation, and command of a man's spirit,
etc.

While zeal and fidelity to the Truth, ordinances and government of Jesus
Christ, hear ill in the world, and suffer all the odium and scandal that a
reviling world, and the venomous wit of malice can heap upon it. Truly the
earth is not able to bear their words.

Thus this reverend and worthy man, for whose pains herein I thank him, and
thank God for him, and for his providence that brought this piece to my hand,
at a time so seasonable; as I do also for the work of that worthy and ingenuous
Dr. to whom I owe so much for my Preface. In matters of this nature, which are
of proper concernment, it is better to deal by others words, then our own. For
by this it will appear we are not alone in our judgment and manner of
procedure, in discharge of our duty, nor in suffering for it.

There is one exception more which some make against my discourse, which is, It
was unseasonable. And to this I briefly answer: It Is plain, these persons who
urge this, are not acquainted with the Topics, and proper seats of arguments,
deliberative, or persuasive. I did, and do conceive that if I might be so free
as to make use of the respects of the people to the King at any time, and from
thence to dehort them from sin, and to persuade them to turn to the Lord, that
so both King and people may be (by Gods blessing) settled and established upon
sure foundations; That now was the only time I will not say, but surely in all
good reason it was a very seasonable time: When people are high, and full, and
earnest, and that generally, and it being almost the only talk of bringing in
the King; was it not seasonable upon a solemn Fasting day, to mind people of
being more careful of bringing King Jesus into their hearts, then any mortal
King unto the Throne? And inasmuch as sin (the sins of the people, (for that
way I carried it) had destroyed our former King, that therefore they should
beware, lest by their sins they destroy the latter. Had I said any thing by
way of opposition, or had I not very frequently upon all occasions (and that
not in corners only, but openly) declared my judgment for the coming in of
the King, it had been something: But surely these men have some prejudice
against my person: But whether they have or no, thus much I tell them (in the
fore quoted words of the reverend Dr. in the Preface, and where this exception
is in part answered) I will no more learn of them how to preach, then they will
learn of me to buy and sell. And so I leave them.

And now upon the whole matter, I will draw toward a close with this request
to those who may be Auditors hereafter, that they would not, by ignorant or
wilful mistakes, or if reports, make the reproach of Ministers a means to
repair their decayed and broken fortunes, in taking up, or carrying on, and
telling lies to those whom they have a mind to ingratiate themselves withal,
and may (as they hope) lift them up out of their low condition.

I must tell you sirs in few words (for I have gone beyond what I intended
already) in thus doing (belying and reproaching the Ministers of the Gospel)
you do but the Devils business. Satan's greatest design is to hinder the
progress of the Gospel: And he well knows, contempt of the Minister brings
neglict of his Doctrine It is a truth so clear in your own experiences, that I
need not say more to it: And consider you are hereby injurious not only unto
us (weakening our hands that we cannot reap the desired fruit of our labors)
But you injure both your selves and others of our people, who by your evil
practice and example in this kind are drawn into the prejudice, sin and
mischief with you. I shut up all with this: If it be an honor, which brings a
great reward with it, to be isntrumental in the work of men's salvation; what
can they expect who in any kind hinder it? Consider it betimes, and be wise for
the future.

TO fill up the void place of my paper, I thought good to add a testimony or
two conducent to my purpose in the preceding Vindication, and that from a
witness not to be suspected of partiality in this matter; And that is Dr.
Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, taken out of his own Diary or Day book of every
days observations under his own hand, and found with him by Mr. Pryn, when he
searched him and his Lodgings in the Tower. And this I have in a Book published
by Mr. Pryn, entitled, A breviate of the Life of William Laud, etc. where page
21. you have this passage recorded.

June 14. This day John Bastwick, Dr of Physic, Henry Burton Batchellor of
Divinity, and Will: Pryn Barrester at Law, were censured for Libels against the
Hierarchy of the Church.

June 26. The speech I then spoke in the Star Chamber, was commanded by the
King to be Printed, and it came out June 25. I suppose the first June 26.
should have been June 16.

And this now manifestly evidences, their sufferings were not for any offense
against the Civil State: And what power that Bishop then had to tyrannize, and
how they did rage for things of their proper concernment.

And what was the cause of the tumults in Scotland (which we all know led in
the tumults in England) the same Bishop (who best knew it) will tell you. In
the same page, thus.

April 29 1638. The tumults in Scotland about the Service Book, offered to be
brought in, began July 23. 1637. And continued increasing by fits, and has now
brought that Kingdom in danger; No question there is a great concurrence
between them, and the Puritan party in England, a great aim there to destroy me
in the Kings opinion, etc.

Mark here. These 3. men suffered in June 37. and the Tumults began the next
month following, and so went onwards: And did they prosper?

And he here acknowledges these tumults began about the Service Book: Which
what a one it was, and how differing from ours, you may read in another Book of
Mr. Pryns, entitled, Hidden works of darkness brought to light, discovering
the practices used to usher Popery into our Realms.

I Will add one testimony more out of the former Book, page 22.

Thursday, December. 5. The KING declared his resolution for a Parliament, in
case of the Scottish Rebellion: The first movers to it were my Lord Deputy of
Ireland, my Lord Marquess Hamilton, and my self: And a Resolution voted at the
Board to assist the King in extraordinary ways, if the Parliament should prove
peevish, and refuse, etc. By the Board, he means the Councel-Table.


Observe here now, who, and why, and whence came all our Troubles. And how per
fas, aut nefas, it must be carried on (as it was) to his, the Kings, and the
Kingdoms undoing: And see, if the Parliament answer not their ends, in this
good Bishops language, they are peevish.

THE END.

