THE Priests IGNORANCE; AND Contrary Walkings to the SCRIPTURES:
OR The Practice of the Apostles, who were the true Ministers of Jesus Christ;
Together with Thirty Seven Errors of the Priests, Discovered.
THe Teachers of this World profess the Scriptures to be their Rule, and
Touchstone to try withal, 2 John 4.9. Isa. 8.20.
and he that walks contrary to the Scriptures is a Seducer, and has the spirit
of Error.

That which makes a Minister of the World, 2 Pet. 1.21. Gal. 1.12. Ezekiel. 3.1.
Jer. 23.33. and 22.
is Oxford and Cambridge; and they are so long there, give so much for their
Learning, and when they have done, they have so much for their preaching; the
Prophets and the Apostles did not so, Christ gave no such Command; and here
they act contrary to the Scriptures, and have the spirit of Error; And they
will let none preach bur themselves, and such as come from Oxford and
Cambridge; here they act contrary to the Scripture: for the Scripture says,
You may all prophecy one by one, and if any thing be revealed to him that
stands by let the first hold his peace: here they limit the Holy One of Israel,
and show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world have a set maintenance of the world and if any man
refuse them, they sue him at the Law: 1 Cor. 6.6. Acts. 20.23. 1 Pet 5.2, Deuteronomy.
4.2. Prove. 30.32.
the Prophets and Apostles did not so; there act contrary to the Scripture, and
have the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world take a Text, raise Doctrines Uses, Points, Trials,
Motives, and have a Clark to say, Amen: the Apostles did not so, these act
contrary to the Scripture, and show the Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world sing David's Quaking, Psalm. 6 5 6, 7. 1 Cor. 14.15.
Psalm. 13 11.
Tremblings, Crying^, Wakings, Praises, Prayings, Prophesies, in Meeter, and
have a Glass to preach an hour; and when they read the Psalms, Hats must be
on; when they sing them, Hats must be off, but the Priest has one or two Caps
on his head* the Apostles did not so when they spoke to the world; these act
contrary to the Scriptures, and have the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, Let us sing to the praise and glory of God, and
give the ignorant profane people words to sing, as, I am not puffed in m^nd, I
have no scornful eye, when as they are puffed in mind and have scornful eyes,
herein they dishonor the Lord, causing people to lie, showing the spirit of
Error.

The Teachers of the world have the chiefest places in the Assemblies, Mat. 23.
6, 7, 8.9.10.11. Mat. 6.5.7.8.
called of men Masters, laying heavy burdens upon the people, stand praying in
the Synagogues: Jesus Christ forbad such things. The Teachers of the world now
act such things, contrary to Christ's Command and practice; so showing
themselves Antichrist, Seducers and Dissemblers, and have the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world holds up outward Temples, 1 Cor. 8.10.
calling them Churches; whereas the Church is in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. and calls
it the House of God, and thus act contrary to the Scriptures: they are
Seducers, having the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world sprinkle Infants, Gal. 3.1. Luc. 1. 26.36.
telling people it is an Ordinance of God, which is contrary to the Scriptures,
never commanded by the Lord; but these hold it up, and so bewitch the people,
and are seducers, and show forth the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world call people unto a Sacrament, Genesis 10. Genesis 29.28.
for the which there is no Scripture; here they act contrary to the Scriptures
teaching people lies, contrary to the Scripture, a Declaration of God: here
they are seducers, and show forth the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world marry people, and take money for it, the Apostles
did not so: here they act contrary to the Scripture, showing forth the spirit
of Error.

The Teachers of the world take money for burying the Dead, Mar. 10 8. Mar. 8.12.
the Apostles did not so: here they act contrary to the Scripture, showing the
spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world take money for Churching of Women, the Apostles did
not so: thus these act contrary to the Scripture, showing the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world have Easter Reckonings, and Midsummer dues, and money
out of Servants wages, the Apostles did not so: these act contrary to the
Scriptures, and show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world preach Funeral Sermons over the Dead, and have ten
shillings, more or less for their pains, Mar. 10.8. 1 Cor. 16.17, 18.
as they can get it, the Apostles did not so: these act contrary to the
Scripture, and show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world agree with the people for so much in the year for
preaching, 1 John 2. 16, 17.
the Prophets and Apostles did not so, it is contrary to Christ's Command, Romans
12.2. Deuteronomy. 29.12.
Freely ye have received, freely give: thus they act contrary to the Scripture,
showing the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world go in cuffs, and double Cuffs, and Boot-hose-tops,
living in the lust of the flesh, following the fashions of the world, which the
Apostles spoke against: here they act contrary to the Scripture, showing the
spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world take Tithes, Nehem. 10.48. Nehem. 13.13 Neh. 12.44.
Neh. 11, 16.
the tenth of men's Estates: in the Old time Levi, who received Tithes, the
Fatherless, Widows, and strangers were to come and be relieved within his
gates: but the Priests of the world do not fill the Fatherless the Widow, and
the strangers; here they act contrary to the Scriptures, and show the spirit of
Error.

The Teachers of the world say men shall never be perfect, Mar, 5.48. 1 Cor.
2.6. Phil. 3.15.
when the Scripture says, Be ye perfect, even as your heavenly Father is
perfect; and we preach wisdom to them that are perfect, and every one that is
perfect must be as his Lord; as many as be perfect be thus minded, stand
perfect and complete in all the Will of God: here they deny the Scripture, and
show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, Romans 6.22. Co^os. 2.111. 2 Co^. h. 17.
Men shall never overcome their sins as long as they are here, nor be made free
from the body of sin, and the Scripture says, we are made free from sin, and
have put off the body of sin; and they that are Christ's have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, and all things are become new;
here they act contrary to the Scripture, and show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the World say* that men shall not be sanctified throughout in
body, Jude 1. 1 John 3.7, 8.
soul and spirit, but in part, so long as they are here; herein they plead for
a hold for Satan in them, and are Seducers and Deceivers, for the Scripture
says, ye are sanctified throughout in body, soul and spirit, and he that does
righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righte^us. Let no man dece^ve you:
He that sins is of the Dev^ll, and never knew God. Here they go about to
keep people in their sin, when Christ comes to take away sin, speaking contrary
to the Scripture, and shows the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the World say, the Letter is Light, Joh. 8.12. 2 Cor. 4.6.
when the Letter says, Christ is the Light: and the Letter is the declaration
of the light, which was in them, that spoke sorth the Scriptures: here they
speak contrary to the Scripture, and show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the World say, 1 John 1.1. Romans 8.10.
that the Letter is the Word, which is false, for the Letter says that God is
the Word the Letter is a declaration of the Word, which is fire, and sharper
then a two edged sword; and the word is nigh thee, in thy mouth and in thy
heart, and so they that draw people to the Letter, telling them it is the Word,
are Dissemblers, Seducers, no Ministers of the Word but are in an Error.

The Teachers of the World say; 2 Cor. 3.6. Ezekiel. 13.3, 6.17.
that the spirit is the Letter and they are inseparable, when the spirit says
the Letter kills, and is death, and thou that would raise the spirit out
of the dead Letter, thou art a Di^iner and Conju^er, following the imaginations
of thine own brain; here thou art a seducer, and shows the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.
that salvation is in the Scripture, and that the power goes along with the
Letter, which is death; God is the cause of men's salvation: here thou art a
seducer, and shows the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, that the four Books, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.19,
20.
Matthew, Mark Luke and John, is the Gospel which is but the Letter, a
declaration of the Gospel; Matthew. 23.27, 28.
Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, is
glad tidings to imprisoned souls, Romans 8.14.
1 Pet. 4.6.

The Teachers of the world pretending the Scriptures to be their ru^e and guide
to walk by, and acting contrary; they show themselves to be seducers,
dissemblers and hypocrites, and shows the spirit of Error.

For they are the Sons of God, that are guided by the Spirit of God, to live
the life that they did, that gave forth the Scriptures. Richard Farneworth.
Cease from your Idol Shepherds, for they are the Beasts that all the world
worships, and wonders after; hold them not up, Rev. 13.
the Lord is against them. Christ is the true Shepherd, and his Sheep hear his
voice, but the voice of strangers they will not hear. Tho. Aldam.
THe Teachers of the world told us that Hebrew, Greek, and Latin was the
Original, and such might open the Scriptures who had that original, and we do
see that Pilate had that original and could not open the Scriptures but
crucified Christ, Luke 23.38. Joh. 1.1.
and when he had so done, he wrote in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and set it over
Christ, and thus they are contrary to the original showing the Spirit of
error, for in the beginning the word was.

And Luke a Minister of the word said, that they that was Ministers of the word
took in hand to set forth in order, Luke 1.
a declaration, and thus they are contrary to the Scriptures showing the Spirit
of error, and go about with a form of godliness to blind people.

And the Apostle says that the Gospel was preached by Abraham, Romans 1.16.
Gala. 3.8.
before the letter was written, and this Gospel are they ashaimed of, which is
the power, showing that Spirit which is erred from it.

And the Teachers of the world says that Christ has not enlightened every man
that is come into the world, Joh. 1.
when as the Scripture says he does, and John bare witnsse to it that he did,
and thus they are erred from the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, showing
the contrary, a spirit of error.

And the Teachers of the world have told us that the steeple-house is the
Church, which was in the days of Qu. Mary a place for all her Jesuit Priests,
and she made a decree that whosoever did disturb any of her Priests in the
time of their service, whilst they was at their Mass or Ministering, as they
call it, in their Church or Churchyard, or did deface any Cross or Crucifix,
they was to suffer three months imprisonment, and she was called a defender of
the faith who gave forth this decree, which is quite contrary to Scripture and
faith, 2 Thesse. 1.
as you may read 1 Cor. 14. which says, you may all prophesy one by one, that
all may learn, that all may be comforted; and thus the Papists and the Priests
now are contrary to the faith, and contrary to the Scriptures, and the Church,
showing the Spirit of error: for the Scripture says, 1 Thesse. 1.1. 1 Cor.
14.3 0.
the Church is in God; And the Minister of God says, if any thing be reveiled
to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace. And the practi^e of the
Ministers of God and the Church disturbs the Ministers of the world, now in our
days, as it did the Papists Priests, which makes them prison and persecute,
manifesting the Spirit of error.

And the Teachers of the world told us that Cambridge, and Oxford is the two
Fountains, and those was the Ministers of Christ that came from thence, Gala.
1.
which we see through the mercy of the Lord, that they are the Ministers of the
world, made by the will of man, and so are contrary to the Scriptures, showing
the Spirit of error.

And the Teachers of the world told us that they was Ministers of God, and they
was to open the Scriptures, and yet they told us they had not that Spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures; so then another, the Spirit of error.

The Teachers of the world told us, they was Ministers of Christ, and they do
take Tyches of men, 2 Pet. 3.3. Jude. 11. Genesis 4.
and if they will not give it them, they sue them at the law, and take treble,
but we do not read in the Scriptures that the false Prophets, false Shepherds,
false Apostles, and false Teachers, and the persecuting Magistrates, that they
ever did use such oppression: and here these Teachers are contrary to the
false, and contrary to the true, showing the Spirit of error; therefore you
that fear the Lord God, be awakened.

The Teachers of the world do manifest themselves to be in the error, for how
many Goales in the Nation are the Servants of God cast in, by and through their
means, which shows that they are the Teachers that goes in Cains way and
Balaams way, and so in the Spirit of error which their fruits makes appear
out of the faith of Abel the sufferer.

Did ever any persecute that was in Abels faith, whom God has re^pect to, but
such Teachers as goes in Cains way, and Balaams way, as you may read in Jude
and Peter, and is not here marks of the worlds Teachers, that all the honest
hearted may see, that fear God, by their fruits and marks which they
themselves do manifest. And do not they manifest themselves to be the briars
and the thorns where the Grapes and Figs grows not? And do not the Teachers
of the world manifest themselves to be the ravening Wolves, which have gotten
the sheeps clothing and by their means many of Christ sheep are cast into
prisons, and there almost murdered, and they have made many of their
Magistrates without the fear of God to be their Executioners, to cast the
Lambs of Christ into prison, but such as fear God see their folly, and the
errors of the wicked Teachers are to many too mention.

Again, such Priests as preached for hire, and Prophets that divined for money,
and heads that judged for rewards, these built up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity, therefore shall Zion for your sakes be laid wast, and
plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become as heaps, and the Mountain of
the house shall be as the forest: And all consider that be in the light, if
this Nation be not brought to the same pass by these builder (which are now
cried against with the) light that Micah was in, Mich. 3.9.10.11.
but them which be in the error hold up them which be in the error: but them
which be in the light cannot hold up them which be in the error, neither ever
could in all ages, but the light did them judge and condemn; in which light
the Saints have their unity, both with the Son and the Father: and this was
given forth, that all may take warning in their lifetime what they hold up.

The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth,
Psalm. 37.12.12.14.
the Lord shall laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming. The wicked
have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow to casf down the poor and
needy, and to slay such as be of upright conversation.

THE END,

