TRUTH Cleared of Scandals, or TRUTH lifting up its head above Scandals, etc.

Occasioned by the Meeting of those people called Baptists, and those whom the
world scornfully calls Quakers. at Harliston in Stafforthshire, upon the 27.
day of the 7. month, in the year 1654.

Showing the difference betwixt the Ordinances of Christ and of Antichrist, and
the true worship and the false, with a Discovery of the two seeds, and the New
Covenant, the Doctrine of Baptismes, laying on of hands, the Resurrection, and
eternal judgment, Heb. 6.1, 2, 3, and Heb. 12.22, and 23.

Also, The unprofitable servant and the talents, and of being caught up into
Paradise, the Thorn in the flesh, and what it is to take pleasure in
infirmities, and what those infirmities are, that is to be gloried in; Also,
something of Perfection, and Imperfection, and the glorying in the Cross
largely proved, according to Scripture, etc.

By one known to the world by the name of RICH. FARNWORTH.

For Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel, not with the
enticing words of man's wisdom, neither, lest the Cross of Christ should be of
none effect,

1 Cor. 1.17. and 18. LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1654.

To the READER.
READER,
IN the Reading of this ensuing Treatise, as thy understanding is kept open,
thou may see the difference betwixt Truth and error, that thereby thou may
choose the good and refuse the evil; try all things and hold fast that which is
good, and take heed of censuring or judging the truth with evil thoughts, and
out of an evil heart, lest judgment return upon thee again, but judge
Righteous judgment, so shall thou be preserved in Peace in thy Conscience. The
cause of my writing of this little Treatise, was occasioned upon a Meeting at
Harliston in Stafforth Shire, upon the 27. day of the 7. month, between the
baptized people, and those whom the world scornfully calls Quakers, to clear
the Truth of many aspersions, and false accusations, as in the Reading thou will clearly see the differences betwixt Truth and error, as thou Read with
an understanding: And whereas we are accused for denying the Scriptures and the
Ordinances of Christ, in short, thou may see what we own according to
Scripture, and what we do deny, that is contrary to Scripture; also the trial
of the Spirits, and the Doctrine of Baptismes, and the laying on of hands, and
the Resurrection and eternal Judgment, true Faith, the Church of the
firstborn written in heaven: Something of them spoken of in this Treatise,
which may be for the bringing down of the kingdom of Antichrist, and the
setting up of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, that Truth may be cleared of
Scandals: But I am not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel, as in thy
Reading thou will more plainly see.

RICH. FARNWORTH.

THE ORDINANCES AND WORSHIP Of GOD in the Spirit.
GOD is a Spirit, and all his Ordinances are Spiritual, now in the
Gospel-Ministration, and his Worship is in the Spirit, as it is written, John
4.23, 24. And the Worship and Ordinances of God in the Spirit we own, who are
of the Circumcision in the heart, with the Spirit, who rejoice in Christ Jesus,
and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3.3. Col. 2.10, 11. Now the Lord is
that Spirit which we all beholding with open face, as in a Glass, are changed
from glory to glory into the same image and glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord, as it is written, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18.

And secondly, the Church of God and of Christ we own, who are the household of
Faith, made all of living stones, elect and precious, a Spiritual house for
God to dwell in, whose house are we, who are builded upon the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the Chief Corner Stone in whom all
the building grows into an holy Temple in the Lord, the Church of the
firstborn, written in heaven, of which Christ Jesus is head, and we are
complete in him who is the fullness, and fills all in all, as it is written
and witnessed. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. 1 Pet 2.5, 6, etc. Heb. 3.6. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and
Heb. 12.22, 23. Ephesians. 2.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Col. 2.9.

And thirdly, the Ministry of Christ in the Spirit we own, and the new
Covenant, and the Law of God written in the heart, and we witness the
teachings of the Lord as he has promised and said, which promises of the
Father we witness fulfilling and fulfilled, and we witness Christ Jesus who
is the Saints high Priest, and the everlasting Sacrifice; we witness and own
the Fathers teachings according to his Promise, and we witness Christ Jesus to
be our Passover, and that he is able to save to the utermost all those that
come unto God by him, Heb. 8.10, 11. Jer. 31.31. to the 35. Isa. 54.13, 14.
John 6.45. John 14.15, 16, 17. and 26. Heb. 7.25.

Fourthly, The Baptism of Christ which is in the Spirit we own, and all who are
Baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and are made
partakers of the Name, nature, and properties of God; for he that has the Son,
has life, and he that has the Son has the Father also, as Christ has said,
All mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them; and by one
Spirit are we baptized into one body, and made to drink in one Spirit, where
there is one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, one God and Father of us all, who
are of the righteous seed, who are Baptized into Christ, and have put on
Christ, as it is written and witnessed, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 3.18,
19, 20, 21. 1 John 5.10, 11, 12, 13. John 17.10. 2 John 9. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
Ephesians. 4.4, 5. Gal. 3.26, 27, 28, 29.

Fifthly, Prayer we own, Praying by the Spirit of Christ, and if any man be in
Christ Jesus he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. and walks not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit, and the same Spirit which raised up Jesus Christ
from the dead, we witness dwelling in us, by which Spirit we are quickened,
even by the Spirit of Christ that dwells in us, Romans 8.10, 11. And we know
that all that are born again of water, and the Spirit, and are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, and we have received the Spirit of
Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father, the Spirit it self bearing witness with
our spirits that we are the children of God, Rom 8.14, 15, 16. Likewise the
Spirit helps us, and teaches us to pray, for it makes intercession for us,
and he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the Spirit,
because he makes intercession for us according to the mind and will of God,
Romans 8.26, 27. Mat. 6.5, 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 1.18.

Sixthly, the holy Communion in the Spirit of love, that we witness; for God
is love, and they that dwell in God dwell in love, and they that dwell in love
dwell in God, and God in them, and herein is our love made perfect, as it is
written, 1 John 4.16, 17, 18. And we own all those who abide in the doctrine of
Christ, such as have fellowship with the Father, and the Son, and the rest we
deny, as we are required, and as it is written and witnessed Ephesians. 5.11. 2 John
9, 10, 11. But that communion in the Spirit we own, which the Saints have
fellowship in with the Father and the Son, and the Cup of blessing and
communion in the blood of Christ we own, which the Saints drink in by the
Spirit into one Body, as it is written and witnessed. 1 Cor ^0.15, 16. 1 Cor.
12.13. And as Christ has said, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood
dwells in me, and I in him; and the bread of life and the living food we
witness, spoken of in John the 6, And the fruit of the Vine, and the Cup of
blessing, which is the Communion of the Blood or life of Christ, who is the
Vine and the virtue, and the bread of life for souls to seed on, and live, John
6.52, 53, 54. to the 59. John 15 And you that are spiritual, judge ye what I
say, The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ,
and the Cup which we drink, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ; for
we being many, are one Bread, and one Body, as it is written and witnessed, and
we are partakers of that one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.15, 16, 17. Which Bread is Christ
the Bread of life which our souls seeds on daily, and lives; for ever praised
be the Lord. John 6.48, 52, 58.

Seventhly, Singing with the Spirit and the understanding that we own, 1 Cor.
14.15. and we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding to know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in
his Son Jesus Christ; and this is true God, and life eternal, as it is written
and witnessed, 1 John 5.20. but to sing David's conditions in Rhyme and Meeter,
as the world that lies in wicked and without the understanding do, John 5.19.
that we deny, and against it testify; but Hymns and spiritual Songs with
grace in the heart, that we own, as it is written and witnessed, Col. 3.15, 16.
and to sing with the Spirit and the understanding new Songs, which none can
learn but those that are redeemed from the earth, that we own who are redeemed
and witness, as it is written, Rev 5.9, 10. Rev. 14.3, 4, 5.

Eighthly, Preaching by the Spirit we own, by which Faith comes in the hearing
of the Son, which is sent of the Father, preaching to the Spirits in prison, 1
Pet. 3.19. and all that are sent by the Spirit, and are of the Seed Royal,
such we own, as it is written and witnessed, Isa. 59.21. Isa. 61. Isa. 48.16,
17.

And all who are anointed by the Spirit to Preach, which Preaches by the
Spirit, and gives freely as they have received freely, such we own, Isa. 55.
Chapter and Isa. 61. and all such we own as are sanctified, and sent of the Father,
that have no unrighteousness in them, who are able Ministers of the New
Covenant, not of the Letter but of the Spirit, as it is written and the word of
Faith in the Spirits Ministration, we own and honor in our souls, God is our
Record that we lie not, but his Spirit witnesses with us in the same, who are
sealed and sent, and are led by his Spirit, whereby we know that we are the
Sons and the children of God, as it is written and witnessed, Romans 8.14, 15,
16. John 7.16, 17, 18. 1 John 1.2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 10.6, 7, 8. John 3.31, 32, to
the end. Romans 10.13, 14, 15. Gal. 1.11, 12, 15, 16. Mat. 11.27. Mat. 10. 2 Cor.
3.6.

But all hireling Priests that Preaches for hire, and bears rule by their
means, as the false Prophets did, and as they do, Isa. 56.10, 11. Jer. 5.30,
31. Ezekiel. 34. 2 Pet. 2. Such we deny, and against them restifie, and all that
holds upon idols temple, and calls it a Church and spri^^^es In^^^ts, and (...)
Christ nor his Apostles never practiced any such thing to such objects, neither
have they any Rule in the Scripture for it, such we deny, and all that do
things by imitation from the Letter, and have not the life, and all that are
called of men Masters, and have the chiefest place in the idols temples, and
such as takes Tithes, who oppress the creation thereby, such are no Ministers
of Christ, but are Gentiles, and amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, and such we
deny, and woe is their portion, therefore beware of all such, Mark, 12.38, 39,
40. and Mark 10.42, 43, 44. Matthew 23, and all such we deny, who have
fellowship with devils, that eat and drink not discerning the Lords body as the
Gentiles do, and as it is written, 1 Cor. 10.29. 1. Cor. 10.20, 21.

And all that takes Texts, and adds their own inventions, and speaks the words
of others, stealing the word from their neighbor, and speaks from the mouth
of the Lord, and says the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, such we deny,
Rev. 22.18. Jer 23.29.30.31.32.

And all that denies perfection by Christ in the New Covenant, and Gospel
Ministration, such we deny, and witness the New Covenant and the perfection,
as it is written, Romans 10.14.

TRUTH Lifting up its head above Scandals. Romans 1.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
Romans 1.28. to the end. Romans 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Occasioned at a Meeting at Harliston in Stafforth-Shire, upon the 4. day of
the week, and the 27. day of the 7. month, between those called Quakers, and
the people of the water Baptism, or one called by the Name of Thomas Pallard,
a teacher to that people, and one known to the world by the name of Richard
Farnworth, whom they scornfully call a Quaker.
THomas Pallard, at the Meeting as abovesaid, thou coming thither of purpose to
cavil, to oppose the Truth that day, thou out of subtilty, and serpentine
policy, when thou could not in honesty object any thing against what was
declared, yet out of subtilty thou queried concerning the New Covenant spoken
of, that day, and asked, whether or no I lived in the enjoyment of that
Covenant spoken of, I answered and said I did.

Then thou Pallard said, that in the tenor of the New Covenant, it was said,
according to the Fathers promise, that they in that Covenant should be all
taught of God, and he would be merciful unto their sins and iniquities, and
remember them no more, and then it it was so, it might follow that I was freed
from sin; and John said, he that said he had no sin, he deceived himself, and
the truth was not in him.

Here out of subtilty thou went about to have had John's words to have crossed the
end of the New Covenant of grace, which is confirmed by an Oath of him that
lives for ever, for the Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a
better hope did, which hope is Christ as it is said, the Mystery and the hope
of Glory, as it is written, Col. 1.27. 1 John 3.3. verse, and he that has this
hope purifieth himself even as he is pure, as John has said, whose words thou
would have had by thy craft, to have made void and null the Covenant of God, in
Christ Jesus our Lord, which thou could not, for Christ Jesus is the end of the
one, and the beginning and fulfilling of the other, who took away the first,
and did establish the second, and by one offering he has for ever perfected
them that are sanctified, and their sins and iniquiries will he remember no
more, as he has said; and where remission of sins is, there is no more
offering for sin, but there is boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood
of Jesus, by the new and living way which he has consecrated through the vail,
that is to say his flesh, Heb. 10.9, 10, to the 21.

Then Pallard I asked thee, if John when he spoke those words did write those
words for a continuance in sin, because afterward he says, My little
children, these things write I unto you that ye sin not, 1 John 2.1. And John
said afterward, My little children I have written unto you because your sins
are forgiven you for his Names sake, and he that abides in him sins not, he
that sins has neither seen him nor known him, as it is written 1 John 2.13
14. 1 John 3.6, 7.

And as John is speaking of the two seeds, and the new birth, and the
manifestations of the love of Christ, and the difference between the godly and
the wicked, or the children of God and the children of the devil, and as he
comes up to speak of higher degrees in the grouth, he says, He that is born
of God sins not, neither can he sin because he is born of God, and his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin because his seed remains in him; and he
that is begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one touches him not,
as it is written, 1 John 3 9. 1 John 5.18. And John said, that he that commits
sin is of the devil, and he that sinned not was of God, and thereby the
children of God and the children of the devil was to be known asunder, for the
devils children sins, and Gods children sins not, as it is there said,
and Christ Jesus was made manifest to take away their sins, and in him was no
sin at all, and as he was, so was they then in that present world, as it is
written and left upon record. 1 John 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 John 3.14. 1 John
2.27, 28. 1 John 5.20. 1 John 4.16, 17.

Pallard, then thou told of a visible Church, and visible Officers, and visible
Ordinances, etc.

Answ. I said unto thee again, that the Church was in God, the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, made all of living Stones, elect and precious, a spiritual
house for God to dwell in, by the Spirit, and Officers and overseers were made
by the holy Ghost, and he is not visible, for the world sees him not, neither
knows him, as it is written. Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 2.5, 6. John 14.17.

And God is a Spirit, and his Church is spiritual, and they endured as seeing
him who is invisible, and they were not come to the Mount which could be
touched, but they was come to Mount Zion, and to the City of the living God,
and to the heavenly Jerusalem, which is invisible, and to an innumerable
company of Angels, and to the General Assembly and Church of the first born,
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men
made perfect, and that was not visible, but invisible, and incomprehensible in
the power and life of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ Heb. 12.22, 23.

And Christ is the head of this spiritual body his Church, which he has
purchased with his blood, and he rules in it, and orders it by his Spirit, and
he has put all things under his feet, and given him to be head over all things
to the Church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all,
Ephesians. 1, 22, 23.

And he came and preached peace to them that were a far off, and to them that
were nigh, and he also preached to the Spirits in prison, 1 Pet. 3 19. And he
is the same yesterday, to day and for ever, Heb. 13.8. and the word of Faith is
preached by the Righteousness of Faith in the heart by Christ Jesus there, in
his Church and Temple which is holy and pure: 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Rom 10.6, 7, 8.

For through him we have an access to the Father by one Spirit, and are
baptized by one Spirit, into one Body, which is Spiritual, and we are made to
drink into one Spirit, where the fruit of the Vine is, and the bread of life,
and the water of life, the thirsty souls for to refresh, and there is one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of us all, who are heirs according
to the promise, and being baptized into Christ, we have put on Christ, and are
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, and are built upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ Jesus being the chief
corner Stone, in whom all the building fitly framed, grows unto an holy
Temple in the Lord, in whom also we are builded together for an habitation of
God through the Spirit; and God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth, and the Church is in God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 2.17. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Gal. 3.27, 28, 29. Ephesians. 2.18.
to the end. John 6. Phil. 3.3. John 4.23, 24. 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. verse.

Then I asked thee Thomas Pallard water Baptizer, if God who was a Spirit was
visible, for the Church is in him, the Pillar and Ground of all Truth, and the
Word and the Law and the Ordinances and Oracles of God stands in the
incomprehensiblenesse of his infiniteness, and his Worship is in the Spirit
and power of the holy Ghost in the eternity and the essence of the Scripture,
or the Divine Epistles written by the Spirit is in the heart tables as it is
written, not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God in the mystery, and
the Baptism is in the Spirit, and praying and singing and preaching is in the
power, and pure and eternal wisdom by the Spirit, and the watch is in the
Spirit, and all the officers and overseers in the Church of Christ, is in the
Spirit made by the power and authority of the holy Ghost in the blood of
Christ, sealed by the Spirit, and anointed, and Christ is the chief Shepherd
and Bishop of the soul, and makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers flames
of fire, and they are not of the Letter but of the Spirit, not made by the will
of man, but by the (...) ill of God, which is sanctification, and Paul was made
a Minister of the New Covenant, in the Gospel Ministration, not by the will of
man but by the will of God, and by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, as he
certified to the brethren by the Spirit, Gal. 1.11, 12, and Christ was revealed
in him, Gal. 1.15, 16, and he did preach Christ by the Spirit in them that he
preached unto, and they were able Ministers, not of the Letter but of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7. Col. 1.25, 26, 27. and 28. 2 Cor, 3. to the 7, verse.

And thou Pallard, who art a great teacher to the baptized people, at that time
said, that the Spirit and the Letter were inseparable, etc.

Ans. Herein thou openly laid out thy ignorance of God, and of Christ and the
Spirit and the Gospel, and the New Covenant, and thy nakedness is bare, thy
covers will not hide thee, to say the Letter and the Spirit is inseparable: God
is a Spirit, but God is not the Letter, neither is the Letter God; Christ is
the New Covenant, but Christ is not the Letter, neither is the Letter Christ,
and the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, but the Letter is neither
the Gospel nor the power, but declares of it, and if our Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded their
minds, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. But the Letter is not hid, it is open to all, to read,
or get read, but the Gospel is yet hid to thee Pallard, and all in thy nature,
and thou have made thy self a Minister of the Letter by thy own will, and never
was made a Minister of the Gospel of grace, nor of the New Covenant yet in the
blood or life of Jesus, according to the will of God the Father, that says the
Letter and the Spirit are one, and inseparable, as if the Spirit of God were
locked up and confined in the Letter, which is death, and if so, all the world
would have the Spirit, and buy and sell it, if it were in the Letter, and at an
easy rate, they might buy it for three or four shillings, for so may they buy
the Letter, but the Spirit cannot be bought, therefore it is not in the Letter;
if that the Spirit had been so easily come to, or if it could have been bought,
Simon Magus proffered money for it, but could not thereby gain it: And when he
saw that through laying on of the Apostles hands the holy Ghost was given; he
offered them money for it; now the holy Ghost is not in the Letter, but the Holy
Ghost is the Spirit of God, in the Blood or Life of Christ: but the Letter is
not the Spirit Printed in Paper, and bound up in Lether, that a man may carry
it in his hand or pocket, and buy it and sell it for money, so can he not do the
holy Ghost and many may be baptized with water, and want the Spirit as thou
do, and many of you water baptizers do, that as yet knows no holy Ghost,
that says the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, there you water Baptizers
are out of the Doctrine and life of the Apostles, and they that baptized with
water, who had power to give the holy Ghost, which you have not, Read Acts
8.12. to the 18.

And when Simon saw, that through the laying on of the Apostles hands the holy
Ghost was given, he offered them money, saying, Give me also that power; Simon
did acknowledge the holy Ghost to be the power, and not the Letter, here he was
beyond you, but because the Spirit and Power is separated from the Letter,
Simons money and he was like to peish, that thought to have bought the Spirit
and power of God, had it been in the Letter he might have bought and sold it,
but he could not attain to it, and all that trades with the Letter are as
ignorant of the Spirit, as Simon was, and all that thinks to buy it for money,
and raise the Spirit out of the Letter, are sorcerers, and in nature like to
Simon Magus, and Simon the Sorcerer spoken of in Scripture, that were in the
Apostles times, and now there are many Maguses and Elimases without the Spirit,
and has the Letter, but labors to keep people out of the Faith and power of
Truth, and seeks to shut up the Kingdom of Heaven from men, as the Pharisees
did, and keep people in outside forms, without the holy Ghost, or the Power,
as thou Pallard and all in that nature does, that says, the Letter and the
Spirit are inseparable; there thou art out of the Faith, and out of the power
of the Spirit, and wants the holy Ghost, and art in that generation which had
the Letter, but persecuted the Spirit and art baptized, but wants the holy
Ghost, as Simon did, Acts 8.18, 19, to the 24. Acts 13.6, 7, 8, to the 11. Mat.
23.12, 13, 15, 25, 28, 33.

And thou Pallard, when thou stood to oppose the truth, and to keep people out
of the Faith, in a dead water form, which neither washes within, nor cleanses
from sin, as thou said, yet Elimas-like thou would withstand the Trnth, and
labored to keep out of the Faith with thy sorceries, and said that the Letter
and the Spirit was inseparable, but thou herein was nakedly seen, insomuch that
the people many of them would not be deluded by thee, but cried out of thy
folly, as they might well, that said the Letter and the Spirit were
inseparable, then said the people, if so, the Spirit might be bought for three
or four shillings, and many would have the Spirit, for they might buy a Bible
for 3 or 4 s. Here Pallard, thou great water Baptizer, thy folly did
exceedingly appear, and thy ignorance of God and the Spirit was thereby
discovered, and that thou art a mere formal hypocrite, in the form and the
Letter without the Spirit; and here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord
to be no Minister of Christ, nor the Gospel, nor of the New Covenant, but
without the Spirit, and knows not the power nor the holy Ghost, and thou and
all in thy nature has no more power to lay on hands than Simon Magus had, who
was baptized in the water, but had not the holy Ghost, and thy laying on of
hands will work no more effect than Simons would have done; for the power thou
have not, nor none in thy nature, that says the Letter and the Spirit are
inseparable, and thou art no minister of the Spirit, but of the Letter, and
ran, but never was sent of the Lord, therefore he is against thee, and all in
thy nature, that steals words from others to speak, as the false Prophets did,
read Jer. 23.21, 22, 30, 31, 2. verse.

Thou Pallard water Baptizer, that art a Minister of the Letter, and not the
Spirit, that says the Spirit and the Letter are one, or inseparable thou art
contrary to the Ministers of Christ, and the New Covenant in the Gospel
ministration, who were able Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the Letter: for
the Letter is death, but the Spirit is life, and is out of the Letter, and in
the new Covenant, anointed and sealed are they that are sent, and preaches the
Spirit and not the Letter. 1 John 2.20; 27. John 3.33, 34. 2 Cor. 3.6.

Here thou art shut out of the anointing, and out of the new Covenant and out
of the Spirit, and so are all in thy nature, and are in darkness and death,
unsent, and unsealed, and not anointed, no Ministers of the life nor the
Spirit, but of death and darkness, and in the oldnesse of the Letter, and not
in the newness of the Spirit, and there you are separated from the life of
Truth, and in the self separation, who have not the Spirit, that say the Letter
is the Spirit, or the Letter and the Spirit is one, and cannot be separated,
but the Ministers of Christ were not of the Letter, but out of the
self-separation, and in the Spirit, and had the manifestation of the Spirit,
and the gifts given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. and they did not then serve
in the oldnesse of the Letter, as you Baptists do, but their service stood in
the life and power of Truth, and in newness of the Spirit, and not in the
Letter: neither was their preaching with the enticing words of man's wisdom as
yours is, but with demonstration of the Spirit, and in power, that the Faith of
others might stand out of the wisdom or policy of man, in the power wisdom and
strength perfection and power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. 1 Cor, 1.30, 31. 1 Cor.
1.18. 1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Romans 7.6, verses.

And Ministers of the new Covenant in the power and life of Truth were Divine
Epistles written in the Tables of the heart, written not with ink as the Letter
is, but their Divine writings in the heart tables, were by the Spirit of God
both written and ministered out from the Spirit, and not from the Letter, as it
is said, ^ Cor. 3.

And here thou Pallard, and all in thy nature, are razed out of their
Ministry, and out of their Divine Epistles, and out of their life, and art in
the Letter, as the false conceited Jews was without the Word of eternal life,
that lived by their thoughts and conceits then, as you Baptists do now, and
Jesus Christ said unto them, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal life, and they are they that do testify of me; I am the life,
and ye will not come unto me that ye might have life; see John 5.39, 40.

The Jew outwardly which put Christ to death had the Letter, but not the
spirit, nor the life, and there they was separated from the spirit and the
life, and the love of God was not in them, but they had great knowledge of the
Letter without them. John 5.40, 41, 42. Mat. 2.4, 5, 6.

And thou Pallard art amongst the outward Jews, and all in thy nature without
the love of God as they was, and opposes the Truth as they did, and has
knowledge in the Letter as they had, but are without the spirit, and the power
of the holy Ghost as they was, and the Letter is thy life, and thou will not
come out of it to Christ, who is the eternal life, who thy self art in death
and darkness, that says the Letter and the spirit are inseparable and
afterward says ignorantly that it is a History, and the Spirit is to thee a
mystery, that art so in confusion, and in Egypt and Babylon, building up and
throwing down, and deluding the people thereby; for shame, blush, and give over
deceiving the people, and all such as thou art, who has the Letter, but not
the spirit, that says the spirit and the Letter is one and cannot be divided
nor separated, and yet calls it a History, when the Scripture says, Christ
is a Mystery, then not a history; therefore silence deceit, and stop your
mouths, your blackness and darkness is seen, and your deeds are for
condemnation with the light, that are acted in that nature, contrary to the
light: John 3.19, 20.

Pallard thou art ignorant of God, and all in thy nature, that says the Letter
and the Spirit are inseparable, for God is a Spirit, but God is not the Letter,
the Word of God is eternal life, and does endure for ever, this is the record
that God has given to us even eternal life, and this life is in his Son, 1
John 5.10, 11. and not in the Letter; and we know that the son of God is come,
and has given us an understanding that we may know him that is true and we are
in him that is true, not in the Letter which is death, but in the son which is
life, even in his son Jesus Christ, this is true God and life eternal, and the
Word of God is eternal life, which does endure for ever: 1 John 5.12, 18, 20.
1 Pet. 1.22, 23.

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God, all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that
was made, in him was life, and the life was the Light of men, etc. John 1.1, 2,
3, 4, 5.

The Word is God, but the Letter is not God, neither were all things made by
the Letter, but all things were made by the Word, therefore the Spirit which is
the Word of God: Ephesians. 6.17. is not the Letter: The Word is within in the heart,
Romans 10.6, 7, 8. 1 John 2.14. Col. 3.16. but the Letter is without, bound up in
Paper and ink, which declares of of the Word.

The Word is the life of the world, and the Word sanctifies soul and body, as
it is said, sanctify them with thy Word, but it is not said, sanctify them
with the Letter, and so we were washed, cleansed, justified, and sanctified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, John 17.16, 17, 1
Cor. 6.11. John 6^. 1. John 8.12.

But Letter does not sanctify, neither is the Letter the Light and life of
sanctified men, but the Word and the Spirit is, which is not the Letter.

And all things are upheld by the Word of his power, Hebrews the 1. But all
things are not upheld by the Letter.

See how dark and ignorant of God art thou Pallard; for the Word of God is as a
fire, and a hammer, and breaks the Rocks to pieces, Ier. 23.29. but the
Letter does not, and the Word of the Lord is as a fire in the bones, Ier. 20.9.
but the letter is not; by the Word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all
the host of them, by the Breath of his mouth, Psalm. 33.6. but by the Letter
they were not; the Word of the Lord is for ever settled in heaven, so is not
the Letter, Psalm. 119 89. His name is called the Word of God: Rev. 19.13: But
his Name is not the Letter: Pallard how dark art thou, that says the Letter
and the Spirit are inseparable; and then after called it a History, is the
Spirit of God a History? and is Christ a History? The declaration, says he, is
a Mystery; but I bade thee instance one place where the Bible was called a
History, but thou could not: see how confused thou art, and how blind, and if
the blind lead the blind, shall not both fall into the ditch? Here I charge
thee to be ignorant of God, and ignorant of his teachings: And I charge thee to
be no Minister of Christ, nor the Gospel, that says the Letter and the Spirit
are inseparable; thou have set up thy self to be a Teacher of others, and many
such as thou art, who art yet untaught of God, and you would be teachers of
others, before you be taught to deny your selves, and thou, and all that says
the Spirit and the Letter are inseparable, and calls it a History, you are blind
and ignorant of the Mystery, and blind and ignorant of the truth, and the
power of God you know not, nor the holy Ghost, that preaches the Letter without
the Spirit, and would raise up the spirit out of the dead Letter, all such are
witches. Sorcerers, and conjurers; and we hold all such accursed: Gal. 1.8, 9.
Gal. 3.

The Apostles of Christ went up and down preaching the Kingdom, and preaching
the Word, and not the Letter, and the Word grew and multiplied, but the Letter
did not grow and multiply, Acts 12 24. And they were sent out to preach by the
Spirit, but they were not sent out to preach by the Letter; and the Spirit of
Christ does quicken the mortal body, but the Letter does not, but the Letter
does not, and by the Spirit Christ were raised from the dead, but by the Letter
he were not raised from the dead; Isaiah was anointed to preach by the Spirit,
but the Letter has not the (...) to anoint withal; he said, the Lord God and
his Spirit had sent him, but he did not say the Letter sent him, neither did he
ask leave of the Letter, when the Spirit said go, and all the Apostles were
sent by the Spirit in the power of the holy Ghost, but they was not sent by the
Letter, which is neither Spirit power nor holy Ghost; and the Spirit of the
Lord bade Philip join himself to the Eunuchs chariot, but the letter did not,
the Eunuch had the Letter to read, but knew not the guide which is the Spirit,
Romans 8.14. and the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip again, that the Eunuch
saw him no more, but the Letter did not: Acts 8.29, and 39. Romans 8.11. Isa. 61.
Luk 4.18. Acts 1.8. And the Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits
that we are the children of God, etc. Romans 8.16 1 John 3.24 Isa. 48.16.

Pallard, thou water Baptizer, and all you Water Baptizers, that say the Letter
and the Spirit is one, or inseparable, here your ignorance of God and Christ
and the Spirit is seen, that you have the Letter but not the Spirit, and stands
in need to be taught what be the first Principles of Religion, though you take
upon you to be teachers of others, you are yet dull of hearing, and knows
neither the power, spirit, nor holy Ghost, Church Faith, hope, election,
overseers made by the holy Ghost, nor the anointing, nor yet the true fear,
that says the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, and is a History, as thou
Pallard said, who also said, that judgment was not committed to Christ,
whilst he were in the world, and Christ himself said, that for judgment was
he come into the world, that they that saw not might see, and that they that
saw might be made blind, John 9.39.

And thou here would make Christ a liar, that says he had not judgment
committed to him whilst he was in the world, and he said, for judgment he
came into the world, but thou that says thou sees, art now sound blind and
ignorant of the Mystery, that says the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable,
and calls it a History, but thou are found the liar, and the Antichrist, and
knows not the Spirit, who are not in the Doctrine, of Christ and so has not
God, 2 John 9: and thou liar, and all liars are for the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, as the Scripture says, Rev. 22.15. Rev 21.27. Rev. 20.8.

Therefore Pallard stop thy mouth, and all in thy nature, who are out of the
Light, and out of the Truth, and silence deceit, I charge thee in the presence
of the Lord, as I said to thee when thou went forth, to go away from that
place, for I shall be a witness for the truth, against thee and thy deceit,
before the judgment seat of Christ, and to that in thy conscience shall I be
witnessed which does convince thee of sin, and check and reprove thee in
secret; thou said three times that I denied the Scriptures to manifest thy
lies, when it was proved by the Scriptures, and witnessed to the contrary
there, evidently before thy eyes, as many can witness, and that within thy
conscience will witness the same, that which reproves thee for sin and evil,
and checks thee in secret, which lets thee see the deceit of thy heart, and
makes manifest subtilty and craft, which is acted in that nature contrary to
the light, but the Lord takes the wise in their own craftiness, as it is
written, and so was thou taken in thy snare thy self, about thy water-baptisme,
that thou could not get loose, though thou make it thy idol which thou so much
takes pleasure in, but thy image would not abide the fire and the hammer at
that time, but was ready to break all in pleces; but thy works, and every man's
works in thy nature shall be tried by fire, and all that will not abide the
fire shall be burnt; for every man's works shall be made manifest, whether it be
silver, gold, precious stones, wood, hay, or stubble that he builds for the
day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall
try every man's works of what sort it is, and his works that will not abide the
fire must be burnt, and he himself suffer loss, as thou art like to do, and
all in thy nature, for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God; for
it is written, he takes the wise in their own craftiness, as thou wast taken
in thine, and thy Babylonish building is known, with the Light it is seen and
comprehended, and with the Light to be condemned, and if any of those builders
in thy nature be saved, it must be so as by fire: 1 Cor. 3.12, 13, 14, 15 and
19. and 20.

Thou could not witness that thy water baptism did wash away sin, neither
could thou witness that thy sins were washed away by it, but were in
confusion and lies, saying and unsaying, Babylonish, building up, and throwing
down, and daubing with untempered mortar, as all in thy nature do, neither
could thou witness the gift of the holy Ghost, that it were or could be
given by any of you water baptizers, when it were demanded of thee upon thy
examination in that thing at that time, as many can witness, and that in thy
conscience shall witness the same, the Light of Christ Jesus which will
condemn thee, and all that hate it, and are contrary to it; for this is the
condemnation of the world, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light, and the reason is, because their deeds are evil,
as thine is: John 3.19, 20.

And as thou could not witness to the washing away of sin by your water
Baptism, nor the gift of the holy Ghost to be given by it, when it was
demanded of thee, neither could thou witness to the eternal judgment, and
also denied perfection to be attainable; and here thou, and all you water
baptizers are razed out of the Apostles doctrine and life, who said, that they
would leave the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and go on to
perfection; which you Baptists, and thou Pallard, great water Baptizer, denies,
and so denies that which is the whole life of truth, and the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ, and they that had passed thorough the Doctrine of
Baptismes, and the laying on of hands, they passed on to the Resurrection, and
to eternal judgment, which thou Pallard denies, for they came to the General
Assembly and church of the first born, written in heaven, and to God the Judge
of all, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator
of the New Covenant, and they knew the shakings, not of the earth only, but of
the heavens also, that things which could not be shaken might remain, which
shakings thou knows nothing of, nor none in thy nature, that denies perfection,
and the eternal judgment, but we having received a Kingdom which cannot be
moved, have received grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence
and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire, the same that theirs was that
left the first Principles of the Doctrines of Baptismes, and the laying on of
hands, and the Resurrection of the dead, and came to the eternal judgment,
and to God the judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect, and
were in the Church of the first born, written in heaven, and had received the
Kingdom, and know the consuming fire, and dwelt with everlasting burnings, and
this I witness, he that can receive it let him, Heb. 6.1, 2, 3. Heb. 12.22. to
the end. Isaiah. 40.28, 29, Isaiah 33.14, 15, 16, etc.

But to thee Pallard, great water Baptizer, this is a mystery, and to all in
thy nature, that denies the eternal judgment, and the first Resurrection, and
the perfection which the Saints witnessed, and they were risen with Christ, and
were made to sit together with him in heavenly places, and said to others in
their grouh, If ye he risen with Christ, set your affections on things which
are above, and not on things which are on the earth, and some said, that their
conversation were in heaven, and others knew that so many of them as were
Baptized into Christ, were baptized into his death, that like as Christ was
raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so they also should walk
in newness of life, etc. Romans 6.3, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6. Col. 3.1, 2. Phil.
3.20, 21. Rev. 20.6. Rev. 21.1, 2, 3. to the 9.

But thou, and you water baptizers are yet in the oldnesse of the Letter, and
not in the baptism of sufferings, nor in the new life, nor knows nothing of
the eternal Judgment, nor of the Resurrection, nor perfection, nor the New
Covenant, nor the Seal thereof, that says the Bible is a History, and the
Spirit and the Letter are inseparable, as thou Pallard, great waterman did; and
thou, and the other that were with thee at that, time, impudently did lie
before the people, and said, Christ had not judgment committed to him whilost
he were in the world, and Christ himself said, for that cause was he come into
the world, as I then told thee, and as thou may see in John 9.39. And where
he said to the Jews that they judged him after the flesh, but he judged no man
after the flesh, but he judged righteously, and with righteous judgment, and
his judgment was true, for he and his Father was one, as he there said, and he
was one that bore witness of himself, and the Father that sent him bare
witness with him, and Christ there had judgment with the Father, and all
judgment he said were committed to him; and he told them (the envious Jews)
that they were of their father the devil, and his works they would do, and he
told them there was no truth in them, for their father the devil had not abode
in the Truth, and they was of him, and he told them he knew that they had not
the love of God in them, and his judgment was true, and he called them
serpents and vipers, and said, How-should they escape the damnation of hell,
and he pronounced woes to Pharisees and Hypocrites then, such as had a form
from the Letter, but was separated from the Spirit and life of what they did
profess, and from Christ and the new Covenant, and were in the Letter without
the Spirit, as you Baptizers are and as thou Pallard art, and all that are in
their nature, and such as say the Bible is a History, and the Spirit and the
Letter is inseparable, and that says, Christ had not judgment committed to
him whilst he were in the world, as you Baptists, and thou Pallard did, here I
charge thee in the presence of the Lord, and all in thy nature to be false
accusers of Christ, and liars and enemies of his truth, as the envious Jews
was, as thou Pallard art, and all you who are in their nature, and as you may
read, John 8.44. John. 5.39, 40, 41; etc. Mat. 23.33.

Thou may well take upon thee Pallard to lie of me and the truth, that would so
impudently lie of Christ, that said he had not judgment committed to him, nor
given him whilst he was in the world, when he said, that for judgment he was
come into the world, as I then told thee: And secondly he said, that he had
life in himself as the Father had, and he had authority given him to execute
judgment, as it is written, and as he was come for Judgment into the world,
and had authority given him to execute it: So thirdly, he had power to quicken
whom he would, as well as the Father, and he said, that the Father had
committed all judgment unto him, John 9.39. John 5.21. to the 28.

And thou that said the Bible was a History, and yet the Letter and the Spirit
is inseparable, and that Christ had not judgment committed to him whilst he
was in the world, and that Christ had not Judgment committed to him; for he
had a body, and were sensible of hunger, and such stuff thou had, and were in
the lies, blasphemies, and false accusations, as thy fruits made thee manifest,
yet thou takes upon thee to teach and baptize, and art of great account amongst
poor seduced water baptized people; but thou art discovered to thy shame, and
it may be for the good of many poor souls to see your deceits come to light.
Oh, thou deceitful one, be ashamed and confounded, let shame cover thy face,
repent and give over deceiving the people, and all in thy nature, now thou art
warned, as thou was then, and to the Light of God in thy conscience am I made
manifest, and that will witness for me and the Truth, against thee and thy
deceit before the Judgment Seat of Christ, in the great day of the Lord, when
I shall also stand before the Judgment Seat, and be a witness against thee
there, except thou repent of thy lies and blasphemies, and false accusations,
and deny them all openly, as thou witnessed to them openly, and now to the
Light in thy conscience shall this be witnessed, which light will be thy
eternal condemnation, if thou hate it, and act knowingly and wilfully contrary
to it; now thou have time, prize it, for one woe is past, but behold two woes
more follows after, as it is written; And the sixth Angel sounded, and I
heard a voice from the four horns of the golden Alter, which is before God,
saying to the sixth Angel which had the Trumpet, loose the four Angels which
are bound in the great river Euphrates, and the four Angels were loosed which
were prepared, for an hour and a day and a month and a year, for to slay the
third part of men; he that both an car to hear let him hear, and he that can
receive it, let him receive it: Rev. 9.12, 13, 14, 15 Zech 13.

Therefore now Pallard, great water Baptizer, and all that are as thou art,
teachers of others before they be taught themselves, and all imitations, that
worships ye know not what, who are dipped In the water, but are ignorant of the
Divine nature, that says the Bible is a History, and yet the Letter and the
Spirit, Pallard, thou says are one and inseparable; how blind and ignorant
art thou, and are you Baptizers of the Mystery, silence all flesh, and stop
your mouths, and take heed of deluding poor people any longer, I warn you, and
charge you, in the presence of the Lord, as you will answer it, before the
Judgment seat of the great God, and Pallard, that in thy conscience shall be a
witness for me, when thou sees me not, the Light of Christ Jesus there, for to
that am I made manifest, yet shut up from thy dark mind, for Light shines in
darkness, but darkness comprehends it not, John 1.9,

Yet Light comprehends darkness, though darkness cannot comprehend the
Light, and with the Light that comprehends the world art thou comprehended, and
with the Light which changes not art thou seen, and all in thy nature, and
known to be our of the Light, and out of the Truth, and out of the new
Covenant, and out of the Church that is in God the firstborn which is written
in heaven, and no officer there, nor no Minister of the new Covenant and the
Spirit, nor yet baptized into Christ, nor no friend of Christ, nor none in thy
nature, no more than the envious Jews and the Pharisees was, and the Priests;
the Priests of the world and thou art in one nature, and guided by one spirit,
the same that guides all the children of disobedience, as it does you, and
there is no difference between them and you, but that you have the sheeps
clothing, and they have the wolves, but both one inside, and nature; thou have
the outside form according to the Letter more than they have, but thou art
without the power, and ignorant of the Mystery in the Spiritas they are, and as
abovesaid, that says the Bible is the History in the Letter, and yet thou
says the roughness is felt, and thy darkness is seen, thou dark Sott, would
thou bring God and Christ, Faith, hope, Election, and the New Covenant, the
holy Ghost, and the eternal Spirit and blood of the Covenant, within the
compass of death, and have them historical, that says the Scriptures or
Letter of the Bible is a History, and the Spirit and the Letter are
inseparable, when as I told thee a History was a fable or a story, but the
Scriptures I own to be a true Declaration of the Truth that they lived in that
spoke them forth; and the Declaration of the Truth is most certainly believed
amongst us that the world scornfully calls Quakers, and the life of them
enjoyed, Christ Jesus the chief shepherd and Bishop of our souls; and though
the Scriptures outwardly be not the Spirit nor the eternal* Word, nor the life
of God and Christ and the Saints, yet the Scriptures are a true Declaration of
those things declared of, Luke 1.1. but not the Word of God, for it is eternal
life, and lives and endures for ever: 1 John 2, 3.4, 5. 1 Pet 1.22.23.

I would have had thee Pallard, to have proved by the Scripture that it was any
where called a History, and that the Spirit of God was kept or confined in a
history or a fable, but thou could not, for godliness is a mystery, and the
Devine Writings by the Spirit are in the new heart tables, as it is written,
Col. 1.27. 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. and the Saints knows Christ in them, and the opening
of the Mystery, and his Ministers preaches him amongst the Gentiles now; for
you self-conceated ones, like the outward Jews, will none of his counsel; but
great is the mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. and the Comforter that abides
for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom the world cannot receive; and you
Pharisees and self-conceited ones cannot receive it, neither do you know him,
that says the Spirit is in the Letter, and the Letter is a History, but we
know him in the mystery, and the Spirit of Truth to be out of a History, for he
dwells in us, as says the Scripture, John 14.15, 16, 17. Romans 8.10, 11.
Praised be the Lord for the riches of his love to our souls, in taking of the
Seals, and opening the mystery in the Lord Jesus Christ, Rev. 5. Isa. 29.11. to
the end. Col, 1.25, 26, 27, 28.

Which mystery is yet hid to thee Pallard, water-Baptizer, and all in thy
nature, that says the Spirit and the Letter is inseparable, and is a History;
stop thy mouth for shame, and cover thy lips, for the promise is not to that
seed of the serpent which you wise ones of the world are one with, as the
Pharisees and the envious Jews was; but the promise is to the seed of Abraham,
according to the Spirit. Genesis 17. Gal. 3, 29. Gal. 4.28, 29.

But as it was then, so it is now, they that are after the flesh persecute them
that are after the Spirit, who are of that seed, yet we preach Christ crucified
unto you self-conceated ones, and outward Jews a stumbling block; and unto the
Greeks foolishness, but unto them that are of the seed according to the
promise, and are for salvation, Christ the wisdom of God and power of God; for
Christ has not sent us to baptize with water, but to preach to the Spirits in
prison, as he did, 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. to the end, and not to preach the Gospel
with the enticing words of man's wisdom, lest the cross of Christ should be of
none effect, which is of great effect unto us, and to all that are subject unto
it; for therein is our glorying in the Cross, by which we are crucified unto
the world, and the world is by it crucified unto us, and we are crucified with
Christ, yet we live but our life is in him, and by the Cross we live in him,
and that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross having
thereby slain the enmity, he came and preached peace to them that were a far
off, and to them that were nigh, for by the Cross through him we have an
access by one Spirit unto the Father; and God forbid that we should glory in
any thing save in the Cross of Christ, by which we are dead, and crucified to
the world, and the world unto us: for in Christ Jesus there is not any thing
that avails but a new Creature, and as many as walk according to this Rule,
peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the seed and Israel of God, for in him
shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory through the Cross,
Gal. 6.14, 15, 16. Gal. 2.20. Isa. 45.24 25. Ephesians. 2.16, 17, 18.

And the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness, for it is
written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to naught the
council of the prudent, Isa. 29.11. to the 18. and in that day the deaf shall
hear the words of the Book, which neither the learned nor unlearned outwardly
could open, and in that day of the opening of the Book or mystery of
godliness, the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of
darkness, and the meek who are of the righteous seed shall increase their joy
in the Lord, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the holy one of Israel,
for by the Cross which crucifies the world, and slayes the enmity therein,
will the terrible one be cut off, and by the Cross will the scorner be
consumed, and by the Cross will all that watch for iniquity be slain, and cut
down, therefore thus says the Lord who redeemed Abraham, concerning the house
of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his face now wax pale;
but when he sees his children the work of mine hands in the midst of him, they
shall sanctify my Name, and sanctify the holy One of Jacob, who are of that
seed, and shall fear the Lord God of Israel, and they also that erred in Spirit
shall come to understanding, and they that murmured shall learn Doctrine, Isa.
29.18, 19. to the end.

Where then is the wise? where is the Scribe, where is the disputer of this
world? Therefore, thus says the Lord, I will proceed to do a marvelous work
amongst this people, such as are of the wisdom of the flesh, and the seed of
the serpent, whose hearts are removed from the Lord into the things of the
world, and the earthly learning and knowledge, and the earthly part is above
the good seed, and they draw near the Lord with their mouths and their lips,
but hearts are far off, and their fear toward me says the Lord, is taught
by the Precepts of men; therefore the marvelous work that the Lord works
amongst them is this, the wisdom of the worldly wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of the prudent in that nature shall be hid, which is a work of
wonder, for it is written, has not not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? For after, that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God,
then after by the foolishness of preaching it pleased God to save some, and
the preaching of the Cross to the cutting down of the carnal part, and the
raising up of the seed, and letting it out of Prison by the power of the Lord,
is now the same in the Ministry by the Spirit that it was then, for it does
now please God by the preaching of the cross, which is counted foolishnes with
worldly wise men to save some, as he did then; For now the Jews require a sign,
and the greeks seek after worldly wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified unto
the Jews a stumbling block now, and unto the greeks foolishness, as it was
then amongst the great outward Scholars and worldly wise men, And we see and
know our Calling that are sent to Preach and minister in the Cross, that
thereby the enmity may be slain, and the seed be brought forth of prison and
bondage by the Cross again, for not many wise men, after the flesh not many
mighty, nor noble in the world, not many of them are called.

Oh, how hard a thing it is for them that have riches to enter, because of the
Cross, but God has chosen the foolish; poor, base, weak things in the worlds
account as he did then, to preach the Cross, and to confound things that are
mighty in the worlds eyes and account, as Pallard the great water Baptizer was;
and things which are despised has God chosen, and things which are not
accounted of by the world, to bring to naught things that are of great account
by them, that all flesh may be silent, and not glory in his presence.

But in the Lord are the seed of Israel justified, and in him they glory, and
he is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption,
that according as it is written, he that glories let him glory in the Lord,
but we have nothing to glory in, save the Cross of our Lord Jesus, who has
said, all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them, and
this is witnessed through the Cross. 1 Cor. 2.17, 18. to the end. Isaiah 9 13,
14. Isa 45.25. John 17.10. Romans 8.16, 17, 18, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1.10, 11, 12.

Then Pallard, I asked thee where ever Paul which thou said gave forth orders
to the Churches, etc. had any Commission to baptize, or where ever he says in
any place that he was sent for that work? But on the contrary he said, he was
not sent for that work, as it is left upon record under his handwriting, 1
Cor. 1.17. For says he there positively; Christ sent me not to aptize, but to
preach the Gospel, and not with wisdom of words neither, lest the Cross of
Christ should be of none effect: And I asked thee what the Cross was, but thou
could not tell, and why he was sent to preach, and was necessirated to it, as
he says in the 1 Cor. 9. For says he, though I preach the Gospel, I have
nothing to glory of, but as he said before, in the Cross where his Ministry
stood, and says he, There is a necessity laid upon me to preach the Gospel,
and woe is to me, if I preach it not, etc 1 Cor. 9.16, 17, 18.

But he did not say there was a necessity laid upon him to baptize, but he
thankt God that he had baptized no more; by permission he did that, and not by
commission, for he said plainly, that Christ sent him not to baptize, but to
Preach, and he was sent by the Spirit to Preach, and not by the Letter, as he
did certify to the brethren, and his certificate is to be seen for it, Gal. 1.
but not to baptize.

And he gave forth the Orders to the Church by the Spirit that sent him to
Preach; and where did he by that Spirit ever send forth any to baptize with
water? but to Preach he did; and he was sent by the Spirit and not by the
Letter; and thou says the Spirit and the Letter are inseparable: but when the
Son was revealed in him, he did not stand to consult, neither did he ask leave
of the Letter, but obeyed the Command of the Spirit, as it is left upon record,
and the Letter did not give forth the Spirit, but the Spirit was before the
Letter was: neither did the Letter send them to preach, but the Spirit did, and
gave them power to speak as the Oracles of God, but where did he say he was
sent to baptize, but only to preach in the Cross, and that by the Spirit, and
not by the Letter, for Christ was revealed within him, and sent him to preach
by his Spirit, and that which he preached he had not received of the Letter,
but out of the Covenant of life, and from the flowings in of the Spirit; and he
had known much of the Letter whilst he persecuted the Spirit, and when he
received: he Spirit, he denied himself and took up the Cross, and followed
Christ in the Cross, and there continued in that Ministry by the Spirit, and
were an able Minister of the New Covenant, not of the Letter but of the Spirit,
and he said, that the Gospel which he preached unto them he had not received it
of man, neither was he taught it of man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ
within him, and they did not cross him with the Letter, and say, how could
they know that Christ was revealed in him, but received his Testiwony as from
the Spirit, their Spirits witnessing with his Spirit, and they were one in the
seed, and their Gospel was hid to them that were lost; but the Letter is not
hid, neither is it lost; but the Gospel is hid to thee Pallard, and to them
that are lost, who have the Letter but not the Spirit, for if any man have not
the Spirit of Christ he is none of his, but many have the Letter but not the
Spirit, as thou have the Letter but wants the Spirit, and all in thy nature,
and are in the self separation from the Spirit which the Letter speaks of,
having not the Spirit, that says the Bible is a History, and the Letter and
the Spirit are inseparable, such are in a form without the power, and so are as
a body without the Spirit, and dead trees twice plucked up by the roots, as it
is written, but Paul was not without the Spirit and the Power, but preached in
the power of the Spirit, that the bodies faith should not stand in the wisdom
of men's words, but in the power of God, as it is written, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. Gal.
1.11, 12. and 15, 16. 2 Cor. 3.6. 1 Cor. 9 16, 17, 18. Romans 8.

But where was he sent by Commission to baptize, and why was there a necessity
laid upon him for the one, and not for the other, to baptize as well as to
preach, seeing that the care of the Church was committed to him, and he knew
the whole Council of God? 1 Cor. 9.16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 1.17. Acts 20 28, 29.

Then thou answered and said, he baptized as well as he preached, for he
baptized Crispus and Gaius, and he baptized also the house of Stephanos; and
thou began thereupon to make an oration to the people, and devise mischief, and
to tell lies, and said to the people he denies the Scripture, and said, Paul
did not baptize, etc.

Thereupon the people some of them made answer, and said, do not accuse
falsely: wherein did he deny the Scriptures, he did not say that Paul did not
baptize, but asked where he was sent to baptize, etc.

Then taking thee with false accusations and lies in thy mouth, in reproof I
spoke something unto thee, and said, how durst thou lie so impudently, without
any ground, but that it was suffered thee Pallard, to lay open thy folly that
day to thy shame, and for the good of others that were lorded over by thee,
till thy nakedness and falsehood openly appeared, so that some of them did
speak to thee of it, and I then charged thee in the presence of the Lord,
either to make good what thou had said, in falsely accusing without any ground,
or else for ever stop thy mouth, and be ashamed of thy lies, and false
accusations in that thing, and also in others; and I said, when did Paul
receive any Commission for to baptize, or when was he sent for that work,
because himself said he was not sent to baptize, but to preach, and there was a
necessity laid upon him for the one, and not for the other, and he had a
Commission to preach, and not to baptize, lest by doing it by permission
without a command, and so abuse his power, he gave God thanks that he had
baptized no more, lest they should say he did it in his own Name, and without
warrant or authority from God, because he had no commission from God for to do
it; for he confessed and said, that Christ sent him not to baptize, but to
preach, and for that he had a Command, and woe was unto him if he did neglect,
and he was not to preach with the enticing words of man's wisdom neither, but
in demonstration of the Spirit and power, lest the Cross should be of none
effect, in which his Ministry stood, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 9.18.

And what he did by permission was one thing, and what he did by commission was
another, and sometimes he did things by permission, and not by Commission, and
what he did by permission was as from the urgency, but what he did by
Commission was from the eternal power of eternity, and was the Lords,
therefore he puts a difference between the man and the woman, and forbids the
woman to speak in the Church; he that can receive it let him: I told thee
Pallard, that Paul also circumcised after he were a Minister of the Gospel, as
well as baptized, and he had as much ground for the one as the other, but no
command for neither, and Christ was circumcised outwardly, as well as baptized
outwardly, and he ministered the circumcision also, and were a Minister of the
same, as in Romans 15.8.

And I asked thee how thou followed Christ in that, to fulfill that
Ministration, and what account thou could give of it in the inward man as it
is written, Col. 2.11, 12. etc.

Because Christ ministered that, and they did witness that Ministration through
the Spirit in him, and so they were made complete in the substance and life of
all truth, through the Cross.

And because it is written, that death reigned from Adam until Moses, even
over all that had not sinned, after the similitude of Adams transgression, and
the Law and the Prophets were till John, John succeeded them, and he came
burning and shining, amongst those that were born of woman was not a greater
than John, yet he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.

Then Pallard water baptizer, I asked thee how thou could witness to those
ministrations in the inward man, for the seed is but one, and how thou could
witness a passing from death unto life as they did that spoke forth the
Scriptures, for they that had passed from death unto life, said, that he that
was born of God did not commit sin, and they also said, that he that committed
sin were of the devil, and thereby the two seeds was known, and the children
of God was made manifest, and the children of the devil, by the operation of
each seed ruling in them, and working forth through them, and they that had
passed from death unto life, knew who was of God, and who was not, and so does
the same seed now, and they knew who did abide in darkness and death, and so
do they now who are in the Light life and power of the Truth, and they know
that the Son of God is made manifest in them, and has taken away their sins,
as they knew then that witnessed the same through the Cross, who said, that
they dwelt in him; and he dwelt in them; but they did not know it by the dead
Letter, but by the quickening Spirit, which is life, and was given them, 1 John
3. Chapter.

And they knew who were passed from death unto life, and that the Son of God
was come, and had given them an understanding that they thereby might know him
that was true, and they knew it not by the Letter, but by the Spirit, and they
had the true knowledge of it in the eternal Truth, who affirmatively said, we
are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and
eternal life, and not the Letter, but the Letter declares of it, 1 John 5.20.

Then Pallard I asked thee how it was with thee in deaths Dominion, because it
is written of deaths reigning from Adam until Moses over all who have not
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, and what that death was,
and reigned over in thee, how thou came from under it to know the Law which is
perfect, and does endure for ever, according to that in the conscience, and is
to be fulfilled in all that walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, and
how thou came into the prophecies in the inwards, because it is written, the
Law and the Prophets are till John, and the seed is but one, not seeds, but
seed, and the promises are to the seed, fulfilled through death in the
Ministry, by the Spirit in the cross, which cuts down and raises up, and how
thou came to know John's Ministry set up within because he came and does come
burning and shining, and there is a willingness to rejoice in his Light for a
season, and how it was with thee in that Ministration; to know the ax laid to
the root of the tree, and the tree to be cut down, and what that fallow ground
in thee was which must be ripped up, and I also asked thee what self was, with
the fruits and the ground of it, which the Cross is. Lo, I told thee the
creation was a figure, and out of the ground sprung up gross herbs, weeds,
briers and thorns, etc. And the offspring was not the ground, the offspring
might be cut off, and there might spring up more fruits of the like nature
again, so the fruits of self might be cut off, and the offspring was not the
ground; and whilst there was the ground and the roots in it unript up, more
fruits would grow there of like nature also, therefore John said, Rip up your
fallow ground, make the rough places smooth, and prepare the way for the Lord
to come into his Temple; that he may sit as Refiner, I asked thee how thou past
through that Ministry of John in the inward man, and what succeeded John,
because it is written, that the least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he,
and some did witness that they were set in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2.6.

And I said unto thee, if thou was an Officer in the Church of the first born
written in heaven, and were in the kingdom, thou could witness to those
things, Heb. 12.22. and 28. Luk 17, 21.

And liberty was granted to thee for to declare thy passages in the inward
ministrations, if that thou could, that it might be for the good of the
people there present, but thou could not speak any thing at all concerning
those conditions, and inward ministrations, when thou was desired, and several
times urged to it, but all that thou could say, was to accuse falsely, and said,
I denied the Scriptures, and made that thy cover, which would not hide thee,
but left thee bare, and thy nakedness did then openly appear; then I charged
thee to be a liar, and others witnessed against thee for saying that I denied
the Scripture, when thou had no ground for it; but the devil was a liar from
the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, and thou liar, who art out of the
Truth, art of him, as thy deeds makes thee manifest, John 8.44.

Therefore stop thy mouth, and cover thy lips, and let shame strike thee in the
face, for ever, thou liar, and false accuser of the just.

Paul, who was a Minister of the new Covenant, not of the Letter, but of the
the Spirit, he declared of his passages, and his grouth, and how he came out of
one dispensation into another, and they that grew from one degree of grace and
glory into another, they said* that they knew no man after the flesh, though
they had known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth knew they him so no more,
and they gave account of their passages and grouth, which thou could not do,
Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. 2 Cor. 5.16, 17.

And the Apostle said, give a reason of the hope that is in you to any man that
shall ask you, and withal be ready to do it, that you may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the height and depth and breadth and
length of the love of God.

And thou Pallard, who art the great water baptizer, and all you outward
dippers, and outside washers, who makes clean the outside of the body or
vessel, as the Scribes and the Pharisees did, and are hard bound up in a dead
form; your ground is yet fallow, and to be ripped up: And thou Pallard, and you
dippers, sprinklers with water, and outward baptizers, teachers and people,
pastors, deacons, and elders, and all and every one of you, from the highest to
the lowest, that cannot give account of the inward Ministrations and passages
through the Cross, from death unto eternal life, and says the Letter and the
Spirit is inseparable, you are yet out of the Saints conditions, and out of
their life, and are in darkness and deaths dominion, doing things by imitation
in your wills, and are in that nature which acts contrary to the light, and
you set up forms contrary to the Light, and according to your carnal
apprehensions, and are as a body without the Spirit, that say the Bible is a
History, and that says the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, as Pallard
the great water baptizer did.

Now the Lord is that Spirit as is spoken of in the new Covenant, and glorious
ministration, but the Lord is not the Letter, but he is the Spirit, and where
the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, and we all with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image, from glory to glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord, and not by the
Letter, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18.

You Dippers, sprinklers, and water baptizers, that says the Letter is the
Spirit, or the Spirit and the Letter are inseparable, as Pallard did, you are
as a body without the Spirit that are in that nature which acts contrary to
the Light.

Where is the gift of the holy Ghost amongst you dippers, and outside
sprinklers, and water baptizers? Where have any of you sold your possessions
yet, and laid down the price at your Apostles feet, as the water baptizers did,
Acts 4.

And where are you filled with the holy Ghost, that says the Letter and the
Spirit are inseparable, and calls it a History, as Pallard, did? Oh, what
hypocrites are you, and how far short are you of that mystery? when were ever
the place shaken where you were assembled together, when they had prayed the
place was shaken where they were assembled together, and they were all filled
with the holy Ghost, and spoke the word of God boldly, as the Spirit gave them
utterance, and not the Letter, Acts 4.31. Acts 2.4. Acts 7.55.

Wherefore, brethren, say they, look ye out seven men, full of the holy Ghost,
whom we may appoint over you, but we will give our selves to the Ministry of
the Word, and to prayer, but they did not bid them to choose out self conceated
proud men, full of fleshly wisdom, and vainglory, like unto you watermen that
are in this generation, neither did they choose men full of the Letter, and
brain-conceats as you do, but they choose men full of the holy Ghost, for the
holy Ghost had all the Rule in the Church of God, and they choose Stephen a man
full of Faith and the holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and
Timon, and Parmenus, and Nicolas a Proselite of Antioch, full of Faith and the
holy Ghost was those, and of good report, and they who were in the power of the
Lord, and full of the wisdom of God, and were endued with the holy Ghost, who
had given themselves up to serve God, in the ministry of the word, and not in
the Ministry of the Letter, those who were in the power of God, prayed, and
laid their hands on those that were sent forth, and they were filled with the
heavenly wisdom, and with the holy Ghost, that none were able to resist them,
that stood in the power of the Spirit, and they were anointed by the Spirit,
and the holy Ghost sent them forth about the work of God in the Ministry of
the Word; and the Word of God increased, which is not the Letter, as you
baptizers say, but it is the Spirit which yet you are ignorant of, and as the
Word of God increased, so the number of the Disciples increased, and were
multiplied, and Stephen were full of Faith and power, that the wise men of the
world, and great Disputers of the Synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians,
and Alexandrians, and them of Silicia, and of Asia disputing with Stephen, and
they were not able to resist the wisdom, and the Spirit by which he spoke, and
not the Letter, which wisdom and Spirit, and laying on of hands, and sending by
the holy Ghost, and Ministry of the Word of eternal Life, Church and Church
Officers that were made by the holy Ghost and is, which you Dippers,
Sprinklers, and water baptizers are ignorant and know nothing of, though you
have an outward form, you have not the power nor the Spirit, nor the Gifts as
they had, but are as a Bell without a Clapper, or a body without the Spirit,
that says the Letter is the Word, and the Letter is the Spirit, and the Letter
is a History, and says the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, as Thomas
Pallard great water Baptizer did, and it is evident you have not the gifts, nor
the holy Ghost amongst you, as the water baptizers spoken of in Scripture had,
therefore are you but Pharisees, that have not the Spirit, and the holy Ghost
as they had that spoke forth the Scriptures, and as they now have that lives
in the life of the Spirit; but you that say the Letter is the Word, and the
Letter is the Spirit, and the Letter and the Spirit is inseparable; You
Baptizers with Water are out of the Divine Nature, and that faith spoken of,
and out of the life and power of the holy Ghost, by which they did both preach,
pray, and minister the Word, and lay on hands, and send forth, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
to the 9. Mark 16.16, 17, 18. 1 John 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Mat. 5. Luke 6. 1 John
3.9. 1 John 5.18. John 7.38. John 11.25, 26. 1 John 2.20, 27 Acts 6.3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10 Acts 4.31. Acts 8 17. Acts 19.6, 13 2, 3, 4. Acts 4.32, 33, 34.
Acts 20, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Hebrews 12.22, 23.28, 29.

Read those Scriptures, and let all who have a discerning given them in the
eternal Truth, see whether the Dippers, Sprinklers, and water-Baptizers be not
out of the life of them, and without the Falth spoken of, with the fruits and
effects spoken of in them, and without the Power, wisdom, Spirit, Gifts, and
holy Ghost spoken of in them, yea, or no; When did ever any of you Dippers,
Sprinklers, or water Baptizers, give any the Gift of the holy Ghost by laying
on of your hands or when did the holy Ghost send you to preach? that say the
Letter is the Spirit; and the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable; here your
ignorance does appear in the Ministry of the Spirit: Read those Scriptures
before mentioned, and let them judge you, that say the Letter and the Spirit
are inseparable; and let them, and the Light of God in your consciences which
is pure judge you, and judge your empty forms without either life or power:
Examine your selves, ye water Baptizers, whether ye be in the Faith or no, 2
Cor. 13.5.

For it is written, that he that believes, though he were dead, yet shall he
live, and he that believes, out of his belly shall flow the water of life, and
this I witness, and he that lives and believes shall never die, and he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned; and he that is baptized, and believes these signs shall follow them
that believe, in my Name, says Jesus Christ, shall they cast out devils, they
shall speak with new tongues: and the third sign that follows after Baptism,
the Baptism of Believers is this, They shall take up Serpents.

And fourthy, They shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them.

And the fifth sign that follows the Baptism of Believers is this, they
shall lay hands on the sick, and shall recover them; and these are not done by
the Letter, but the Spirit, as it is witnessed, Mark 16.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
John 11.25, 26. Psalm. 107.20, 21.

Now you water-Baptizers, examine your selves, whether you have faith or no;
When were the devil cast out in you, the Prince of the power of the Air, the
Spirit that rules in those that are dead in trespasses and sins, who are not
yet quickened by the Spirit, for the Spirit does quicken, but the Letter does
not, Ephesians. 1. Romans 8.10, 11.

When were the Serpents head bruised in you? And when were you cleansed from
the deadly poison, the poison of Aspes that is under the tongue of those that
use deceit, which are of the seed of the Serpent, and in that nature and
condition spoken of Romans 3.11, 13, 14, to the 19.

When were you washed any one of you, and cleansed with the water of the word,
and by the Spirit of our God, Ephesians. 5.25, ^6, 27. 1 Cor. 6.11. that says the
Letter is the Word, and the Letter is the Spirit, and the Letter and the Spirit
are inseparable? And when did you cast out devils? When did you speak with now
tongues? When did you take up Serpents, and drink the deadly poison and it not
hurt you, who yet are full that are one with the Serpent? and when did you ever
recover the sick by laying on of your hands upon them, who are not yet as the
little Child that Christ took in his arms and blessed, learn your figure, and
examine your faith; let the Light of Christ Jesus in all your consciences
search you, and it will let you see that you are full of lust, but so was not
the little Child, and the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences will let
you see that you live in actual transgressions, so did not the little Child,
and the Light will let you see your inward disease; and that you are not healed
and cured, and made whole, and blessed as the little Child then was; and
except ye become as that little Child, ye shall in no wise enter into the
kingdom of God; for there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie, but they
which are written in the Lambs Book of life; he that can receive it, let him,
Revelation 2.26, 27, 28, 29. Revelation 21.27.

And how far short in practice of those water Baptizers spoken of in the fourth
of the Acts are you Dippers, Sprinklers, and water Babtizers, in this
generation? For as many of the Water Baptizers there spoken of then, as were
possessors of Lands or Houses sold them, and brought the prices of things that
were sold, and laid down at their Apostles feet, and distribution was made to
every man according as he had need, Acts 4.32, 33, 34, 35, etc.

If you imitate them in one thing, why do you not follow them in all? But where
have any of you Dippers, Sprinklers, and water Baptizers, Imitaters followed
them in their practice in that? You can take what you will and leave what you
will, as your conceats and fancies are; Oh, hypocrites, which make clean the
outside of the cup and platter, the body or vessel, but inwardly you are full
of extortion, lust, envy, pride, and access, the Light of Christ Jesus in your
consciences will accuse you of it, and let you see it, rooted and seated within
you in the earthly dark parts and that Light is your Teacher, loving it, and
obeying it, but that Light is your condemnation, hating it, and disobeying it,
who act contrary to it, and love the deeds of darkness rather than the Light,
with the Light you are all seen and comprehended; your covers will not hide you
now, you water baptizers; if you sew all the Fig Leaves together that you have,
or outward imitations, and taken on Commands from the Letter by your wills,
they will not hide you who are in that nature, which acts contrary to the
Light, with the Light are you seen to be out of the life of what you do
profess, as the Pharisees was: You are bare, that wants the clothing of the
Spirit, and says the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable.

Woe to you all Formalists, that are out of the Light, and covered with the
Letter and earth, and not with the Spirit of the Lord, Read Isa. 30.1. Math.
23.25.

You water Baptizers are seated in your conceits, and stablished in your
self-righteousnesse, as the Pharisees was, and appears righteous outwardly unto
men, as they did, but within ye are full of deceit, pride, lust, hypocrisy and
iniquity as they was, with the Light you are seen and discovered, Mat. 23.27.

And the Light of Christ Jesus in all your consciences will let you see where
you are, and reprove you in secret, for acting contrary to it, and the Light of
God in thy conscience, Thomas Pallard, great water Baptizer, and all that are
in thy Nature, form and hypocrisy, the Light of Christ Jesus in all your
consciences, which checks and reproves you in secret for sin and evil, will
let you see the hypocrisy and iniquity that yet is unwashed out of your hearts.

You have washed the outside in the Water, but yet are in the evil nature, and
the Light of Christ Jesus in all your consciences will let you see the same;
which Light, if you love it, and obey it, and submit to the Teachings of it,
will bring you to the knowledge of the eternal Truth, and out of your
conceated forms, to take up the Cross to, your wills; and earthly wisdoms,
to die to the world and all your pride and vainglory, that Light which lets you
see the deeds of darkness, and the evil of your hearts, that Light is your
Teacher, which stands out of all evil, that Light is your Teacher, your that
love it and bring your deeds to it to be tried, that your works may be wrought
in God, that light is your condemnation, all you that hate it, and act contrary
to it, who love the deeds of darkness rather than the Light, John 1.9. John
8.12. John 3.19, 20.

Now you have time, prize it, and take heed of sinning against the Light, and
Pallard, and all in that nature, give over deceiving the people, and keeping
them in a dead form, without either life or power, lest their souls perish and
be lost, thou that says the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable and a
History art ignorant of the soul and the mystery, give over I warn thee, and
charge thee, in the presence of the Lord, and all in thy nature, as you will
answer it before the judgment seat of Christ, I shall there be a witness
against you if you will not take warning; now you have time, prize it: For
hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, by his Spirit which he has
given us, and not by the Letter but by the eternal Spirit, hereby is our love
made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, as they said,
who were in Christ before us; who said, as he is, so are we in this present
world, witnessed in the eternal power by the Spirit, perfect in love, and
complete in him who is the head of all Principally and power, as it is written,
1 John 3.24. 1 John 4.16, 17. Col. 2.9, 10.

And Pallard, where thou said Paul had attained to such high Revelations and
discoveries, and were taken up into the third heaven, as is there spoken of,
yet afterward, though said, he cried out of his infirmities and said, he had
nothing to glory in but his infirmities, and had a prick in the flesh, etc.

I answered thee again, by way of Querie to that, and asked thee if it was Paul
that was taken into the third heaven, or some other that he there spoke of, and
gloried in at that time, and in that thy mouth was stopped, for I of thee
received not answer to it again, there was the deceit in thee silenced at that
time, as well as before, and thou had nothing for to glory in but thy shame and
folly, as it did openly appear in so much, that a member of the body cried out
against thee, or the head, to see thy folly, as the Ass cried out against
Balaam, and spoke to show him his folly, and the poor creature said, Had not he
been his Ass, and carried him so long? when did he ever know him do so before?
And when the Lord opened Balaams eyes, he saw his folly, and if the Lord open
thine eyes, thou may plainly see thine, who thy self have ridden and lorded
over poor creatures so long, and had them at thy command, yet at that very time
one was made to speak to thee, that had been ridden on or lorded over by thee,
and did reprove thee, to see thee so show forth thy folly: When was it ever
known that he did so before to thee at such a time? But it is but that the
Scriptures may be fulfilled; as it is written, they shall proceed no further
that resist the Truth for their folly shall thereby he made manifest to men, as
thine was (...) the Truth at that time, 2 Timothy 3.8, 9 And (...) stond up for
the Truth to resist thy deceit, though thy (...) appeared, thou art ready to
put them out of thy service, of (...) it, if it be so, they may rejoice to see
thy madness and folly made manifest; thou was at that time without the Sword
as Balaam was, and the poor creatures who had been hard bound down under thee,
at that time rejoicee, and it they continue their joy will increase, and
blessed are all they that suffer for righteousness sake, and says the Lord,
all those that are cast out for my Names sake, I will appear to their joy, and
to the shame of all their false pretended Brethren, that says, let the Lord be
glorified by them, in scorn, contempt, or disdain, in nature like unto the
Jews, Isa 66.5. Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. Luke 6.22, 23.

But as touching the place of Scripture where thou said Paul was in such
Raptures, and high discoveries caught up into the third heaven, and taken up
into Paradise, and after cried out of his infirmities, etc. 2 Cor. 12.

As I said then, so say I still, let all the wise hearted read it, and judge,
whether Paul spoke that of himself, or some other, for to it thou would not
return me an answer, when I demanded it of thee: But Paul himself plainly there
says, that he knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, whether in the
body or out of the body, he could not tell, but had Paul there spoken of
himself, he could have told if it had been him, and he did not say that he was
caught into the third heavens, and taken up into Paradise, and afterward fell
out of it again, to cry out of a thorn in his side, or a prick in the flesh,
and say he had nothing to glory in but his infirmities as thou Pallard and
darkness conceives, Read and see, 2 Cor. 12.

Paul there speaks of another, as it is plain: for says he, first I knew a
man, such a one as he is there speaking of: he speaks of the time also: and it
was above 14. years ago, or bypast from that time, that he was there speaking
of him, and he says, that though he spoke of him and his being in Christ, so
long since from that time, yet he knew not whether he were in the body or no;
but in that place he said, that God knew whether he was in the body or out of
it; but he there says, that such a one was caught into the third heaven, 2
Cor. 12.2.

And further he there says, he knew such a man, whether in the body, or out of
the body he could not tell, God knew, as he says in the 2 Cor. 12.3. But had
Paul spoken of himself he could have told how it had been with him: yet in the
sixth place he says, that such a one was caught up into Paradise; and in the
seventh place it does appear, that he was a dear friend to Paul, and told him
what he heard in the third heaven, and in the Paradise, but it is not expressed
there, for he says they was such words as was not lawful to utter, 2 Cor.
12.4.

Then in the eighth place he says, that of such a one he would glory, 2 Cor.
12.5.

But says he, of my felf I have nothing to glory in, but mine infirmities, yet
he had wherewithal to glory, but he forbore at that time, lest any man should
think of him above what he saw him to be, as he there says, 2. Cor. 12 6.

And he that were taken up into the third heaven, and into the Paradise, and
heard such words that was not lawful to utter, were an intimate friend of
Paul's that did make it known unto him, and in him he gloried, who were in such
a perfect state as that, though he had nothing in himself to glory of; but his
infirmities that he took pleasure in; those infirmities was not sins, as
darkness takes them to be, but his infirmities which he gloried in, and took
pleasure in, was in necessities, in distresses, in persecucutions, and in
reproaches for Christ's sake, as it is set down plainly in the 2 Cor. 12.10.
read and see: and to be reproached and persecuted for righteousness sake, was
a blessed thing as Christ himself said, and as you may read and see, Mat.
5.10.11, 12.

And blessed are those that are in such infirmities, for such a cause as it is
written, Luke 6 22, 23. And if ye be reproached for the Name of Christ; happy
are you, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4.13, 14.
and Paul being in that happiness gloried therein, as it is written; and he did
most gladly glory in those infirmities that the power of Christ might rest upon
him, and therefore in them he took pleasure, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10.

And thou Pallard, Water Baptizer, and the rest, denied Perfection in this life
in the new creation, and working of God, for we know that we are the
workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus, and he that is in Christ Jesus is
a new creature, old things are passed away, and all things are become new, as
it is written, Ephesians. 2.10. to the end. 2 Cor. 5.16, 17. Rev. 21 1, to the 6.
verse.

Pallard thou and all that denies perfection, you deny that which Christ came
to accomplish by his death, resurrection and ascension, and Ministry in the
Spirits of his Saints, and in the new Covenant, for if perfection could have
been by the Leviticall Priesthood, for under it the people received the Law,
what further need was there that another Priest should rise after the order of
Melchisedeck, and not be called after the Order of Aaron, for the Priesthood
being changed, there is made of necessity a change of the Law also: for he of
whom these things are spoken pertains to another Tribe, of which no man gave
attendance at the Altar; for it is evident that our Lord sprang out of the
Tribe of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning Priesthood, and
it is yet far more evident, for that after the similitude of Melchisedeck there
arises another Priest, who is made not after the Law of a carnal
commandment, but after the power of an endless life, for he testifies thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck; for there is verily a
disannulling of the Law or commandment going before, which stood outward in
types, tithes, shadows and figures, for the weakness and unprofitablenesse
thereof, for the Law outwardly made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a
better hope did, make perfect; which is in the mystery Christ, the hope of
glory, and the new Covenant, and he that has this hope in him purifieth
himself even as he is pure, and he that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified are of him, and he is not ashamed to call them brethren, and he has
for ever perfected them that are sanctified; Read those Scriptures, and let
them judge thy ignorance Pallard, and the ignorance of all you that deny
perfection to be attained to by Christ in the new Covenant, and Gospel
ministration, Heb. 7.11, 12, 13. to the 20. Col. 1.27, 28. 1. John 3.1, 2, 3.
Heb. 2.10, 11. 1 Cor. 6.11. Heb. 10.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. etc. 1 Cor. 2.6, 7. etc.

Secondly, God willing more abundantly to show to the heirs of promise the
immutability of his Council, when he made Promise of it to Abraham, confirmed
it with an oath, and said unto him, Walk before me and be thou perfect, and see
who the heirs of the Promise are, which has right to it, Gal 3.29 Gal. 4.28.
which thing in the Covenant is so confirmed to the seed, that by two immutable
things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong-consolation who are children of the Promise, as Isack was: who are of
the seed and heirs according to the Promise, who have fled for the Refuge to
lay hold upon that set before us, which is most sure and steadfast, and makes
an entrance to that within the Vail, where the forerunner for us is entered,
Heb. 6.13. to the end, and we are in him and he in us, and we are made perfect
in one, and are in union and Fellowship with the Father and the Son, as they
witnessed, John 17.10. 2 John 9.

And says Jesus our Lord, At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father,
and you in me, and I in you, John 14.20.

And there is there that bear record, the Father, the Word and the holy Ghost,
and these three are one in the Kingdom amongst the Saints, even the Kingdom of
heaven within, as it is written, 1 John 5.6, 7; 8, 9, 10, 11 Luke 17.21.

And says Christ to the Father, the glory which thou gave me, I have given
them, that they may be one even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one, John 17.23, 24,

Christ Jesus in his Sermon upon the Mount, he taught the People, and said unto
them, be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, Mat. 5.48.

And they did not cross him in his Doctrine, and say they could not be
perfect, as people say now in this generation.

When Abraham was ninety and nine years old, the Lord appeared unto Abraham and
said, I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1.

But Abraham did not cross the Word of God, and say he could not be perfect.

Paul he saw that perfection was to be attained, and he pressed after it, and
did not tell people it was not possible it should be attained unto, as the dark
Teachers of the world do now, that labors to keep people in darkness and
unbelief. But Paul in his grouth, as some were in Christ and grown up to
perfection before him, but he pressed after it, and said, as many as are
perfect be thus minded, to press on others to come up to perfection, for
Christ Jesus when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave
gifts unto men, for that very end to edify the Body, till they come into the
fullness of the measure of the stature of Christ, and unto a perfect man in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14, 15. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.

Job was a perfect man, as God himself said; and Noah was a perfect man in his
generation; and David said, Mark the perfect man, then there was perfect men,
and the end of such are peace, Genesis 6.9. Deuteronomy. 18.13. 2 Kings 20.3. 1 Chronicles.
28.9. Job 1.8. Psalm. 37.37.

But the transgressors shall be destroyed together; the end of the wicked shall
be cut off, and turned into hell, and be burned with fire and brimstone: Read
Psalm. 37.38. Psalm. 9.17. Rev. 21.8.

Read those Scriptures and see your portion that plead for sin, and continue in
unrighteousness, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Rev. 22.15. Rev. 21.27.
Rev. 20.15. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. Romans 1.28. to the end: Romans 2.5, 8, 9. Mal. 4.1.
Psalm. 9.17. Rev. 21.8.

See your portion you that desire to continue in wickedednesse, and take your
reward, Mat. 25.41. to the end. Read and understand all that desires to love
God, and take warning whilst you have time, now you have time, prize it, and
plead not for sin which is the devils kingdom.

And thou Pallard; thou and all that denies perfection are ignorant of the
Life of Truth, and the Ministry of the Saints, and crosses the Doctrine of
God, and of Christ, and crosses the Covenant of grace, and the Ministry of the
Saints, for they preached wisdom amongst them that was perfect, as it is
written, 1 Cor. 2 6, 7.

And Christ in his Sermon upon the Mount bade them be perfect, Mat. 5.48. And
the Apostle said, Finally my Brethren, farewell, be perfect, 2 Cor. 13.11.

And they said, Let us go on to perfection, Heb. 6.1. And they did go on to it,
for they came to the innumerable company of Angels, to the Church of the first
born written in heaven, to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just men
made perfect, Heb. 12.22.23. And they said, therein was their love made
perfect, that they might have boldness in the day of judgment, for as he was
so was they in that present world: 1 John 4.16, 17. And they were without fault
before the throne of God* and no gull was found in their mouths, that were
redeemed from amongst men, Rev. 14. being the first fruits unto God and to the
Lamb, verse 4, 5.

And they said to others that were in their grouth, as he that has called you
is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, and this is witnessed,
See Rev. 14.3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1.13, 14, 15, 16.

And thou Pallard, and all that says the Bible is a History, and says the
Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, and all that preaches the Letter and not
the Spirit, and denies perfection by Christ in the new Covenant, Heb. 10.9*
11, 18. All such as you are, do bring a contrary doctrine to Christ and his
Apostles, and all you that are against perfection, you are against the new
Covenant, and you deny the Scriptures therein, that deny perfection, and you
deny the Doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles, and the end of Christ's death,
resurrection, ascension, and the Church of the first born written in heaven, as
is proved by the Scriptures, Heb. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. Heb. 12.2^, 23, 24, 28. Heb. 10.16, 17, 18, 19, 29, 21, 22.

And we deny you, and all that deny fellowship with the Father and the Son, and
we are not to receive such into our houses, nor to bid them God speed, but to
hold them and you all such accursed, as it is written and as you may read, 2
John 9.10, 11. Gal. 1.8, 9. 1 Cor. 16.22.

Therefore silence all flesh, and deceit, and stop your mouths, say not but
that you are warned, lest I be a witness against you before the judgment seat
of Christ, in the terrible day of the Lords feirce wrath and indignation; and
as I told thee Pallard at thy going forth of the door, that shall stand for
thee. Zeph. 1.14. to the end. Isa. 66.15.16. Mat. 25.41, etc. 1 John 4.17. 1
cor. 6.23. Jude 14, 15.

R. F.
Written in Warwick shire the beginning of the eigth month, October. 4. 1654.
The sealed are the LORDS, etc.
THerefore, thus says the Lord, Behold I have laid in Sion, and do lay there a
chief corner stone, Elect and precious, he that believes on him shall not be
confounded, and the Foundation of God stands ever, and has this Seal set
upon it, the Lord knows who are his, and they that are Sealed, they know him
by his indwellings in them, and we know that the Son of God is come, and has
given us the gift and the Seal, and the understanding by which we know that we
are in him, and he in us, even in his Son Jesus Christ, and this is true God
and life eternal, as it is written and witnessed, See 1 Pet. 2.4; 5, 6, 7. to
the 11. 2 Cor. 2.19. Rev. 9.4. Ephesians. 1.13. Rev. 7.2, 3. John 6.27. 1 John 3.24.
1 John 5.20.

God has also out of his free love given to every man a talent, or a measure
of grace to improve, and Christ is the true light that enlighteneth every man
that comes into the world, and he that obeys the Light is led out of
darkness into the eternal life, and enters into Covenant with God, and is
Sealed, and enters into the joy of his Lord, as it is written and witnessed:
Mat. 25.14, 15. Romans 12.3. Titus 2.11, 12. John 1.5, 9. John 8.12. Heb. 5, 8, 9
Mat. 25.19, 20, 21. to the end. Ephesians. 1.

But he that hates the Light he is the unprofitable Servant that accounts God
a hard Master, but though he do so, he has the Light manifested in his
conscience, which lets him see the deeds of darkness, and not obeying it, that
will be his condemnation: John 3.19, ^0.

It does not teach him, because he does not love it nor obey it; therefore
because he has it and does not obey it, when God takes away his own, he will
be found just in the condemnation of the ^^oothfull, and ^n the damnation of
the wicked; for it will stand with his Justice so to do, let God be just, and
every man that hates the Light be found a liar, he that hates the Light has
it, as the unprofitable servant had the Talent given him, to improve, and did
not improve it, and so it was taken from him that had not, and given to him
that had; the Talent was taken from the unprofitable servant that had not
improved it, and was given to him that had improved his Talents, and he entered
into the joy of his Lord, but the unprofitable servant was cast, and is to be
cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth, as it is written Mat. 25.

But he was not cast into utter darkness because he had not the Gift given
him, but because he had it and did not make use of it to serve him with it that
gave it unto him; and the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
prosit withal, if he use it aright in the service, but all does not profit,
because all does not obey it, and Christ is the true Light that enligteneth
every one that comes into the world, and lets him see his sins, and the deeds
of darkness: but every man does not love the Light, so as in all things to
obey it, and there is his condemnation: not because he has not the Light made
manifest to the view of his understanding, but because it is made manifest to
the view of his understanding, and he loves darkness rather than Light, he
that obeys the Light is led out of darkness, and has salvation: John 8.12.
Heb. 5.8.9.

But he that disobeyeth the Light, and receives not the Truth in the love of
it, but serves unrighteousness, he and all such are for damnation, John 3.19,
20. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.12:

FINIS.

