THE NEW Nonconformist; Who having obtained help of GOD, does persist unto
this very day; WITNESSING, Both to Small and GREAT, Some of those Glorious
Things WHICH The Apostles, the Prophets, and Moses, did say should come to pass.

OR, The VOICE of A Careful Shepherd, Crying, From his Watchtower at W.C. Unto
his Little Flock at W.L.
With a loud Voice.

Matthew. 10.17. Matthew. 7.15. Philip. 3.2. Tit. 1.12. BEWARE of Men: Beware of
Dogs: Beware of Wolves, and of other evil Beasts.

Joh. 10.11, 12, 13. The GOOD SHEPHERD gives his life for the sheep. But He
that is an HIRELING, and not the Shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, sees
the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flees; and the wolf catches them,
and scatters the sheep. The Hireling flees, because he is an Hireling, and
cares not for the sheep.

Printed at London, for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1654.

A PREFACE To every Honest and Intelligent READER.
IT seemed good unto the Apostles, and Elders, Act. 15.23, (...).
and Brethren at Jerusalem, when they wrote to the brethren of the Gentiles in
Antioch, and Syria and Cilicia, to recommend their beloved Barnabas and Paul,
with this short choice Character; They are men which have hazarded their lives
for the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. (...). Tradiderunt animas. Bez.
exposuerunt.


And verily they must not love the Lord Jesus at that ordinary rate, which even
the Bishops and the Deacons of the Churches generally content themselves withal
at this day, who do intend to adventure their lives in his Cause, and for his
Name, against the present refined policies and practices of the Whorish Woman
and her lovers, the Kings of the earth, with their Retinue.

It is a sad Symptom, Mat. 24.12.
when the love of many grows colder and colder, at that point of time, when the
Lord expects (as well he may, if you knew all, Christian friends) it should
grow hotter and hotter, till it amounts to that degree, and perfection of
operation which is mentioned Rev. 11.5. If any One will hurt them, who stand
before the Lord of the whole earth, fire proceeds of out their mouth, and
devoureth their enemies: and if ANY ONE will hurt them, he must in this manner
be killed.

I humbly conceive, the Word of JEHOVAH is not in any of his servants hearts as
A BURNING FIRE, but they are also at the same time enflamed with love and zeal:
this multiplication of heat, as I may so say, causes them, like Jeremiah, to
be weary of forbearing, Jer. 20.9.
so that they cannot stay and contain themselves within those bounds of
Mediocrity and Moderation, which used to be cried up by the lukewarm
generation of Preachers and Professors in all ages hitherto.

But the Scriptures must be fulfilled; and therefore, it is not to be admired,
that there should be such an universal Apostasy, and that those who had a Name
to live, Rev. 3.1.
are now dead. Wonder not, I say, Oh Little Remnant! that there are so many
fallen asleep, but rather ponder the true reason, why there are any kept awake.

For, that most excellent old Doctrine, which our Lord taught his Disciples, in
the days of his flesh (and accordingly, after his ascension was very much
practiced) has been of late, if you observe it, almost utterly out of date, I
mean the Doctrine of self-denial, and of forsaking all (Relations, Mat. 16.24.
Luke. 9.23.
Liberty, Goods, good Name, yea, life it self,) for his sake and the Gospels;
How little is it preached now? how much less is it practiced? But the reason is
ready, and upon record: These are the last days; and the Spirit speaks
plainly, 2 Timothy 3.1, etc.
and without a Parable, That in those days men shall be lovers of their own
selves, cevetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, etc. lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God, (yet) having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof. Observe, whether very many, in stead of denying themselves, as Christ
has taught, do not deny the power of godliness, 2 Pet. 2.1.
and the Lord that bought them, as the world and lust persuade.

But hearken, dear hearts, and be cheerful; yea, be ye very joyful in
believing, that the Spirit of life and power from God, shall ere it be long,
enter into a choice company, Rev. 11. Ezekiel. 37.10.
and they shall stand upon their feet; and fear shall fall upon all those who
see them: for I know and am persuaded, that there is at this present time, a
remnant according to the election of grace reserved by God to himself, Romans
11.4, 5.
(notwithstanding the present Apostasy) who have not bowed the knee either to
the Beast or to his Image. I wait to see this reserved remnant called out of
their several holes and caves, where they are hid from the world, and from one
another, and so brought together, even as so many dry bones, bone to his bone,
etc. to make a standing Army for the King of Saints, in the time appointed of
the Father.

Mine heart, Judge. 5.9.
(a Deborah's was) is toward the Governors of Israel, that offer themselves
willingly among the people: bless ye the Lord. Oh! keep your garments clean,
and close about you, and you shall walk with Christ in white, for such are
worthy. How do I rejoice in Spirit, that I can in Spirit go through the grates
of my Prison, and pass through all the guards, which are set to shut and keep me
up from the society of the Saints, and converse sweetly in a mystery, with
those beloved Brethren of mine, whose faces I never saw in the flesh!

Methinks I hear, A mystical Conference, betwixt the prisoner and his Brethren,
who are one spirit with him, in the present truth and work of God in the world.
Dan. 8.13.
with Daniel, one Saint speaking and another Saint saying unto that certain
Saint which spoke, How long shall be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice,
and the transgression of desolation, to give both the Sanctuary and the Host to
be trodden under foot? Then methinks I hear a sweet voice from another Believer,
saying, The Sanctuary shall be cleansed, it shall be cleansed. Amen, say I,
from my Watchtower: the Lords Sanctuary has need of cleansing.

David had had such Worthies come from New England and from Holland, at the
beginning of the late great revolution, as would not only have helped to
maintain their own and their Brethrens seize; but would also have
advanced valiantly, like undaunted Leaders of the Lords volunteers, 2 Timothy 2.3.
upon the old carnal Church and its Clergy: and, as becomes good Soldiers of
Jesus Christ, would have endured any hardness, rather then have given place by
retreat or subjection, though but for an hour, Gal. 2.5.
that so the truth of the Gospel of the Kingdom might have prevailed in the
World.

We had these honorable thoughts of them; but alas, where are they? and what is
become of these reputed Champions, for the Lamb against the Beast? are not most
of them even revolted and gone? 2 Timothy 2.4.
are they not entangled in the affairs of this life? yea, are not some of them
busy in building again the Things they have destroyed?

(...). Luke 12.30.
carried like Meteors betwixt Heaven and Earth. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts
shall perform this great Thing whereof we speak: and if need be, Jehovah will
create a Spirit of judgment, and a Spirit of burning, for the accomplishing
that honorable Enterprise for his Son, which the hearts of the choicest Saints
are so much upon.

Again, It Is probable, 1 Cor. 1.27.
God will take some foolish Thing or other, some weak, some despised Thing, to
perfect his praise, in the midst of all his enemies.

For oftentimes of old, the Instruments have been too Many, sometimes too
Mighty, sometimes too Wise for God to use. Wherefore let us remember, It Is thy
part and mine, to believe, that notwithstanding the Retrograde motions, both of
persons and Things, as we suppose, yet certainly, the Main Design is carried
on with an High hand; but, in paths so secret, that the most sharp-sighted
Politicians in the Kingdom of the Beast, cannot well tell how and where to
obviate or countermine.

And, which is the most confounding Consideration of all the rest, such is the
nature of this great Contrivance, (which you through mercy are privy to) that
if there be at any time a Discovery made, of its mighty Eruptions, as now and
then there is; yet, the Soldiers weapons, with the Counselors and States-mens
wits in conjunction, dare not suddenly grapple with it: but if they, at any
juncture of time, are found so hardy, as to make this bold adventure, it is with
utmost hazard of being ground to powder.

As for me, (a reproached Outcast, an exile Captive) it is upon my heart to
desire Two Things of you my brethren and companions in tribulation, and in the
Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ.

Pour out prayer, and then lift up prayer for the prisoner. Ephesians. 6.18 Jude 20.
verse
Oh! let there be a Continuation of prayers and requests on my behalf, in the
Spirit, I say, in the holy Spirit: for certainly, the Lord has heard your
supplications for me, as I shall, I hope, demonstrate in due season. Oh pray!
and pray again, ye close followers of the Lamb, That, if this Close prisoner be
delivered up again to the Councils for Christ's Name sake, Mat. 10.17.
and his Kingdoms sake, he may be made Mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18.24.
and eloquent with that eloquence and elocution only, which the Spirit of
Christ was wont to administer to the suffering Saints in all ages. And, That I
may be of a very high, and of a mighty spirit for our dear Lord Jesus; yea, of
a lofty and a daring spirit, according to the glorious Ministration of the New
Testament, and not otherwise in the least: which yet will never be, unless, He
be dearer to me then my life, whom my soul loves, and unless I am kept under
the constraining power of divine love. 2 Cor. 5.14.


Oh Brethren! this Divine love will make bitter Things sweet, and turn a strait
Prison into a stately Palace.

Do I say, Will do these things? yea, it has performed greater works then I
can possibly, after much meditation, compass to express. Wherefore, I entreat
you to remember my bonds, my strait bonds, as you do; and I am persuaded, your
brotherly love herein will turn to good account for each of you also, when with
diligent observation you ponder what improvements you have made in the
industrious prosecutions of so good a trade.

And let men beware, how they impute it to proud presumption in me, thus to
hope, Luke 21.28.
to look up, and to lift up my head with such boldness in this Cause, even
before the faces of the Highest and most Majestical Potentates in the World, if
called before them: for has not my God asked me many times, Will thou in such
a Cause as this (though most perfidiously forsaken by very many) be afraid of a
man that shall die, and of the son of man that shall be made as grass?

Did not Stephen, Acts 7.
that renowned Deacon of the Church of Christ, carry it sweetly, and yet
stoutly for his Lord, when he was brought before the High Priest and the
Council? His Highness did not affright him in the least; Stephen was protected
and encouraged by One who was infinitely higher then He and all the Lords of
the Council: before I had tasted of Stephen's Cordial, I often wondered how he
did dare to speak at so high a rate, before and unto the High Priest, as you
read Act. 7.51, 52. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do
always resist the holy Ghost; as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the
Prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them, which
showed before of the coming of the Just One, of whom ye have been now the
betrayers and murderers, etc.

Again, was not Luther, in the presence of Charles the fifth, and the many
illustrious Princes of Germany, inab^ed by the most High, to bear up with
invincible courage, so that they could not prevail to terrify or affright him
from his Faith and Doctrine which he had taught the people from the holy
Oracles? and then, it is easy to conjecture how improbable it was, that all the
Monks and Friars, all the Prelates and Parish Priests should afterward be able
to resist the Wisdom and the Spirit by which he sp^ke.

Oh! how sweet has that word been made to my soul? 1 John 4 Ye are of God,
little children, and have overcome Them, because, Greater is He that is in you,
then he that is in the world.

Offer up praise for the prisoner.
I beseech you also let there be m^intained a constant conjunction in praising
the Name of our God and Father. Le^ us agree to meet every day, many times in
the day, for the performing this Celestial, this Angelical service.

O! Psalm. 34.3.
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together in the Spirit
(...) and though our outward man be not capable during my restraint of local
fellowship in this spiritual ^acrifice of praise, yet it will refresh me much,
to recount the mercies, which are our proper portion and inheritance, in
distinction from the world.

1. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, in Christ: as,

That he has chosen us in him, and that b^fo^e the foundation of the world,
etc.

That he has predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to
himself, etc.

That he has made us accepted in the Beloved.

That we have redemption through the Beloved, and this in his blood; which
redemption is the forgiveness of sins, etc.

That he has abounded in the riches of his grace toward us, and this in all
wisdom and prudence.

That he has made known to us the mystery of his will.

That in Christ we have obtained an inheritance, etc. and such an inheritance.

That after we believed, we were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise.

2. But beside those blessings and other glorious privileges, which I partake
of with all Saints, the Lord has enriched me with many precious Jewels in this
present condition, which I desire may be so used by me, as to adorn the Gospel,
and to improve those new talents which are vouchsafed to me, in this House of
Bondage, from day to day.

The mercy of contentation in this close imprisonment, Phil. 4.11.
I value at a very high rate before the Lord, in mine acknowledgements of his
loving kindness toward me.

The liberty and cheerfulness of my Spirit: though the flesh be weak, I am able
to say, with great joy, Heb. 13.5.
through rich grace, That the Lord has not left me nor forsaken me, but has
given me Liberty in Bonds, and Enlargement in Prison. I can tell you in the
power of an holy Triumph, Although the Soldiers have attached my body, and
keep my outside in chains, though they have barricado'd the way whereby the
Saints were wont at first to come to visit me, for the mutual comfort both of
them and me; yet blessed be my God and Father, my spirit is out of their reach,
and the new and living way into the Holiest is kept open, Heb. 10.20.
and by the blood of Jesus I have boldness to enter into that within the veil.
Heb. 6.19.
I cannot express the comfort of the visitations of the Father and the Son, who
according to Christ's engagement, Ioh. 14.23. Do graciously, gloriously come
unto me, and make their abode with me, who am less then the least of all these
mercies.

What shall I say? I have a longing desire, (but it is not an inordinate lust
after outward liberty) to come and declare what God has done for my soul, and
to teach and preach Jesus Christ publicly and from house to house. Acts 5.
last.
Let us therefore in the Name of the Lord, join our forces, and strive
together in prayer, that when I come, I may come in the fullness of the blessing
of the Gospel. Romans 15.29, 32.


That I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may with you be
refreshed, even with you, who through love in the Spirit have endeavored to
let loose and break in sunder those bonds wherewith I have been tied so many
months. And I am persuaded, (for I will not dissemble,) that this shutting and
tying me up, will render me, by the power of God with me, more fierce, more
fell and furious against the Kingdom of the Beast, then I was before; but it is
probable, The Lord by his Spirit has taught my hands to war, and my fingers to
fight the battles of the Lamb, more skilfully then I did before.

I bless the Lord also, and let his people say, Amen, Romans 12.2.
that I am still a Nonconformist to the world, and the world-like-Church; but
am through the grace of God made more conformable to the image of his Son: Romans
8.29.
and when Christ who is my life shall appear, I also together with others shall
appear with him in glory. Colos. 3.4.


It often comes into my mind, how David complains, Reproach has broken mine
heart. Indeed, Psalm. 69.20.
to be stigmatized, and set as upon a Theater for a spectacle, (...), Gal. 6.17.

(...), 1 Cor. 4.9.


and set as upon a Theater for a spectacle, and to be gazed at, is a very
unwelcome condition to the nature of man: but herein I am conformed to my Head
also, Heb. 6.6.

It was reported during my first close imprisonment, that I had forsaken
(Christ) the Head, and was under the ministration of evil Angles, That I had a
spirit of delusion, etc. Sometimes by some men, I am a fool; by others, that I
am a madman: since my close confinement here, I am against Magistracy as
Magistracy; poor fellow, I cannot define what faith is. But blessed, for ever
blessed be the Name of the Lord, I can say, in Paul's spirit, None of these
things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might
finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God.

By the ensuing Letters, to that little Flock, which I am over in the Lord, my
spirit and my design may be discerned: they are the Index of my very heart.
When Epistles are the true and genuine issue of the soul, (as these are of
mine) there is no difficulty in making an estimate of the Author of them,
especially, when there is no opportunity for the polishing and artificial
adorning of them, as in the writing of these there neither was, nor well could
be.

The first was written from near the Council-chamber-door, in the midst of
company, and in have, because I expected every moment to be fetched in; and I
was willing to salute the Church from my bonds, they being to meet in the
afternoon of that day.

The next, and all the others, were according to the constant frame of my
spirit at other times, no artifice, no premeditation or study. I had no thought
of this kind of publication of them. Soundness in the faith, the power of
godliness, and the promoting of the present truth and work of Christ, are those
things which have lain next my heart for many years; and if I speak or write to
the Saints, those things will certainly flow forth: for that saying of Christ
is truth, Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks, (and so the
pen writes, if he be an honest-minded-man that guides it.)

I should not have thus far appeared, but for the manifestation of the truth:
and what error soever any one espies, in those Letters, I am ready to retract
and correct, upon any the least advertisement with light from the Oracles of
God; 2 Timothy 3.16, 17 (...).
for the Scripture being divinely inspired, is profitable for correction, that
the man of God may be perfect, perfected to every good work.

I have great need of patience, that after I have done and suffered the will of
God, I may inherit the promise. Moreover, to conclude, I must not cast away my
confidence; for that also has great recompense of reward.

We poor oppressed prisoners, are fools, for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in
Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honorable, but we are despised.
This word I write to the dissatisfied Saints, who are so apt to censure, and to
speak evil of the things they know not; but yet I write not these last words to
shame you; but because I in my very soul desire, you may not stumble and fall,
and show your shame, and break your bones. Therefore again I warn you, not to
believe reports. When I am brought before Councils of State, or Courts of
Justice, and there be found any evil in me why I should be thus dealt with,
(even worse then blasphemers, and felons, and other malefactors, are dealt with
in Prison, and that, in several respects) then it will be time enough for you
to censure, and judge, and condemn: but to this day, after seven months
imprisonment, I have not been brought to the place of hearing, neither accusets
not witnesses have passed upon me. My heart does not condemn me, nor the Lord,
who is greater then my heart, and knows all thin^s; I have boldness before
him, and should I fear what man can do unto me?

Therefore judge nothing before time, until the Lord come, who both will bring
to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsel of
all men's hearts; and his judgment will be according to truth, Amen. Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

From my Watchtower in this house of bondage, called Windsor Castle, this 28
of the 6 Month, 1654. Your servant for Christ's sake, willing to do or to
suffer according to the will of God, Christopher Feake.

To all that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, who have
fellowship with the Father and his son Jesus Christ, and with one another.
Precious Souls!
HAving tasted, in some measure, the sweetness of communion with God, and also
of fellowship one with another; we cannot but commend the same to all Saints,
as a thing worthy to be desired, coveted, embraced, and promoted by them to the
utmost in their generation. And when other ways of Communion one with another
are denied them, then this of writing with Ink and Paper each to other, has
been ever found of singular use and comfort to them, and been practiced by the
Saints in all ages, even from the Apostles times down to these of ours wherein
we now live; whereby they do still encourage, comfort, counsel, exhort, stir
up, quicken, and provoke one another to love, and to good works; and to a holy,
humble, heavenly, sincere, upright, and unblameable conversation, in the midst
of a crooked, perverse, corrupt, deceitful, and adulterous generation. And we
amongst others having sound no small refreshment by these Letters, which were
occasionally written unto us by our dear Pastor, (when he was through the
malice and instigation of Satan, the old uccusor of the brethren, rent and torn
from his Congregation, and from his other dear relations; we know not for what
cause, unless it were for his faithfulness, cordialness, and constancy to the
Lord Jesus and his Saints, and unto their Cause and Interest; or for bearing
his testimony against the sins and evils of Apostates, Backsliders, and
Treacherous dealers, that so ignobly deserted their Colors, and are revolted
and gone; or for witnessing to the Truths of the kingdom and coming of the Lord
Jesus, the king of Saints, and the king of Nations, to rule and to reign in
righteousness, and in judgment in the earth, according as he has spoken
thereof, by the mouth of his holy Prophets which have been since the world
began:) we have often earnestly desired, for our own farther comfort and
edifying, and for the like benefit and refreshing to other Saints, that these
his Letters to us (with many others which he has written) might be made
public; to the end, that as the Lord has and does comfort us in all our
tribulations; so we might hereby be a means (under him) of comforting others
with the same comfort^ wherewith we our selves are comforted of God; and that
those who have the gift of discerning of spirits in any measure, may judge
whether these things that are written, (being no other in effect, then such as
from time to time have been spoken and preached to us, by this faithful (though
despised) servant of Christ) be the breathings of the holy Spirit of God, or
the inspirations and suggestions of the devil, and of evil angels, as
unreasonable men have calumniated and aspersed him. Say we not well, that thou
art a Samaritane, and have a devil? said they of Christ. Now if they call the
Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his
household? Yet, says Christ, Be not deceived; God is not mocked: the Blasphemy
and the words spoken against the holy Spirit, they shall never be forgiven unto
men, neither in this world, nor in that which is to come. However, says he to
his disciples, Beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the Councils, and
ye shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, FOR A TESTIMONY
AGAINST THEM. But when they shall deliver you up, take no thought how or what
ye shall speak: for it shall be given you in the same hour what ye shall speak.
For IT IS NOT YE THAT SPEAK, but THE SPIRIT OF YOUR FATHER WHICH SPEAKS IN
YOU: Matthew. 10.20. etc. It is the Spirit of your Father (says Chrisst) which
speaks in you. For the blessed return of which Spirit of the Father from on
high, and for the glorious effusion of it upon all flesh, let the sons and
daughters, and servants and handmaids of the Lord (to whom it is promised) ever
pray, and they shall find every day more and more, that it will break forth
mightily, to the confounding of that spirit of the World, that is risen up in
opposition and contradiction to it: for this spirit must fall, but the Spirit
of Christ must arise; and the Priests and Soldiers can no more suppress it, or
keep it under, then they could the body of Jesus from its resurrection. In the
mean time, let it suffice unto us, that Christ knows the blasphemy of those,
who say they are Jews, and are not; Christians, and are not; for Christ, and
are not; for the Ministers of Christ, and are not; for the Spirit of Christ,
and are not; but are the Synagogue of Satan, Rev. 2.9. and are of their father
the devil, and the lusts of their father they will do, who was a murderer from
the beginning, and ABODE NOT IN THE TRUTH; who is also a liar, and the father
of lies, Joh. 8.44.

Signed by appointment and in behalf of diverse others of the Congregation, who
have subscribed the Original copy. Thomas Allen. John Luxford. Robert Davie.
Stephen Rookeby.


POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
TAke notice, that the two last Letters to the Church are placed out of order,
because they could not be obtained in due time; and therefore are to be read as
the two first Letters from Windsor, though printed last.

A short WORD To the faithful REMNANT, who are of one SPIRIT in the present
Truth, and Cause of Christ.
I Always, since I understood the nature of the controversy betwixt
Antichrist and the Lord Jesus, in the light of his own Spirit, found it a
blessed employment to be inquiring and harkening, where the sign of Gods
presence was, and, upon which of the Congregations or assemblies, I could find
the most glorious demonstrations of the power of godliness, and where the Lord
was pitching his Tents, and revealing himself to his Beloved Ones. This is also
my work, at this day, to contemplate and consider what posture the Saints are
now in, and to watch that I may know, where the glory of the Lord is revealed,
and where or from whence it will break forth, at the approaching revolution.

In time past, before the New Model was in being, or extant in the world, it
was in the scattered Saints, yet gathered together in several meetings, (kept
in the City, Army and Countries) to find out a right way from Babylon to Sion.
You remember what distress the Lords people were in at that time, when that
Tyrant had the North and West at his devotion, when Essex his Army was beaten
and degenerate, when we were betrayed and forsaken by the old Soldiers of
Fortune, when the King and his Princes were victorious and rampant, after the
sacking of Leicester.

And when the new Model was despised in almost all men's eyes, It was commonly
called in reproach and scorn, both by the King's and Essex his soldiers, The
New Model.
save a small remnant of praying and believing Saints, where was the presence
of God then? who could declare before whom the pillar of fire did show it self,
as the token of Jehovah's presence?

It must not be forgotten, but remembered with renewed thankfulness even at this
day, That it did break forth and manifest it self, most gloriously, from
Nazeby-field, even every day more and more.

Then the Lord began to use the new Army, as One of the weak, foolish, despised
Things of the world.

Then the Council of War used to ask counsel of God, and God was with them,
wonderfully to direct them, to bless them with victorious success abundantly.

Then the Headquarters were famous and amiable, even as the Tabernacles of the
Lord of Hosts: Then the Spirit of Glory and of God rested upon them, and
marched before them, everywhere; yea, it was as a wall of fire round about
them, and the glory in the midst of them, Zech. 2.5.

And so it continued from year to year, to the astonishment of the wicked, and
to the triumphant rejoicing of the righteous.

At length, after some dangerous Temptations were overcome, (as the Armies
trinkling and tampering with and for the King, Queen, and their Issue, which
afterward in their straits, they bewailed in Windsor Castle) the presence and
Spirit of the Lord engaged them also to execute judgment and justice upon the
grand murderer and persecutor of the Saints, (not to mention other strange and
great enterprises) so, as that the whore of Babylon and the Kings of the earth
had cause to be exceedingly afraid.

Ireland was reduced also with a high hand, especially at the beginning; and
the Lord was gloriously present still with the General and his Army: only some
intelligent self-denying souls did discern plainly, that diverse Officers began
betimes, even too too early, to mind the prey, even before the work was done:
and it cost many of them very dear.

Let us remember also the expedition into Scotland, and the high Appeal made by
our Presbyterian-Brethren, and the Army, with their friends: nights and days
were spent in earnest prayer on both sides: the Lord appeared in terrible
Majesty at Dunbar.

About that time, the Cause of Christ, the Interest of Christ, the work of God,
the downfall of Babylon, and suchlike language, sounded from the Headquarters,
from the great Officers of the Army. My soul was ravished to see and observe
the spirit of prayer at White Hall in those days among many of the chief
Commanders, as if they had loved none but Christ, as if they cared for none but
Christ and his Interest, as if they would never have endured any King but the
Lord Jesus, or any Laws but his, or any Ministers but his. We (who through
grace were plain-hearted) thought there were not such another people upon the
face of the earth, (for love to Christ, to the glory of Christ, that he might
be magnified and exalted) as were the conducting and commanding part of the
Army.

But Oh! Oh my Bowels, my Bowels! The gradual declension and defection since
Worcester, with what words shall I bewail it? how have all the things of Christ
been neglected? how has that most noble and glorious Cause of the Lord Jesus
been forsaken, by those, who ought by manifold obligations, to have promoted it
to the utmost? there was a price put into their hands, and power was in their
hands. Oh this spirit of Baruch to seek great things for our selves, when
Jehovah says, Seek them not. Behold, that which is built, God will pull down;
and that which is planted, He will pluck up. The Lord Jesus is making great
have, to break in pieces all these Kingdoms both new and old; and yet men are
busy in seeking their own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ. I cannot
but speak, I must open my heart to some, who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity:
my lise is not dear to me in this Cause. If the Powers of the world and Rulers
of the people have a mind to take away my Life, as they have done my Liberty,
behold, here it is in a readiness: If the Lord give the word, I am willing
through grace not only to be bound, but to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus,
and for the Gospel of the Kingdom. I am free to give directions to my worst
enemies, were they may make inquiry after all my ways from my childhood to
this day; and if they find I have committed any thing worthy of death, or of
bonds, let them take their advantage: but to keep me a Prisoner seven or eight
months, and not bring me to the place of hearing, that I may know what my
crime is, and who are my accusers, and the witnesses; this is not fair dealing.
I am loath to aggravate things; but the manner of the Romans was more according
to justice, expressed in Acts 25.

Brethren, I desire to keep in memory the Cause of our dear Lord, so do you,
and know them who are of this Spirit through the Nation: provoke one the other
to wrestle with God, to cry unto our Father. If his children cry unto him, he
will not, he cannot long forbear; he will return, and have compassion on the
Remnant of his Heritage: for mercy pleases him.

The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all your Spirits, in the glorious
ministration of Grace, Mercy, and Peace continually, Amen.

From my house of bondage, this 31 of the 6 month, 1654. Yours for the Lord's
sake, to do, or to suffer on your behalf, Christopher Feake.

FINIS.
For the well-beloved CHURCH of Christ, meeting in Colemanstreet, Swan Alley.
My dearly beloved Brethren in the Lord, my Joy, and my Crown,
INdeed and in truth, The high and glorious mysteries of the New Testament, and
the most sweet ministrations thereof, are little understood by any of the
Saints in this day: Therefore we are so exceeding low in our Spirits, in our
Experiences, in our Affections and Resolutions for our dear Lord Jesus. But in
the appointed season, the return of our King from a far Country, will amaze all
those that would not have him to reign over them. This salutation now is sent
unto you, to signify to you that you are in my heart (through rich grace) to
live and to die with you, in this most noble and most honorable Cause of the
Lord Jesus Christ, both yours and mine. Blessed be the Father of our Lord
Jesus, that ever he revealed his Son in such a poor, silly, inconsiderable worm
as I am. Oh the riches of his grace! to entrust me with the preaching of the
glorious Gospel of the blessed God. I would not exchange mine employment, so
sweet, so comfortable, for all the riches, glory, authority and pompous
excellencies, which the fourth kingdom can tempt the sons of the earth withal.

God is gloriously gracious in these dispensations of sufferings: What a sweet
night have I had! Why should the Lord condescend to refresh the Spirit of a
poor, sinful, very sinful creature, in so transcendent a manner? Be of good
cheer, wait on the Lord, believe more, pray more, praise more, do more, love
more, abound in every good work more and more, The God of Peace, of Grace, of
Truth shall be with you. Undoubtedly, as I lately told you, the Spirit of the
Lord is rising: he cannot be kept down by the Princes, Powers, Soldiers,
Politicians of the Earth. Oh what confusions in Counsels! What concussions in
Kingdoms and Commonwealths! what contestations among the professors in this
City, are at hand! Great is Gospel Truth, and shall, and must prevail. How can
we forbear triumphing in the expectations of the downfall of mystical- Babylon?
If the Lord crucify us unto the world, and the world unto us, (as I know he
will) and pour out his Spirit richly, What may we not attempt for the interest
of our dear Lord? Remember, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver,
(in the Hebrew, Statutemaker) the Lord is our King, He will save us.

Your eminent growth in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, is that rich blessing which living and dying I bequeath unto you,
and request for you. A rise and shine, O ye precious sons and daughters of
Sion, in the midst of this dark world, as the stars in the firmament, each of
you in the families, neighborhood, and companies, where the Lord has or shall
dispose of you.

Believe it, my dear hearts, the Lord is coming: keep close together, love as
brethren; above all, be exceeding careful to maintain on your part, holy,
heavenly, spiritual, intimate communion with the Father, with the Lord Jesus,
and with the Saints of the most High: the fruits whereof will be joy in the
Holy Ghost unspeakeable, and most full of glory. Amer, and Amen. Hallelujah.

Letter the first from White-Hal, written while I was waiting on the Council
before I was called in. Yours in the most sweet fellowship of the Gospel, and
at liberty whilst in bonds, (for they are easy ones hitherto) CHRISTOPHER
FEAKE.
POSTSCRIPT.
My Fellow-prisoner for Christ, Mr. Powel, saluteth the Congregation with dear
affection.



For the well-beloved CHURCH of Christ meeting in Colemanstreet Swan-Ally.
My very dear hearts, ^he sons and daughters of despised Sion,
THe most spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, be your portion;
yea, the Lord Jesus himself, with all his fullness and glory, be still the lot
of your inheritance: and when the streams are at any time cut off, the Lord
show you the Fountain, which is Himself, God blessed for ever. Although my
heavenly Father has given me a Writ of ease, for the present; yet I am with
you in Spirit, and signify to you my love in the Lord: my time is not yet
come, and it may be it must be the fruit of your fervent prayers. I am clearly
convinced from a power invisible and invincible, that this imprisonment is not
unto death, But for the glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified
thereby. See John 11.4. I allude to that saying of Christ concerning Lazarus
his sickness: says Christ, This sickness is not unto death; and yet afterward
Jesus said plainly, verse. 14. Lazarus is dead: did Christ speak untruth before,
when he said, This sickness is not unto death? No, in no wise. So, although
this imprisonment should be unto death, (which blessed be my Lord, my God and
my Father, I do nothing fear, in the vulgar sense, yet in a spiritual sense it
is not, but for the glory of God; yea, undoubtedly, if I should be gathered to
my Fathers by the Soldiers and the Priests means in an unusual way, I rejoice
in Spirit, in the apprehensions of faith, which the Lord vouchsafes to me,
that out of my blood shall spring forth such a notable Spirit, as will be the
utter ruin of that cursed whore, with all the powers on earth new and old,
that take her part, paint her face, and do her work.

Wherefore rouse up, my dearest hearts, in the might of your God, and go on in
the Name of your Captain General, and by your secret, inward, in^isible
weapons, wound this base, upstart, ^rivate interest, under the fifth rib. But
in the midst of all your h^^y ^eal for the service of your dear Lord, forget
no^, I charge you, and every of you, before him that quickneth all things, and
witnessed a good confession before Pont^us Pilate, that you do principally,
constantly, zealously mind the inward work, the intimate communion which the
Saints use to have with the Father and the Son, as being their present paradise
on this side heaven. Oh for the Lords sake, every one of you, Parents,
Children, Masters, Servants, Young men, Old Disciples, Weak, Strong, Rich,
Poor, Married, Unmarried; Oh! I say, Be holy, be humble, be spiritual, live in
love, walk in sweet peace. Blessed be God, I have such satisfaction of you
generally, that you are a holy people, wholly separate to God: and if there
should be any close hypocrite among you, pray the mask and vizard off, that it
may he known who has not loved the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, but their
own lusts secretly traded in.

A godly jealousy over you, causes me thus in true Gospel-affection to write
unto you, watching over you at this distance with thoughtfulness and
carefulness in some small measure night and day, that I might present you to
Christ, and He to his Father, as beautiful and glorious a part of his spiritual
kingdom, as any other in this generation. Oh! that it might be so; Oh! that it
might be so,

The Lord Jesus Christ be with your Spirit, especially in your holy Assemblies.
Brethren (all of you) pray, pray for me.

This 1 day in the morning, the 5 day of my most comfortable confinement, 1653.
An unworthy worm, desirous to serve the Lord Jesus and all his Saints,
Christoph. Feake.
POSTSCRIPT.
I and my yoke fellow salute every Saint in the Lord. My Wife, a dear comfort
to me, desires the prayers of the Church particularly for her; and we both
desire you to bless the Lord jointly for his wonderful goodness to us: he is
verily a God hearing prayer.



For the well-beloved CHURCH of Christ meeting in Colemanstreet, Swan-Alley.
My dearly beloved in the Lord,
WHo in the Lord Jesus are builded together for an Habitation of God by the
Spirit: This is the fourth time I have in much affection written to you,
saluting you again in the Lord, as a holy people peculiar to Christ our Head;
in the light and power of whose glorious Spirit, you every one walking, shall
certainly come up to those seize and enjoyments, which will render you
truly honorable in the eyes of your very adversaries. Blessed be the name of
our God for ever, who has translated us from death to life some time since;
who is also transforming us from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.
Brethren, know, That the Messengers of the Church, together with the loving
Epistle which they brought with them, were exceeding welcome, and acceptable to
the Lords Prisoner, who was and is still filled with comfort from the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort: yea, I do not know of any one minute,
wherein dejectedness of Spirit has been my portion; yea, on the contrary, a
cheerful, lightsome frame and temper is my lot, from my tender Father night and
day. My care for you (which is my greatest exercise) ending in faith and joyful
confidence, that the Lord is doing good to you, as unto me: and those that are
approved, will be made manifest in these tr^ing times and seasons. Wherefore I
befeech you all again and again, by the mercies of God, by the meekness and
gentleness of Christ, that you walk very circumspectly in these evil days,
that you set the Lord always before you, resolving (in the sense and
remembrance of those first loves that were mutually between the Lord and each
of your souls at your first conversion and believing, and when you were first
sealed (after that you believed) by the holy Spirit of promise) out of
faithfulness and love to Christ, to follow the Lamb on Mount Sion whithersoever
he goes, first, in paths of holiness; then upon the Mountains of Israel, in
fresn green Pastures, where He, I say, He leads you; then to Prison, through
Fire, through Water, anywhere, everywhere, the Lord being in the midst of you,
and with you. Ah my dear brethren! the Lord Jesus being with us, bonds are not
bonds, reproach is not reproach, enemies are no enemies, death it self is not
death. My heart is enlarged: I could wish my self among you, that I might pour
out my soul before you. The Lord is good, his mercy endures for ever. The
brethren you sent to me, have reported the presence of the Lord in the midst of
you, your purpose of heart to cleave to the Lord and to one another. My counsel
for the present is as follows: though they be the same things that I write
over again now as before, yet consider them; Paul did so.

1. Now that ye are come together in the name of the Lord Jesus, let every
member of the Congregation consider what they are obliged to; Is it not to
continue together with the Church, walking in all the ways and Ordinances of
Jesus Christ? Did they not consent, in the hearing of Angels and men, to do
their duties, which are Commands of Christ, as well as to receive of the
privileges of the Gospel? Those that from respects of their particular
spiritual profit, do omit their duty, as in the public capacity of the members
of the body of Christ, without the consent of the whole, upon
Scripture-grounds, will find themselves in a snare ere they are aware.

2. Being all together before the Lord, as His peculiar people, desire
earnestly to know of him, whether or no there be not some of your number whom
he intends to set apart as a Teacher in the Congregation, for the carrying on
the work of the Lord in the Congregation; and then, if so, to beg to know who
he is: if not, to entreat him to furnish you with helps this way, as it were
from heaven; that so, you may not only be edified among your selves, but be
^eet, like a golden Candlestick with burning and shining lights in it, to give
light to the dark world, and so serve the Lord in your generation upon the best
account.

3. I desire you to consider, that the more my coming among you, is, and shall
be a fruit of your prayers in faith, the more we shall all rejoice together
when we meet. And therefore I desire you to spread my condition before the
Lord, that I am sent hither by an arbitrary power, no accusers brought face to
face, no witnesses produced; but in a private Juncto, determined to commit me
and Brother Simpson to this Castle, In Order to the preservation of the peace
and safety of the Nation: these are the words of the Mittimus; no crime laid to
our charge; their own fears and jealousies are the cause of this unrighteous
dealing with us, to rend and rear us violently from our Congregations; and here
not to suffer us to preach the Gospel to the poor people, that they may be
saved, while they are eating, and drinking, and rising up to play. Mr. Jenkins
when he was banished by the old Parliament from London, had free liberty to
preach as often as he would. The Lord beholds all these things, and I write not
this by way of complaint, the Lord knows; for my life is comfortable without
intermission; and the Lord has sent me hither for some glorious end, I am
verily persuaded.

4. I entreat you, looking upon each other as the sons and daughters of the
living God, to grow in love, in brotherly love, in love in the Spirit; to
abound in love, as the Apostle speaks, toward each other, and toward all men,
as by the rich grace of God I find I do toward you: and this you will find,
that loving the Lord Jesus more dearly, you will be the more tenderly
affectioned each toward other. This is the distin^uishing character of the
Disciples of Christ: this is the primitive Spirit; and Philadelphia, of all the
Churches in Asia, (which signifies brotherly love) was not reproved, but
encouraged by Jesus Christ: Oh! be you that Churches Sister.

5. Beg, in stead of all, the rich, glorious effusions of the Spirit of Christ;
that would render you a happy, holy, heavenly people; a spiritual, zealous,
faithful, fruitful people. I find, I find, Brethren, that the excellent
Spirit is rising, returning, revealing it self in the world, though the world
cannot, will not receive it. Walk in the Spirit, live in the Spirit, speak in
the Spirit, pray in the holy Spirit, rule in the Spirit, come together in the
Spirit, continue together in the Spirit, conclude in the Spirit all your
meetings: reserve the Brethren that are fullest of the holy Spirit, for the
last in exercises, that you may go home with a sweet relish of the presence of
Christ, with warmed refreshed hearts, with an appetite to come again the next
opportunity, because you found Jehovah so graciously present the last time. Oh!
when, Brethren, dearly beloved, and longed for, shall I see your faces again in
the great Congregation? In the Lords best time, in the time appointed of the
Father, my Father, your Father: to Him, with the Lord Jesus and the holy
Spirit, be glory for ever, Amen. Salute every Saint in Christ Jesus. The Lord,
the eternal God, be with you, and keep you every one in his bosom for ever,
Amen.

The 8 of the 12 Month, 1653. Yours in the Lord, to serve and love you
unfeignedly, Christopher Feake.

For the Saints and faithful Brethren in CHRIST meeting in Warwick Lane, LONDON.
My dear Brethren in Christ,
THe prosperity of whose souls I ardently desire more and more. Blessed be the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for all those spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in Christ, wherewith he has and does bless us the unworthiest
of his sons and daughters. Let me now write a few words unto you by way of
exhortation, to press forward toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus; for I perceive that in the neglect of this
duty, Satan takes great advantage to keep up his tottering and sinking kingdom
at this day.

If the Angels of all the Churches had been zealous in the prosecuting of those
things of which they made a fair show in the flesh, and in face or appearance,
Undoubtedly the several Congregations had been the glory of the Nation in the
midst of it, as God was willing to be their glory in the midst of the Nation;
then had not the faces of the most intelligent and spiritual Saints waxed pale
with grief, to behold the apostasy of the most eminent leaders; then had not
the forceries and witchcrafts of this present world, beguiled them ere they
were aware; then had not Satan filled their hearts, and the hearts of so many
of the Brethren, to deal treacherously with the Lord Jesus and this glorious
Cause, which is in great danger to be deserted utterly, as a thing of no value.
But they are the last times, and therefore it is the less wonder to see men to
be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, -- -- truce breakers,
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good,
traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures, (hunting, feasting, music,
worldly pomp and pastime) more then lovers of God, having a form of godliness,
and denying the power of it; from such those who are contrary minded must and
will turn away, namely, such Christians as being full of the Spirit, 1. Are not
lovers of their own selves, but of the Lord Jesus and of all the Saints. 2. Not
covetous, but liberal, laying aside as God has prospered them, honoring the
Lord with their substance, and with the first fruits of all their increase;
doing good, rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. 3.
Not arrogant, boasters; but lowly and meek, self-denying, resigning up all to
the wise disposal of their Father. 4. Not promise-breakers, or
covenant-breakers, but faithful; not changing a good resolution or word, though
it be to their hurt. 5. Not traitors to the Saints, to Christ's Interest, to
Gods Glory; but zealous promoters of common justice, of righteous laws. 6. Not
heady, or rash, wilful, violent advancers of their own forms; but praying,
waiting, deliberating. 7. Not lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; but
lovers of God, of Christ, of the Saints, of the Commonwealth, and
publick-good, more then of all the pleasures, delights, honors, powers and
glory, which the world can by any means administer to her admirers. Oh take
heed of mingling with backsliders and revolters! you will gain nothing by
acquaintance with them, or dependence on them: be contented with such things as
you have, if it be possible, (yea, if you have but food and raiment:) be not
sollicitous, do not make a busling for places and preferments, as do others,
lest you be brought into the temptations of serving proud imperious men's lusts
and humors. The word of command from our Captain General, by this his unworthy
leader of one of his Companies, is, To your close order, to your close guard;
and the watchword is, The Lord is coming, watch and pray; the Lord is coming,
watch and pray. Give the word, Fellow Soldiers, throughout the Lords Host,
which is armed with invisible, invincible, spiritual weapons; it will become in
due time terrible as an Army with Banners, Amen.

Finally, my Brethren, the time being short, Oh! beg of the Lord, that you may
go forward toward Gospel-perfection, that you may be full of spiritual
knowledge, experiences, and acquaintance with God, even the Father, and with
the Lord Jesus Christ. Now let the word of Christ dwell richly in you. As for
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and love to all the Saints, if your souls
flourish and prosper therein, all will flourish; then you will press onward,
you will be zealous, not lukewarm; you will admonish one another, watch over
each the other, advise, help one the other; you will glorify the Lord, adorn
the Gospel, shine like lights in the dark world, and put formal, worldly,
hypocritical professors and Church Members to shame, at the coming of Jesus
Christ. Salute every Saint, especially those who are most helpful, exemplary,
and diligent to promote the communion of Saints. If there be any that will not
obey the Law of Christ upon admonition in love, note that man or woman by
letter, that I my help to heal them at this distance; for I am with you in
Spirit. The Lord, even the Lord that fanctifies and saves you, be your portion
for ever.

The 11 of the 12 Month, 1653. Yours in the Lord with all I am, Christoph.
Feake.

My Beloved in the Lord,
I Do again salute you, as those, to whom the Father of glory has appeared in
the face of Jesus Christ, and to whom the holy Spirit has already come, as the
Comforter, to satiate the soul of the hungry and thirsty ones, more or less. My
soul is still waiting upon the Lord for your good, as knowing that all your
fresh springs are in him, as mine are; otherwise we should soon lie down in
sorrow. But blessed for ever be the glorious Name of our Jehovah, who in the
superabundant riches of his grace, has made most precious provision in the
Lord Jesus Christ for us, and for all the Saints. Verily, Brethren, the
consideration of the willingness and large heartedness of our heavenly Father,
is enough to overwhelme our poor weak Spirits; our frail hearts are not in any
wise able to bear up under that weight of glory, which breaks in upon us: when
the most High condescends to visit any of our souls from the throne of his
glory, Oh! how are we even filled with wonderment at those enjoyments and
seize! especially when we remember what we were in time past, enemies in
our minds by wicked works, full of unrighteousness, or selfrighteousness, very
vain, foolish and disobedient, serving diverse base lusts and pleasures. Now for
such wretches, and vile, base creatures as we were, to be so graciously dealt
withal, to be admitted into the presence of the great Jehovah, to partake of
exceeding great and precious promises of the divine nature, of the holy Spirit,
to be sealed with it to the day of redemption, and a thousand such privileges;
what manner of love is this? Oh! all ye Saints, break forth in secret and open
admirations; wonder at these things, as at the most rare and excellent objects
that are in all the world. What? what are the pleasures and honors, and pomp,
and powers of the children of men, to that joy and peace, which is in
believing, to those ravishing delights that are in the presence of the Lord,
and at his right hand for evermore? Assuredly, if the holy Spirit were fallen
upon any of us in that spiritual glory that is expected, we should indeed shine
like lights in the world, and hold forth the word of life most affectionately
and effectually to the Saints, and to the sinful sons of men; we should be a
blessing each of us in every place where we come: Parents would adorn the
Gospel, Children would adorn the Gospel, Pastors, People would be Ornaments to
the way of Christ; and the want of that Spirit, and the non-resting thereof
upon us, is the ground of all that unevenness in our walking, of our
unfruitfulness and barrenness in the Lords Orchard, of our unusefulness in our
generation.

As for my present condition, I tell you again, and I tell you rejoicing, The
Lord is good, exceeding good; I am filled with his company, I am satisfied as
with marrow and fatness, I must praise him with joyful lips: when I meditate in
the night watches, my meditations are very sweet. It is best for me to be with
God, with his people; and I shall be much with the Lord, that I may again, once
more, be with his hidden ones, and his holy ones, that rejoice in his Highness.
I am departed for a season, that I may return for a great space of time:
goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; and I would gladly
be a pillar in the house of my God, and would go no more out. And let me tell
you, I earnestly (and I desire your help also) beg and entreat, that the Lord
Jesus, that the name of the city of my God, which is the new Jerusalem which
comes down out of heaven from my God, and Christ's new name, may be written
upon me: I am looking out for my right to enter into that City, which shall be
called, The Lord is There.

Brethren, beloved of the Lord, how is it with you, and the daughters of Sion?
are you like the chariots of Aminadab, a living lively people, a zealous active
people? Tell me at this local distance, how is it with you? do you fear the
Lord above many? do you thrive and prosper, as the primitive Saints used to
prosper, that were Saints indeed? do you wrestle for me in good earnest? for I
trust this imprisonment shall turn to a good account, through your prayer, and
the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ: to that dear Savior of yours and
mine, be excellent glory for ever. His glorious grace be with every faithful
heart, Amen.

From my Quarters at Windsor-Castle this 15 of the 12 Month, 1653. Your
Shepherd in bonds, Christoph. Feake.

My dear friends and companions in the fellowship of the Gospel,
SEeing the good pleasure of the Lords goodness, and the work of Faith, is
fulfilling in me the Lords unworthy prisoner, and the time appointed of the
Father is not yet come; I do not find my spirit willing to accept of
deliverance, before the one and the other be fulfilled with power, that the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in me, and I in him, according
to the grace of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh dear hearts! it is given
to me a poor silly worm, despised of the people, through the wonderful free
grace of my God, Not only to believe (which is no small token of the favor of
God in Christ) but also to suffer for his sake; which seems to be an addition
of his favor, to those that have first believed. Oh! who knows what it is to
be sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, but those that have a spiritual
feeling of the mighty power thereof! how good is it to draw nigh to God! I have
often spoken of it, and felt it; but now it is glorious indeed, to keep company
with the Lord himself in his own holy place, even the Holy of Holies. My hearts
desire for you all, and every one, is, That you might be filled with all wisdom
and spiritual understanding, and by degrees come to all riches of full
assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God even
the Father, and of Christ; for verily that is such a condition as makes a
heaven on this side heaven. Oh! the excellent glory, sweetness, and fullness of
that estate! but never (I am persuaded) did any of the Saints enjoy themselves
and their God, so richly and abundantly, as the sincere Martyrs and sufferers
for the Name of Christ and the Gospel; because none have occasion so much as
they; all the world hate them, and their persecutors especially: therefore if
the Lord also hid himself from them, poor wretches, they would be of all men
most miserable. Therefore, further, Christ is bound by the duty of his Office
to look after Them, to stand by Them, to cherish and to nourish Them, to
countenance and encourage Them, to fill them with his own fullness, when the
world has emptied them, and scorned them, and imprisoned them, and buffeted
them, and put them into the forms of traitors, of heretics, of seditious ones,
etc. If the Lord should not reveal his love; yea, if he should not crown them
with loving kindness and tender mercies, then That Temptation would rationally
prevail, It is in vain to serve God, it is better to serve the lusts of men,
and our own: It will urge further, What profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances? Is it not better to observe the Ordinances of the Kings of the
earth, of the Princes, of the States and Protectors of the earth, then
otherwise, and do as the most do, as those do who are lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God?

But blessed be the Lord Jehovah, my rock, for ever; I have no ground to be
dissatisfied with my condition in this respect, as if the Lord did keep at a
distance, as well as man; yea, on the other side, I am full, I am rich, I
abound, the Lord is with me most graciously, most gloriously. Friends, if you
knew what it is to lose all, or to be willing to lose all for Christ, in the
light and power of the Spirit of Christ, you would be more courageous, forward
and zealous in this noble Cause, in danger to be starved (but it shall not
miscarry) by the policy and private interest of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the Truth, and of the Spirit.

Brethren, I must break off: I am as much employed, as when I was in London,
for the most part, and am put to it, to write my Letters to you while company
is in my chamber; and so swiftly write what the Lord dictates, without study:
for I want opportunity; and the messenger now stays. Therefore, remember what
I have taught you publicly and privately from house to house; it is, for the
substance of it, such Doctrine as I dare through Grace, and the assistance
thereof, seal with my blood. I can boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will
not fear what man can do unto me: be ye strong, quit your selves like men; fear
not the power, pride, lusts, threatenings of man, walk as becomes the Saints;
let brotherly love continue, be not ashamed of my bonds, nor of my keeper.
Expect glorious revolutions, to make way for the desire of all Nations. Blessed
are they, even all those that wait for him, and love his appearing. My heart is
enlarged: surely prayer is made for me, I find so much incoms from heaven. The
Lord be your exceeding great reward, who wrestle for me. Salute every Saint,
especially those who are most full of the Spirit, and most useful for Christ
and his people. Eternal grace and glory be every ones portion, henceforth and
for ever, Amen.

The 18 of the 12 Month, 1653. From my strong Tower and place of sure defense.
Your faithful Shepherd, although absent and in bonds, Christopher Feake.

My dearly beloved Brethen in the Lord,
ACcording to that talent which I have received from the Lord, I desire to be
found fruitful and faithful to the Lord Jesus and his people; for it would be a
most sad thing, for my Master to find his servants either idle, or
ill-employed. And seeing, dear Brethren, that ye look for such things as the
Apostle Peter does speak of, in 2 Epist. 3 chap. Be diligent, that ye also may
be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. Questionless, when he
comes that shall come, he will find but little faith on the earth; and if he
find it so, you and I may readily conjecture, how all other graces will be
wanting; insomuch, that the righteous will scarcely be saved, and the wise
Virgins will do no more then enter in. I fear there will not be an entrance
administered unto them abundantly, into that everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, because but even then, they will be slumbering and
sleeping, and so cannot have their senses exercised, and in a meet posture to
keep him company, as those who have watched with the Bridegroom, and come along
with him.

You see I am careful to stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance, at
this distance; it is altogether from love, and for your edifying. It may be
some of you may be willing I should receive advertisements of your best things,
of your faith, and hope, and love, and humility, etc. but not of your
weaknesses, of any omissions or neglects, of any whisperings or evil
surmisings, or suchlike unseemliness; but let such remember, that the whole
Scripture being given by divine inspiration, it is not only profitable for
doctrine, but for reproof, and for correction and instruction in righteousness.
Therefore if any of you find any discontents or swellings in your own Spirits,
which you endeavor to hide, but yet they are clearly discerned by experienced
Saints; (for one word is enough to the wise:) let such an one know and
remember, that it is not a Gospel-frame of heart: the Corinthians indeed were
puffed up for one against another; but the Apostle reckons it a great
uncomliness in that body of Christ. I write not these things to shame you; but
(as those who are dear to me) I admonish you, lest Satan should get an
advantage of you, and so occasion your adversaries, and his instruments, to
blaspheme the people and ways of God.

Oh! Brethren, make it each of you (for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake) your
business, that your love, your holiness, your meekness, moderation or evenness
of Spirit, be known unto one another, and unto all men, that you may rejoice
exceedingly, and I may rejoice exceedingly when we shall meet together again,
not only in this world, but in that which is to come; when all the faithful
shepherds with their flocks shall be gathered together before the great
Shepherd of the sheep, and receive from him a crown of glory that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for us, who are kept by the power of God through faith
unto salvation.

Finally, Oh ye dwellers upon mount Sion! take heed to your steps, to your
goings out and your comings in; let your words be seasoned with salt, which may
minister grace to the hearers, and not grief. The bridling of the tongue is an
heavenly art and faculty: we count him a perfect man, who is very skilful this
way. Be swift to hear, and slow to speak; and be sure to remember, That our
adversary the devil goes up and down like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may
devour: like as the Lord said of Behemoth, He trusts that he can draw up
Jordan into his mouth; so, this crooked and piercing serpent hopes to swallow
up whole Churches into the gulf of his belly, which is this present evil
world. Oh therefore! let your eyes be in your forehead, to foresee the dangers
of the present juncture of time. The Lord fill your souls with Himself, and
Son, and Spirit, that there may be no room nor place in your hearts for any
sublunary interest whatsoever. The time is short; the path is untroden; snares
are multiplied; the service is hot; the victory is impossible to flesh and
blood, but easy to faith. Wherefore, my beloved in the Lord, be ye steadfast
and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, in whom I salute every Saint
in Christ Jesus throughout the whole Congregation, both those that were in
Christ before me, and those whom the Lord has revealed himself to, of later
years; the weak and the strong, the rich and the poor, great and small, who are
beloved of Christ: to him be glory and dominion in this, and in the world to
come, Amen.

From my pleasant prisonhouse, this 24 of the 12 Month, 1653. Your careful
shepherd in bonds, for the testimony of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus,
Christopher Feake.

Dearly beloved in the Lord,
HOw far, and to what degrees my Letters have been acceptable unto you, the
Lords people, and a part of the lot of his inheritance, is best known to him
whose eyes are in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, as a flame of fire, and
whose prerogative it is to search the hearts and try the reins of the children
of men. But blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of glory, who has put me in the Ministry of the new Testament, that he has
vouchsafed to his poor unworthy servant, This grace of bearing testimony to his
coming and his kingdom, and has superadded and heaped up encouragement upon
encouragement; so, as that I shall not be left nor forsaken in this honorable
Cause of his Son Jesus Christ, and of his Gospel. And I do further praise his
glorious Name by this Epistle in this Congregation of his Saints, for that he
has given me a room in his own bosom, and in his holy place, even in the holy
of holies, the place where his Honor dwells, and where his glory shines; as
also, has let me into the hearts and prayers of many of his choicest people,
who have received a good measure of that holy and divine unction, whereby
gradually they may come to know all things: although I am also sensible of that
dissatisfaction concerning me and my Cause, which is upon the Spirits of diverse
godly people. But do not we know that they are generally such as are contented
to sit down on this side Jordan with the two Tribes and a half? and their
seize and enjoyments are no higher then they were seven years since, if
so high, neither do they desire they should be; but my soul pities them. I see,
those that were first, are in danger of being the last; and the last, are in
probability of being first. And blessed are they who are not offended in
Christ, and at the Gospel of the kingdom. As for you, Brethren, beloved, and
longed for, great is my care for you, great is my rejoicing over you; I can
say, Through grace the Lord has given me to have a natural ^^re of your state,
and of your affairs; and what I have written hitherto, I have written with much
seriousness of Spirit, as in the sight of God; and in sincerity, as knowing
that I am what I am, through free mercy, for your edifying. Information is for
your edifying, exhortation is for your edifying, reproof is for edifying: if
there be no matter for reproof to work upon, if it find nothing in you, or any
of you, bless the Lord who has kept you; and that joy in uprightness and
innocence, will be for your edifying. If there be any among you conscious to
any unworthy walking before the Lord, his people, and the world, (as who is
not? I am sure, I am guilty of unworthy walking and miscarriages every day)
then let every such one lay his or her hand upon their heart, and humble
themselves secretly before the Lord, and look to their steps. Our God is a
jealous God, and a consuming fire, and he searches Jerusalem with candles, and
espies and knows all your thoughts, all your works, and ways, and words, and
walks. Look to your hearts, and spirits, and affections, and dispositions, and
ends, and principles, with all diligence. Believe it, Christ will make work
among you, if all be not found at the bottom: my office and ministry which I
have received in the Lord, will bear me out in being instant in season and out
of season, in representing what I judge to be the mind of Christ unto you from
the oracles of God, they being profitable for doctrine, and for reproof,
correction and instruction in righteousness; and happy are the people, who have
the Lord Jehovah so near unto them in all matters, for their God, as he is even
unto you; though I am nothing, and desire to be accounted so, so that Christ
may be all, and in all; so that you may make up the fullness of him that fills
all in all.

As for that fruit of righteousness and love, which you have lately showed
forth in the presence of the Lord Jesus, and his elect Angels, for, and in
consideration of my sufferings formerly at Newgate-market, and at the present,
and of all those necessary expenses incident thereunto; I do here testify, to
the glory of the Lord, and declaration of your readiness of mind, that it was
administered in sea^on; and so has not only made a supply of that which should
have been administered by others, and was not, but also is abundant, by many
thanksgivings unto God: and as he that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly;
so he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully: for as you abound in
this grace and other graces toward others; so God is able to make all grace
abound toward you. Therefore, my Beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not as in
my presence only, but now much more in my absence, Work out your own salvation
with fear and trembling; yet let not the hope and assurance of salvation, eat
up and devour your holy fear and trembling frame of spirit before the Lord; but
like the true inward circumcision, worship God in spirit, rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Further, I exhort you and urge you,
as from the Lord, in whose name I write, to do all things without murmurings
and disputings: let all your things be done in brotherly love; let all passages
be managed with meekness of spirit, that concern a private interest; but with
holy zeal, that concern the public interest of our Lord and Lawgiver: and to
this end, the Lord give you all, from the greatest to the least, a spirit of
wisdom, to try things that differ; and particularly, to distinguish betwixt the
glory of Christ, and the honor of men; that you may approve accordingly of that
(always in all conferences) which is most excellent; for I tell you, or rather
the Lord, That his glory must not now be given to another; and they that follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes, must have also a constant disposition to leave
all, to lose all, at an hours warning, for his sake and the Gospels. With many
other words I could write unto you, for my heart is enlarged; but I must break
off, and commend you to the grace of that God who brought again from the dead
that great Shepherd of the sheep by the blood of the everlasting Covenant; and
to the word of the Gospel, which is able to build you up further, and to give
you an inheritance among them that are sanctified through faith in Christ
Jesus: to whom with the holy Spirit be glory for ever. Brethren, pray for me
and mine, when you pray for your own souls.

The 1 of the 1 Month, 1653. Yours in bonds, for yours and the service of all
the Saints, CHRISTOPHER FEAKE.
POSTSCRIPT.
Brother Simpson salutes the Church in the Lord, and desires continuation of
prayers, thanking you all for your kind remembrance.



Dearly beloved Brethren,
MY hearts desire and prayer to God for you all, is, that as you have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, so you may walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and
stablished in the faith, as you have been taught, abounding therein with
thanksgiving; for otherwise, Satan will get an advantage against you, and
prevail upon you, so as to put you to shame, and me also, in the sight of this
present, evil, old world. Oh! how will it tend to the glory of our God and
Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, for you to remain unmovable and unshaken
in the midst of all the present temptations, both on the right hand and on the
left? considering, that the subtle old Serpent has, doubtless, a most
mischievous design against you, as you are the Temple and Habitation of the
living God. Oh! how shall we rejoice together, when we meet to bless and to
praise the Lord for preserving us unto his heavenly kingdom? notwithstanding
the strong endeavors of all adversaries, to keep us asunder, to scatter us,
and so to rejoice and glory in our desolation. But our God will come, and will
not keep silence; yea, he will come with vengeance, and make a most wonderful
discovery of that notorious falsehood and hypocrisy, of that prodigious
perfidiousness, whereof this adulterous generation is so deeply guilty before
the Lord and his people. In the interim, possess your souls with patience;
watch and pray, lest you also enter into temptation, lest you also being led
away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. Remember,
it is Jeho^ah your righteousness, who is able to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy.

Great are my hopes, many are my fears concerning you, and especially
concerning those among you, who shall think within themselves, when they hear
this, You are more fearful, or he is more fearful then he needs to be; we shall
do well enough: let such an one think (if any such there be) that such thoughts
nourished and cherished in his heart, are certain symptoms of an uncertain
Spirit, and of a treacherous heart. Oh consider, consider what relics of
unbelief! what remainders of lusts! what members of the old man, are yet
unmortified in the best of us! Who made us to differ from the World? Oh lean,
lean upon your Beloved, that has made a difference between you and those poor
creatures, that are yet in their blood, yet in their sins. Are you not
believers? are you not Disciples of the Lord? are you not Saints by calling?
have not you every one seen the Lord? have not you as others beheld as in a
glass, with a face unveiled, the glory of the Lord? then, Brethren, why are we
not transformed from glory to glory? why are our hearts narrow, cold, heavy?
why are our Spirits carnal, earthly and staggering? why do not our souls mount
aloft? Great is my boldness in writing, as it used to be in speaking to you. (I
have a great interest in you, and among you: I have a great part, a large share
in the good or evil that befalls you: your comforts, are my comforts also; your
discomforts, are my discomforts also.) Oh that I might warm your hearts at this
distance, by the power of God! setting these expressions of love and truth,
strongly and effectually upon all your hearts. How does the inward pulse of
your hidden man beat? what secret workings, walkings and communications in the
inmost holy place? Do you, can you set your feet upon the necks of your wost
enemies, the cursed corruptions of your nature? Verily, Christians, if you do
not grow into intimate acquaintance with the Almighty; if you attain not to
holy familiar communion with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, you will be
of little use in the public service of the Lamb against the Dragon, the Beast
and the false Prophet. Beg with ardent supplication, to live and to be kept
under the glorious ministration of the Spirit. Do not so mind the work within
doors, as to neglect the work abroad. Do not give up your strength, and the
might of your Spirits, for the carrying on the public work of Christ abroad,
to the disadvantage of the concernments of your souls: but as I have formerly
advised you, touching the graces and the gifts of the Spirit; so I persuade as
to this matter, carry on the great affairs within and without, In conjunction
and in proportion: But remember, (as I have told you often) Therefore does the
Lord dispatch the business of your salvation and particular happiness, giving
you a full assurance of eternal life, that so, his people having their own
inheritance secured to them for ever, they may be capable of serving the Lord
Jesus in their generation, upon the most noble account. Now, my Beloved, I
shall conclude with a few words unto you, as you are assembled together in the
Name of the Lord: ponder your paths, study the duty of your relations. Consider
what families you live in, and what eyes are upon you; let the believing
Husband endeavor to gain the unbelieving wife; and the believing wife, the
unbelieving husband, by a holy, wise, loving, dutiful conversation both in word
and deed; let parents and children that fear the Lord, carry themselves as
becomes the Gospel; so masters and servants: that was the great care of the
Apostles in the primitive Churches. Study the Epistles that were sent to all
the Congregations. You have lately testified your love to me, beyond my
expectation; accept of this and suchlike tokens of my love to you. Oh that I
might find you, when my God brings me among you, a people mightily improved in
holiness and purity, in brotherly kindeness and love, in self-denial and
heavenly mindedness, in zeal and spiritual magnanimity, in every grace, in
every gift, walking in the most excellent ways of truth and peace; that God in
all things might be glorified by us, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for
ever, Amen. This Epistle and Salutation is sent in much affection unto you,

From my prisonhouse, this 4 of the 1 Month, 1654. From your faithful
shepherd, through grace, still in bonds for Christ. Christoph. Feake.
POSTSCRIPT.
My fellow-prisoner and my yoke fellow salute you; and we earnestly desire a
continual mention in prayers and supplications before the Lord; withal,
desiring, that the Lord may be magnified in the Congregation, for all the
loving kindnesses and tender mercies, wherewith he has crowned us, since we
were made the prisoners of Jesus.



My dearly Beloved,
BEhold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should
be called the Sons of God! If the Lord Jesus will confess us to be such before
his Father and the holy Angels, yea, and before the faces of our proudest
adversaries, What ground of joy unspeakable and full of glory will be hereby
administered unto us, even in the midst of all those reproaches and slanderous
reports, that the men of the world (who mind earthly things) do endeavor so
industriously to heap upon us? The truth is, The world knows us not, because
it knew not him; it hates us, because it hated him. And the news of his second
coming is as troublesome to the Kings of the earth, now in being, whether they
are the sons of ancient Kings, (as the Prophet speaks) or late Usurpers and
Tyrants, as ever Herod was troubled at his first coming, ( Mat. 2.3.) and all
Jerusalem with him. Oh, Beloved! those appearances which are acceptable to the
Saints, are no ways welcome to the earthly powers; those truths which are milk
and honey to the children of Sion, are gall and wormwood to the inhabitants of
Babylon. It Is no marvel, nor urange at all, that it is but a little, little
flock, which will be found to remain faithful to that inward, invisible, pure,
spiritual interest of our dearest Lord, which is now breaking forth through all
these thick and tempestuous clouds.

Verily, my Spirit is more and more heightened and quickened to look for most
glorious and admirable vicissitudes: Methinks my heart rejoices, as if a
cordial from heaven were conveyed to it, to encourage me now in prison for this
good old Cause. Oh! what a pleasant sight, to see the Whore of Babylon, with
the Kings of the earth, with all her drunken Princes, and her Wise men, and her
Captains, and her Rulers, and her Mighty men, wearying themselves in new
Counsels, tiring out their Spirits in obviating the feared and suspected
designs of the praying awakened Saints, both in Cities and Countries. Come,
dear Brethren, this is not a season for you to be wearied, and to faint in your
minds; but let us look unto our Jesus the Author and the Finisher of our
faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised
the shame, and is now set down at the right hand of the throne of God.

Brethren, now it is a fit time for us to consider, I say, to consider the
Apostle and High Priest of our profession, and to hold fast our profession; let
no man or devil get our Crown; our very confidence has great recompense of
reward. What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits unto me?
especially those blessings of the New-Testament-Ministration. And what thanks
can you render unto him, who has hitherto kept you by his mighty power, from
the present abominable apostacy? Have you every one on a garment of fine
linen, white and clean, which is the righteousness of the Saints? And does the
Lord help you to keep your garments about you, that no man see your nakedness?
then you shall walk with Christ in white, when he comes; for you are worthy.

But, if on the contrary there should be a declining and departing from the
living God in any degree, through unbelief; if there be a decay of love to the
Father, and a warm affection to the world, and the great and the sweet things
thereof, in any of you, in any among you; what a sad consequence were that?
after all the open and professed declarations, which have been observed by
Angels and Men. But I hope better things, though I thus write, from that
principle of Pastoral-love and care, which the Lord has put into me. What
shall I say? methinks I am present with you, in the midst of you, observing
what love, peace, gentleness, sweetness of brotherly communion there is among
you, from the greatest to the least. What inward spiritual joy, manifest zeal,
what beauty of holiness, what mutual edifying, what praying in the holy Spirit,
what warm exhortations, what gracious admonitions, are stirring among you? Yea,
but, Brethren, what if the Lord himself should suddenly come, and stand in the
midst where you are assembled together, and view the posture of that little
flock, from which I am violently removed for a season, for their trial? should
he find all things managed after his own heart? would you be glad to see the
Lord, as the Disciples were? John 20.19, 20. read the place. Might he not
upbraid you with unbelief and hardness of heart? should he find nothing in
you, and among you, worthy of admonition or reproof? Tell me at this distance,
how could you behold him, if you should see him in his glory, and in his
Fathers glory? are you able to abide the day of his coming? I fear there are
very few Congregations of Saints in all the world, that are tolerably prepared
for the Bridegrooms coming.

Finally, Beloved, remember what I have spoken to you while I was among you,
from the word of the Lord: the searcher of hearts knows, I did, and
endeavored to do, all things for your edifying, for the best advantage of your
precious souls: I was always willing to bring forth out of my poor treasury,
things both new and old; even such Truths, and Principles, and Rules, as I
received of the Lord, by the teachings of that holy unction, and delivered unto
you; I kept back nothing that I could judge by the light of the Word and
Spirit, that it was profitable unto you; and it was and is your part, to search
the Scriptures daily, whether those things were and are so or not. If I should
see your faces no more, if I were to be offered up, I should not repent of what
I have taught you, and the poor sinful children of men; whatever the Rulers of
the darkness of this world do judge or say: my heart does not condemn me in the
least, all this time of banishments from the courts of the Lords house.

And blessed for ever be my Shield and Buckler, I have great and sweet
confidence toward him; and the Lord being my Helper and Protector, I do not
(for I have no cause to) fear what man can do unto me. The Lord make you and me
faithful unto the death, and fill us, that are his in good earnest, with joy
and peace in believing; only let your conversation be, as becomes the Gospel
of Christ, that whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of
your affairs, that ye stand fast in one Spirit, with one mind, striving
together for the faith of the Gospel. My fellow-prisoner saluteth you:
Brethren, pray for us, strive in prayer for us, that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and wicked men, in the time appointed of the Father. Salute most,
the most holy, lively, heavenly, active Saints in this crooked generation. The
Lord be with you.

Yours, as, and because your are Christ's, Christopher Feake.

Brethren, Beloved and longed for in the Lord,
THe High and Mighty One, (whose name is Jehovah our righteousness) be your
Protector for ever. O! that he would look down from the Habitation of his
Holiness, and of his Glory, and smile, and shine upon every one of you in the
Beloved, The Lord Jesus, who loved us, and gave himself for us, when we were
yet sinners and ungodly, when we were yet enemies in our minds by wicked
works: to whom be glory for ever, Amen.

Verily, it is good to be writing and hearing of the sweet and precious Name of
the Lord Jesus. It is most pleasant to ponder and to meditate upon the mystery
of God, even the Father, and of Christ. When once we have crucified the flesh,
with the affections and lusts thereof; when we are by means of walking with the
holy One, become spiritually minded, then, Oh then! we suck sweetness out of
bitterness, and can turn water into wine; then we find meat in the eater, then
we enjoy liberty in bonds, and life in death; then we feel the Lord blessing,
when men are cursing. Christianity is a mystery throughout; yea, the managing
of the most easy and obvious affairs in the Churches of the Saints, is to be
in a mystery. All your things are to be spiritually ordered. It Is a most
glorious sight to me, to see every debate, every consultation, every
resolution, all your ordinary matters, beautified and adorned with that holy
gravity, and seriousness of language, gesture, method, with that sweetness of
love, humility, mutual condescension; with that meekness of wisdom in the
Elders, of attention, and reception, and consent in the Brethren, that may
render you amiable to the Lord Jesus and his elect Angels, being in the midst
of you; formidable to wicked men, and the evil Angels, that observe you, and
watch for your halting, and would rejoice to epsy among you any uncomliness or
absurdity: this would be an excellent means to help you to set the Lord always
before you, to have fresh and new thoughts of Gods Omnipresence, of Christ's
walking in the midst of the golden Candlesticks: this used to overawe my
disorderly Spirit, when I was among you. I hope I shall learn, as Timothy, how
to behave my self in the House of God, which is the Church of the living God,
in this short time of banishment, better then formerly. I believe the Lord
intends a manifold benefit by my absence, to you and many others, as well as to
my own soul. I rejoice exceedingly in spirit, to consider, We do not live in
the declining age of the Church; but in that season, when the Lord will add
abundantly more of his Spirit, then in many generations formerly. Wherefore,
let me beseech you to gird up the loins of your mind, put on your sandals,
walk, climb up to the top of Pisgah, look over Jordan, behold the Land of
promise, the Land of rest, the Land flowing with milk and honey; look beyond
the downfall of Babylon, the marriage-supper of the Lamb, the great battle of
Armageddon; look beyond the victory over the Dragon, the Beast and the false
Prophet, to the binding of Satan; look beyond the binding of Satan, to the
coming down of the new Jerusalem, to the spiritual glory of the City, whose
name is Jehovah-Shammah, to the peaceable reign of our Solomon: there remains
a rest for the people of God. Believe, and live to enter into that rest. Let
the word of Christ dwell richly in you: the Lord make you all mighty in the
Scriptures, wiser then your teachers, wiser then your enemies; and then,
nevertheless, the more humble, and lowly, and lovely in the possession of your
seize. The Lord fill the great vessels, and the small vessels brim-ful of
grace, and peace, and truth, and love, and spiritual understanding; in a word,
fill you with his Spirit, as with new wine: the Lord make you drunk with his
Spirit. Oh that every one in the Congregation had a high Spirit for Christ, a
mighty Spirit for Christ. I would to the Lord you had each of you the Spirit of
David's Worthies, in a spiritual sense, that a few of you, even two or three of
you, were able to break through the host of the Philistines, for our David's
sake. Be of good comfort, There is work to do for the Lords young Disciples,
that are in their first love; and their love to their Savior and his interest,
will be tried. There is business also for the Lords old Disciples, that have
been tried already, and have overcome: let them continue faithful to the death,
and they shall receive a crown of life, a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord is preparing for them that love his appearing.

Brethren, I have received your Messengers with gladness, and we do mutually
refresh each other: the Lord be with your Spirit. I shall further enlarge my
thoughts the next opportunity: pray, and strive in prayer, for a poor worthless
creature: the Lord is good to me in abundance: I long to appear with joy in the
great Congregation.

From my captivity in Windsor, the 15 of the 1 Month, 1653/4. Your faithful
Shepherd in bonds, Christoph. Feake.

Dearly Beloved in the Lord Jesus,
THe desire of my Soul on your behalf, is this, That the Lord would so
communicate himself to you, that ye might be (like the Saints at Rome in Paul's
time) full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish one
another; and in that case, I should rejoice with you all abundantly; for my
chains and bonds would be lighter and easier to me by many degrees. Whereas now
I must ingenuously confess before the Lord, and unto you, that the care that
comes upon me daily, because of you, is more unto me, then all the cruel
mockings and scourgings with the tongue; yea, even then my bonds and
imprisonment which I endure at this day. The honor of our dear Lord is so much
concerned in your walking, and comunion together, in your sweet, gentle, meek
and holy behavior, in the ordering and managing of the affairs of Christ's
spiritual Kingdom, through him set up by you, that still, at every turn, you
come into my thoughts: How do they walk? do they walk orderly? do they please
God? do they edify one another in love? have the adversaries no cause to speak
reproachfully? has their adversary the Devil no advantage to speak against
them? do they pray in the holy Spirit? Is there a high and a mighty Spirit for
God, and for Christ, and for his Cause, in the midst of them? Ah! Brethren, I
think with my self, how shall I find you when I come unto you again? Have you
increased with the increasings of God? are you more and more strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner man? do you live by the faith of the Son of
God? I would to God I might find you less lukewarm, and more zealous for the
Lord, then when I left you, more in the Spirit, and less in the flesh, and in
self, and in this world. Do none of your eyes begin to dazzle at the glory and
splendour of the Court? as do the eyes of others. Come, Brethren, a day in the
Lords Courts, is better then a thousand, in any Princes Court upon the face of
the Earth; and for my part, I had rather be a doorkeeper, or sit at the
threshold of the Lords House, then to dwell in the Tents or Palaces of
wickedness. It may be the Lord has called me aside for a short space, for this
very purpose, to tempt you, and to prove you, and to see what is in each of
you, and what the workings of your Spirits are; and to let you know by
experience, that the wisdom of God, in appointing guides and leaders to your
use and edifying, is that which cannot but be acceptable to the sober, serious
and steadfast Saints.

As for mine own condition, I desire to deal plainly with you. Blessed be my
God, and my gracious Father, my lot is falsen to me in a pleasant place, and I
have a goodly heritage: as for personal contentment, it is very great. I am
doing my Fathers work and will; I am suffering for the Gospel of the Kingdom; I
am learning to be more conformable to Christ my Head, in learning obedience by
the things that I suffer. It is absolutely the best estate for the present,
that my heavenly Father can put me into. The words of Manoah's wife to him, are
sweet unto me: If the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received
a burnt-offering, and a meat offering at our hands, neither would he have
showed us all these things, nor would, as at this time, have told us such
things as these: so I say, If the Lord were not pleased with our sufferings in
this Cause; if this service for Christ-were not acceptable (but unacceptable)
unto him, he would never have revealed himself so graciously and so gloriously
unto us, as he has done; he would never have filled us with so sweet peace and
joy in believing; but our hearts would have condemned us, if he had left us: so
that through rich mercy, I am not careful, what men think of us, what their
opinions are, how they carry themselves, in speaking evil of things they know
not. It is sufficient, and abundantly sufficient to us, that our comforts
abound and increase, they diminish not. I tell you, Brethren, the very
confidence that God has put into us by his Word and Spirit, has great
recompense of reward. There are two things, that do, I am persuaded, work for
our good. 1. The malice of our enemies, that scorn us, and backbite us, and
judge us busybodies, and evil doers, and disturbers of the peace, etc. says
the Lord to us, Your enemies speak falsely, and the more they curse, the more I
bless, and will bless. Verily, this is sweeter then honey. And then secondly,
There are a company of faithful souls, who in the light of God, do understand
the present Cause of Christ, and that we are sufferers upon that acount; and so
they wrestle, and will not let the Lord go, unless he bless us, poor prisoners,
with special and suitable blessings. Verily, I bless the Lord night and day in
remembrance of the prayers of the Saints, who understand the times, next unto
my blessing his name for the glorious intercession of our faithful and merciful
High Priest.

Finally, Brethren, farewell; live in love, follow those things that make for
peace, and, whereby one may edify another: do not grieve one another Spirits
by any uncomly expressions, in words or behavior. Grieve not the Spirit of
Christ; but study the happiness of the whole body, and glorify the Lord by an
holy, sweet, meek and gentle, profitable conversation. I salute you every one
once more in our dear Redeemer. Imitate those who walk most like Jesus Christ,
and we shall meet again with joy, and our joy shall no man take from us, Amen.

From my Prison-lodging, the last day of the 3 week of the 1 month, -- 54.
Yours, next unto my being Christ's, desirous of your best good, Christoph. Feake.

Dear Brethren,
THe superabounding satisfaction, wherewith the Lord has condescended to
enrich a poor, empty creature, calls aloud upon me, to magnify his Goodness
toward me. If I should tell you a feigned story of That which I have not seen,
nor felt, nor experienced in my self, the Lord would find me out, and make me
an example (to those that should come after) of his severity and strict dealing
with me; but in very deed, I do plainly perceive that the Lord has purposed to
show me more of his glory.

Indeed, a great part of my care will be concerning You, to whom I am as nearly
related in the fellowship and service of the Gospel, as ever, notwitstanding
this distance; and therefore, shall not cease praying for you, as I have begun,
that you may every one adorn the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, and walk
worthy of the Lord who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory. And I would
that you should understand, Brethren, and believe, that the things which have
befallen me, have come to pass rather for the furtherance of the Gospel, then
otherwise; and I hope some, if not many of the Brethren in the Lord Jesus, will
grow confident by my bonds, and will be much more bold to speak the word
without fear, considering especially, that the Lord has made a most sweet
addition to my former joy and comfort in the Holy Spirit; so that I may say
boldly, The Lord is my Helper, I will not fear what man can do unto me.

I know I shall ere long come again, and continue with you all, for your
furtherance, and the joy of your faith, that your rejoicing in Christ Jesus may
be more abundant for me, by my coming to you again.

Dear Brethren, Innocence and Independency make the highest and the mightiest
Spirits; and let the Princes, the Priests, the Captains (who are so busy in
bolstring up the cursed whore of Babylon) know it for a Truth, that the Lords
Hidden, Holy Ones, will in the might of the Spirit of Jehovah, shout down the
walls of the Babylonish Jericho: though they are as high as Heaven, they shall
come tumbling down. Amen. Hallelujah. Oh! that I might be one of the teeth of
that sharp threshing instrument, which the worm Jacob shall ere long be
transformed into; and so help to thresh the High and Mighty Mountains of the
Earth, and to beat them small, and to make the Hills as chaff.

I do very much hope, when I come again, I shall come in the fullness of the
blessing of the Gospel, more then ever. Wherefore I beseech you to be at peace
among your selves, to admonish the disorderly in abundance of tenderness in
love, to comfort the feeble-minded, to support the weak, to visit the
fatherless and widows, that are widows indeed.

I thought to have spoken with some, concerning whom it was needful to look
into their condition; but the wise God prevents me for the present, that I may
hereafter have more light from his word to guide me in difficult affairs. Pray
form, that in this retirement, I may attain better to understand, then ever
hitherto, how to behave my self in the Church of God, in the house of the
living God. Oh! it is sweet to be sensible of a growth in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; to whom be glory and dominion,
now and for ever, Amen.

From my pleasant countryhouse, this 31 of the 11 Month, 1653. Your faithful
remembrancer at the glorious Throne of Grace. CHRISTOPH. FEAKE.

Dear Brethren, Beloved in the Lord,
FOr whose best good and greatest happiness I would be content to endure
(through the strength of Christ) whatever the Lord should be pleased to permit
man to do unto me. It may be the Lord is but beginning to accustom me to the
yoke, having hotter service yet behind for me to be engaged in. I confess, I
suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds, 2 Timothy 2.9. but (my comfort
is, as was Paul's) the word of God is not bound; and (Oh that I could speak the
Apostles following words in his Spirit) therefore I endure all things for the
Elects sake, that they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus
with eternal glory.

As for my self, I have no cause to complain, but rather to magnify the
wisdom, power and goodness of my God, who in the riches of his Grace, has in
some measure enabled me, and counted me faithful, putting me into the
Ministry; who naturally, and from mine own inclination, am very apt to
slothfulness and negligence, to dullness and luke-warmness; insomuch that I
wonder to consider, how the Spirit of Christ has from time to time
overpowered my natural temper, causing me, with much effectualness of Grace,
to be in some degree laborious in his harvest-field: the remembrance whereof is
(among other particulars) a most sweet refreshment to my soul in this my
banishment from his House and Temple for a time: what his intent is in ordering
me such a portion for the present, will in time appear. But in the mean season,
my care and sollicitousness for the Church is abundantly above the care of my
self: I am not sollicitous for mine own concernments; being fully satisfied in
the light of God, that it is unspeakably for my good to be thus dealt withal by
these men. The great thoughtfulness of my heart is for you all, who have in
good earnest given your selves up to the Lord, that you might, in this curious
juncture of time, have your conversation as it becomes the Gospel: And a true
report of your holy, loving, steadfast walking with the Lord, and one with
another, will be my great joy and rejoicing before the Lord Jesus, both now,
and at his appearing. Wherefore, if it were the good will of God to give you
all, fresh and further discoveries of his mind, how you ought to walk, and to
please him, ^hile I am thus by force kept from among you, what blessed
occasions should I have to break forth here, in blessing and praising the Lord
abundantly in this behalf?

I desire exceedingly to rejoice in the beholding your Order, and the
stedfastness of your faith in Christ: for I much fear lest by some means the
Tempter should tempt you, or some of you, and so my labor be so far in vain,
as the temptation does prevail: And some of you may remember, I forewarned you
of this hour of temptation long before; which I told you would try the
strongest Christians, so reputed; but now plainly see, if Ancient Professors
among you be not very circumspect, you may see that Scripture further fulfilled
every day; ^he first shall be last, and the last shall be first.

Now by way of faithful advice, in reference to Order, and orderly walking, I
take it for a truth granted, (as which cannot with any color be denied) That
those Saints, who are come out of Babylon, and brought to Sion, and are become
a peculiar people to the Lord, and a particular body or corporation to Christ,
I say, they ought to continue together in prayer and supplication with one
accord; so they did, Act. 1.14. and it is said, Peter stood up in the midst of
the Disciples: and see Act. 2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers: they that
believed were together, verse. 44. and the Apostle, Heb. 10.25. not forsaking
the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is; but exhorting
one another; and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching. These things
are not proved to you; but you are put in mind of this foundation-Truth in
reference to discipline and worship; for those things are to be transacted in
the assemblings of the Saints, as being for the glory of God, and the edifuing
of the Body. But the thing wherein I would be helpful at this point of time,
is, to propound ways for the practicing of this rule of continuing and walking
together.

1. First, Let the Elders and Brethren agree with one accord, that the whole
Church be gathered together in the name of Christ, to consider, after earnest
prayer to that purpose, how they may be kept together: for this Hour of
temptation will endanger the sca^tering of many. Against that day which is
appointed, I shall prepare somewhat for direction.

2. Let those that are unacquainted with their duty, (judging it to be their
liberty, without further waiting, to provide for their spiritual feeding
elsewhere) let them, I say, know, that if all should be of their mind, what
would become of the Churches of Christ? Let them not have more respect to their
particular private benefit, though spiritual, then to the glory, work and
business of Christ; at least, let them attend upon the Lord with the Church, to
obtain their desire with consent of the whole body; and brotherly love requires
this: and let them give in their Ar^uments distinctly, that they may be weighed
by Scripture. It is the opinion indeed and practice of some, if the Officer be
absent, to wander hither and thither, and so fall into suares ere they are
aware: and there have been woeful instances of this.

3. Let not any debate proceed so far, as to hinder edifying, and engender
strife; but let there be care taken to prevent strife, as men are careful to
prevent the breaking in of waters. The Lord has blessed my endeavors this way
hitherto, and I have much comfort herein at this day.

4. In debating any thing or case, that is stated according to Scripture, let
the Brethren speak first, that so if there be any light among them, it may be
noted: and this will be looked upon, as the enjoyment of that liberty that
Christ has given; But if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God,
and briefly and distinctly to the point.

5. Covet the best gifts: those Brethren in whom most of the power and glory of
the Spirit of Christ does appear, who are mighty in the Scriptures, who are
most lively, spiritual and warming, are to be desired and called upon; and if
there were none to speak to you from the word, yet it were worth while to come
together to pray in the Holy Ghost, which is one blessed means for the
quickening of our dull and sluggish hearts.

6. If there be a desire to join with any of the Churches in the Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper, consider with whom, and when, etc. let there be mutual
consent in brotherly love.

Oh! that the Spirit might lead you into all truth! My great desire is, That
you may so walk, as to glorify the Lord abundantly.

This 3 day of the 12 Month, 1653. Yours to love you, to serve you, to suffer
for you, CHRISTOPHER FEAKE.


