Written by one, whom the World calls a Quaker, Joh. 17.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. Verses. In the time of Isreal's captivity, bound under hard hearted Pharaoh,
that rules over the pure Seed, the Israelite within; Thus says the Lord,
Therefore do I make my Power known, that Israel may go free. Read Scriptur and
see if can own same po^^ that they that (...) them for
Read Job 8. etc. 4.21.5, 37 1.


David Psalm. 10 3, 4. Psalm. 38 7, 8. Psalm. 1 120 Isal. 66 and 5. Jer. 23. Hab.
3. Eze. 3 10. Dan. 11. Act 9 5, 6.
Thus says the Lord, we have heard a Voice, of Fear, of Trembling, and not of
Peace; Wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his Loins, as a Woman in
travel ask ye now, and see whether a Man does travel with Child, and all
Faces are turned into palenesse: Alas that day is great, so that none is like
it. It is even the time of Jacobs trouble, but he shall be saved out of it; And
I will break his yoke from off his Neck, and will burst his Bonds, and
strangers shall no more serve themselves of him, but they shall serve the Lord
their God and David their King whom I will raise up unto them

Jer. 30.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. Eze. 12 18. D^n 10
The word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of Man, eat thy bread with
quaking, etc. So fearful was the sight, that I did exceedingly fear and Quake:

Heb. 12.21. Verse. Printed in the Year, ^653.

One of Sions sharp Threshing Instruments, with A Bunch of Sweet Grapes on the
end of it.
FOr tender hearts, which desire to know the way to Sion, the City of the
living God, that they may mind the leadings of the Fathers love, that sends
his Son to them, when they lie wounded, half dead, being fallen amongst
Thieves, Jer. 23.3 Ioh. 10.8.
those that steal their words from their Neighbors, and have no Oil to power
in, neither do they take any care of them, but leave them, Ezekiel. 3.4 ver. Jer.
5.3 31. ver.
and do not show any mercy to them at all, looking lightly at them, all that
they look after is that they may be Lords and Rulers over Gods heritage, to
make themselves great, and rich, and honorable in the World, not knowing the
office of a Physician, to dress the wound, and power Oil into it, neither do
they know the office of a Shepherd, but are more like Swineheards, Ezekiel. ^^ 2,
3, ver.
all Baals Priests, feeding their lusts, faring sumptuously, and living
delicately, in great parsonages, and fat benefices, fatting up themselves for
the slaughter, pushing the diseased, and take no care, but lose the sheep,
feeding themselves, and feed not the flock, which causes the Lord to complain
of them, and he sends his servants, rising up early and lying down late to cry
out of their carelessness, Ezekiel. 3* 5, 6, 7, 8, 9* 10. ver.
and some of them they beat, and some of them they stone, and others they
imprison, to satisfy their lusts, and lives themselves in pleasures, and
wantonness, doing their own wills and not regarding the will of the Lord,
Therefore is he sore displeased with them, and will turn them out with the
unprofitable servant, ^^e. 34.^^, 17, 18, (...).
and reward them according to their works, even feed them with his sore
judgments. But as a loving Father, (...) ^^.10.9, 11. and 15, 16.
and a tender and good Shepherd, does he take care for his sheep, and sends
his Son to fould them, and lead them into fat Pastures, even feeding them all
along by the Rivers of his love, ^^^e. 34.11, 13, etc.
where there is green and fresh mercies for the souls of his distressedones,
to feed on, (...). 15.^, 2, 8, 9.
and he dresseth the Diseased ones, pouring in the Oil of Faith, and Love, and
Mercy, mixed together, to heal up the wound, and make them cheerful, (...).
4.34.
and profitable, to bring forth fruit for his Fathers glory, and his delight is
altogether in doing his Fathers will, H^b. 10.7, 8, 9, 10. Verses.

This was written by a laboring Man, that sometimes Thresheth, and sometimes
Plowes, and keeps with his Fathers sheep, who is an Husbandman, and his delight
is altogether in the new Creation, watering Plants, and feeding Lambs, and such
work as his Father sets him about, whose desire and delight is altogether, in
doing his Fathers will.

A Bunch of GRAPES, AND An Iron ROD.
ALL the Children of the Lord are taught of the Lord, Isal. 54.12, 13, 15.
and are far from oppression, and they are established in righteousness: The
Lord alone is the Teacher of his people by his Spirit, and they are made
possessors of that which the World does but profess; All you that profess
love to God and Jesus Christ, see what you do possess of him, Mat. 11
A great Fig Tree is sprung up out of the Earth, full of flourishing branches,
and leaves; but examine, look upon the Tree, and see for fruit, the Lord is
coming to look for fruits: every one seriously consider, where he stands,
what he professes, and what he practizeth, It is not be that says Lord, Lord,
that enters into the Kingdom, but be that does the will of the Father, now
there is no entrance into the Kingdom, Mat. ^^ 13, 14.
but through obedience, and every one would gladly enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but they that will enter must enter in at the strait gate, not through
their own wills, and lustful desires, but through the cross in self-denial,
in obedience to the Lord Jesus Christ; The Lord has commanded that thou shall
not be drunk, nor proud, nor covetous, nor given to anger, malice, nor
revenge, nor to deal deceit fully with thy brother, nor to see them naked and
hungry; and many other things thou shall find commanded in thy spirit, and thou will confess it is truth, now mind whether thou do obey the Lord in
temperance in all things, in giving freely to thy poor brethren, in feeding
and clothing them, in forgiving one another, freely: in speaking the truth to
thy Neighbor, etc. (or thy lusts) and if thou do, thou shall be beaten with
many stripes. Yea, but thou say thou want power, no thou slothful
servant, thou hidest thy Tallent in the Earth; (...). 4.7. ^^m. 12.3
See if there be not the Talent given thee, the Lord is convincing every one,
and has set up his Ministry, saying, thou must not do evil, and has
written what it is to do evil in thy heart, and how to do well: but thou
disobeyest, and calls God an hard Master, Remember the slothful servants
portion, but if thou will obey the Ministry of Jesus Christ, mind, employ thy
Talent, (...) 3.11. ^.1. Chapter (...) 8.12. Pet. 1.19
he has set a light in the World within thee, convincing thee of every evil
thought, word, and action, be obedient to that, and it will guide thee into all
truth; It will be a present teacher, a present Law in all companies, and upon
all occasions, yea in all thy ways, to be a light to thy Feet, and a
Lantern to thy paths, thou shall find the light, love, truth, in obeying it
continually, manifesting it self unto thee, and working thee into the
experience of the Divine taste, sight, and apprehension of the exceeding love
of thy Savior, that when thy carnal mind (Dinah) who would run forth to
fetch in earthly profits, or pleasures, continually to cross those desires,
and take away from thee that Scorpion, which the Devil offers, to take thy
earthly mind with, and so imprison thee, and waiting in this light, 1 Chapter 15,
16, 26 ver. 1 John 2. 2 Cor. 1 Heb. 1 15, 16. 1 Cor. 13. 2 Cor. 16, 17, ver.
Isa. 12. ver. 1 Pet. 3.20. Isa. 29. ver.
The Lord will give thee an earnest penny even his precious love, to nourish thy
spirit, even unto eternal life, thou need not run out for teaching, If thou will but hear what the spirit speaks to the Church, in thy heart, If thou
have an Ear to hear, that Minister, he has the everlasting Gospel to
Preach, and he does continually Preach, and hand out the love of God to thee,
examine thine heart, it is either an holy Temple, where the Gospel is preached
by the Spirit of God, or the Temple of the Devil, where the Devils doctrine
is preached: now mind, his servant thou art, to whom thou yeeldest obedience,
the Lord is setting up his Ministry in power, in the spirits of his people, to
him be everlasting praise for ever. Therefore cease from Man, and from the
teachings of Man, hear what the spirit speaks, to every disobedient spirit,
this is the Ministry of God that works faith, that administers grace to the
heaters; The Lord complained of a people, that drew near him with their lips,
and that spoke of him in their mouths, but their hearts were far from him,
that had their fear taught to him, by the precepts of men, see if it be not
even so now, great runnings out for teachings after Man, great professing God
in words, but where is the power of godliness; great speakings of Jesus
Christ, a Redeemer, but when he comes, the professing Pharisees will not know
him, but looks for an outward day of the Lord, an outward Kingdom, not
knowing the voice of the true Shepherd in the spirit, not when he comes to take
the Kingdom to himself, will he suffer him; If he be thy Redeemer, see if he
have redeemed thee from thy vain conversation, and if thou find him not
doing it in thine heart, why do thou call him Savior or Redeemer, and hate
to be redeemed and saved? see your teachers, they say unto you, that you would
not be proud, nor covetous, nor oppress, nor go to Law one with another, nor
contend for the goods of this World, and say the Lord says it, but the Lord
never said it so to them, that live in those things, (...). 7.15, 17, 18,
20.23.28,
to be your teachers: feed no longer on wine, least ye bring forth a whirle
wind, they swear by my Name says the Lord, and yet they swear falsely, he
that has a Dream, tell his Dream, and he that has my word speak my word,
for what is the Chafe to the Wheare says the Lord, (...). 10.7, ^, 10.
^0.7.26, 28. (...). 4. and
and is it any thing else, but to tell Dreams, of their own hearts, studyings,
and inventions, to say, and not to do, to profess to have the word of the
Lord, and under that color to grind the faces of the poor? Christ never sent
any such: be not deceived, God is not mocked, to day if you will hear hear
the Voice of the Lord, 40.3, ^.
in your spirits, and it will break the Ceda^s of Libanon, remove the
Mountains, and cause the Hind to cast her Calfe, it will break down every
high thought, and remove every proud imagination, and cause every wild lustful
desire to be abortive, and it will give streng h to overcome the wicked one, to
deny that which tempts to do evil, and b^ing you to John, to be Baptized in
Aenon, into Repentance, and newness of life; it will not only show you the way
to the Father, but it will bring you into the way to the Father; Jesus Christ
saving, and taking away your sins, and blotting out the handwritings, and
into righteousness, (eternal Life) it will let you see how the Lamb of God
has laid slain in you, from the beginning of the World in you, by your lusts,
and corruptions, viz. The resisting the love in convincings of evil, ^^ch.
12.10
and movings to good, the sight of which will cause you to mourn over him whom
you have pierced by your lusts and corruptions, and no longer to allow the
Jews Act; Now the Lord raise up the plant of his right hand in all your
spirits more and more, that there may be abundance of sweet Grapes, that he
alone may be honored.

Friends, prize the love of God unto you, Joh. 1.4.
and mind ^he light of God in you, that shows you sin and ^vill, and your
conditions, and obey that which shows ^ou the vanity of your own minds, and
the deceites of your own hearts, the Lord calls for your hearts, my ^^nne, give
me thine heart, keep my Commandments, Prove. 7.2, 3. Pro. 2. 1 2, 3, 4. and
Mat. 24 26, 27, 2 Col. 1.27
^ind them about thy neck, and write them upon the Tables of thine heart, So
shall they be health to your souls; Harken diligently to the voice of Christ,
and your souls shall live; he is not without in formal hearing, and formal
praying, and formal breaking of Bread and Wine, he is not there, he is risen,
look not for him without, but look for him within, and cease from man whose
breath is in his Nostrills, for wherein is he to be accounted of, wait upon
the Lord, Jam. 5.7
and he will renew your strength, and enable you to wait, but it may be you
will say, I must use the means, you must do so, let me tell you, you will find
it hard to flesh to wait, therefore use the means of patience, Let patience
possess your souls, let the light guide you, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7.
that shows you your wandering desires, and vain thoughts, and wicked
imaginations, and if you be guided by it, it will turn your minds within, 1
Cor. 4.
and bring you to Repentance, and Repentance, it will bring you to be loving
and merciful, for God is so, and it will bring you to be meek, and lowly in
spirit, and being kept in the true fear, it will cause you to lay aside all
evil, Acts 3.1
as the light makes it manifest, and to wait upon the Lord in patience, till
an entrance be made to your souls, and refreshment come from the presence of
the Lord, and says Christ, If ye love me, keep my Commandments, let them be
upon your hearts, that you may obey them, and says he, I am the light of the
World, and the World is set in man's heart, so that he cannot find out the
beginning, Eccl. 3.1
nor the end of the work of God, mind the light that arises there, look not
forth at man, but keep within and wait upon the light, he that loves the
light, brings his deeds to the light, that the light may prove them, this light
is not a Chapter without you, ^oh. 3.19, ^0, 21.
the Chapter declares of the light, but it is not the light, the light is
within, Pet. 2.19 Cor. 4.7
as it was in them that spoke forth the Chapter; and minding the light of God
in you in me^sure, having your minds guided by it, it will turn it within, and
cross your wills, for there is a daily cross to be taken up, to your own
wills, and your wills being crossed, that it cannot go forth, to fetch in
desires, it will pine and famish the Earthly part in you, and as the light
grows, it will make more evil manifest in you, and then the judgment will be
set up within, ^am. 5.9.
and there will be a watch set over all your thoughts, words, and works, and
the righteous Law will pass through you, and limit your carnal minds, and
bring into subjection every disobedient thought, word, or work, and there will
be true Judgment and Justice executed in you, ^a. 26.9.
so that you shall find that Scripture fulfilled, that says, when thy
Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants thereof shall learn
Righteousness, there will be Justice done, upon the carnal (Earthly) part
within you; ^er. 11.12
And then Righteousness it will arise to guide you, and rule you, to live, and
act in righteousness, and true holiness; Therefore look not forth, for that
which looks forth brings in darkness, therefore abide in the light in
measure, and it will guide and keep you in peace, and look not above your
conditions, for none shall be condemned for that which they know not, but for
that which they know, and do not obey, being obedient to the right, it will
lead you our of all the ways and works of darkeness, and lead up to purity, to
Holiness, to Righteousness, without which none shall see the Lord, let them
profess what they will, ^et what you do possess, and look not out: for
let^ing your mind forth either after men for teaching, or ^o be feeding or
delighting it self in any object without, as pride, or profits, or pleasures,
or preferments, (...) honors, or covetousness, or anger, or malice, Jam. 1.2^
26.
or ^eevishnesse, or passionateness, it does draw you out of your conditions,
and so the pure will be vayled in you, Jam. 3.2. ver. Ver. 5.^ Ephesians. 5.^ 4, 5,
6. ve^
and then out of that veil will arise thoughts, and doubtings and
questionings, and fears, and your minds will be ^^rdened, and troubled in you,
and you will be ready to say that God withdraws from you, when he does ^ot, it
is your minds that go astray from him, and ^eade all your affections after
it; Psa. 34, Jer. 17.8.
Therefore blessed is ^he vian that trusts in the Lord, and whose mind is
dayed on him, and he will keep him in perfect peace all his days, whose mind
is stayed on him; ^ro. 8.3 33, 34. Psalm. 48.^
O wait on the Lord in patience, and let the light of God guide you, and it
will keep you in peace in measure, as it grows in you, and walking in it in
measure, it will keep you open, and pure, to receive the teachings of the
Father, and as the light grows, it will open to you more and more, waiting in
patience, (...) will lead you sooner out of troubles, into rest, and peace, and
joy, for when troubles do arise, your wit and reason would be studying out a
way to be at peace, Romans 5.3 4, 5. Romans 8. 25, 26, 27
but it cannot, but rather keeps you in bondage, therefore let patience have
its perfect work in you, and it will crucify impatiency, and lead you through
the ^rosse, for patiently waiting through the cross ob^aines the Crown, and
gets the victory, when ^roubles do arise be content, Luke 21.19. Heb. 10.36.
and let patience possess your souls, when temptations come, submit to the
will of the Lord, and look not down at Temptations, and Troubles, but look
up to the Lord who is present with you in them, to lead you out of them, look
not to find out a way by your own wisdom, but mind the Angel of the Lord
that is present with you, ^^m. 5.2, ^ 4, 5.
to lead you out, for says he, in all thy affliction^ I am with thee, and the
Angel of my presence shall go before thee, Therefore mind to follow him, and
he will lead you out of Temptations, and Troubles, up to Peace and Joy, and
Rest, even into the everlasting Covenant, to be united into the Divine Nature,
to partake of all the soul satisfying Comforts and Refreshments, Cor. 2.9, ^^,
11.
where there is marrow and Fatness, and love indeed, which no Tongue can
express,

Oh be faithful, be faithful to the Lord in what is made manifest in you, and
prize his love above all things, and sink down into the love and mercy of the
Lord, and mind to be kept in the corsse, the pure is the cross to the carnal
part in all things, and standing in the Counsel of the Lord, it will discover
all the consultaions of the enemy within, and so your will being kept in the
cross, Wisdom and Reason, and Imaginations will be kept under, and thou will
be kept in peace in all conditions, Joh 15.5.
abiding in the which, in dwelling in that which is pure, and you will be
brought to a discerning, to savor truth from error in your selves, and you
will see what it is that would draw you forth, and a strickt watch will be
kept, and so the tempter will be discovered how he lays his baits to draw
forth your minds, and that which discovers the temptations, will bring you to
reject the tempter in all things, Jam. 4.7. Iam. 1.12. Jam. 5.8.
and he will be kept for entering in, abiding in that which is pure, and it
will keep you in the pure fear of him who is pure, and the pure fear will
keep out all slavish fears, and so your minds will be kept free from all
objects without, and from thoughts, ^ Pet. 5.8, 9
and musings within, and having your minds clear and pure, you will be fit to
^^ceive the teachings of the Father, and so shall you ^ome to hear words
unexpressable, having your minds ^^re and free, and so a way will be made for
the free love of the Lord Jesus Christ, to flow into your souls, which being
made to taste, and partake of, having ^our souls therein exercised, it will
draw you out of your selves, into that where no Creature is, even into the
fountain of your Fathers love, 1 Pet. 10, 11.
to rejoice in him with exceeding joy, and it will even take your affections
into its own purity, and excellency, that the ^owings in of it will even break
your heart in pieces, Cant. 4. 8 10, 11.
and overcome all things that are in enmity against it, and take you up into
rapture of Joy, and Ravishment of spirit, to have your souls bathed in that
full fountain of living mercies, to delight in the Lords Love, above all other
loves whatsoever, for the love of all things that are visible, is but
transitory, and fades away, but dwelling in that which is pure, it will draw
your affections into that which is invisible, Cant. ^. 1 13, 14, ^
to be comprehended into the excellency of the full fountain of the free love
of the Lord Jesus Christ, which will comfort your hearts, and cheer you up
above all other comforts whatsoever: Oh my dear hearts, dwell wholly within,
and mind to be guided by that which kills all lustful affections, to outward
and visible delights and pleasures, which are but as dross and dung, in
comparison of the eternal and invisible excellencies. Oh, wait still upon the
Lord, and be not hasty, he is worthy to be waited for, stand wholly in the
Counsel of the Lord, and your wills which would be delighting it self, below,
will be kept in the Cross, which will cut down all things which are Earthly
and carnal in you, and so abiding in the Cross, Heb. 4.13.
and standing in the Counsel of the Lord, it will keep from harkening to
words without life and power, to savor from what Genter they do arise, for by
standing in the Counsel of the Lord, it will bring you to know, the true Power
of God in your selves, and to know the living word, which gives your souls
refreshment, which proceeds from the Divine Power, and excellency of the Lords
Love within, operating, and manifesting it self to you, from the Lords own
free Love, and eternal Excellency, and knowing this within your selves, (...).
13. ^^nt* 7.6, ^0, 9, 10, 12, ^^, ver.
you will be brought to discern the same power of life, when it brancheth
forth its self in others, to have unity with it; All words that are spoken
without life and power, arise from a vain light mind, and they draw out the
mind to lightness, and begets into the same nature of its self, and there the
will gets liberty, and the old man is kept alive, and gets words from the same
Center, that arises out of conceivings, and imaginations, to speak of, but
words without life destroy the Simplicity, in you, and harkening to them, it
will draw you out of the love and sense of the Mercies of the Lord, and the
pure unity and tenderness will be lost, and the old nature will get up again,
and take its liberty under other Colors, and thereby the Grace of God will be
turned into wantonness, ^^h. 15.5, ^^vers.
and so the Lord will be dishonored.

Oh my dear hearts, I beseech you for the Lords sake to walk worthy of your
calling, see that your minds be kept within, and guided by the pure guide, and
it will keep you and lead you into purity it self, and knowing the true
Voice, and the true Power of the Lord Jesus Christ in your selves, ^^h. 10.14
^^, 28.
it will bring you to know the same in others, and that will beget into the
same life to live in love and purity, to have Union and Communion with that
which is pure and holy, and as words without life do deestroy the pure
^^^plicity and veil the pure, giving heed to them, (...) words that are spoken
from the will raise up the ^^^e, and rent through the veil of darkness, and
^ive light and refreshment, to that pure seed which ^es low, to nourish and
revive it, that it may get ^^rength, and grow in purity and love, oh look ^ot
out at words, but know the power of words, and give up your selves wholly to
the Lord, that ^ee may guide and lead you into all truth, but stand (...) the
Counsel of the Lord, and so away will be ^ade beyond your understanding, Jo.
14.16 17. verse. 8 26. verse.
that the pure ^^ed may be raised up in glory in you, cease wholly from all your
Priests, for they draw your minds from the pure teachings within, and so will
leaven you with their dirty stuff that is fetched out of the ^^ld store house
of their studyings, 1 John 2.2 Jer. 23.2^ 26, 27. v^^ Jer. 23.25 Heb. 4.12 13.
conceavings and ^maginations, that they fetch out of old Authors and
Commentatours; for they know not the word of God, that study for words to
speak, the Word of God is a living Word, it is a powerful Word, (...) will
cut down all lustful desires in you that would run forth into the earthly
carnal delights: And that which cutts down the carnal desires in you, will
strengthen the pure desires, that streams of living and fresh Mercies may come
into your souls, from the living Fountain of the Lords eternal love, and
this is within, Christ is within, 2 Cor. 13.5. verse. great is the mystery of
Godliness, Christ in you, Col. 1.27. Know him there; and the word is within
you, know it there, Romans 10.8. Let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in
all Wisdom, Teaching, and Admonishing one another, let the Peace of God rule
in you, Isai. 9.6, 7
which is Jesus Christ, the everlasting Prince of peace, know it all within you
Col. 3.15, 16. Come to know this Teacher within, and look after no other, ye
have an Unction, and ye need not that any Man teach you, but that anointing,
1 John 2.27. Know Christ within, killing sin and evil, and reveailing and
manifesting the hidden Riches of his Fathers Love to your souls, Romans 8.^0,
11. Cor. 1. ^. 7.28.
the mystery that has been hid, from Ages and Generations, is God the
Father now revealing in the hearts of a poor despised People; Now if thou love
the Lord Jesus Christ, thou must not love the World, for he that loves any
thing more then Him, he is not worthy of Him, and thou must deny thy self of
all the delights of the flesh whatsoever, thou cannot have the Love of God, and
the love of the World, for the friendship of the World is enmity with God, Joh.
2.15 (...) 6.24.
Oh love the Lord Jesus Christ with all your Hearts, for there is no love like
to his Love, and wait wholly upon him for Teaching. Now to wait is to have
your minds stayed off from all Thoughts, Conceivings and Imaginations, Pure,
and Free, and then you will hear the voice of the good Shepherd, speaking to
your Souls, that are in Prison; Therefore wait wholly, and be not weary, and
wait within, and when Troubles and Temptations do arise, do not look at
them, but mind that which does discover them, that is the love of God to
discover them, mind that, and stand wholly in the Will of the Lord, and so you
shall find rest to your souls, 1 Pet. 3.18, 19.
and walk worthy of the Lords Love, every ways, in Life and Conversation, and
take heed of turning his Grace into wantonness. This was not written for
Swine to snuffle upon, with their dirty Noses, and so cast dirt on it, but from
the flowings of love to tender desires, to mind what begets the desire to
Righteousness, (thi^st after the Water of Life) and you shall find in minding
and obeying, the tender Love of God, as a careful Father, bringing a reward
with him, as a tender Shep^eard, cherishing his Lambs in his bosom, Isa.
40.10, 11.
and gently driving those that are with young; open when ^ee knocks; If thou
but lay thy hand upon the La^ch, thou shall feel the smell of Mirrhe. Cant.
5.4.
Let Swine feed on Husks, and forms, keep thou out of the words of all men,
and sink down into the ground, (the eternal Word of Life within) and ^eare
and follow the leadings in thee, Gal. 6.4.
and so thou ^alt live in thine own life, and have thy rejoicing ^n thy self
and not in others.

Thine in the Vine, R. F.

NOw cease wholly from all your Priests, for they never were sent of God, but
are enemies both (...) him and his, as by their fruits is made manifest, they
are persecutors, the highest of them in their ^^eshly Wisdom, are the highest
deceivers, and now ^re found to be persecutors, as the Jewish high Priests did
persecute Christ when he came in the ^^esh, so do these Priests persecute
Jesus Christ, now where he is made manifest in the spirits of his people, ^o
testify against their deceits, As is now made manifest by them, Therefore cease
wholly from them ^ll, great and small, For as a Troop of Robbers ^^ite for a
Man, so the company of Priests murder in ^e way by consent, Hosca 6.9. and hold
up that filthy horrible thing, which the Lord sent his true Prophets to cry out
against, as in Ier. 5.30, 31. ver. ^aith he, A horrible and a filthy thing is
committed (...) the Land, the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear
rule by their means, and the People love to have it so, but what will ye do
in the end thereof says the Lord, Vengeance is mine and I will repay Therefore
hold them not up, but come out of Babylon, l^st ye be partakers of her
plagues, Rev. 18.4, 5.
like Priests like people, Hosea 4.9. and the Leaders of the people cause them
to err, and if the blind lead the blind, hot shall fall into the Ditch, Mat.
15.14. The Prophet divine for money, Isai. 9.16.
and the Priests they Preach for hire^ and lean upon the Lord and say, is not
the Lord amongst us? Mica. 3.11
but says the Lord, they ran but I did not send them, Therefore they shall
not profit the people at all, Jer. 23. See what you are profitted by them and
hold them not up, the Lord is against them Ier. 23.30, 31, 32, Verses, and the
Lord will mak^ them contemptible in the Eyes of the people, Mal. 2^ 9. ver. woe
to them, they have run in the waye^ of Caine, who was a Murderer, and
Teaches for rewards, Jude 11.
as Balaams Priests did; and shall peris^ in the gain saying of Core, for the
Lord hat^ poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, Isai. 29.10
an^ has closed your Eyes, the Prophets and your Rulers, and your Seers has
he covered, Isai. 19^10. Stay your selves and wonder, cry ye out, and cry
they are drunken, but not with Wine, they stagger but not with strong drink;
Wherefore the Vision is become unto you all, as a book sealed which men
delivered unto one, that is learned, saying, read this I pray thee, and he
says, I cannot for it is sealed, Isai. 29.11, 12, 13.
and the book is delivered to hi^ that is unlearned, and says, read this I
pray thee and he says I cannot, for I am unlearned, Wherefore thus says the
Lord, for as much as this people dra^ near with their Mouth, and their Lips,
but their Hearts are far from me, and their sear toward is taught by the
Precepts of Men, Therefore I will ^^eede to do a marvelous Work, and a wonder
amongst ^^ese people, even a marvelous work and a wonder, for (...) wisdom of
their wise Men shall perish, and the ^^derstanding of the prudent shall be hid,
Isai. 29.13. (...). Now the Scripture is fulfilling daily, and to (...)
fulfilled: Woe to them that seek deep to hide ^^eir Council from the Lord,
and they say, who ^^th us, and who knows us? and their works (...) in the
dark: Thus says the Lord, your turning things upside down shall be esteemed
as the Potters ^^ay, Isai. 29.16. It is yet a little while, and Le^on shall be
turned into a fruitful Field, and the ^itfull Field shall be turned into a
Forest. And in (...) day shall the deaf hear the words of the Book, ^^ve
the Mystery of Godliness unfoulded in them, ^^d the blind shall see out of
obscurity, and out darkness, and the Lord will be the glory of the ^^ople
Israel his chosen ones, and the meek in the ^^rth shall increase their joy in
the Lord, Isai. 29.18, 19.
and the ^^ore among Men shall rejoice in the holy one of ^^ul; They also that
erred in spirit shall come to ^^derstanding, and they that murmured shall ^^ne
Doctrine, Isai. 29.24. shall be all taught of (...) Lord, and know the voice of
Jesus Christ, (the ^^e Shepherd, and Bishop of their souls) Cease ye in Man,
whose breath is in his Nostrills, Joh. 10.14.
for where^^ is he to be accounted of? Isa. 2.22. What agreement ^^th
Righteousness with Unrighteousness, and what ^ommunion with light and
darkness? Cease from (...) teachings of Men, of corrupt minds, and wait ^olly
upon the Lord, for the pure teachngs of his ^^it, the spirit of truth, that
guides and leads to all truth, Thus says the Lord, Come out from ^^ng them,
and be separate, and touch no unclean things, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Rev. 20.12.
and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my
Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God Almighty, 2 Cor. ^.18.

The Book that was sealed with seven Seal is opening, the Mystery of
Godliness which is Ch^i^^ in us, the Divine Power of Righteousness, an^ the
Lord alone is Teacher of his people, himself alone by his spirit, Rejoice ye
Saints and Righteous ones, Isai. 3.10. Joh. 15.1, z.
the Lord is Keeper of his Vines, he the good Husbandman, the Keeper, and
Preserv^ himself alone, Therefore thus says the Lord, say un^^ the Righteous
it shall be well with them.

Says Jesus Christ, Cant. 1.12, 13, 14.
I am the Vine, ye are the Branches, I am the good Shepherd, and my Sheep
know my Voice, and I lead them into fat pasture^ large, Cant. 2.4, 4, 5, 6.
and g^eene, where there is fullness of varieties, love in Joy and Joy in
Peace, and merc^ in the seat, where the King of Salem does abide he brought
me to the banqueting House, an^ his Banner over me was Love, stay me with
Flaggons, Comfort me with Aples, Cant. 2.13.
for I am sick (...) Love, Love, Love; The Vines the tender Grape give a good
smell, O come and taste how graciou^ the Lord is, my Beloved is mine, and I am
his: The Fi^g tree puts forth her green Figs, and the Vines with the
tender Grapes give a good smell, ari^^ my Love my fair one, and come away.

Say unto the wicked it shall be ill with them, Isai. 3.11.
an^ they shall be rewarded according to their doings the wickedness of the
wicked shall slay them, J^r. 17.10,
Com^ out of Egypt, Come out of Babylon, Come out (...) the dark Ministry of
the World, least you be cursed, and blasted, for the curse is upon the
Ministry of Antichrist, Mal. 2.1, 2, 3.
and the Lord will be avenge of his Enemies, and he will rule all Nations as
with an Iron Rod, Rev. 19 19, 20, 22
and break them to pieces as a Potters Vessel; And there shall be but one
Sheepfold, and one Shepherd, the Lord one, and his Name one;

Rejoice ye Saints and righteous ones, the Lord is King, And sits upon the
Throne, Ruling by his Power, to him alone be all Honor and Glory, Rev. 21.
Praise, and Thanks, now and for evermore: Hallelujah to the highest.

Farewell.
R. F.
1 John 1 10.
Thine in the Vine,
We cannot be assunder,
I in thee and thou in me,
Rejoice in our Fathers Love,
John 14. and ver. the 20. Joh. 17.21 21.
There Is three in one, and one in three,
And that is perfect love in Unity,
I in them, and they in me, as
Thou Father art in me, that
They may be perfect in one.
John 17.23. R. F. with S. T.
(...). 2. ^, 11 ^, 1.
In the Vineyard together,
Tasting of the fruit of the Vine,
Where there are many sweet
^^nt. 7. ^, 12.
Grapes sprung forth to feed one.

FINIS.

