THE GENEALOGY OF CHRISTIANITY AND OF CHRISTIANS.

DECLARED In a Sermon at Mercers Chapel before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor of the City of LONDON, April 28. 1650

And now thus published For the undeceiving of those, who say they are
Christians, and are not, but do lie; and for the Establishment and
Encouragement of those, who having named the Name of Christ, do indeed depart
(even in this hour of Apostasy) from all Iniquity,

By C. F. one of the Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Ministry of the
new Testament.

(...). Anonym.

Christus non quaerit, utrum adhaereas huic vel illi nationali Ecclesiae: sed
utrum a^haereas verae fidaei, non utrum sis Romanensis, (Anglicanus Sco^^cus,
etc.) sed utrum sis vere sanctificatus et renovatus. Daven. in Coloss. cap. 3.
ver. 11.

London, Printed for Peter Cole, at the Printing-Press in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange, 1650.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS FOOT, Lord Major of this famous City of LONDON.
My Lord,
HOw far the Great Antichrist, and degenerate Church of Rome have eclipsed, and
thereby obscured the original glory of true Christianity, is best known to
that remnant of overcomming Christians in this Age, who are worthy in Christ
his account, to walk with him in white. Assuredly Christendom (as it is called
for distinction sake) is sunck into so low a degree of degeneracy, as that in
respect of Idolatry and Prophannesse, of impiety and iniquity, the Catholics
and Protestants also, for the most part, do so walk, as if it were their
studied design, to render themselves utterly unlike to Jesus Christ; and unto
this kind of Christians, he will profess at the last day. I never knew you,
depart from me ye workers of iniquity! Oh therefore, how does it concern the
faithful Disciples of Jesus Christ, to bring forth the Register of the
Genealogy of the primitive Christians, to emblazon according to the rules of
Gospel Heraldry, the native honor of this thrice noble Family, and that by an
ornamental carriage and Conversation. But alas! how few do make it their holy
ambition, to display before the world the glorious Excellency of true
Christianity, by acting in the life and power of this New Testament unction?
^uc. 1.17.
It was Prophesied of John the Baptist, that he should go before the Messiah in
the power and spirit of Elias, but it is the honor of the Saints, now in these
times of the Gospel, to go in and out, to do and to suffer in the power and
spirit of the Messiah or Christ himself, and may the number of such Christians
be multiplied exceedingly: and may the great number of those that act and walk
in the power and Spirit of Antichrist, of the Dragon, of the Beast, of the
false-Prophet decrease abundantly; Rev: 16.13:
may the Generation of Renegadoes and Back-sliders, of self-condemned
Heretics, and Apostatized Professors, who put the Son of God to an open
shame, that speak scornfully of the Word, the Spirit, the ways, the Ordnances
of Jesus Christ, may they, every one, be snared and taken, prevented and
frustrated in all their un-Christian Ends, and means tending thereunto, may they
never prosper in any of their Assemblies, Teachings, Exhortations, which are of
any tendency to the disparagement of the wholesome words, even the words of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy: 6:3, 4.
and the doctrine which is according to Godliness, and let all the Disciples
of Christ, all sincere Christians say, Amen.

My Lord, what thoughts of heart have been occasioned by your Honors
Commandment, and mine engagement, for the printing of the ensuing Sermon, is
best known to the Author of so impersect and unpolished a Discourse upon such a
weighty Theme. There was always an utter averseness in my natural Genius, to
appear on the Stage upon this account. John 7.4.
And I can say, through grace, I have never sought to he known openly, or to
show my self to the world, as being conscious to a great unsitnesse of Ingeny,
and to the want of Spiritual Dexterity, for any work of this nature. But since
it is your Lordships pleasure, that this Sermon should be preached over again
in this other form, behold, (after tedious attendance for dispatch, upon the
proper instruments of this kind of publication) I humbly present it before your
Honor, this second time; with some few convenient clauses, here and there
superadded, beseeching God, (who has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the things that
are mighty,) to command a Blessing upon these weak endeavors, wherein I did,
and do aim at the new-Christianizing of such nominal Christians, as are really
without God, and without Christ, dead in trespasses and sins, and I would to
God, that all that heard me that day, were both almost and altogether
Christians, yea Christians upon the best account, so, as to be found unto great
praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Your Lordships to command in the service of the Gospel. CHR. FEAKE.

Acts 11.26. The last clause. And the Disciples were called Christians first in
Antioch.


HIstory and Prophecy are the Alpha and Omega of the holy Scriptures and these
two (the Knowledge of things past from the beginning of the world, (...).
and the foreknowledge of things to come, until the ending of time (et adhuc)
and beyond) are the great desire and delight of the intellectual world; All the
sons of men naturally thirsting after nothing more than this kind of knowledge,
yea, even the excellency and perfection thereof. Now there are none other
writings extant in the world, worthy to be compared with the word of God, in
respect of these two: For first, if you take notice of Scripture History, it
takes the crown of glory from off the head of all other Histories, for verity
and antiquity; all other Records are of a later date, and have not the
excellency and the glory of Truth infallible stamped on them. Then secondly,
Praedictiones aliae suum gradum habent, spiritustamen vaticinia, long
supereminent. Calv.
if you consider Scripture Prophecies, all other predictions and
prognostications, all the divinations that ever were in the world besides,
cannot be a parallel to these, for their certainty and sufficiency.

Now this book of the new Testament, it is an History of diverse evangelical
transactions, undertaken and managed by the Lord Jesus Christ (and his
Apostles) in the world, immediately after his death, resurrection, and
ascension into glory, and the Church could not be well without it, as ye may
clearly discern by its great usefulness in a true Gospel reformation:
Providence, I say, has well provided this part of the Scripture, for the
advantage of the Saints (especially of those Disciples that come out of
Babylon,) (...). Act. 8.39. Let him that reads understand.
wherein, when they read and understand, they may know in many particulars, how
they ought to walk, and to please God, as the Disciples and Churches here
mentioned, walked and pleased God.

I think it meet to give you a brief narrative of such passages (from the first
Chapter unto this present Scripture) as will make up a proper, and a necessary
manuduction unto the ensuing and intended doctrine.

After the Ascension of the man Christ Jesus into heaven, Heb. i. (...)
to sit down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, (as the Holy Ghost
phraseth it) there were about an hundred and twenty men and women assembled
together with one accord in one place, (Disciples they are called) waiting for
the mission of the holy spirit: Christ had foretold, or told them before, that
unless he went away, the Comforter would not come; now he being gone to the
Father, and they (by virtue of his command) abiding at Jerusalem, and waiting
for the promise of the Father, the sending and descending of the Spirit.

Behold in the second chapter, the Holy Ghost comes down suddenly in a most
glorious ministration, that the like was never heard of in the world before,
and sat upon each of the Apostles, in the appearance of cloven tongues like as
of fire, whereby they were enabled on a sudden to speak in other tongues as the
spirit gave them utterance; so that the Jews and Proselites out of every
nation, there reckoned up, (...).
(most part of the nations in the world, at least, under the Roman Empire)
heard them speak in their own language or proper dialect, the wonderful works
of God.

Peter speaking a few words, in the midst of an amazed and mocking multitude,
the Lord did so prosper and bless what he and the rest spoke, that about three
thousand souls gladly received the word, and were added to that first new.
Testament-church. Afterward the multitude of the Disciples increased
exceedingly. But now Satan, the God of this world, who blinds the minds of
them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should
shine unto them, endeavored what he could, to prevent the progress of it by
raising up a cruel persecution against the Church: Hereupon the Church was
scattered, (...), Faedum in modum verber^bus lacero, faedum in modum tracco.
(...), Haling, dragging men and women to prison.
all except the Apostles; so there was the first new-Testament-Church
scattered: which was but lately gathered, but (by an overruling hand of
providence) the scattering of that first Church, was the gathering of many; for
some went one way, some another way, and where ever they came, they were
instant in preaching the word, preaching the Lord Jesus, holding forth the
doctrine of the Gospel. Philip went down to Samaria, and there brought in
abundance of people to Jesus Christ. In this interim, there were planted
Churches throughout all Iudaea, Galile, and Samaria: And in this eleventh
chapter, that we may make haste to the words of the text, at ver. 19. you have
an historical account of the glorious success of the Gospel in the more remote
parts among the Gentiles. Now they that were scattered abroad, upon the
persecution that arose about Stephen, travailed as far as Phaenice, and Cyprus,
and Antioch, preaching the word to none but the Jews only. They thought they
alone were the people to whom the glad tidings of the Messiah should be
published and proclaimed; but now at this Antioch, the hand of the Lord was so
with them, Vide Calvin in locum.
that a great number of the Graecians believed and turned to the Lord.

This being reported to the Church which was in Jerusalem, (for the Apostles
being at Jerusalem, had opportunity of bringing in others to the obedience of
the faith, in stead of the dispersed Disciples) it was matter of great joy, and
and they sent forth Barnabas that he should go as far as Antioch. Civitas ab
Antiocho magno, denominata. Lyr. (...) to (...)
Antioch it bare the name of one of the Kings of Syria, one of them was a
bitter enemy of the Church of the Jews, Antiochus Epiphanes; and for his rage
and madness, they changed Epiphanes into Epimanes; and so instead of Antiochus
the Illustrious, they called him Antiochus the * furious. Or Antiochus the mad.
In this City, Antioch, as formerly in Samaria, two eminent thrones of Satan,
the Gospel wonderfully prevailed, and was readily embraced by a great number,
much people was added to the Lord; Paul and Barnabas come hither, assemble
themselves with the Church a whole year, and teach much people. And now when
Christ had Disciples among the Jews, and Disciples among the Gentiles; when he
had a Church at Jerusalem, That is, A. Congregation of Saints called out of the
world by the word, to the fellowship of the Gospel.
Churches in Judea, Galile, and Samaria, * a Church at Antioch, being a very
considerable number of people, distinguished from the rest of the children of
men, having Laws and Ordinances, ways of Worship differing from all other: they
are called by a new distinguishing name, they are called Christians. And the
Disciples were called Christians first at Antioch: that was the first place
where they received this appellation, and from thence the other Churches of
Jesus Christ, who hitherto were called Saints, Distinctio voeis ambiguae primum
sit in omni rerum consideratione. Kec. Who is as the wise man? and who knows
the interpretation of a thing? Eccl. 8.1.
Disciples, and Disciples of the Lord, etc.

Continuance of time has rendered this word, a very ambiguous word, I mean the
word Christian; and therefore this being the time of reformation, I speak not
of carnal external reformation, but of a reformation intended by Christ and his
Spirit, we must endeavor to reform, not only persons and things, but the
names of things: and indeed, reformation of this nature, is nothing else, but a
Reduction of persons and things, and names, to their original causes, in their
first constitution, to form them again, as it were; which cannot be understood
without explication and distinction, as the rule of the School is: yea, that
maxim in all the Schools of Philosophy, and Theology is most true and useful,
(...), Planto in (...) that man which would teach aright, must first of all
make a diligent enquiry into the names of things, whereby they are called, lest
being miscalled or misnamed; there be a misapprehension or a misunderstanding
of things themselves. so then this is the truth which I shall from these words
recommend unto this audience this day, and I desire it may take hold upon all
your hearts, not only in the explication of it, but application also.

The name, or title, or appellation, CHRISTIANS, was given originally, unto the
Disciples of Jesus Christ. I mean Disciples exclusively, and inclusively,
excluding all others, including all such.

Now it is somewhat dark, as from the present History, Est nominum impositio
alia (...).
how this name or appellation was given, whether occasionally, and
accidentally; or from deliberation, by election and choice, as they usually
distinguish in this point. If upon consideration, whether by Paul and Barnabas,
or whether by the people of Antioch that were without, discerning this people
in their doctrine and practice, to exalt the name and honor of the Lord Jesus
Christ only and altogether; Or whether it was given by their enemies, by way
of reproach, As they were called also Nazarens.
calling them Christians after the name of Christ, in a scornful and
ignominious manner; Or lastly, whether it were imposed by the special direction
of the Spirit, this is not easily determined here by a negligent Reader,
although it be a truth most evident, that this name was given at the first to
the Disciples of Jesus Christ.

But yet other Scriptures will help us in this thing, nay, I cannot but bring
this verse under trial, in order to the finding out of the true ground of the
imposition of this name upon the Disciples of Jesus Christ; for, (...).
whereas it is in the translation rendered paslively, (they were called) and so
no account is given by whom they were so called or named; if you render it
actively, (the text will bear it) so a clear account is given of the
nomenclators, who they were viz. Paul and Barnabas; for thus it may be read,
And it came to pass, that they assembled together with the Church a whole
year, and that they taught much people, or a great multitude, and that, they
called or named the Disciples, Christians, first in Antioch. But if the most
skillful in this language, will contend for the passive construction of the
verb, (...), the Kings translators version, I shall not further intermeddle,
though much may be said (I perceive) pro and con) in this dubious case,
concerning the two first words of this verse, in reference to the last clause;
(...), and (...),
but, as I said, let it suffice, that there are other texts of Scripture, which
do significantly enough, express the divine approbation of this title, as
here, its at the first imposed; as in 1 Pet. 4.16. he had said in the 14.
verse, Jf ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, etc, But let
none of you (Saints, Disciples) suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an
evil doer, or as a busy body; yet if any suffer as a Christian, let him not
be ashamed, (neither of the name, nor of the sufferings, or punishments,) but
let him glorify God on this behalf. So that you see plainly, the Holy Ghost
owneth this name, however it might be given at the first, Vox sit propria,
determinata, et adae quata rei significandae, brevis canon, sed tres vocis
magnas virtutes complectitur. Keck. log. lib. 1. cap. 1. Pontificii non parum
officiunt doctrinae de Ecclesia et ejus membris, cum vocem (Clerus) quam Ap.
Petrus tribuit omnibus fidelibus Christi membris, quadam arrogantia temeraria,
ad turbam Sacerdotum restringuntet sacrificulorum quasi illi soli sint sors
illa et hareditas Domini at que idcirco reliquae Christi ^embra quodnm
supercilioso respectu vocant Laicos.
or by whomsoever, it being a name or title very proper and very significant, a
word adaequate to the persons named, and intended in that name; why, therefore
it is to be accepted as given of God to the Disciples of Jesus Christ; yea, and
this precious truth, this noble appellation, is not to be parted with easily,
by the saints; they may safely appropriate it to themselves, the whole, and the
only family of Jesus Christ; to any other sort of men besides, how clamourous
soever in their claims, it does not appertain. As in a like case, both in the
Catholic Church of Rome, and the national Church of England (as from custom,
and by tradition, and not from Scripture, they do call it,) the Priests, the
Prelates, and their Curates do assume and arrogate to themselves only, the
word Clergy, the Lords lot, or inheritance; calling the ordinary people, the
Laity, and and the best of them Lay Elders, themselves Divines, the Clergy,
yea, the Church; whereas in the word of truth, the Saints, all of them, great
and small are the Lords Clergy, the Church, 1 pet. 5 3.2 Pet. 1.4.
partakers of the Divine nature; and therefore how necessary is it, to reform
and rectify the very names, and titles of things and persons, lest otherwise
the strangers intermeddle with the childrens joy, and that worthy name (...).
, whereby they are of right named, and distinguished, should through their
ignorance, filence, and negligence, come to be more and more blasphemed and
abused.

Now for the managing of this truth for the best advantage, I shall first
proceed to the removal of all those which walk in any degree of contrariety
thereunto, from having any part or fellowship in the dignity of this honorable
appellation, (so far as in me is,) and that is by way of negation, peremptorily
denying those to be justly or properly called Christians, who indeed are not
such, upon the terms mentioned in the text, visibly Disciples.

Secondly, I shall insist upon the true notation of the word, Christian; and
then give, by way of affirmation, the honor of that title to whom the honor
thereof is due.

Thirdly, I shall be ready to give an account, what congruity in reason, what
rational ground there is from Scripture and otherwise, to enervate, nay to make
void the title of mere pretenders and usurpers; and in the authority and power
of divine truth, to put the Disciples of Jesus Christ, in possession of that
honorable prerogative which of right belongs unto them. And these three things
I am the more careful to fix upon; because, as in all other writings and
discourses we must necessarily put a difference between an abusive word or
phrase, and a proper expression: So here we must keep close to the form of
sound words, (...).
and not call or account any man a Christian, that is not a Christian in deed
and truth, that was never yet a Disciple of Jesus Christ, no not by night, and
secretly for fear of the Jews, as Nicodemus, it is to commit an abuse in
speaking; Vocabula sunt propria, cum his ipsis rebus significandis adhibentur,
propter quas sunt instituta, huic virtuti opponitur (...) magna obseuritatis,
saepe etiam erroris causa
it is an (...), which has been of very evil consequence in this matter for
many generations, as afterward you will well perceive.

The first of these I shall speak to in the general, and in particular;
therefore in the general consider, that the worst and unworthiest men have
assumed to themselves, and dignified themselves with the most glorious Titles
and Names that have been current among the sons of men. The Turks at this day
call themselves Musslemans; i.e. right believers; and all the world besides,
are mistaken in their Faith, if you believe themselves concerning themselves.
The Papists they assume to themselves the name of Catholics and Christians,
and they are the true Apostolic Church, and dignifie themselves with all the
glorious titles of this nature, that are abroad in the world; why now on the
contrary, those that have had most right to this illustrious title of
Christians, and the like, they have been robbed, and disrobed of their
ornaments and garments in this respect; If they have called the Master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more them of of his household? Mat. 10.25. (...),
and in stead thereof, men have put upon them the most odious and hateful
names; Christ himself, the head of the Christians, was called a Samaritan, and
they said he had a Devil; Paul a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens, a
seditious fellow, a very * pest, as the word is; and so formerly in this nation
(as in the time of Popery rampant) the choises^, and most precious of the
people of God weie called Heretics, Lollards; and of late days, in the time of
the Prelaetes domination, Schismatics, Puritans, Sectaries, and such like
terms of reproach they were branded withal. But now consider what is to be said
in this first particular, the generality of men and women are not to be called
Christians; for from the beginning it was not so: those that are not Christ's
Disciples are not to be called and accounted Christians. This is a time of
reformation, justice, and right must be done to every one; by the authority of
the word of God, I may pronounce sentence against the far greatest part of the
people in Christendom, Men commonly and generally content themselves with
taking Christ's part in that which is honorable, the name, and title, not
caring for that which is answerable that is to die unto the word, and to live
unto God Vald.
(as it is called) who walk contrary to the example of Christ, the practices of
Christians, and the principles of Christianity; they are degraded by the virtue
of the truth in this word. The Disciples, the Disciples of Jesus Christ, are to
be called Christians, and none other throughout the world.

But more particularly. First, Although the Papists, or Disciples of
Antichrist, are called Christians in contradistinction to the Turks, the
Disciples of Mahomet, as you know, that are intelligent men in Histories; yet
notwithstanding, at the best, they are but Antichristian Christians; nay
indeed, they are Antichristians not Christians; for take the choicest of the
Papists, the most devout, and the most holy of the followers of Antichrist, why
they are not Christians, their doctrine is Babilonish doctrine for the most
part, their devotion is Babilonish devotion, (...) religious and honest women,
Act. 13.50.
it is Antichristian holiness, their worship, doctrine, tion favors not, has
not the spirit, no not the tincture of Christianity; and if the devoutest
disciples of the man of sin, the tens and the hundreds of these, are not
Christians much less their thousand; and their millions of Natural
bruit-beasts. (...) 2 pet. 2.12.
brurish sensual epicures, all these are cut off from any interest in this
honor.

2 There are Unchristian Christians as well as Antichristian: these as they are
not against Christ as those aforementioned are against him, so neither are they
with him, and Mat. 12.30.
the words of Christ are, he that is not with me is against me, and I call them
Unchristian Christians in a contra-distinction to the Antichrist and his
disciples, unto the Papists known usually by another word, occasioned in the
convention of some Princes of the Empire in Germany, at Smalcaldy, where in
their writings to the Emperor they begin every head of their Articles with the
word Protestamur, we protest, and from that time those who did come off, and
separate from the Church of Rome, were called protestants, and that word and
apellation past over the sea into England, and so to other parts, they were
afterward sub-divided into Lutherans, and Calvinists; Protestant christians,
for the most part, not real christians, in Qu. Eliz. days called Protest^nts at
large, and carnal Gospellers.
Now the degenerate protestants of these times, because they are not
Antichristians, do esteem and account themselves our Orthodox Christians, and
yet the generality of them may be reputed Unchristian Christians, that is such
as have the title of Christians undeservedly, being altogether unlike to Jesus
Christ whose name they glory in, as if it did de jure belong unto them. And of
these, two sorts there are, first all loose, lewd protestants: Secondly all
formal, hypocritical professors of Christianity.

1 First all licentious protestants, we must remove them from having any
interest, in this title, by way of negation, Christians they are not, though so
they call themselves, and assume (as if worthy thereof) the honor of this
name; for as Chrysostom said of old concerning nominal Christians of dissolute
conversation, that they are not men, in propriety of speech, (...), so may I
affirm of these Unchristian protestants, their actions and transactions in the
world savor not, relish not of the spirit of a man, they are so brutish in
their lusts, so filthy in their lives, the eldest sons of Belial in their
generation, and upon this account there will be discarded, and set by, many
thousands of people in this nation, men and women, high and low, rich and poor,
Priests and people, that have the title and name of Christians or protestants,
baptized (as they say) into the name of Jesus Christ, and yet do live more like
unto Devils incarnate in all manner of wickedness and licancsousness,
committing sin with greediness, than unto the first or primitive Christians,
who were indeed the disciples of Jesus Christ If ye continue in my word, then
are ye my Disciples indeed. (...) Sed dicet aliquis etiam de nostris excedere
quosdam a regula disciplinae: desinunt tum ehristiani haberi penes nos. Tert.
apo.
, who followed his doctrine and conversation, who obeyed from the heart that
form of doctrine into which they were delivered. Romans 6.17.


2 Secondly all formal professors, that is, such as make a plausible show, and
carry it in their outward garb, as (not only Christians in name, but)
Christians upon the best account, Acts 9.1.
the disciples of the Lord, and yet notwithstanding are no way worthy of that
worthy name, for they are not Christians inwardly in spirit and in power, (...).
but only in o (...). Gal 6.12.
appearance, or face, or word, or letter 2 Timothy 3.5. These distinctions ^^e of
great importance. qui nene distinguit, been docet. Phil. 3.20.
, where Christ is at Gods right hand, but these men have not their conversation
there, it is true they have not their conversarion in hell, (as it were) like
the Demoniake, among the graves, or apud inferos, as he alludes in the Comedy,
nor have they their conversation in the world, upon so bad an account, in some
sense, as those formerly mentioned, but they have their conversation betwixt
heaven and earth; betwixt heaven and hell, as it were, as they paint Erasmus,
hanging betwixt both, for he was half a Papist, and half a protestant, so all
formal professors they are but painted sepulchers, they may be painted and
pictured and drawn to the life (as meteors in the middle region of the air)
hanging, living, conversing, (...) luc. 12.30. live not in suspense, be not as
meteo^s.
tween Law and Gospel, between works and grace, between Christ, and
Antichrist, between Moses and Christ, or upon a such like account, as this;
they are like the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, they are neither hot nor
cold, but lukewarm, partaking of both heat and cold, whom the Lord (as such)
will spew out of his mouth.

Now lest this distinction should be offensive to the formalists The Scribes
and Pharsees, * the formalists of those times, were most offended at Christ and
his distinguishing doct. See Luc. 16.13, 14, 15.
(who do importunely assume to themselves this honorable title, Christians) as
not being grounded upon scripture sufficiently, I shall clear it from the
language of the Holy Ghost, concerning the Jews in the old testament.

For they were called Jews or Israelites, first in a contradistinction to the
heathen nations, in all the world. A Romans 3.30.
Jew was fully and plainly distinguished, from a Gentile, but now secondly
among themselves, there was also a distinction; there were false Jews, lying
Jews, as in the 2d. and 3d. of the Revelations, the Lord there speaks of those
that say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie, and there were the true
Israelites in whom is no guile; for all are not Israel that are of Israel, all
are not the seed that are counted for the seed; 1 samuel 2.12.13, etc.
therefore as you may see in the old testament among the Jews, some were so^s
of Belial, as the sons of Eli, they were Jews, and in the Priests office, they
drew near to the Lord, to the tabernacle of the Lord in Shiloh, yet were some
of the most vile of the children of men, And Isaiah, c. 1. called the Rulers of
the Jews, Rulers of sodom: now the men of ^odom were wic^ed, and sinners before
the Lord exceedingly, Genesis 13.13.
(for they lay with the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle, and
they sent their servants to take away the flesh as it was seething, out of the
Caldron by force and violence, and so abused and profaned the sacrifice of the
Lord:) And others were outwardly, and seemingly holy, and unblameable, like the
Pharisees and the Apostle Paul before his conversion, unreproveable, touching
the righteousness which is of the Law, yet they are called hypocrites again and
again, woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.14
Hypocrites, even seven times, * in that chapter: So now upon the like account
in the times of the New Testament those that are called Christians are to be
distinguished from those that are such indeed and truth; for though
hypocritical professors assume to themselves that title, which is equivalent
to the name of a true Israelite, an Israelite in whom is no guile, viz. A
Christian, yet it is not to be permitted, for a very vast difference there is,
between the one and the other; insomuch, that I may with little alteration;
apply the words of Christ unto these, Mat. 23.27, 28.
we are now speaking of, * Woe unto ye formal professors, hypocrites, for ye
are like unto whited sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outwardly, but
within are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness, even so ye also,
appear righteous [Christians] unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy
and iniquity. Thus you see to whom the title of Christians may justly be
denied, they having no interest in this worthy name, whereby the Disciples of
Jesus Christ are dignified and distinguished; but if notwithstanding this that
has been spoken, they will account it a kind of robbery to be deprived of what
they have so long possessed, (for many make a profession of Christianity,
richly plausible) let it be agreed, call them Christians, but with this proviso
that they admit an Epithere suitable, and proper for them, false,
false-Christians, and then sure I am, their honor for which they so contend,
will nevertheless be laid in the dust, as of old, 1 Pet. 2.2. 2 Cor. 11.13.
Gal. 2.4.
* false-Prophets, false-Apostles, false, Teachers, false-Brethren, so now,
false-Christians, false-Disciples, will not this be a more stigmaticall brand
upon them, than the single denial of that forementioned appellation can amount
unto? And this may be sufficient for the first viz. The extinguishing the title
of the several usurpers and pretenders, who claim an interest in this name of
Gospel honor, as if of the same house and stock, with these here spoken, of in
the text. And the Disciples were called Christians, etc.

In the next place we come to consider the notation of the word; Christian is
derived from Christ; the word is a word of the Greek language, signifying
anointed ones, Christ being the chief anointed one, and they his fellows, with
this difference, he is anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows,
that as in the pouring the ointment upon Aarons head; the head being the
principal part of the body, did first of all receive the ointment, and from
thence it came down to the skirts of his clothing, and all his garments
savoured of the sweet ointment made by Gods appointment, in the 30. of Exodus
and the 23. so now, the Gospel anointing, was powered first upon Jesus Christ;
as our Head, the Head of all believers, and from him, the Head, it did, and
does descend and flow down, even to the very skirts of his garments, the
meanest and lowest Saint in all the world; and it is his due to have this
appellation, this title of dignity and distinction from the rest of the
children of men but ye have an unction from the holy One. 1 John 2.20.
the anointed of God, the anointed of God, as Jesus Christ was anointed, the
Lord Jesus Christ is called the Anointed One, and they may be called from him
the anointed ones; for as the two words (...), and (...), in Gramaticall
derivation do both grow upon the self-same root (...), but with this
distinction among others, that (...) is a degree nearer the root then (...), so
the two persons signified by these two words viz. Christ and a Christian, in
the New Testament sense, do both partake of the self same unction, with this
difference, that every Chirstian is more remote from the fountain of unction
then Christ is, he receiving it immediates.
immediately, the Christian receives what he receives, by mediante christo.
means of Jesus Christ, first Christ, afterward they that are Christ's.

This word Christ is also expressed in the Old Testament, by a word proper to
that language, (...) from (...) now the self same word that is attributed to
christ, sgiven to others besides him, (indeed it belongs unto him eminently and
emphatically, the Messiah. John 1.41. Joh. 4.25.
we have found the Messiah which is, being interpreted, the Christ; and the
Translators read Daniel 9.25. the Messiah Although there be no, (...) emp
haticum prefixed, to either word.
the Prince) as in the 105. Psalm there you shall find plainly the holy Ghost
does not speak of the Messiah, yet those there specified, are called by that
name, touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm, verse 15. Touch not
my Christ's, Psalm. 105.(...) mine anointed. psalm.(...) his anointed.
my Messiahs, the same word that is in the second Psalm, his anointed, his
Christ, as it is interpreted by Peter, Acts 4. v. 26.27. And before I pass
from hence, you may understand, this anointing is no other thing, then the
anointing of the Spirit. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the
Lord has anointed me to Preach, etc. as you read in the 61 of Isaiah the first
ver. so there is the notation of the word Christian gramatically.

But now thirdly, You must observe the word, according as it has congruity of
reason, in its logical notation: Christians so called from Christ, they have
this denomination, in congruity of reason upon a fourfold account, or in four
respects.

First, in respect of doctrine. 2. in respect of conversation. 3. in respect of
interest. 4. in respect of principles.

First, Christians are so called from Jesus Christ upon this account, of
Grammatica nudam vocem, non naturam considerat Gr. log.

Logicus vocem considerat, non qua vox, sed qua ad ^entis intelligentiam
refertur, et rem explicat.

Keker. in log.


reason, because they (and they only) do understand, receive, and embrace the
truth as it is in Jesus, and no other sort of people in the world do the like,
Non sonum solum nominis expectes, sed et sensum. Tert. Receperunt nominari
Christiani a Christo, sicut Platonici a Platone. Lyran in locum.
this is one distinguishing Character; every Master, or Rabbi, or Teacher, has
had his Disciples, that has attained to any eminency, in any new and singular
kind of learning.

There were among the heathens of old, about Christ's time and before, the
disciples of Plato, the disciples of Aristotle, Aristotelians, and Platonists,
so distinguished, because that the one followed the doctrines, and teachings of
Plato, others followed Aristotle, and embraced for truth what he taught them,
there were disciples that were called Epicurians of Epicurus the Philosopher,
others were Stoics, the Disciples of that Doctrine, as the Holy Ghost gives
you to understand, Acts. 17.18. but its no way necessary to acquaint this
audience, with the several particular doctrines and oplnions of these Masters.
Only thus, to our present purpose every one of these Masters of learning; they
had their Disciples, and their disciple-ship consisted in this, in owning and
cleaving to the doctrines, and opinions of their Teachers, as they were
doctrines distinct from all other doctrines in the world, upon all occasions
letting the world know, by their disputes and professions, by whose name they
had chosen to be known and distinguished from other men. Now (as I said)
Christians in like manner, derive their name, as other disciples, from their
great Doctor, the Lord Jesus Christ, in respect of the particular distinct
doctrine of the Gospel (learned from him and that in a singular manner)
differing from all other doctrines in the world: John 9 28. We are Moses
disciples. Mar. 2.18. The disciples of John and of the Pharisees distinguished
from Christ's disciples.
They cannot be called Moses his Disciples *, neither can they be called John's
Disciples, neither can they be called the Disciples of the first Adam,
(considered as in the estate of innocence, as they speak) in respect of their
own righteousness; but they are the Disciples of Christ, in regard they own,
and cleave to the pure, proper Evangelical truth, those divine, supernatural
truths, which are revealed by the Son from the bosom of the Father, which
neither Adam in his first estate, nor the children of men since that time, have
been able, by strength of rational enquiries, to find out, understand, and
entertain; yea such truths, as the holy Angels themselves were not aware of,
Iuc 1.31, etc. John 1.14. 1 Timothy 3.16. Ephesians. 1.4. Romans 3.28. Gal. 2.20. Rom:
8:11: Heb: 7:25:26
until revealed, viz. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God,
and the word was God. Joh. 1.1. And the word was made flesh. And great is the
mystery of godliness (Christian godliness) God was manifested in the flesh;
and the rest of the doctrine of the Incarnation. Again, Election in Christ
before the world began. Justification by faith without the works of the law.
Living by the faith of the Son of God. The i^^dwelling of the Spirit in the
hearts of believers. The sending of the Spirit from the Father and the Son, The
man Christ Jesus. The doctrine of Christ's intercession at the right hand of the
Majesty on high, and that in our nature. With many other glorious Gospel
truths, which the Angels desire to look into; thus you may see what I intend by
the doctrine of Christ, as distinct from all other doctrines. And surely those
that are ignorant of these and other Gospel truths, strangers to this divine
learning, cannot properly be called Christians. Indeed Antichrist and his
disciples, pretend to be Christians, and disciples of Christ, as you heard, and
its true, some of these doctrines forementioned they profess to cleave unto,
but that of 1 Titus is verified in them, they professs that they know God but
on works they deny him, etc. And because of the admixture of contrary
doctrines, summed up in the confession of faith, made at the Council of Trent,
their doctrine may be called a mungrel doctrine, and so their worship, like
that set up of old, by the Jewish-Priest, among the several nations, 2. Kings.
17.33.41. they served the Gods of the lands and of the Countries, and they
served Jehovah, there was a mixture in their doctrine and worship; and you
know, what the learned writers and best scholars that contend against the
Papacy, say of them, their doctrine and worship, their whole religion is a
Miscelany, made up partly, of the Jewish Doctrines and practices, and partly of
the heathenish doctrine and practices, and partly of the doctrines and
practices of Christians, but that is the least part, it being composed chiefly
of Mosaicall and heathenish institutions, unwritten traditions, and many
ridiculous ceremonies: and the more any shall endeavor the introduction of
those doctrines which are not taught by the Lord Jesus and his Apostles, the
more improbable is it, they should be esteemed the disciples of Jesus Christ,
and consequently Christians, at the last day, for as you see he that is a true
Christian, understands the truth as it is in Jesus, and receives it and cleaves
unto it according to the a (...). Mary sat at Jesus feet to hear his word,
Luc. 10.39.
measure of faith given unto him, and as the righteousness of God is revealed
from faith to faith, sitting at Jesus his feet to hear his word, as the manner
of Disciples was of old time, b Paul brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and
taught, etc. Acts 22:3.
and is unto this day.

Secondly, Christians are so called from Christ, in congruity of reason in this
respect, because so soon as they are Christians, there is such a sweet
similitude between. Christ and them, in point of conversation, that they
mutually and reciprocally resemble each other, to the observation of the Angels
and discerning men, where there is a great dissimilitude betwixt the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the children of men, there is wanting a ground in reason, to call
such men Christians. As it is an utter absurdity, to call the Jews or Turks or
wicked persons, Christians, because no similitude in them, because utterly
unlike to Jesus Christ, so on the other side where any are found, believing as
Christ teacherh, and walking as he walked, observed to be in the world, as he
was in the world, it is most proper to call and account such as these are,
Christians and disciples; and when believers grow up to eminency, in faith and
practice, reflecting much of the glory of Christ upon the world in these two:
Oh then how fitly may they receive this honorable appellation, Christians,
Disciples of the highest form, their Profiting appearing unto all. This part of
their discipleship is properly called imitation, or following of the Lord. Be
ye followers of me as I am of Christ, the words are, (...). 1 Cor. 11.1.
be ye imitators of me. 1 Cor. 11.1. and so 1 These. 1. Ye became followers of
us and of the Lord, (...).
imitators of us, and of the Lord. And says Paul, thou have ^ully known my
doctrine, manner of life. In the margin of some of your Bibles, it is (...). 1 Timothy 3.12.
thou have been a diligent follower of my manner of life. Now this imitating
and following of Christ in the manner of his life, consists in these three
particulars, first in being, second in doing, third in suffering; after the
manner that Jesus Christ, was, and did do and suffer in the world. A Christians
conversation in point of demeanor in the world is like Christ's demeanor.
First of all they are in the world, as Christ was in the world, not of it,
while they are in it; you may know what was the frame and temper, and as I may
so say, the divine Genius of the spirit of Jesus Christ, in regard of his
father, how he delighted to converse with God in prayer, and communion with him
that way, by meditation and the like. And you know the genius and property, and
the frame of the heart of Jesus Christ toward his Disciples, that had received
the same spirit, how much love and delight in their company, to teach them and
to reveal to them the great things of God, that they might grow in grace, etc.
You know his demeanor and carriage while he was in the world, to Publicans and
sinners, how he did reveal the love of God to them in the world, and tells them,
that John 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him should not perish but have everlasting life. And I am he that
God the father has appointed, and sealed; and sent into the world. He did not
lift up his voice in the streets, he was not tumultuous nor turbulent, but
there was abundance of sweetness, meekness, and gentleness; thus he was in
the world, and we should be so in the world, and by how much the more,
Christians are like unto Jesus Christ, by so much the less, they are of the
world, as it is in the 17th of John, in the midst of that chapter, twice
repeated by Christ, to the father. Father (says he) they are not of the world,
as I am not of the world.

And then secondly, In respect of their doings, their actions and transactions
in the world, they are followers of Christ.
For their actings, Jesus christ did not keep al his goodness to himself while
he lived, and make others the better for him when he died, as the custom of
rich men is, they will keep their estates close while they live, and do little
or no good That is comparatively or in any proportion to ability and
opportunity.
in the place of their abode they die, there is a resurrection of their estates,
when they themselves go down to the grave, then their estates shall rise up in
their stead, but oftentimes, it attains not the end which they propounded. But
now from the time that Jesus christ was anointed at his Baptism, and the holy
Ghost came down upon him in the shape of a Dove, and a voice was heard, saying,
This is my well beloved son in whom I am well pleased, which voice we heard says
Peter) from that time forth for three years and a half, the whole space of his
life, Acts 10.38.
he went up and down doing good, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, healing
sicknesses, and performing all duties and offices that belonged to him as he
was the Son of Man, the Man Christ Jesus, and so ought Christians in conformity
to him, to have their conversation here in the world, to be willing to
distribute, ready to communicate, Christianns popullus per omnia sanctus est,
et non in templis tantum et ritibus Ecclesiasticis sed in omni vita,
omnitempore, omnibus in rebus omnibus factis ac studiis, nomins and gloriae
Christi consecratus, Musc.
to order their whole conversation aright, doing what the will of the Lord is as
Christ said I come to do thy will, O God, and so to be imitators or followers
of him, not only in outward demeanor, and behavior (which yet is exceeding
comely and commendable, viz. to be in behavior, as it becomes Saints) but
also more especially, in our actions, practices, and whole course of life. And
moreover observe, Luc. 12.13
When one said unto Jesus Christ, Speak to my Brother, that he divide the
inheritance with me, he would not intermeddle in the matter which belonged not
to him, but answered, Man, who made me a Judge, or a Divider among you? He
would not be a Busie-body He was (...). A Bishop of souls, 1 Pet. 2. ult. but
not (...), A busy body Bishop. The ambitious Clergy of all ages have been
notorious for the contrary witness the Histories of the several Kingdoms round
about.
in other men's matters. In this thing, all true Christians should approve
themselves his Disciples, treading in this very foot-step. Oh take heed of
stretching your selves beyond your line; keep within your compass; shine as
bright as you may within your own Orbs; move with as much advantage to the
world, in your proper Spears, as is possible: so many as interpose, and
intrude into another Province, are utterly unlike to Jesus Christ.

And then Thirdly, in point of Suffering, when Christ was brought before
Authority, he did not reproach and vilify them, but with meekness of wisdom,
or mock wisdom, spoke to Pilate concerning truth, and other matters that
passed between them; when he was reviled he reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, and says the Apostle, he has left us an (...). Leaving a written
copy. And Disciples ought to write after their Masters copy
Example, that we should tread in his steps. And truly in all Ages, Genuine
Christians have made it a principal part of their care, to approve themselves
the diciples of the Lord Jesus in this particular.

Now in the Third place, Christians are denominated from Christ, because they
promote his Interest; consider therefore, what is the great Interest of Jesus
Christ in its several parts. First of all, the glorifying the Father in the
Son. Secondly, the glorifying himself with the Father. And Thirdly, the
convincing the world of Sin, and Righteousness, and Judgment by the Spirit.
This is part of the great Interest of Jesus Christ, that the world through him
might be saved; Now if you are Christians upon the account mentioned in the
Text, you will, as Disciples of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.31.
carry on his Interest; then whether you eat or drink, or what ever you do, you
will aim at the glory of God, 1 Pet. 4.11.
that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ. And again, if
you are christians, Joh. 5.23.
you will endeavor that the name of Christ may be magnifyed, and exalted also,
as you desire the Father may be magnified, Joh. 17.5.
and exalted, Joh. 13.31, 32.

So likewise, It concerns christ nearly, and it is a great part of his
Interest, Ioh. 17.23.
That the world might know that the Father has sent him, and that they might
know the errandupon which he is sent, the saving of sinners. Now every one of
you, who are the Disciples of christ of a truth, should according to his Talent
received, say and do, as the Apostle John of himself and others, 1 Ioh. 1.1, 2,
3
That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have
looked upon, and our hands have handled of the wo^d of life, That will we
declare unto others, that they may have fellowship with us, and truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. It is the
property of Disciples, true to their Master, to multiply their number, and gain
in others: The Disciples of Christ, christians, have greater cause than any
other, to pursue this part of their Masters Interest, and an obligation lies
upon them accordingly.

Again, another part of christ's Interest, which is very conducible to this
honor, so far as it is advanced^ is, the Psa. 110.1. Heb. 10.13. (...),
henceforth expecting till his foes be made his ^oot stool.
making all his foes his footstool, the bringing them all down, even under his
feet. The present Interest of Christ is the Revealing and destroying of his
Grand Enemy. The Autichrist, and the subduing the Kings of the Earth, who have
committed Fornication with the Whore of Babylon, who having one mind, give
their power and strength unto the beast, and make war with the Lamb. Rev. 13.2.
The Dragon gave him his powet, or army, his seat and great authority. Vide Med.
in loc.
The interest of the beast is to maintain his power and authority given by the
Dragon, even beyond the two and forty months allotted to him by divine
appointment. The Man of sin, the Son of perdition assumeth to himself, and
accepts from others, names and titles of honor and glory; Nay exalts
himself above all that is called God or worshipped, etc. Opens his mouth in
blasphemy against God to blaspheme his name, at the same time gratifieth the
Kings of the earth with magnificent titles, giving to the King of Spain the
title of the most Catholic King, to the King of France the most Christian
King, to the King Henty 8th. Vid. Fox. Acts and Mon.
of England, (for helping the Papacy against Luther.) Defendor of the faith,
etc. Now consider it is the interest of Christ in this age, to obscure and
stain all this splendour and glory, by his shining forth in the greatest glory,
of that mosthonourable title, Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, intended
purposely for these times wherein we live. Now therefore, O all ye Christians,
that are indeed disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ, awake, awake, the enemies
of Christ are now to be made his footstool, pursue this interest to the utmost
in your several places and callings, see to it that you believe and rceive a
complete victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his mark, and
over the number of his name; see to it that you have not his mark either in
your foreheads, or in your right hands, for the Lamb shall overcome and they
that are with him, called, and chosen, and faithful. And this shall suffice
for the 3 reason, why the Disciples of Christ are called Christians, because
after the manner of true disciples, they promote the proper and several
interests of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, and those who are otherwise
minded, cannot in good congruity of reason, be properly called or accounted
christians, look whose interest you most promote his disciples indeed you are.
Its a Noble Study seriously to enquire, what is the present great interest of
Jesus Christ, and a great honor to all true Christians to carry it on
effectually.

And then fourthly, and chiefly, though lastly. Christians were and are so
called from Christ, in respect of the Similitude, nay I may say Identity of
their Principles.

For what! though men profess to entertain and receive the truths of Christ,
the pure and Evangelical doctrine distinguished from all other doctrines and
truths, in the world? what though they should profess to have their
conversation in heaven, in respect of holy duties, unblameable conversation and
sweet carriage in doing good, and in not being of the world, free in outward
appearance from covetousness, and covetous practices, and free from
uncleanness, filthiness, and fordidness of living; and what though they should
seem to join with the people of God, in carrying on the cause of God, and
interest of Christ, against the common enemy; yet if they should be and do all
this, and much more then this, if they should not do it from that principle
which is proper to Christians, but from a principle of violence from without,
or a principle set on work, by virtue of an end, that is not suitable and
congruous unto the great end that Christ propounds, then certainly all the
glory and honor of these men would lie in the dust, notwithstanding all the
three former, and this is on purpose brought in, to spoil the claim and title
of the best painted hypocrite, or false Christian though acting in the most
glorious garb, and carriage of himself.

And therefore mark and consider, what was the principle of Jesus Christ, Here
some were observed to sit and ^eep.
from which he acted; (if any of you are sleepy and drowsy, rouse up your
selves for this is of great importance.) The principle by which Christ Jesus
had his being in the world, and acted, and suffered, and carried on the work
that appertained to him, it was the spirit of God as you heard before, in the
61 of Isaiah the first. The spirit of the Lord is upon me and he has anointed
me, the spirit has anointed me; nay, the spirit is that anointing, in the book
of Exodus, a place formerly hinted you, There the composition of that holy
anointing oil, which was to be poured upon the type of Jesus Christ, the high
Priest Aaron, and upon his sons, and upon all the holy vessels and utensils of
the Tabernacle, is at large described, it is compounded of the richest spices,
the most aromatical, the most odoriferous spices, together with the oil Olive
an Hin, as it is there expressed in the 30. of Exodus the 23. and 24. Thou
shall take to thee principal spices, of pure Myrrh five hundred shekels, and
of sweet Cinnamon, half so much, two hundred and fifty shekels, and of sweet
Calamus two hundred and fifty shekels, and of Cassia five hundred shekels after
the shekel of the Sanctuary, and of the oil olive an Hin, and this ointment was
to be madeafter the Art of the Apothecary, the ingredients to be exactly
weighed, as the textspeaks. And thou shaltant ointwith this ointment the
Tabernacle, and the Ark, and the vessels, and thou shall sanctify them, that
they may be most holy, and thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons and consecrate
them, that they may minister to me in the Priests office. Now this was but a
Typical representation of that holy anointing of Jesus Christ by the spirit,
and the anointing of his sons, his people, his children, his disciples after
him.

And in the Canticles, when Christ comes to look after his spouse, comparing
her to a garden, my sister, my spouse is a Well enclosed, a Fountain sealed,
etc. thy plants are an Orchard of Pome-granates, with pleasant fruits, with
Camphire, and Spicknard, and Saffron, Calamus, Crynamon, Myrrh and Aloes, and
the like. Now these spices of Arabia foelix, those aromaticall spices in those
hot countries of the world, they are of a most pleasant smell, and as Jesus
Christ was made pleasant by the anointing of the holy Ghost, grace was poured
into his lips, he spoke as never man spoke, and grace was poured into his whole
conversation, his whole carriage savoured of the sweetness of the spirit of
God. So if you are Christians, you are anointed with the self same spirit, if
any here say they are Christians, and have not the spirit of Christ, they are
not Christians, they are none of his Disciples. For if they were of his
Disciples and Christians, they have received of this anointing, it would run
down from him the Head, upon the Officers of the church, and then upon every
one, even to the door-keepers of the Churches of the Saints, the ointment will
run upon these, and they should smell of it in their conversation, wherever
they did walk or speak, sweetness should break forth at their lips, and it
could not be but where ever they came, they would smell of that sacred ointment
too, of that holy anointing, and their actions, would savor of the spirit of
Jesus Christ. Now, this spirit, I should insist upon it, as being the Principle
indeed, as it is an informing Principle, as it is an actuating P^inciple, as it
is an assesting Principle, and as it has been and is in our spirits, ^cting
with Christ's spi^rit, so that whatsoever we do as Christians, we should do,
going forth in the strength of that anointing. In the 1 John 2. and the latter
end, read it over. But that anointing which you have received of him, abides
in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no l^e; and even as it has
taugh you ye shall abide in him; which is a choice scripture, and none
understand it (though they understand the Grammar of it, they understand not
the Theology, the Divinity of it) but those that have received it. For Christ
in the fourteenth of John, speaking of the Comforter, this Anointing, says he,
which or whom the world cannot receive, for they know him not, but ye know him;
for he shall abide or dwell and be in you for ever.

And this shall suffice now, for the doctrinal part, showing you how in
congruity of reason, the Disciples of Christ are called Christians, because
they savor and receive the doctrine of Christ, and they are imitators of the
Convers^tion of Christ, they promote the Interest of Christ, the Principles by
which he acted, they likewise act in the world. And indeed a through
consideration of these 4 particulars, should marvellously induce Christians, to
be ambitious to hold forth the glory and honor of that honorable title
Christians, and Christianity, as becomes the Disciples of Jesus Christ.

application of this Doctrine: the remainder of the time shall be spent that
way. Is it so that this honorable title and name [Christians] was given
originally unto none but the Disciples of Jesus Christ, unto the Churches of
Christ, of a new, Testament form and frame; as you may see in the words before
the text. They assembled themselves with the Church a whole year and taught
much people and when they became a great company of people, then they had a new
name given them, the Discriples were called Christians, etc. then first of all
for Information and instruction of all those in this Congregation, that are
ignorant of this point. By this we may take a due estimate of the number of
Christians in the world, how many there may be in the world. Men heretofore (it
may well be) have thought there have been more Christians in the world than
indeed there were. And now its more than probable that diverse here present will
be more charitable and favorable in their Computation of the number than they
ought to be, lest they should exclude themselves. This doctrine will help us to
take an estimate of them, thus: By that time all those whose Conversation is in
Hell as it were, that make a Hell upon earth, all Devils incarnate you know
such there are, the unclean spirit works effectually in them, the Children of
disobedience, and yet are called Protestants, and called Christians by that
time I say these are abstracted; By that time those whose Conversation is upon
earth, that are earthly minded men, that mind the world, and the things
thereof; By that time I say these are discounted, by that time all those, whose
Conversation is between Heaven and Earth, as it were between God and Mammon,
they are not downright Altheists nor Papists, but Protestants, but yet
carnal, or loose, o^ formal at best as being Christians in an outward garb
only, by that time these are discarded and set aside as utterly Heterogeneal:
by that time, this is done, even in this Nation, how many, think you, will be
left, concerning whom it may bespoken, and that in truth, that they are
Christians, and Disciples of Jesus Christ.

When Diogenes in his time, (he was a very notable Philosopher, Alexander the
great much admiring him, saying, if he had not been Alexander, he would have
been Diogenes) when he saw the City in which he lived, falling into so much
injustice and wickedness, one day came into the midst of the City with a Candle
in his hand at noon day, and being asked what was his meaning to come with a
candle in his hand at Noonday, Oh! says he, I come to search every corner of
the City narrowly, to see if I can find an honest man, in such a multitude of
men and women he could not find an honest man. Now by way of allusion, is it
not so at this day? when Jesus Christ comes, shall he find faith upon the
earth? If before Christ comes, he should now send a Messenger with the Candle
of the Lord in his hand into this City, into the Markets, amongst the buyers
and sellers; into your shops, amongst the Tradesmen. If a man should come with
the Candle of the Lord into the Courr of Aldermen, into the Custom-house,
amongst those Officers, to all the Committees of Parliament, to the Council of
State, with the Candle of the Lord; and there be looking and espying and
searching; and being asked who do you look for, might he not answer. Why if I
can find a Christian among so many Christians, if I can find a Disciple of
Jesus Christ amongst such multitudes of men and women that call themselves
Believers, that call themselves Disciples, but surely they call themselves
such, falsely, and in much darkness of mind. For now bring the Candle of the
Lord, and look, and observe the difference between the one and the other, and
alas! you can hardly find one of an hundred, Vix centesimus quisque was the
usual phrase of Calvin upon such occasions as this. And assuredly, scarce one
of an hundred of those that are called and accounted Christians are such indeed.
that are in deed and in truth Christians and Disciples. This brings to
remembrance that of the fifth of Jeremy, and the first verse. Run ye to and
fro, through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the
broad places thereof, If ye can find a man, if there be any that executes
Judgment, that seek the truth, and I will spare it. Behold here the paucity of
true Israelites: so now My Brethren, so many Disciples of Christ in the
Parliament, so many Christians and no more; and so many Disciples, real
Disciples of Jesus Christ in Common Counsel, in the City, as there are, so many
Christians, and no more, not one more. Therefore you had need look to it, you
have possibly hitherto, that have least cause to do so, assumed to your selves
the most honorable title of Christians, and Believers, and Protestants, and
Saints and the like, whereas when all those are removed that I spoke of before,
where shall you find a man that may be so styled?

Appellation of Christians? Do thou sooth up me, and I will sooth up thee; Do
thou have a charitable good opinion and esteem of me, and so I will have of
thee, say these men one unto another in effect: But now see here your error,
and your danger, and the mistake, and the consequence of it. What if you should
argue Ex non concessis? what if you should beg the Question, and desire that
may be taken for granted, that is not granted, what woeful mistaking is here?
Suppose that you say thus of your selves, and others say thus, that are men,
that judge as Christ says, (...) john 7.24. (...). romans 2.2.
according to outward appearance; yea, but how if the Head of the Christians,
Jesus Christ, the great Doctor of the Chair, should not agree with that
determination that thou have made, that thou art a Christian? for he judges
according to Truth: What if all the world should call thee such, and at the
last day Christ should before all the world, bid thee depart, thou art no
Christian, what is the consequence of such a mistake as this is? And therefore
Christians you had need go upon sure grounds, and you that are not Christians,
or have cause to doubt whether you are soor no, you had need make enquiry from
this day forward. So thou that art an infamons person, an odious wretch, for
sordid Lusts, thy throat an open Sepulcher, evaporating, breathing out Oaths,
Cursings, Blasphemings, thou that have thy bones rotting through thine
uncleanness and filthiness, will thou take upon thee, the famous and honorable
title of Christianity and a Believer, do thou think to carry the cause thus?
Why Angels and intelligent men see clearly thou art no such person, much more
does Jesus Christ see it clearly that is the Head of Christians. Thou take
the Name of Christian upon thee, even as the Jesuits take upon them the Name
of Jesus, it is a sweet Name, an honorable Name, a name of great respect: But
now the Jesuits (that are denominated from Jesus) assuming it to themselves,
they are the hatefullest men, and the vildest persons in the world, the
greatest seducers, So Paul of the unbeleeving lews, Behold thou art called a
Jew, and restest in the Law, and mak^st thy beast of God. Romans 2.17.
the most bloody and cruel minded men of all the Sects of the Papists. Now it
will be a sad case at the last day for thee to be ranked with these men; these
men they have as good a Name as thou have, and as famous and as honorable a
Name; as Chrysostom says of the Name Christian. Yea, but it is not what thou
art called but what thou art, that will be enquired into at the last day,
however thou carriest it now. * Behold thou art called a Christian, and restest
in that Name, and make thy boast of Christ; but thou have eyes full of
Adultery, and thy heart is full of coverous practices, and thou can not
cease to sin; when thou sinnest thou rejoycest, and then thou art most merry
and jovial, when there is the greatest cause that thon should be most sad
and disconsolate. Now what art thou the better for the Name of a Christian, and
Believer, and a Protestant, no Papist, and the like, if thou be such a base
wretch, and so continuest to the end? And therefore you had need seriously to
consider this mistake, and the sad consequences of that mistake when you style
your selves Christians, and are not so, when you are accounted so by others,
and are not so indeed. But especially I would speak to those that have
professed themselves Christians, and so have been taken to be upon a better
account than others, in regard of a form of Godliness, and now are fallen off
what a sad condition are these men in, who have rejected the word of Christ,
despised the Spirit of Christ, speak evil of the Ways of Christ, account the
Ordinances of christ, vain things, in a word have renounced the whole new
Testament Unction: and being possessed by an unclean, blasphemous Spirit,
account it, and call it their Glory, and their perfection to perpetrate the
vilest abominations, without the reluctance of their own Spirit; what will be
the end of these men the Apostle declares in Heb. 10.26. F^r if we sin
willingly after that we have received the know edge of the Truth, there
remains no more Sacrifice for sin but a certain fearful looking for, and
expectation of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries. Give them a portion with Hypocrites, noting to us, that Hypocrites
they are the first born of Hell, they have the right of Primo-geniture, a
double portion as it were, give him his portion with Hypocrites.

Glass, how to judge of themselves, and what to set down by way of account
concerning their estate, if so be that the question be thus put among you, from
the greatest to the least in this Assembly, Art thou a Christian? Yes, But art
thou assured of it in the power and light of truth? How know thou, thou art
a christian? Why now, here is a glass, whereby thou may discern, whereby
thou art enabled to enquire and examine out the truth; Why you see plainly,
that originally, those were called christians, who were indeed Disciples. The
Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch. So that now if thou art
indeed and in truth a Disciple of Jesus Christ, thou art a christian. But if
thou art none of christ's Disciples, but either Moses Disciple, or Mammons
Disciple, if thou art a servant to the God of this world, thon art an enemy to
christ instead of being a Disciple, an enemy to his Interest, secretly wishing
and desiring that this Interest that is now setting up in the world might be
undermined and brought to Inought And if thou have not the self-same Spirit
dweling in thee that dwelt in Jesus Christ? If thon art acted by a Spirit of
self-love a Spirit of vain Glory, thou art none of Christ's, his glorious
unction, is not yet poured upon thee. Have thou learned and walked in the way
of the Lord, for, he that says, he abides in him ought so to walk, even as he
walked, if not, with what face can thou challenge to thy self the the name of
his Disciple; Oh consider I say again, what little cause thou have to assume to
thy self the name of a christian.

If so be that you should see a man with his face and his feet contrary each to
other, his face looking upward, forward and upward unto Heaven, and his feet
directly turned backward, carrying him backward, downward toward a steep
precipice under which is a pit of destruction, First you would say this is a
Monster, this is a Monster, his face one way, and his feet walking another, and
leading him backward: And then secondly, you would pity him, he is going to
destruction, and sees it not, sees not the precipice, he sees not the pit, the
Gulf of destruction underneath, at the bottom of that precipice, you would say
he is a Monster and you would pity him. My Brethren this is directly the
Description of a Counterfeit Christian; here is a Character now, of abundance
of persons in the world, and I fear of many here present, It is true your faces
are fixed upwards and toward heaven, toward Christ, toward God, happiness,
salvation, you look that way, you profess that way, look in your face, it is a
beautiful face, and it is set the right way toward Heaven and salvation,
toward God and his Glory, this is your pretense, but look down now upon your
feet, and observe your walking, your fect are turned clean contrary to your
face, and these feet carrying the body, face, and pretense, and all to Hell,
and utter ruin and destruction, such a man is a Monster amongst men, and not a
kindly Christian, that is rightly born and rightly begotten of the immortal
seed of the Word, born of God and not of man, he is not such a man, but a
Monster amongst Christians. And ah, poor Monster whither art thou going,
walking, carrying, and drawing thy very face, thy presence, and pretense and
demeanor together with thee, down that precipice to eternal destruction. Now
although it is true, I cannot determine, which are these in this Assembly, yet
he that sits in heaven, and observes all your down-lyings and uprisings, and
understands your thoughts a far off, he sees how many monstrous Christians
there are in the world, and here, with their faces toward Heaven, and their
feet turned and distorted directly contrary to them. And therefore it is that
in the Ministry of the word this day, he calls out to those Monsters of
Christianity that have a beautiful face, a fair pretense and their actions
contrary. Take heed, whither are you going, and look after the Precipice, the
downfall, the gulf of ruin that is behind you, and that you are going to, and
therefore now remember this truth, this glass shows to you who are Christians,
who are not, who are Monsters, who have neither the face, nor any thing, no not
any proportion of a Christian, and who they are that have any part. No more
Christians in this congregation than Disciples, and so many of you as are
indeed the Disciples of Jesus Christ, so many may deservedly challenge the
Title, the Name, and honorable Appellation of Christians, But I must draw to a
conclusion.

word of Exhortation to those that are Christians indeed, as you know there
were Jews or Israelites indeed, it concerns you, and it concerns your Head,
your high Priest (as Christ is called, the Apostle, and the high Priest of our
profession, in the third of the Hebrews, and the first. Wherefore holy
Brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle, and
High Priest of our Profession, Christ Jesus.) Why now it concerns you to be
Christians indeed, and to purpose, not only to be so, but to be so in the
sight of men, as well as in the sight of God, that tries the hearts. Art thou a
Christian cordially, cordially engaged into the interest of Jesus Christ? Have
thou received this truth? Desire to be in the world, as Christ was in the
world, and not to be of the world, any more then Christ was of the world? do
thou act from the same principles, from the same Spirit in all thy carriage and
conversation? ^^en Christians live like your selves? Be in behavior as it
becomes the Disciples of Jesus Christ; for the time is coming that those that
are true Christians shall lift up their Heads when the rest of the world shall
hide theirs, and hang them down.

There were four Monarchies, and all of them are distinguished by their
several titles, ending like unto this, Caldeans and Babylonians, Persians,
Grecians, Romans, why now the second extinguished the first, and swallowed up
the very name of it, the third, Daniel a^ 34.44.
extinguished the second, and the fourth the third, and so they have supplanted
each other. Now comes the fifth Monarch the Lord Jesus Christ with his
Christians, his Disciples, and Followers, and sets up a new-Government in the
world, makes a new Heaven, and a new Earth, reforms all things, and then as the
name of the Romans was honorable in their time, so shall the name of
Christians be the honourablest name that ever was upon earth, since the first
Monarchy and before, and all other Honor shall be but Infamy, in respect of the
Honor that shall rest upon Jesus Christ and his Christians in the world, and
that upon a voluntary acknowledgment and confession of many of the Nations of
the Earth, and those that refuse to set up this Kingdom, shall be made
Tributaries to it at least, Nay, Isaiah 60.12.
that Nation and Kingdom that will not serve Christ and Christians shall
perish, yea those people shall be utterly wasted: All the Dominions under the
whole Heaven shall be given to the Saints of the most high, and even now the
time, Daniel. 7.27
and times and half a time is almost finished, as it is in the 10th of the
Revel: Time shall be no longer then the beginning of the sound of the seveneth
Angel, Rev. 11.15
and then the Kingdoms of the world, shall become the Lords and his Christ's
and his Saints, even theirs that are with him chosen and called and faithful,
and they shall walk with him in white; for they are worthy, and who then but
Christ and his people in the world. Now is the beginning of the dawning of that
glorious day, and therefore Christians lift up your Heads, fear not all the
Invasions, Insurrections, and Machinations of Antichrist against Christ, they
are as nothing, they are but as ropes of sand, all their Counsels shall come to
naught, and whatsoever they agree on in their Council Chambers, they shall
never perform in the field, And therefore ye Christians stand fast in that
liberty, with which Christ has made you free, cleave close to that glorious
truth of the Gospel; 2 Cor. 5. vlt.
He made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, and walk in holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord. Remember whatever the Spirit said to any of the Churches, Rev. 2,
and 3.
he says to all the Saints. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches. To him that overcommeth and holds out to the end, shall
be given a Crown of life, and thus and thus he shall be rewarded. And therefore
now, upon the defection and Apostasy of others, do you approve your selves unto
Christ, and not only so, but approve your selves in the world, like the Sons
of God, and daughters of God, and like the anointed of the Lord, as having
received a great measure of that Anointing, the Spirit being poured out richly
upon you, even the Spirit of Jesus Christ. All other Spirits and Interests will
be ashamed, and go out like as the lesser stars go out and hide themselves from
the rising Sun, and the name of Christ and his Disciples shall be famous from
the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, and such honor shall
Christ and all his Saints have, when he comes, Amen come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. But this shall suffice for this time.

FINIS.
To prevent errors in reading, the Evrrata's in Printing are thus to be
rectified.
ERRATA.
IN the sheet of B, page 8. line 14. for weie tead were. C p. 3. l. 4. for
tween r. between. D p. 2. l. 26. for abode they die r. abode, and when they
die. p. 7. l. 3. for richest r. rich. p. 8. l. 5. for wherever r. where ever,
E p. 1. l. 37. for Altheists r, Atheists. P. 4. l. 11. for soor r. so or.

As for literal faults in Printing, the favor and help of the Reader is
requested, according to custom of courteous dealing in such cases.


