AN Appeal to Heaven, AND HEAVENS MINISTERS: The most Reverend Pastors of Gods
Word, Now assembled in the Synod of ENGLAND:

And to all the faithful People of God: From all the Prisoners, imprisoned for
Debt, in the several Gaols within the Kingdom of ENGLAND, and Principality
of WALES.

Together with diverse infallible Reasons, showing, that imprisonment of men for
Debt, is contrary to the Law of God: The law of Nations: as also, the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

Composed in the year of Englands Jubilie,
if they do not neglect Justice and Equity,
In the year of grace forty four,
else will Judgment enter by the door.
Written by a member of the true Church of Christ, J. M. F.

Humbly show,
THat having formerly addressed our selves, by our several humble Petitions,
unto the high and honorable Court of Parliament, for redress of our
intolerable grievances, and Christian slavery, suffered under the heavy and
unexpressible yoke of tyrannical Imprisonment, where they that rule over us
make us to howl, Isa. 52.5.
Isa. 52.5. A thing in it self surpassing the tyranny of Turks and Pagans, and
not to be paralleld in any other Kingdom or State throughout Christendom.
Being also a thing far different from the liberty of the Subject, and quite
contrary to the Contents of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right. Both which
were also ratified and confirmed by his Majesty, for the benefit of all his
people. And whether Imprisonment for Debt, be a thing consonant to the word of
God, we refer to your pious judgments, upon your serious perusal of these
several portions of holy Scripture, viz. Psalm. 14.4. 6. Psalm. 53.3, 4. Psalm.
82.2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 94.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 20. Isa. 3.14, 15. Isa. 10.1, 2,
3, 4. Isa. 58.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Jere. 5.27, 28. 30. Ezech. 22. Micah 7.2,
3, 4. Zach. 8.16, 17. Matthew 23.23. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. with many other such
like places, proving the unlawfulness of Oppression, Imprisonment for Debt,
and the neglect of Justice for relief of such whom the Lord has afflicted,
Psalm. 69.24. 25. 26.
through several crosses and losses, by sea and land: Whose afflictions also
have been redoubled upon them by the tyranny of some persecuting Nimrods,
whereby they are brought to extreme want and misery. Yet notwithstanding all
this, their miserable bodies are daily sacrificed by the merciless Common Law,
unto the tyranny of Jaylors, and their adherents; as also to the oppression of
their cruel merciless Creditors.

Thus having (as we said before) addressed our selves by our several Petitions
of complaint, but by what unjust hand we know not, our complaints have been
hitherto obstructed, and we thereby (for these three years past) have not
reaped the pleasing fruit of our humble and just desires, for the work of our
relief in, and release from, these our several dungeons of misery, and places
of tyrannical oppression, notwithstanding the Dormant Ordinance of Parliament
to that effect.

The anchor of our hope now resting on heaven, and on you the pious servants
and instruments of God, for the crying aloud in the ears (and stirring up) of
all those Worthies, to whom the Lord has committed the sword of Justice, to
and for the work of our deliverance and speedy accomplishment of our just
desires.

We do therefore in all humility, beseech you by the mercies of God, to
commiserate these our present deplorable conditions, and to make these our
grievous and unjust oppressions manifest unto that high and honorable Court of
Parliament, that so thereby we may become capable of their great care, for the
honor of God, in the relief and release of us his afflicted and long
oppressed members, by the flowing stream of true justice and judgment, Exodus
23.6, 7, 8, 9.
without respect of persons, in a free current, without any pecuniary charge
(which is a thing, that our extreme poverty cannot reach unto.)

And that this just and pious act of relief and release, may through their
wisdoms be conferred on us, by men truly fearing God, and hating covetousness,
and not by any covetous Lawyers, seditious Atturnies, oppressing Jaylors, Psalm.
10.3.
nor by any their adherents, who (like unto the Mass Priest) have ever (by
their calling and profession from their youth) been taught this one impious
Principle, viz. Give me my fee, 1 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
or else No Penny no Pater noster, no money, no Justice, no true judgment nor
mercy.

In confidence of your pious favor to be extended for the accomplishment of
this our humble request, we shall ever continue our prayers for you and all
your pious undertakings, and send our praises to heaven for you, as for the
pious instruments of our delivery from these seminaries of iniquity, and seed-
plots of all abomination, tyranny, and oppression.

Infallible Reasons showed, why men for Debt ought not to be Imprisoned.
FIrst, They conceive themselves to have been most unjustly and tyrannously
detained in prison, by the corrupt practices, ways, and means, of evil
minded Judges, covetous Lawyers, Levit. 25.23, 24. 35. 43.
seditious Atturnies, and by and for the particular benefit of cruel exacting
Jaylors; Especially such of them who are allied to persons of eminency in the
State: Contrary to the laws of God, the laws of Nations, and the fundamental
laws of this Kingdom.

For, The words of Magna Charta are these, viz.

That no freeborne Subject shall be detained in prison for Debt, Will. 2. chap
18 Magna Charta 9. of Hen. 3. chap. 19. Regis. (...) 77. D. Homine (...) sel^o
6. 3. Edw. 1. chap. 15. and Anno 5.9. and A^no 25. Edw. 3. chap. 4.
any Ordinance, Law, Act, or Statute, made, or hereafter to be made to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And the power of this law is not, nor ought not to be extinguished at this
day, being a perpetual Law, and obtained by the blood of many thousands of our
ancestors. By which they freed themselves and us from being slaves, and thereby
have made us freeborn Subjects, and for diverse other most weighty causes,
whereupon it was first founded, being at this day styled and taken to be the
Fundamental law of this land. And all Statutes that shall be made in any one
particular point, contrary to Magna Charta, are void by the Statute of the 42
Ed. 3. chap. 1.

Secondly, In regard of the continuance of these unjust and tyrannous courses.
For that ever since the beginning of this Parliament, the poor prisoners have
been by no ways nor means enabled, Genesis 18.19.
freely to reap the fruit of Justice, for their release out of prison, and
relief against their oppressors; For, notwithstanding all our several
grievous complaints, (these three years past) against our oppressors, and
cruelty of Jaylors, and their merciless Substitutes, our complaints have been
slighted, Hosea 4.1, 2.
and we our selves still detained in prison, under the cruel bonds of
oppression and Christian slavery.

Thirdly, In regard the Jaylors are still countenanced, and suffered to persist
in their tyrannous courses and cruel practices upon prisoners; by murdering
of some, starving others to death, and decripping of others by their iron
fetters; Job 24.14.22.
which is a thing manifest to many prisoners, and others also.

Fourthly, In regard the Jaylors (notwithstanding the just unlimited power of
this Parliament) most impudently still persist, in threatening the poor
prisoners with their iron fetters, and in practicing this their cruel tyranny
on some, as also by posting of some of them from one prison to another, Psalm.
31.13.
and from one part of the prison to another, upon their private distaste taken
against any of them; Psalm. 58.
as also by suffering and also causing the prisoners to be violently assaulted
and beaten in their chambers, by their instruments of cruelty; by reason
whereof their lives have been and are still endangered, and their estates
utterly ruined.

Fifthly, In regard the Jaylors are also still suffered to exact their unjust
extorting fees, and without control, 42. of Eliz.
to oppress, defraud, and deceive the prisoners of their gifts, and Legacies;
as also of the collection-moneys due unto them by the Statutes of this Realm,
and to detain some men in prison, merely for their own unjust exacting fees,
until such time as some Legacy comes for release; to the hazard, yea, often to
the loss of the prisoners life. In all which several extreme oppressions,
the poor prisoners have hitherto reaped no redress.

Sixthly, In regard of these distracted times, the charity of the Basket also
much failing; By reason whereof, diverse prisoners for debt, have been starved
to death, and more are like to follow the same way daily, if this barbarous
oppression course of cruelty, for imprisonment of men for debt, be still
suffered to continue in this Kingdom.

For these and many other most pregnant reasons, J^^^ 4.11, 13.
ready to be manifested, if by Justice countenanced, and not by the subtlety
of some powerful personages still obstructed; the poor prisoners ought in all
reason and conscience to enjoy their liberties, and also for that purpose to be
speedily by Justice relieved and released. For we are a people spoiled of all
our estates, credits, and callings; and many of us from being formerly painful
and profitable Bees in this Commonwealth, Pro. 21.3, ^, 10
are now by these inhumane courses made Drones, Pro. 21.22, 23
yea, we are rather, as men buried alive, and by the mere subtle practices of
the persons aforesaid, we are all of us ensnared in holes, and hid, yea,
buried in prison-houses. Behold, Isa. 42.22.
we are set apart for a prey to oppression, and none delivers us, yea, for a
spoil to Lawyers and Jaylors, and none says, Restore unto them their right.
And if it be not so now, Job 24.25.
who will make me a liar, and make my speech nothing worth?

We beseech you therefore by the mercies of God, seriously to consider these
things, and let not the blood of the innocent, and the groans of the
oppressed, cry any longer for vengeance, lest their cry fall heavy upon the
whole Kingdom. For, as the blessings of God shall crown those people, that
truly and freely execute Justice and Judgment between man and man, without
respect of persons, and without any pecuniary reward; Amos 3.10, 11
so wrath and destruction shall be upon all neglecters thereof.

For, Psalm. 58.1.4. 5. 10. 11.
They know not to do right, says the Lord, who store up violence and
oppression in their palaces; and abhor him that speaks uprightly; Amos
5.10, 11 12. 15, 16. 24.
and tread upon the poor, and afflict the just, and take Bribes, and turn
aside the poor from their right.

Therefore as ye expect the favor of God, and his blessing on all your
weighty matters, even the peace and eternal welfare of your souls, as also
the peace, Levit. 26.6, 7, 8, 9. 15, 16, 17. 37.
plenty and prosperity of this Kingdom; Then must you seek good and not
evil; establish true Justice and Judgment, according to Gods law; and let
Judgment run down freely as water, and Righteousness as a mighty stream;
and then, (yet not till then) no doubt but the Lord God will be gracious unto
the remnant of his people, and heal the Land.

If you shall do all these things, Isa. 40.23.
and fear the Lord your God, who only works wonders, and is able to bring
Princes to nothing, and make all the Judges of the earth as vanity, and weaken
the strength of all the mighty; Then shall ye not be destroyed; For, what
does the Lord require of thee, O man, but to do Justice, to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God: To relieve the poor, the widow, and the stranger,
and to let the oppressed go free? Then shall your light break forth as the
Sun, and the Lord your God will have mercy upon you, and divert these his
present judgments from you, and heal your Land; Then will he crown you with
Victories against your enemies; and will also cover your heads in the day of
Battle; Yea, he will then also bless all your designs, Deuteronomy. 28.7. 10. 20.
and will utterly confound the secret Counsels of all the mighty Achitophels
of these times.

But if ye shall neglect the due execution of Justice and Judgment, in all
your Cities, then shall your adversaries still remain, as Goads in your sides,
as Rocks of offense, and continual stumbling blocks to you and your
posterity, until ruin and desolation take hold on all the places of your
habitations in the Land.

Run to and fro through the streets, Jere. 5.
and see if there be any that executes Judgment, and seeks the truth. But
they are as wild horses, every one neighing after his neighbors wife; Yet they
say, Psalm. 73.6. 8.
No evil shall come upon us, neither shall we see the sword, nor famine; Shall
not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this, says the Lord? Who lay
wait, and set snares and traps to catch men, and to bury them alive in
Prison-houses; yea, they surpass the deeds of the wicked, because they judge
not the Cause of the fatherless, and the oppressed, and the Right of the needy
do they not judge.

For I considered all the oppressions that are done, Ezech 4.1.
and behold the tears of such as be oppressed, and they have no comforter, and
in the hands of their oppressors there is power, but the oppressed have no
Comforter; And if it be not so now, who will (or can) make me a liar, and make
this my speech nothing worth? Job 24.25.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed in the year of grace, and expected Reformation, of Injustice
and Oppression. Anno 1644.


