THE SPIRITUAL MAN Judges All Things: OR, THE SPIRITUAL MAN'S TRVE IVDGMENT:
And how by him the hearts of others were, and may be judged by the Spirit of
Truth; and also how things by the Spiritual Man were judged of, concerning both
Salvation and Damnation, proved by several Scripture examples, according to the
Spirit of Truth, which were, and is the guide of the Lords people out of error
and deceit into all truth, according to sweet Gospel-promise, Joh. 16.13. Romans
8.14. ALSO, Something in short, concerning Melchizedeks order of taking the
Tithes of Spoils only of Abraham, after the return from the slaughter of the
Kings, a free will offering at one time, and no more, Genesis 14. answering Heb.
7. And in short, of the order of Tithes, by command under the Law, in the
Aaronical and Levitical Priesthood, the change of the Law, and Priesthood also,
Heb. 7.12. so an end of Tithes: WITH A godly Exhortation and instruction, full
of sweet Gospel Truths, to such as have the witness of the new Testament,
through the blood of Jesus, and some Mementoes: With something also to stop
lies and slanders, that trute may be cleared.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Black Spread-Eagle, at the Westend of Paul's, 1655.

To the Reader,
Reader,
THe cause of my writing this little Treatise, is not as an accusation against
any, but to clear the truth from lying slanders, that the wicked and
Rebellious are ready to cast upon it, who evilly entreated and shamefully
abused the Messengers of the Lord, especially at Drayton in Leicester Shire, on
two days, that one day two Priests, and another day six or seven Priests did
there meet and those called quakers by the world in disdain and reproach, but
to us reproaches is great riches, as they was to Moses who was a quaker, Heb.
i2.2i. Heb. i1.25,26. On the twelf day of the eleventh Month by the world
called January, and according to their account i654. Him that the world calls
Georg Fox, went to Drayton to see his Father, and Friends in the flesh, and him
that the world calls Richard Farnworth went with him, and coming there they
heard that Priest Stephens and others would give them a meeting to dispute with
them; notice there had been of it, by the Priests party does appear, for many
people gathered that day together concerning the same, but George Fox and
Richard Farnworth knew not of it until at Drayton they came, and hearing
thereof, Richard Farnworth went up into the grave yeard, and many people
gathered about him, in the mean while, the Priests went into the Idols Temple
at Drayton, and some would have forced Richard Farnworth into them, but he
refused, and said he was not come to uphold Idols, etc. Then several persuaded
him to go into a great house like a Hall, and the dwellers thereof came and
said they should be welcome and have the command of the house, and none should
bar them, etc. Presently after came him they called George Fox into Drayton
grave yeard, and they thronged about him, so for the truths sake they went into
that great house like a hal, and there they and the Priests, and Priests party
(with others together there met) and after some speech between the Priest of
Drayton and him called George Fox, there was a dispute about the spiritual man,
but several times when him called George Fox and Richard Farnworth, when
either of them so called, should by the spirit of the Lord have answered, the
rude people hailed them violently away several times, and stopped the mouth of
Richard Farnworth with Fists and gloves, and abused him sore, and caused George
Fox to bleed, by their Cruel and Savage usage that day: And afterward on the
i7. day of the same Month, there was another meeting appointed at Dayton, and
the Priests gave notice of that and many Priests and people there was that day,
and very sore with them of the Priests party was him called George Fox used
with violence that day; the Priests party being set on him, to undertake to use
him so barbarously and cruelly as they did, but truth triumphs over all
deceipts and deceivers, and the enmity of truths enemies, the Priests and their
party were abundantly that day made manifest, such is the Fruits of the Priests
flock, and that which their ministry effects and has brought forth, and does
bring forth, they may all blush and be ashamed of the same; and Priest Stephens
that laughed and rejoiced at the abuse of George Fox, by the wickedness of his
own people, and they of his own house, had a chief portion therein, let shame
strike the wife of priest Stephens, his Son, and Servant, and also himself, and
the rest of the priests and their rude people that was there that day, whose
wickedness and folly did so much appear, but in that I cease: Read this little
answering Treatise concerning the SPIRITUAL-MANS judgment which may clear
thine in the same, and learn to know the ground of truth therein, So I remain
thy souls friends and all that love the truth.

Robert Farnworth.

This is to go abroad to stop lies and slanders that truth may be cleared etc.
GEORGE FOX, coming to Drayton to his Fathers in the flesh, upon the sixth day
of the week, being the twelth day of the eleventh month, and after he had been
there a little while, Thomas balls man came to Christopher Foxes house, and
said that George had sent Nathaniel Stephens (who calls himself Minister) there
a challenge, and he miight come up to that, which they call their Church; for
he said they could do nothing til he, called Geerge Fox, came; but as for his
sending any challeng to him as aforesaid, that was false, for no challenge was
neither by him nor from him sent to the said Stephens, priest of the said
Drayton before mentioned; nevertheless, he went up into the Grave Yard, and
there fynding many people, but the priest in the Steeple house and the people
desired him to go into the priest, for they said it was cold, and he and others
could not endure the cold; then he said a Minister of Christ could endure
hardship, hunger, nakedness or cold, and said to the people call him out hither
into the yard, then from the people some unsavory speeches was given to us,
and so after a while seeing the priest would not thither come out unto us, we
went into a hall near unto the grave yard, and there two priests, and a great
company of people went into the said hall, and for a time there was a great
stir amongst the people, whereupon George Fox did exhort them to be quiet and
Sit down, and keep their places, it was for their sakes and the truths sake
that he was come in thither, and their teacher the aforesaid Stephens having
told the old man Georges Father in the flesh, that George had a familiar
Spirit, and there George ask d Priest Stephens of it, who unto him denied it,
and then Christopher Fox told the Priest that he had said so unto him, and he
told him where, also in a place in the Field, which he then and there
mentioned, yet the Priest impudently denied it, and then George asked him what
he did believe, whether he had any such a familiar Spirit; yea or nay; the
Priest answered and said, he could not tell, he might have a good, and he might
have a bad; then G. told him, here thou have manifested thy self to be no
Minister of God, but a false Minister, for the Ministers of Christ and the New
Covenant of God, they could discern Spirits and try them, i Cor. i2. i John 4.
And as you may read in Isaiah, he discerned the familiar Spirit, and judged it,
Isa. 8. And the Apostle discerned the witchcraft of the witches that had
bewitched the Galatians, read Gal. 3. And here thou have manifested thy self
to be a blind guide who can put no difference betwixt the precious and the
vile, who have no salt to savor withal, therefore thou art good for nothing
but to be cast out, and trodden under foot Mat. 5. then Georg told him that the
spiritual man judged all things, and Stephens and the other Priest Chester
both denied it, and said the Spiritual man did not judge all things, and they
sought to cover it with their shuf^ing and deceit, but could not, for the
Scripture in plainess proves them liars, for it says, he that is spiritual
judges all things, as you may read, i Cor. 2.i5. And here both Stephens and
Chester preached another Doctrine, contrary both to the Scripture and Apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and have showed themselves false Ministers, which
say, the Spiritual man does not judge all things, and the Minister of God says
he did judge all things; here you have shut your selves out of the ministry of
the Spirit of God, and denied the Scriptures and the record that God gave of
his Son; and you have showed another spirit, contrary to the Apostles, for the
Apostle said, the spiritual man did judge all things, and your spirit says
the spiritual man did not judge all things; here your spirit is tried to be a
false Spirit, and proved to be a Spirit of error, and you the false Prophets, i
Ioh. 4. 2 Pet. 2. Then it was asked the Priest, whether he had the same Spirit
they had, which gave forth the Scriptures, and he said he had not an infallible
Spirit as they had, and here I charge thee to have a false and fallible spirit,
for thou not having the same spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, then
another; So a false Spirit and a spirit of error, and here again thy Spirit is
tried as the Scripture says, try the spirits, so thou and Chester that have
no^ that Spirit that gave forth the Scripture but you have another contrary to
them, and so you have not fellowship with the Father and the Son, therefore you
are they that are not to be received into the houses, neither is it to you to
be said God speed, least they that do so be partakers of your evil deeds, as
may be read, 2. Ioh. 9.10.ii. verses.

And then it was asked the priests what scripture they had to take tithes of
the people, then one of them brought a Scripture which said, be subject to
every Ordinance of man, when the Apostle witnessed the change of the
Priesthood that received Tithes, and also the change of the Law, by which they
were commanded, which was in the first Covenant under the Law, an Ordinance not
of man but of God, and Christ being come the end of the Law, and some blotted
out the hand writing of Ordinances which now who hold them up are against the
New Covenant, and us who be in it, and that is no ground in saying, be subject
to every ordinance of man for you to take tithes; and the Priests brought the
7. of the Hebrews, as Melchizedeks taking tithes, and the leviticall
Priesthood, and they desired George to read that chapter, Heb. 7. and as he was
reading they laughed and hooted as they use to do that follow bull-batings
thereat, very uncivilly and unsavory, and so manifested both the priest
Stephens and priest Chester to be the false prophers that cause the people to
err by your lies and by your lightness, and have not profyted them, nor
profyts them at all, as your fruits do make it appear, and as you may read,
Ier. 23. who was sent to cry woe against such, and in the seventh Chapter of
the Hebrews, the Apostle who spoke of tithes to Melchizedek before the Law, and
then tithes in the Law, and also the change of the Law, and he spoke of the
change of the priesthood that was under the Law, and when he had spoken of
tithes to Melchizedek before the Law, and then tithes to the Leviticall
priesthood in the Law, for the Law made men ^ High priest, and the Apostle
witnessed the change of the Law, and the change of the priesthood which
received the tithes, and now says the Apostle of the things which he had
spoken of before of tithes in the days of Abraham, to Melchizedek before the
Law, and tyths in the Law, the change of the Law, and the change of the
priesthood, and so the priesthood being changed, to whom must people pay
their tithes now; here the Apostle was a Minister of the New Covenant, and
showed forth the types and the fygures, and the things in the old Covenant, and
the priesthood that received tithes, and change and some of them. So you
teachers and people which be pleading for things in the first Covenant and
priesthood, that the Apostle witnessed, fulfilled, and denied, as the
Scripture it self does bear testimony, and here you manifest your selves to be
against Christ, and against him, Antichrists.

And very rudely and unsavourly did the people hale him they call George Fox
til he bled at that time before the priests face, and the priest said he was
his spiritual father, whom he called George Fox, and Goorge he there denied
him, and showed that the priest was a minister but of the letter and not of the
spirit that gave forth the letter he preached, and then he was fain to call for
his natural Father to take him away, and when they could not stop the word,
they would have stopped the Mouth with the outward hand, and the priest said he
would pray for him, but he denied his prayers, for his prayers that is not
from the same spirit that gave forth the scripture, is from a spirit of error,
and then the priest said, George being come to the light of the Sun, sought to
destroy and tread upon his Star light, but that was false for the least measure
of light he does not destroy, but the Darkness that he calls light, George does
deny, yet the light in thy conscience will witness what he has spoke when the
book of your consciences is opened, and him to be a lover of all your souls,
and eternal good.

Nathaniel Stephens the Priest said, that George Fox as he called him, was one
of his sheep, but George he denied him, and told the Priest he was one of the
false Prophets that drove him away, but now he was found who had been lost, and
the Lord was his Shepherd, therefore he denied him the Priest and all Idol
shepherds and such as bore rule by their means which the Lord sent Jeremy to
cry against, Ier, 5.30.3i. ahd such as sought for their gain from their
quarter, which the Lord sent Isa. to cry out against as in Isa. 56.i0,ii. and
such as sought for the fleece and made a prey upon the people, which the Lord
sent Ezekiel to cry out against, Ezekiel. 3 4. And such as hirelings as the Lord
sent Micah to cry out against, Mic. 3.1i. And such as Christ cried woe against,
that had the chiefest places in the assemblies, stood praying in the
Synagogues, laid heavy burdens upon the people, and were called of men
Masters, as in Mat. 23. And the Priests went away from the place, but George
stayed after he had denied them, their prayers, doctrine and worships, who
were proved to be guided by a Spirit of error, as it was made manifest, and
George spoke the word of the Lord to the people that stayed after the Priests,
and many of their partakers were gone from the place; and then after parted and
went to his fathers in the flesh and there stayed that night, and the word of
the Lord declared by him, that day shall rise up in judgment against the
rebellious, which was and is love to the Souls of all that receive and embrace
it, and the way of holiness, without which holiness none shall see God and
live; now in your lifetime you are warned, repent and amend.

GEORGE FOX.

THE SPIRITVAL MAN Judges all things, OR THE SPIRITUAL MAN'S true judgment.
NOW the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty, 2 Cor. 3.i7. thererfore the natural man's judgment, must not stand
upon the Spiritual man, but the Spiritual man's judgment stands upon the
natural man's head, for he that is spiritual judges all things, and there is
his Liberty, yet he himself is judged of no man, as it is written and
witnessed, i Cor. 2.i4,i5.

The natural man is carnal, and sold under Sin, and therefore in that state
and condition he knows not the things of the spirit of God, and so wanting salt
to savor withal, has no judgment therein.

For the things of the Spirit of God are spiritually discerned, and not
carnally known, i Cor. 2.i4. therefore the Carnal minded man being in death,
Rom 8.6. knows them not, to be carnally minded is death, and they that are in
the flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8.8. fleshly wisdom, fleshly reason, and
fleshly knowledge, which is brutish, and fleshly disputations are vain, because
the vain, worldly, earthly, carnal mind, disputes of things that was was not
spoken forth by it, and the earthly sensual wisdom which is devilish and so
cursed, it would aspire to know the secrets and things of the Spirit of God,
but cannot; for the wisdom of the world is foolishness with God, and the world
by wisdom knows not God, therefore the earthly sensual wisdom must be
sylent, and not dispute of the things of God, for it knows them not, death
and destruction speaks of the same, of spiritual things and of the spiritual
wisdom but knows it not, as it is written and witnessed; and they that are in
the flesh cannot please God, therefore silence flesh and deceit, Romans
8.5,6,7,8. Iam. 3.i5. i Cor. i.i9,20. i Cor. 3.i9,20. Job. 28. Gal. 5.i7. Gal
6.8.

The Spiritual man is born of God the father of spirits, and not by the will of
man, but by the will of God, such are in Union with God, and by him in his
spiritual life and power, has a right to the Spiritual judgment, and the
things of God which are to him Gods free gift, being in his fathers spirit, and
has the spiritual discerning, and of Spirits; therefore who are of the seed
royal in the power of the spirit, endued, anointed in the unction holy, and
knows all things thereby, i John 2.20. Such may judge the Carnal mind, death,
and the enmity therein, for discerning of Spirits is the Spiritual man's proper
gift from the father of Spirits, and it is in the spiritual judgment, his
prerogative above the nature of carnal minded man, the Spirit of the father
dwelling in him, the greater is there enjoyed and witnessed then in the world,
1 John 2.i4. i John 4.4. they in that enjoyment are redeemed from the slaverie,
which slaverie the unregenerate are in, therefore indeed and in truth they
cannot cry Abba Father, but the regenerate who is in unity with the Judge of all
hearts may, it is his privilege so to do, and the spirit of the Father speaks
through the Son, which spirit, in the word and power thereof is the Judge of all
hearts, and judges the Secrets therein, John 3.5,6. John i.i2,i3. 1 Cor. 2. i
Cor. 12. Romans 8. Heb. i2.23. Luke i2.12.

The holy Ghost is Spiritual and dwells within, and speaks through the
Temple, where the promise of the Father is fulfilled, and the new birth
witnessed, where the New Covenant is enjoyed, therefore he that reproves the
world of Sin and unbelief etc. he does judge the Prince of the world and the
carnal mind, and the self love and the self righteousness in the earthly,
sensual, and carnal minded man, wherever he sees it as he sits in his
Temple, and he sees not as the world sees, they see carnally, but he sees
spiritually, and judges in the hearts of one as well as other that which
judgment is due unto, and the holy Ghost, he that is spiritual also, dwells
in the heirs of promise, but the world knows him not, therefore are they at
his true Spiritual judgment now offended, because they neither see him nor
know him, but we that are spiritual, and such as are of the seed and
priesthood unchangeable and royal in the end of all Types and Figures enjoy
him, in the substance and Power of the eternal Truth, for according to sweet
Gospel promise, he dwells in us who witness the new birth, and the holy seed,
and according to the Gospel holy unction he does abide within us, Ioh.
i4,15,i6,i^ i Ioh. 2.20.27. Therefore praised be the LORD, who has hid these
things, and sweet Gospel enjoyments, and true spiritual judgment and discerning
therein, from the wise and prudent of the world, and has revealed them to us,
and who are babes in Christ Jesus of the new birth in the Covenant of grace
according to the royal acception through the sore-knowledg of the
predestination in the choice made by election, contrary to the reprobation,
which things are a mystery to the Serpents generation, which mystery in us, i
Colos. 27. The world and worldly wise men are strangers unto, and knows it
not, i Tim. 3.i6. Ioh. i4.20. Neither do they know the Sons of God, now the
holy Ghost that dwells and abides in them, as says the Scripture, therefore
are they also ignorant of the Spirit of the father speaking through them that
are sons, and so knows not the Spiritual man's judgment, which stands upon the
natural man's head, but are offended thereat, because of the enmity of the
Serpents seeds which lodges in the ground of prejudice and despite against the
spirit of grace, manifest from the evil heart according to the Prince of
darkness acting with the carnal mind in which the enmity stands and is
brought forth against the truth, and they are in enmity against the children of
God also, because of their ignorance of the spirit of truth and knows not God
the father of the faithful, nor his Sons that are guided by his Spirit, as it
is written and witnessed, Romans 8.5,6,7.8, and i4,15,i6. discerning of Spirits,
is the gift of the spirit of God, i Cor. i2. given to his sons that lives
therein, and are guided thereby, Romans 8.i4. etc. Then the enmity may be judged
by the spirit dwelling in his sons, therefore is he the judge of all hearts by
his spirit, and who knows the Judge of all hearts, and the spirits of Just men
made perfect, as they did, Heb. i2.22,23. The same seed according to the
spirit, now may and by degrees does know the things of the spirit of God as
they did, therefore amongst them the hearts Judge is witnessed, and the true
spiritual Judgment known and enjoyed, in the discerning and gift in the
spirits life also now as was then to judge the carnal mind and the deceit
and enmity in others; carnal minded men and subtle serpents as it did then;
God is the same that he was, and his spirit is the same, and the gift in the
discerning where it is given, and he enjoyed as he was then, and also according
to the promise of Christ, who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, 2
Cor. 6.i6. John i4.20, i Cor. i2.i0. Heb. 13.8.

They who say Elijah or Elias, and Elisha had not judgment given to them by the
spirit of the Lord to know and judge of others hearts and ways, etc. such as
say so knows not the word of the Lord, the life of the Scriptures, nor the holy
Spirit by which they and the holy men of God were guided, that spoke forth the
Scriptures as they were moved by the holy Ghost and not by man's will, as you
may read, 2 Pet. i.i9.20.2i.

i King 2i.i8.
Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead, had the Spirit of
prophecy and knew the word of the Lord, i Kings i7. and after he had spoken
the word of the Lord to Ahab then King of Israel, i Kings. i7.i. by the Spirit
of prophecy; the word of the Lord came to Elijah, and according to the word of
the Lord he did, i King. i7.2,3,4,5. And he were fed by the Ravens for a time,
i King. i7.6,7. Afterward the word of the Lord came to him again, and he did
according to it as he he were required in obedience to the same, i King. i7.8.
to the end of the Chapter; and after many days in the third year, the word of
the Lord came to Elijah again, i King. i8. And he showed himself again unto
Ahab and to Obadiah, which Obadiah, who when Iezebell slew the Lords Prophets,
hid one hundred of them by Fifties in a Cave, and fed them with bread and
water, because he greatly feared the Lord, etc. 1 King. i8.i,2. to the 16. so
according to Elijahs words Obadiah went and told Ahab, and Elijah and Ahab met,
and Elijah caused Ahab then King of Israel, to send and gather all Israel unto
Mount Carmell, and the Prophets of Baal, 450, and the Prophets of the Groves,
400. which eat at Iezebells Table: and Ahab did gather the people of Israel and
the said Prophets together unto Mount Carmell, i King. i8.i6. to the 2i. And
Elijah came to all the people and said, how long halt ye between two opinions,
etc. here he knew their hearts and unfaithfulness to the Lord, and after that,
caused fire to come down from Heaven, etc. and when all the people saw it, they
fell on their faces, and they said, the Lord he is God, the Lord he is God;
after Elijah had tried baals Prophets and their God, i King. 18.2i. to the 40.
And after baals Prophets were slain, and things done by Elijah according to the
Counsel and word of the Lord, i King. i8.40. to the end. And he was preserved
from bloody minded Iezebell, 1 King. i9.i,2. He, to wit, Elijah fled, and lay
under a Juniper Tree, and requested the Lord, who graciously answered, and his
word came to Elijah in a Cave, and he made known to the Lord his mind and
complaint, about the digging down of the Altars, and his escaping and
preservation with other things, i King i9.3.4. to the end. After all that, and
the Lords gracious answer to Elijah or Elias, 1 King. i9. Romans i1. which Elijah
anointed Iehu and Elisha to be Prophets in his steed, to judge and execute the
word of the Lord, i King. i9.i5. to the end, and after he (to wit, Elijah or
Elias) had done so as aforesaid, and were returned out of the wilderness, after
fire were come down from Heaven, and after the trial of his God the judge of
all by his spirit and power, and the trial of baals and the false Gods of the
Heathens, and after Elijah had received the word of the Lord in the Cave, and
had made his complaint to the Lord about the digging down of the Alters, and
slaying the Prophets, after, and after beheaded, had besyeged Samariah, i King.
20. to the i3. and after by the direction of a Prophet, the Syrians were
slain, i King. 20.i3. to the 31. and for other passages, from the 2i. verse to
the end of the Chapter. And after all those things and passages in the i King.
21.i,2. to the i7. after all these things, and as aforesaid, then again the
word of the Lord came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying, arise, go down to meet
Ahab King of Israel, and told him where he was, to wit, in Naboths Vineyard, i
King. 2i.i7,18,19. and when Elijah or Elias came to Ahab King of Israel,
according to the word of the Lord, and Eliiah coming to Ahab, Ahab said to
Eliiah, have thou found me O mine enemy, and he answered I have found thee,
because thou have sold thy self to work evil in the Sight of the Lord, i
King. 2i.20. Eliiah by the Spirit and word of the Lord, knew King Ahabs heart,
in knowing that he had sold himself to work evil in the sight of the Lord, as
to him Elijah said, who in the word of the Lord by his Spirit said, in
pronouncing judgment to Ahab and his posterity he said, behold, I will bring
evil upon thee, and take away thy posterity, etc. Read, i King. 2i.2i,22. to
the end. And he said by the spirit of the Lord, that there was none like to
Ahab, did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, though in
his days the judgment was delayed for a cause; so you that work wickedness and
do evil in the sight of the Lord, and continue therein, your judgment
lingereth not, and your damnation slumbreth not, 2 Pet. 2.

They who say Elisha had not judgment given him by the Spirit of the Lord in
the time of the Prophets to know others hearts, and so not knowing could not
judge of them, and thereby would deprive the Spiritual man if they could, of
his true Spiritual judgment, etc.

I answer, Such as say so, and would do so, as aforesaid, they err, not
knowing the true Spirit of Prophecy, nor the true Spiritual discerning and
judgment, nor the Spirit the life of the Scriptures and power of God, which
were in the holy men of God, that spoke forth the Scriptures by the holy Ghost
as they were moved, contrary to the will of man, 2 Pet. 1.21. For Elisha did
know others hearts by the Spirit given him of God, and as he did know others
hearts by the Spirit given him of God, then the men of God by his Spirit may;
therefore Silence subtilty and deceit, who are strangers to the holy Spirit,
and Spiritual judgment, the life of the Saints and holy men of God, which you
are out of, that stumbles at the light, and life that gave forth the
Scriptures, which light is the condemnation, of all who love the deeds of
darkness rather than the light, Ioh. i.9. Ioh. 8.i2. Ioh. 3,19,20,2i. For prove
that Elisha did know others hearts, to stop the Cavilling minds, as Elisha sat
in the house, and the Elders with him by the Spirit of the Lord, he knew and
discerned the intent of the Kings heart who were out of the house, who sent one
to have taken off the Head of Elisha, but before the Messenger came to Elisha
to act or do the the thing and evil which were intended in the Kings heart
against him, Elisha had such a discerning and knowledge of the Kings heart and
intentions, that before the Kings Messengers came to Elisha, Elisha told the
Elders of it that sat with him in his house, and he said to the Elders, see ye
how this Son of a Murderer has sent to take away mine head, etc. 2. King. 6.
the 32.

Here it is proved that Elisha the man of God knew another heart, and what
were intended in it, before it were outwardly acted or done; and this were
known by the spirit of God given unto him, whereby he discerned the same, and
as by the Spirit of the Lord he knew the kings heart that were out of his
house, as he sat in his house with the Elders, and also knew what he had
intended in his heart, before outward action, by the same spirit and gift of
discerning given of God; now others may, but Elisha the Man of God, by the
Spirit of the Lord given unto him, did know what was intended in the kings
heart against him, and spoke before the Messenger came to acquaint the Elders
that sat with him in his house of the same, therefore by the gift of
discerning in the Lords spirit, others may as he did, and no other way then by
the spirit, for the manifestation of the spirit is given to such to discern
and profit withal, for confirmation: Read 2 Kings 6.26,27,28,29,30,31,32. and
i Corrinth. i2.7. and i0. Verses.

See another example in Scripture, concerning Elisha knowing the heart of
another, that so by two or three witnesses Truths may be established, which
are now stumbled at, to wit, that one should know another heart; and when
Elisha looked upon Hazael, and wept, Hazael asked Elisha why he wept: and
Elisha answered Hazael, and said unto him, because I know the Evil that thou will do, etc. 2 King. 8.

Here again, Elisha the Man of God, by his Spirit given him, he knew another
heart, to wit, Hazaels, in knowing beforehand what he would act or do, which
would proceed out of his heart into such actions as he mentioned, which was
not then outwardly manifested, yet inwardly known and declared of by the Spirit
of the Lord through the Man of God, 2 King. 8.i2. And as Elisha the Man of God
knew the hearts of others, and what evil were intended in them, and would
proceed forth of them, as out of the Kings, and Hazaels, he did, and told
Hazael to his face before the things were by him acted and done; then by the
same gi^t of discerning in the Spirit of the Lord, with it others of the men of
God may now discern and know the evil and enmity in wicked hearts of the
Serpents seed; therefore the Lord who gives the gift and discerning* with his
Spirit, is the hearts Judge as he was: Let all Flesh be Silent, the carnal
mind in which the enmity lodges, is offended at the spiritual man's
judgment, now as it was; and he that is after the flesh, persecutes him that
is after the Spirit, and as it was then, so it is now, enmity being put between
the two Seeds, Genesis 3.15. and Galatians 4.28,29,30,3i. 2 Kings 8.i2,13, etc.

Several examples there is in the Scripture to confirm this Truth, which is
so stumbled at by the Children, of DISOBEDIENCE, to wit, That one should know
another HEART; or, that the SEED of GOD should judge the seed of the SERPENTS;
but the spiritual Man's Judgment stands upon the Carnal mind, and above the
Natural Man; and so he that is spiritual judges all things as says the
Scripture, and the spiritual Man's Judgment is true.

He that in the Spirit of the Lord, with it said to others, I know your
thoughts, and your devices, which ye wrongfully imagine against me, he
speaking the words of Truth then by the Spirit given of the Lord, knew their
Hearts and secret Thoughts and Devices therein, etc. And such a one had true
spiritual judgment in the same, to enter into others Hearts and secret
Thoughts and Devices therein, judging and telling them the evil Devices and
wrongful Imaginations of their HEARTS, before the Actions; and as he did
then, by the same Spirit of God given, now others in the gift and discerning of
Spirits, with the Lords spirit may try the Spirits as is required, i Ioh. 4.
And know whether they be of God or no, and so know the evil thoughts and
devices of evil hearts, which are not guided by the Spirit of God, as Job did,
therefore the Jobs, and servants or sons of God, in the service of God, and
with his Spirit may now know the thoughts and devices of others hearts as he
did, Job 21.27. Heb. 5.i4, Malach. 3.i7,i8.

The Jewels of Gold who are in returned, worships God in the Spirit, for he is
a Spirit, Ioh 4.24. 2 Cor. 3.i7. And as he is a Spirit, so his Jewels are
Spiritual; such as are changed from glory to glory into the same Image, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.i8. who in the gift of discerning, i.
Cor. i2.i0. given from the Father in the Son, Ioh. i4.20. Ioh. i7.i0. The
Prophets end is witnessed, Malach. 3.i7,i8. And the Jewels of God, made up into
his Image by his spirit, 2 Cor. 3.i7,i8. They thereby in the Spirits open life
by the gift in the discerning according to the Fathers promise, they know them
that serve God, and them that serve him not, then such knows others hearts and
Spirits, because God is a Spirit, and his worship is in the Spirit, Ioh.
4.23,24. and the truth where the father is enjoyed in the Son, and the Son in
the Father, Ioh, i4.6. Ioh. i4.20. And true worshipers or souls that magnifyes
the Lord, Luke i 46. And whose Spirits also rejoices in the sweet Spiritual
union in God the Father, Luke i.47. And the word of life and Power is known in
its opperation deviding assunder soul and spirit, etc. Heb. 4,i2. Which word
is as a fire in the bones, Ier. 23.29. Ier. 20.9. Here true worshipers are
seen and known in the Spirit, and false Power which is a sword, Heb. 4.i2.

And he that bares the sword, must not bare it in vain, but judge and cut down
Sin, so quenching the fyerie darts of the Devil by the Spiritual sword, Ephesians.
6.i6.i7. The beam being cast out within with the true light, the moat or evil
in others is seen, and the Saints shall judge the world as it is written, i
Cor. 6.i,2. And who judges the world, judges the unclean hearts, for the
world is set in man's heart, as says the Scripture, and the Spirit of truth
being come, reproves the world of Sin, and unbelief, and so he reproves man's
heart in which it lodges and acts, and the Prince of Darkness and of the
world is by the true Spirit seen, and in men's heart with it judged, even with
the sword that proceeds out of the mouth, which is the powerful word of God,
in the life of the eternal Spirit, which Spirit of truth in the eternal power
of God, is the judge of hearts, being come and in the Gospel promises and
witnessed, and is the guide out of error and deceit, into all sweet Gospel
truth, and so into the true knowledge of all things, i Ioh. 2.20. And to enjoy
the Father in the Son, and the Son in the Father, witnessed in the unction
according to sweet Gospel discipline and promise, Ioh. i6.i3. i Ioh. 2.27.
Ioh. i4.20. And the Spirit of truth he has authority according to Gospel
promise, to speak what he hears and to hearts, and shows to souls the things
of the father, in the Sons glorifying o^ him, who has received of his and
shows unto us, so that we enjoy the things that are freely given us of God
thereby, i Cor. 2. And descerning of Spirit is his free gift, i Cor. i2.
Therefore have we received it of him, as they did that witnessed the mind of
Christ, i Cor. 2.i5,i6. And we need no natural man to teach us, to see, and
know, and judge the hearts and things, both concerning predestination,
election, regeneration, justifycation, salvation, and Glorifycation, for the
natural man knows them not, and things in the reprobation which are for
condemnations, I say we need no natural man to teach us the knowledge and
understanding herein, and as aforesaid, but as the Spiritual man, the spirit
of truth and holy unction teaches us and all the Children of God in the same;
therefore silence flesh, for the natural man knows not the things of the
Spirit of God, because they are Spiritually discerned, i Cor. 2.i4, but we who
are in the holy unction, do know that the Son of God is come, i John 5.20. And
in the unction holy we know the gift of the spirit discerning, and true
spiritual judgment also is known and witnessed in the spirits life, and open
understanding, where our witness in the son is enjoyed, as there was in the
New Testament, i John 5,6, and i0,ii, verses, where the gift in the Prophets
end is amongst the Lords Jewels witnessed, and the unction from the holy one is
enjoyed in the New Covenant, praised be the Lord for the riches of his love,
all praise and glory be ascribed unto him, who makes us through his son to
partake of the precious promises and sweet Gospel grace and virtue, i Ioh. 2.20
and 27. 2 Pet. i.3,4.

Nathaniel Stephens Priest at Drayton, and Chester, Priest at VVitherley, who
in your dispute about the Spiritual Man, said he did not judge all things, when
the scripture plainly sath he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he
himself is judged of no man, i Cor. 2.i5.

Here you two Priests are found to be two false witnesses, against the truth,
and are proved to be two liars against the spiritual man and his doctrine, and
you are liars against the scriptures, so showing the spirit of your father the
Devil, by which liars are guided, John 8.44. but read your reward and all
liars like you, Rev. 2i.8. You are they that receives not the things of the
spirit of God, because they are spiritually discerned, i Cor. 2.i4. therefore
do you not know the spiritual man, nor his true spiritual judgment, who are
liars aginst him, and says, He does not judge all things, and the Scripture
says, He does judge all things: What Liars are you against the Truth! be
ashamed of your Lies; see your Errors, and own your condemnation to be just
thereupon.

Q. If the Spiritual man judge not all things, who must judge that which you
would not have him to judge? seeing that the natural man knows not the things
of the Spirit of God, neither receives them, and so not the judgment, and that
is one of the things of the Spirit of God, who is the true Judge; but such as
you who are in the flesh cannot please God* Romans 8.8. therefore for judgment
you are*

But who are out of the lust of the flesh, and out of the knowledge after the
flesh, and are in Christ Jesus, such are in the new things, witnessing the new
Creatures, and enjoys the new things, old being passed away, which new things
and new Creature, you are strangers unto, 2 Cor. 5.i6.i7. who have showed your
spirit of error to us and to all the children of light, then were it known, i
Ioh. 4.6.

You two Priests said you had not an infallible Spirit, nor the same Spirit
which the Apostles had, no more you have, therefore have you a fallible false
Spirit, the Spirit of error, as you have made it manifest and discovered it
upon trial.

The Scripture says, try the Spirits whether they be of God or no; because
many false Prophets are gone out into the world, i Ioh. 4.i. And your spirit
and doctrine is tried and proved to be contrary to the Apostles, who had the
Spirit of God dwelling in them, and were guided by it, and the Spiritual man
judged all things; but you bring a contrary Doctrine to theirs, that says the
Spiritual man does not judge all things; here you have the lying spirit; you
also said you had not the same spirit that the Apostles of Christ had, so a
contrary, as it is tried, therefore are you the false Prophets that are gone
out into the world, preaching for hyre, and seeking your gain from your
quarter, and so to be denied and declared against, as such false teachers was,
Ier. 5.30,3i. Isa. 56.i0,ii.

And you that said you had not the same spirit that the Apostles had, your
spirit is the false spirit, and not the true, then not the spirit of God;
therefore you are to be holden accursed, and also your doctrine that is
contrary and by a contrary spirit to theirs, Gal. i,8,9.

The Apostles and ministers of Christ and the New Covenant, were able Ministers
of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. and they had the spirit of God dwelling in them, i
John 3.24. i Cor. 2.i2. Romans 8.i4,15,i6. And they that had the spirit of God,
to wit, Christ's Apostles, you said you had not the same spirit that they had,
then the spirit of error, therefore are you none of Christ's Apostles nor
Ministers that has not his spirit, for if any man have not the spirit of
Christ, they are none of his, Romans 8.9. but the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ had the spirit of Christ, and were made able Ministers thereby, 2 Cor.
3.6. and by it they knew that they was his, Romans 8.i5,i6,i7. and you that say
you have not their spirit, you have not the spirit of Christ, and so are none
of his, for they had his spirit; out of your own mouths are you judged, who
have showed a false spirit, and a spirit of error, whereby you are known, and
your spirit tried and proved to be that spirit of error, and so you that are in
the spirit of error, are those false Prophets that are gone out into the world,
i John 4.i. who through Covetousness makes a prey upon the people, as such in
your nature did, Ezekiel. 34. Mic. 3.ii. 2. Pet. 2. Jude ii.

And you that say the spiritual man does not judge all things, when the
Minister of the spirit, and spiritual man in his Doctrine said he does judge
all things as by Scripture is proved; here again you ly of the Scriptures, and
cross the Spiritual Man's doctrine, and brings a contrary doctrine to the
Spiritual Man's Doctrine, therefore silence deceivers and stop your mouths, you
are not to be received into the house of believers, but to be holden accursed,
as the Scripture says. 2 John 9,i0,i1. Galathians. i.8.

You two Priests are manifested to be out of the Apostles Doctrine, and false
witnesses against the truth of the Spiritual Man's Doctrine, for he that is
spiritual judges all things, so says the Scriptures, and you ly against
plain Scripture, and says the Spiritual Man does not judge all things, the
Spiritual Man's words proves the truth against your error and deceit, for he who
was the learned Apostle in the Spiritual truths, does affirm the truth of the
thing, and says, he that is Spiritual judges all things, proved in 1 Cor.
2,i5. And they had an unction from the holy one, who thereby knew all things,
proved by sound words in Scripture, i John 2.20. He that said the Spiritual
man judged all things, is to be believed before you, for he had the spirit of
God guiding him, and you say you have not the same Spirit, therefore are you
and your doctrine to be denied, and he thae said the Spiritual man judged all
things, is to believed before you, for he knew the counsel of God, witnessed
by Scripture, Acts 20.26,27,28. but you that have not the Apostles Spirit, as
you said you had not, you are out of the Counsel of God also, which they stood
in, and therefore are you to be denied and declared against by such as stand in
the counsel of God, as the Gospel ministers did, Acts 20. and 27. who your
selves are found liars of the Apostle that stood in the Counsel of God, and
falfe witnesses against his doctrine, that shunned not to declare the Counsel
of God, which you are not in, that said the Spiritual man did not judge all
things, and the SCRIPTURE says, He does judge all Things, and is to be
believed, and you are by the life of them judged and denied, who also said, you
had not an infallible spirit, and said, you had not the same Spirit that the
Apostles had, then you have the fallible, false lying Spirit, the spirit of
error, as it is proved, and as you to the Children of light have manifessed
your selves, your dark Caves will not hide you who be in the works of darkness.

Therefore can we the CHILDREN of LIGHT have no fellowship with your
unfruitful WORKS of DARKNESS; but rather reprove them as we are required,
proved Ephesians 5.ii. And woe to you and all such who are covered, but not
with the SPIRIT of the LORD, who adds Sin unto Sin, as such in your nature do,
and aforetime did, read, Isa. 30.i.

Another Example concerning the SPIRITUAL MAN'S Judgment, the SPIRIT of the
LORD in STEPHEN the Messenger of GOD, who were full of the HOLY GHOST that
SPIRIT in and through him did see the JEWS hearts, and so far judged them that
they were wounded, or cut to the very hearts, such as were out of Stephens
Righteous life, for in the Spirit he saw there inwards, and told them they was
uncircumcised in hearts, and judging the uncircumcision of the hearts, he
judged the seat of enmity and Rebellion, from whence proceeded the enmity that
resis^ted the Holy Ghost, and so he saw the secrets of their hearts, and were
able to judge the deceit, by the spirit given him of the Lord, and by the same
spirit in the gift or discerning, with it others of the Messengers and Servants
of God, in the power of the Holy Ghost, may see the uncircumcision of the
heart, and reprove and judge the enmity therein, in the hearts of others where
it is uncrucifyed, though at it they rage now, as then they did at him.

Stephen, a man full of power and the holy Ghost, said, ye uncircumcised in
hearts, ye always resist the Holy Ghost, as did your fathers, so do ye, and
judging the uncircumcision of the heart that is judged, which is for
condemnation, for who are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands,
the body of Sin is thereby put off, and the enmity slain, for therein lay the
enmity, in Sins body, which being put off, there is no confydence in the flesh,
but unyon with the Father through the Son enjoyed and witnessed, and things
judged by the eternal Spirit, both concerning salvation and condemnation, for
such as believed not the truth, but has pleasure in unrighteousness, are for
damnation, as in the Spiritual man's doctrine is witnessed, Acts 7.5i. etc.
Philip. 3.3. Colos. 2.ii. and Ephesians. 3.14,i5,i6. 2 These. 2.i2.

Priest Chester, thou said, Peter (though an Apostle) knew not the heart of
another; and so thou said a man might know and be able to judge his own heart,
but not the heart of another.

And the Priest of Drayton with the affirmed thee same, to manifest your lies
against the truth, and your enmity against the Spiritual man's judgment: Then I
took a bible, and read Peter's words of sound truth to confute your error, there
in that time, and instead of maintaining your cause according to truth you
could not, but suffered the rude people to hale me and others away, and they
stopped my mouth with hands and gloves, and made one of us to bleed; Oh, shame
upon such a profession, teachers, and people, the end is seen, and the fruits
of it accursed, that is out of the light and out of the truth, the Lord is
against such, for as a Troop of Robbers wait for a man, so the company of
Priests murder in the way by consent, proved Hosea 6. and 9. and there is like
Priest, like people, as their fruits make it manifest, and as may be read in
Hosea the 4. and 9.

And whereas you Priests and liars, said; that Peter (though an Apostle) yet he
knew not the heart of another, and so you would have raised enmity against the
truth, saying, one might know their own hearts, but not the hearts of others,
therefore ought they not to judge of the hearts of other men, etc.

Now I shall answer that according to truth, being by Scripture proved, that
Peter an Apostle did know the heart of another, and judge the enmity therein,
which were conceived against the holy Ghost, and so against the truth, then by
and with the same Spirit that was then in Peter, the hearts of others may be
seen and known; therefore is and may the enmity be judged in others hearts by
the Spirit of truth, as was then: but Peter by the spirit given him of God, he
did know another Heart, to wit, Annanias, as then I said, til I were haled
away by the rude people, and might not then be suffered to plead the truth
against your deceipts; let the honest hearted read Peter's words of truth, Act.
5. And with his Spirit where it is manifested, to rule the heart, and guide and
govern in the understanding, with the gift of the Spirit in the discerning,
such may judge your pride and deceit, who lies against the truth, as then you
did.

Read Acts 5. and there Peter knew the hearts of others, and judged the deceit
therein of such by the Spirit of the Lord, that Sinned against the truth and
the holy Ghost, and lied not to men but to the Lord, as Annanias and Saphira
did, and Peter said to him, Annanias, why has Satan filled thine heart, to lie
against the holy Ghost, Acts 5.3. And why have thou conceived this thing in
thine heart, thou have not lied unto men, but unto God, Acts 5.4. Annanias
hearing these words, fell down and gave up the Ghost, and great fear came upon
them that heard these things etc. Acts 5.5,6. And Peter said to his wife, how
is it that ye have agreed to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, behold the feet of
them that have buried thy husband are at the door, and shall carry thee out;
then fell she down straightway, and yielded up the Ghost, etc. Acts 5.7,8,9,i0.

Here Peter knew the deceit of two hearts, to wit Annanias and Saphira, and he
knew that Satan had filled their hearts, and that they had lied against the
Holy Ghost, and that they had tempted, the Spirit of the Lord, and as Peter
knew it by the Spirit of the Lord, given unto him from the Lord, so others with
the same gift from the Lord, in the Revelation upon the Spiritual Rock, on
which the Church of God is built, with the same Spirit, others on that Rock may
see, and know deceiptfull and evil hearts and Spirits that are not of that
Rock, as he did, being the gift of God to discern Spirits, i Cor. i2.i0.
Therefore those that have the discerning and gift given for that end to try
Spirits whether they be of God or no, the spirit of truth may judge the Spirit
of error and deceit, and Sit where Satan Sits in others hearts, as it did, and
the Spiritual man may judge the deceitful heart, and the Servant of the Lord
may condemn the lying tongue, it is a gift proper to him from God, according to
the Fathers promise, who has said to his in his word, every tongue that shall
rise up in judgment against thee, thou shall condemn; this is the heritage of
the Servants of the Lord and their righteousness is of me says the Lord, Isa.
54.i7.

Therefore, be not offended at the Spiritual Man's judgment, but let the
deceit of the heart be judged, none are offended at it but such as are guilty,
and condemned by the light of God in their own consciences, that answers the
judgment to be just, upon all who act contrary to the truth, and loves darkness
rather than the light, Ioh. 3.19,20,21. and seeing it is the heritage of the
servants of the Lord, to condemn every tongue that shall rise up in judgment
against them, Isa. 51.i7. Then there is no condemnation to such as be in the
light, and so in Christ Jesus, John 8.12. Romans 8.i. Therefore they may execute
the word of the Lord, and do his service and work, in condemning deceitful and
evil tongues, that rises up in false judgment against them, with joy may they
do it, because of the Lord their righteousness, who has given them such a gift
and a privilege worh their inheritance, for this is the heritage of the
servants of the Lord, to i ^ondemn every tongue that rises in judgment against
them, therefore the^ ^ghteous Spirit, may judge the evil heart, and the
servant of the Lord according to his word, may condemn the lying tongue that
rises in judgment against him, but the wicked are not to judge the righteous
seed, which God has for ever blessed; yet the seed of God may judge the seed
of the serpent, according to the word of the LORD, at this the SERPENT is
offended, because by the righteous seed he is judged and condemned; but there
is no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS; who walhk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. and they that are Christ's ave crucified
the flesh with the affections and lust thereof, Gal. 5.24. And where judgment
is brought forth into victory, and the fylth of the flesh pur^ed out by the
spirit of judgment, and the spirit of burning, Isa. 4. There the hearts judge is
witnessed ruler, and the consuming Fire and Refiner, Mal. 3. Heb. i2.23, and
28,29. verses. And he may speak through his Temple, by his spirit dwelling in
it, and judge the deceit and deceivableness, Malach. 3.i,2. to the 7. i Cor.
3.i6. and 2 Cor. 6.16. And as he Sits in his Temple, judging the hearts by his
spirit so he by his spirit through his Temple speaks in reproof to the world
for Sin, and judging the enmity and the feed of the Serpent in any, where the
serpents head is unbruised, and so the judgment is the Spiritual man's, and he
that is joined to the Lord, is in union with that one Spirit as the Scripture
says, 2 Cor. 3.i7,i8. For the spirit of the son is in the heart, there crying
Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. And the spirit of God dwells in such, i John 3.24. And
there the Father is enjoyed in the son, and the son in the Father, and Father,
son, and saints, in unyon and reconciled together, and the witnesses known in
the spirit and the word, John i4.20. i John 5.

Read and understand, for at this none stumbles, where true judgment is known
and submitted unto in the spirit and life, the power of truth there is known,
and what Christ in the Gospel truth says, it is not you that speak in such
things, but the spirit of your Father, that speaks in you, where he dwells
and walks in hi Temple, as he has said he would, 2 Cor. 6.i6. there he sits
Refyner and Judge, and to this truth that in the Consciences which reproves for
SIN, and judges for DISOBEDIENCE, will answer and witness the JUDGE of all
hearts to be just, and in that one spirit which the world knows not, that
knows not the spirit as couscience-book does open; then my witness will me
own, and the spirit of truth, which the world knows not, Ioh. i4.17. neither
know they them who are sons of God, and guided by that spirit, Romans 8.i4. Gal.
4.6. 1 Ioh. 3.i,2.

The Prophets and holy men of God, by his spirit given them, they could discern
the familiar spirits, and the sorcerers, witches and wizards, and did judge
them by the Spirit of the Lord, then by the spirit of the Lord, and the gift in
the discerning, others of the men of God may: For thus says the Lord, I am
God, and change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed, Mal.3.5,6.
Isa. 8. Isai. 44.24,25. Isai. 47.9,i0,11,i2,13,i4. Deuteronomy. 18.

And as the Ministers of Christ the spiritual man, and hidden man of the heart,
in and with the Lords Spirit, could know where Satan's seat in another was, and
how Satan had filled the heart to lie against the Holy Ghost, and with the
Spirit that manifested it, judged the seat of Satan, and the secrets of the
heart, where the Sin was conceived before it was acted, then in and with the
fame Spirit, being given to such now as to Peter, on which Spiritual Rock in
the Revelation the Church is builded; the pillar and ground of truth, some
others in the gift of discerning by the Lords Spirit may know hearts in which
deceit lodges and acts, by the spirit they did, and that spirit may judge the
enmity which stands against the Truth; but a brother is not to be judged, nor
one is not to be set at naught for whom Christ died, yet the enmity may by the
Lords Sgirit be judged where it is discovered, and the contrary spirit tried;
therefore none at this are offended that loves the truth, for mercy rejoices
in judgment; let the pure light of God in all your consciences examine your
Hearts, and there be judge: Deceive not your souls, but deal honestly
therewith, deceit at the true Judgment may be offended, but the woe is to that
and to the wicked, Isai. 3.ii. and vengeance from God is the reward of all that
do evil. Romans 2.8,9. Therefore take heed of Sinning against the truth, and of
lying against the Holy Ghost, as you will answer it before the Lord: Read that
example and take warning betime, Acts 5.i,2,3,4,5. etc. Also read Hebr.
i0.26,27,28,29,30,3i.

The Lord in his, by his Spirit is the hearts Judge, and in the true Church,
the pillar and ground of Truth, i Tim. 3.i5,i6. and if in the true Church the
Lord by his spirit convinced others, and made the secrets of their hearts
manifest, that by his Spirit in his Church such were judged of all that were
unbelievers, and contrary to them; then in the true Church, which is in GOD the
FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 1 Thessalonians, i.1. the pillar and ground of the
TRUTH, i Tim. 3.i5. Heb. 3.6. by and with the Fathers Spirit given and
manifested to discern spirits, i Corrin. i2.i0. and to profit withal, i
Corrinth. i2.7. to some the secrets of others hearts that come amongst them and
are Unbelievers and unlearned in the things of the Spirit of God, may with his
spirit through his children, be seen, convinced, and judged, now as then, for
says the Apostle, if therefore the whole Church be come together into one
place, and all speak with tongues, new tongues is of the Spirit, a Sign of
them that believe and are baptized in the name of Christ, etc. Mark
16.i5,i6,i7. Acts i9.5,6. but if any unlearned in the things of the Spirit of
God, and unbelievers come in whilst believers speak with the new spiritual
tongues, etc. will they not say that ye are mad, but if all prophecy, and there
come in one that believes not, or unlearned, he is convinced of all, he is
judged of all, and thus are the secrets of his heart made mnnifest, and falling
down he will worship God, and report, That God is in you of a truth, i Cor.
i4.23,24,25.

The Gospel Spirit saw Hypocrites under painted outsides, so that they appeared
Righteous outwardly, but within were full of hypocrisy and iniquity, and that
Spirit pronounced woes and judgment to such; and called them whited Sepulchers,
and blind guides, and serpents, and children of the Devil, and those that the
sweet Gospel Spirit so called and judged, were in a great profession, and such
as were called of men Master, and stood praying in the Synagogues, but laid
heavy burdens upon the people, as Priests do now, that are called of men
Master, and are proud and coveteous, stands praying in the Synagogues or Idol
Temples, and such the Gospel spirit then judged worthy of damnation, as you
may read, Mat. 23. to the 34. and he said that their damnation, would be great,
as you may read, Mark i2.38,39,40.

And as the Gospel Spirit did, it is not ungospellike so to do, to such as are
in the same nature they was, therefore learn to know who and what they are,
that with the Spirit of truth are judged, and you will see that judgment due
from the Gospel Spirit now, to the serpents seed as it was then, Mat. 23. Ioh.
8.44. Mark i2.38. etc.

Peter an Apostle, he judged Simon Magus to be in the gall of bitterness, and
in the bond of iniquity, and he told him, his heart was not right in the sight
of God, there he knew and judged his heart, Acts 8.2i,22,23, and Peter called
some cursed children, who had hearts exercised with covetous practices; here he
knew their hearts, and said they was as natural bruit beasts, made to be
destroyed, and they should utterly perish in their own corruption, 2 Pet.
2.i2,i3,i4. etc. Here by the Spirit of the Lord, he knew the hearts of others,
and judged them thereby with sore judgment, even for destruction; and this
spirit that did so was not ungospellike, but one with the Gospel Spirit as
aforesaid; therefore be not offended at the spiritual man's judgment, for he
that is Spiritual judges all things, as says the Scripture.

Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, with his Spirit, discerned the witchcraft and
sorcery, and judged it, and said to Elimas, O full of all subtilty and all
mischief, Acts i3.i5. And he said thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord, etc.
Read Acts i3,i0,ii. And John in the Revelations knew by the Spirit of the Lord,
that the world wondered, and worshipped the beast, all but who had their names
written in the Lambs book of life, and he so far judged, that he knew who
should enter into the holy City, and who should not, but be cast into the lake
that burns with Fire and brimstone; did not he here judge both of things
concerning, Salvation and Damnation; consider, and lay it to heart, Revel. i3.
Revel. 20. Revel. 2i.27. Revel. 2i.8.

The Ministers of the New Covenant, who were able Ministers of the Spirit and
not of the Letter, 2 Cor. 3.6. They said to some, Ye are our Epistles written
in our Hearts, seen there and read, written not with ink, but with the Spirit
of the Living God, in the Tables of the Heart; then such as read in the divine
writing without ink, in the Heart-Tables, and see one another there, reading
in those divine and spiritual Epistles, which are with the holy Spirit written
in the Heart-Tables, such knows one another heart, as knows the secrets, by
knowing what is upon the Tables in the Hearts, and such as are Epistles written
in one another hearts, who ees into the Heart-Tables, and so reads in the
Heart-secrets, they therefore also know who are not their Epistles, and with
the spirit sees the contrary to their spiritual Epistles, and so thereby
knows good and evil assunder, and knows that the world lies in wickedness,
and as by the Spirit, they then did know and judge of those things, others that
are in the same Spirit and life of truth, with the same Spirit and truth may
now know the same, and judge of truth and error assunder, and no other way, 2
Cor. 3.2,3. i John. 5.18,i9,20. i John 4,5,6.

The Spiritual man and Ministers of the Gospel by the eternal Spirit were able
to judge of things concerning Salvation and damnation, and knew the two
Mysteries, and who were of old ordained for condemnation, for says he, in and
with the Spirit that ministered thereby, and wrote to them that were sanctified
by God the Father, and preserved in Christ Jesus and called, Jude i. i Cor.
6.ii. He spoke also of certain that were of old ordained for condemnation, so
far he judged of them, Jude 4,5,6. He comprehends old, and also knew what
should be in the last time, and told that they should be such as would walk
after their own ungodly lusts, Jude 1.18. 2 Pet. the 3.3. And know you not
that the unrighteous and such like shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, as is
spoken of, i Cor. 6.9,i0. Gal. 5.i9,20,2i. Rev. 22.15. Rev. 14.10,i1. And they
who believe not the truth but has pleasure in unrighteousness, are for
damnation, as it is written in Scripture 2 These. 2. to the i3.

The natural man is not to judge the Spiritual man, neither must the natural
man judge of things concerning salvation and damnation, but the Spiritual man
may, therefore that Scripture is full of truth therein, that says, he that is
spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man, i Cor. 2.i5.

Therefore Priests, and you that are against the spiritual man's judgment stop
your mouths, see your error, and own your Condemnation to be just thereupon,
the judgment of the spiritual man stands upon you all.

Something to that about Tithes, in answer thereunto, briefly, or in short,
etc.
NAthanael Stephens, Priest at Drayton, I heard thee plead for Tithes in the
evening, from that of Melchizedeck; whereupon I answered and said, in short,
That Melchizedecks Order was no ground for thy error; for Melchizedeck had no
command to take tithes, or compel them, neither had Abraham any command, nor
known Law, by which he was required to pay them; they was a free will offering
done to Melchizedeck, at one time, and no more, according to that order; not
the thenths of Men's Labors, and yearly increase, but the tenths of spoils
only, given by Abraham to Melchizedeck, after he had blessed him, upon the
return from the slaughter of the Kings, not stated to Melchizedeck by a known
Law, nor for succeeding ages, a free will offering only out of the spoils
from Abraham to Melchizedeck, King of Salem, at one time and no more, Genesis
i4.i7,i8,19,20, etc. answering Heb. the 7.

Then he, and they, who have no blessing for the people, and takes tyths before
Enemies be subdued, and claims them by command, yearly compelling people to pay
them by a Law, not the tenths of spoils of the Soldiery only, but men's
labors, and yearly increase of Hay, and Corn, Hemp, and Flax, Lamb, and
Wool, Eggs, Geese, and Piggs, money for Kine and Calves, Mares and Foals,
money for smoke passing up peoples Chimneys, and for Bees, etc. Such are not
after Melchizedecks Order, he did not so; then such as do as aforesaid, are in
error, as thou art: therefore from that of Melchizedeck to be denied, and thy
ways against testified: Neither art thou after the Order of Aaron and Levi, who
had a command to take tithes, but thou art not purifyed as they was, nor set
apart to do their work and service which they did, that had a command to take
Tithes, a peculiar gift only for their service under that Priesthood, which
being ended, and thou out of their work and service, therefore denied: for the
Priesthood being changed, there was of necessity a change of the Law also, and
the Gospel is now witnessed, where Tithes were never commanded, but freely
preached, according to the Command of him, who is of Iudahs Tribe, which gave
no attendance at that Altar, under the Priesthood, in which Tithes were paid,
as the Scriptures witnesses, Heb. 7.12,i3,14. Mat. i0. Act. 20.33,34,35. 1
Cor. 9.i6,i7.i8.

They who had command to take Tithes by a Law, such were to have no other
inheritance amongst the Tribes, set apart to do the work required under that
Law, and were Aaronicall and Leviticall, and had a storehouse to minister out
of from the Tithes by that Law, to the poor, the widows, fatherless and
strangers, Number. 18.20,2i. etc. Numb. 4. Deuteronomy. i4.29. Malach. 3.i0.

He and they that claims tithes by command or a Law of God, and are not
Aaronicall and Leviticall, nor set apart for that service they was who took
tithes by command and has no storehouse, neither do their gates stand open
for the poor, the widows and fatherless thither to come, and strangers also to
be filled and satisfied, that there may not be a beggar in the land, as there
was not to be a beggar in Israel, but maintained out of the tithes, and such as
do not as aforesaid, and the things in that Law and Covenant contained, which
was imposed upon them, as to circumcise and offer burnt offerings, and what by
the Priests under that Priesthood, were of them required, such as do not are by
that Laws end and all that witness it to be denied, and by that Law such has
not right to tithes, that do not what it of them requires, but to be denied,
who do not their work therein required that had the tithes a peculiar gift for
their service only, during that ministration.

But Christ is come the end of the Law and Covenant, in which tithes were paid,
and he is the everlasting offering, and end of all burnt offerings and
Sacrifyces that were under the Law, are now ended and ceased, and so tithes
where the New Covenant is witnessed, and the Priesthood being changed, the Law
is changed also, and Christ is the end and sum of the things spoken of in Heb.
7, 8, 9, and i0, Chapters.

Therefore silence tything Priests, and tyth-mongers, you that take tithes deny
Christ come in the flesh, to put an end to the Aaronicall and Leviticall
Priesthood in which they were paid, but not in the Gospel, therefore are you
denied, and are no Ministers of Christ, the new Covenant, nor the Gospel, but
declared against, by such as witness the unchangeable Priesthood, of which
Christ Jesus is head, and the Saints high Priest, praised be the Lord for the
riches of his love.

Something of Chester Priest of Witherley, about nakedness.
PRiest Chester of VVitherley, who out of the pride and presumption and evil
of thy heart with a lying tongue, said to George Fox maliciously, Sirrah, do
thou hear, the old Fox shall take thee and carry thee to the Goal, and there
shall help to kill thee, and to take an Iron and thrust thee thorough; this
John Smith does witness,

Let all the Children of light judge of thy evil heart, and take notice of thy
envy and false Prophecy, who art that lying Prophet; thou would have covered it
over with zach. i3.3. but there is no mention of Sirrah, not that the old Fox
there, nor that he should rake George and carry him to the Goal, nor that he
should do as thou said, but in it thou have manifested thy lying Spirit, and
the envy of thy heart, and to be such a one as said, when the other Priest was
reproved for lying, that it was no lie, but a slip with the tongue, but such
covers will not hide Serpents their nakedness, from the truth does appear, and
woe to all such that cover but not with the Spirit of the Lord, that they may
add Sin unto Sin as thou do and such in thy nature, read Isa. 30.i. Mat.
23.33.

Thy foul Spirit and unclean garments are seen, and naked thou are from the
truth, and when thou was contending with the young man in the grave yard
against one that had been moved to strip and put off here our clothes, to
figure out such as thou who art naked from the truth, and has thy cloak of
dishonesty, and coverings of deceit to cast off, and all such as thou art; but
in vindication of the truth against thy deceit, I told thee Isaiah the servant
of the Lord in his days he went naked, in obedience to the word of the Lord to
Figure out to Egypt and Ethiopia, what the King of Assyria should do unto them;
Isa. 20.3,4,5. And thou liar said, Isaiah did not act or do the thing, as to go
naked and barefoot, thou said it was but a vision, and not an act done, till
there openly I took a bible, and with Isaiahs sound words of truth, confuted
thy lies therein, for thou said he did not do the thing, and he said he did do
it, to wit, put off the sackcloth from off his loins, and the shoe from off
his foot and go naked and barefoot, in obedience to the word of the Lord, Isa.
20.i,2. by Isaiahs words left upon Record in the Scriptures, art thou proved a
liar therein, and thou was proved a liar in other things, and so manifested thy
lying Spirit, who thy self art that false lying Prophet, speaking lies of the
truth, and lies of Isaiah the true Prophet, and servant of the Lord, thou said
he did not go naked and barefoot, and he says he did go naked and
barefoot, and he is to be believed, for there is this proof for it, Isa. 20.
but none for thine against it, therefore stop thy mouth thou lying Spirit, thou
said the Spiritual man did not judge all things, and he says he did judge all
things, and is to be trusted and believed in what he said, there is proof for
his truth, i Cor. 2.i5. but none for thy lies therein against it, thou lying
spirit and false Prophet, that lies of the true Prophet, and of the Spiritual
man; thou art one that preaches for hire, and seeks for thy gain from thy
Quarter, as false teachers like thee did, which the Lord sent his servants to
cry against, therefore art thou to be cried against as such was, Ier. 5.30,3i.
Isa. 56.i0,ii. Mic. 3.ii. Ezekiel. 34.2 Pet. 2. Jude 1i. and that of zachariah,
the i3.3. shall stand for thy self, and all such as thou art, and also zach.
i3.4.

To Priest Hill and Priest Mousall, etc.
PRIEST HILL, who accused RICHARD FARNVVORTH, because he would not tell him
what the soul was, by him was answered again, that he, to wit, Richard
Farnworth, had sent several quaeries to Priest Hill, and Priest VVhetstone to
be answered, and the quaere about the Soul was one, answer the quaeres and that
in them, it was said to Richard Farnworth again upon the same, that they could
not be answered, whereupon Richard Farnworth said to the Priest, do you two
Priests return so much in writing under your hands, that you cannot answer
them, and acknowledge your ignorance therein, and it should satisfye him, etc.

Priest Mousall that day in Drayton grave yard, out of fury, struck Richard
Farnworths bible out of his hand, who would have had Priest Mousall by it, to
have proved his practice according to Gospel order, but could not, let shame
strike you all in the face and cover your lips.

An Exhortation and Instruction, to all that desire to walk in the way of Truth
and Righteousness.
ALL people everywhere, whose desires are to know the truth, and the way to the
Father, take heed to, and mind the pure light of Christ, within you, to stay
and guide your minds, and instruct your hearts to be taught the true fear of
the Lord, and in it wait to receive the pure wisdom from God the Father of
lights, that is the light which discovers darkness, and shows you Sin and
evil, which be deeds of darkness, and the light reproves you in secret for
disobeying it, and acting conrrary to it; turn to the light, and wait upon it
for counsel, and join to the light, and not to your vain thoughts and
imaginations, which are for judgment with the light, and condemnation is upon
that which flees the light, and loves the darkness rather than the light, John
3.i9,20,2i. Follow the light and you will thereby be led out of darkness into
the light of life, John, 8.12. So will you know the true guide, John. i6.i3. to
lead you through the true fear, and the pure wisdom into all truth, that by
following the true guide, you may know the true judgment, and judge in the
heart, judging and condemning Sin and unbelief, and so to wait for judgment to
pass upon every evil thought, and upon the devises and imaginations of your
evil hearts, and wait in the true judgment to have discerning, i Cor. i2. And
salt to savor withal, Mat. 5. That through the judgment the door of mercy may
be known, so will mercy rejoice in judgment, and sweet nour^shing virtue will
spring into your souls, and wait for the power of life to be manifested through
the judgment to cut down Sin and purge the Soul with the Spirit of judgment
and of burning, and so separate the soul from the body of death, and join it to
the seed, and the seed to the Lord, to have union in the body of life, thereby
will the witnesses be known, and the Devils Image defaced, and the Image of God
restored again, and changed into Gods Image, as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2
Cor. 3.i7,18. and then the living soul will be known, and to solace with the
quickening spirit, to have the seal set upon the pure heart, the election then
conf^rmed, and calling so made sure, and the unction known and enjoyed, 1 John
2.20. and the Seed and soul anointed to praise the Lord in the beauty of
holiness.

Therefore all people consider, and lay things to heart, and with that which is
pure in your consciences, examine your selves, whether you be in the faith,
and have the assurance of eternal life, and can witness the Record within you
or no; 1 Ioh. 5,i0,11,12. and know you not that Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates, 2 Cor. i3.5. Great is the mystery of Godliness, Christ within the
hope of glory, Coloss. 1.27. This hope that is witnessed amongst the sons and
children of God does purify and cleanse, as the Commands of the Spirit is
obeyed, the purging and purifying of the soul is witnessed; behold, what manner
of Love is this, that we should be called the Sons of God, who are begotten by
the Immortal Word, and born again not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible,
by the word of God which lives and abides for ever, as it is witnessed
through the Spirit, and proved by Scripture, 1 John 3.1,2,3. Pet. i,2,3, and 4.
verses, i Pet. i.22,23. Oh you that desire to know the Lord God, and the way of
Truth and Peace, wait upon the light of Christ within you! John i.9. 2 Cor.
4.6,7. to have a witness of truth raised up into your understandings and a
testimony of the love of God sealed to your souls by the eternal Spirit, in
the Covenant of Grace through the Lord Jesus, lest you die in your Sins, and
your souls perish: now you have time prize it, this is the day of your
visitation, and love to your souls, all who loves the light and forsakes it
self to follow it, to lead you into life and peace; but condemnation is the
reward of all that hate the light.

Some MEMENTOES, TO Put in remembrance the People and Priest of what they did,
that they may be ashamed and repent.
THe i. day of the ii. month, though they had promised and said, that we should
have the command of the house, before we and the Priests went into it to
dispute as they called it, and that none should harm us, etc. It was to the
conttary, the Priests suffered wild boys, and rude people to speak many
together, that were without the fear of the Lord, and such as were void of
understanding of the things of the Spirit of God, for the natural man knows
them not, because they are spiritually understood, or discerned, i Cor. 2.i4.

And they haled us away, and stopped our mouths with their hands and and gloves
in the Priests presence, and threatened what they would do several of them, and
abused us, and made one to bleed, etc. Here the fruits of the Priests Ministry
was made manifest, and their disorder, and envy were showed, and
truce breakers some of them was, and is, for abused we was and harmed, and had
not command of the house as during that time, therefore deceit spoke in such
people as made promises and did not perform them, consider of it, repent and
amend, lest vengeance from God be returned upon such as are truce breakers,
disobedient and rebellious, that in the Conscience will answer for truth, and
against your deceit, and will witness for me and the truth, as Conscience book
is opened.

Some of the Priests in Drayton grave yard the i7. day did to me deny Tithes,
whereupon I bad them then declare against them, and others they pleaded for
them, see what confusion is here, but how can a Kingdom that is divided
against it self stand.

R. Farnworth.

THe seventeenth day, as aforesaid, in the Grave-yard, Priest Stephens said, He
would set a boy to undertake George Fox, but he did not say, he should
undertake neither to dispute, nor argue with him, yet he undertook to abuse
him. Judge in this case.

The same day the said Priest Stephens wife was heard to call a manservant,
and bid him go and pull GEORGE FOX down, and sore after that he were abused
most shamefully; the Priests Son, and Manservant shared in that evil, abusing
of him also, and the Priest Stephens laughed and rejoiced thereat, and for the
same were reproved: Oh shame upon such a Ministry! VVitnesses to this, John
Smith, John Barefoot and Io. Hacket.

Some of the Passages betwixt him whom the world calls George Fox, and the
Priests in Drayton grave yard, upon the fourth day of the week, being the
seventeenth day of the 11. Month.
FIRST, the Priests asked George if he would go into the Church, as they called
it, and he said no, for he said, he stood a witness against them all there, let
them come and prove their Ministry there in the grave yard, for there he was;
for at a meeting a while before in a house, they haled him the said George Fox
to and fro, and haled him away from them, and thrust him, and pushed him up and
down, until he lost some of his blood in the said house, and so he refused to
go into the Steeple-house, but there stood open to declare against their false
Ministry, and then John Chester who is called a teacher, came and haled and
pushed him the said George rudely, and the Priests wife of Drayton very
unseemly, plucked and haled up and down and scoffed and laughed, and the rude
people very boysterously behaved themselves, and threw him down as if they were
at a bul-bating, or bear-bating, or some Stage Play; Oh, be ashamed ye Priests
and people, your profession stincks before the Lord, and now your folly is
manifested, for your voices (I know you teachers) to be the strange voices and
the hirelings, that care not for the flock, but are them that push with side
and shoulder, and makes a prey upon the people, as you may read, Ezekiel 34.
And are them that bear rule by their means, which the Lord sent Jeremy to cry
against, Ier. 5.30,3i. And you are such as seeks for your gain from your
quarter, which Isaiah was sent to cry against, as in Isaiah 56.i0,ii. And you
are hirelings, such as the Lord sent Micah to cry against, Mic. 3.ii. And you
are such as Christ cried woe against, Mat 23. which have the chiefest seats in
the Assemblies, stood praying in the Synagogues, and are called of men Master,
in the steps of the Scribes and Pharisees out of the Doctrine of Christ, and
the woe is to you as it was to them, Mat. 23. And you are found in the way of
Cain, as your envy was manifest in the grave yard at Drayton, and in the way of
Balaam receiving the wages of unrighteousness, it is not a righteous thing that
you should oppress the poor people, and through feigned words and covetousness
make merchandise of them as you may read, 2 Pet. 2. and Jude ii. who are
profane both Priest and Prophet, as you may read, Ier. 23.1i.

And such priests bore rule by their means as as you do now, and by their lies,
and by their lightness have caused the people to err, as it was manifest in
the grave yard at Drayton, for both the priest and people was profane and full
of lightness and vanity, and when he the said George Fox had said he would not
go into the Steeple-house, then violently the Priests wife of Drayton, and
Priest Chester and others violently haled him to have gotten him by force, into
the steeple-house, to have made him to have lied, who had said before he would
not go in, and threw him down in that which is called the p rch, like wicked,
bruit, and heathenish people without the fear of God, shouting and crying out,
as if they were at a bull-bating manifesting their folly, and such are the
fruits of your Ministry, you Priests which were at Drayton that day; Oh, blush
and be ashamed of your practices for your religion stinks. And after the said
Chester had proclaimed him to be a blasphemer to make him odious to the people,
and Stephens Son called him a Heretic, and neither Heresye nor blasphemy could
they prove against him, and Chester proved himself to be a liar, and the false
Prophet, as in zach. 13.4. who said the spiritual man did not judge all
things, and the Apostle said he did, i Cor. 2.i5. And after that Priest Chester
had called him a blasphemer, and Stephens Son had called him a Heretic, and
none of those things could they prove against him, then Priest Stephens and his
wife and his Son, defyred him, the said George to pray for them; Now all people
see what confusion is here found amongst the Priests, and how unstablished they
are, who first called him a blasphemer, and a Heretic, and afterward desired
him they called heretic, to pray for them, and when he had proved the Priests
by the Scriptures to be in the steps of the false Prophets, and cried against
with the true, as Ifaiah, Jeremiah, Micah, Ezekiel, and proved them out of the
Doctrine of Christ, Mat. 23. And proved them out of the Apostles Doctrine, 2
Pet. 2. and Jude. And then the Priests said they would go read the Scriptures,
and then they asked him a question, and flew from that when they should have
cleared themselves, but could not; and then George said, they had granted
themselves to the deceivers, being found in the steps of the false Prophets,
as all the wise in heart may judge, and they put him the said George Fox, to
prove that they was light, and vain, and profane, and this was proved by your
fruits made manifest, and proved in Ier. 23.ii. and 32. verses. And so after a
time the Priests got away, and left him the said George in the grave yard at
Drayton, who stands a witness against all false teaches, which are made by the
will of man, and all the poor people which are deceived, which now cries up
their Dyana, and now their ignorance of Christ does appear, both Prieist and
people who say the Steeple-house is the Church, and are ignorant of the letter
of the Scripture, for it says the Church is in God, the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, i These. i.1. And so both Priest and people are judged with the
Scripture to be liars; and so let your mouths be stopped for ever. And as for
saying Priest Stephens was adulterer, and the rest, he being found in the steps
of the false Prophets, which the true Prophets cried against, he is adulterated
from the Lord, and them all, I stand a witness against them, in the presence of
God, and that of God in all your consciences shall answer, the light which Jesus
Christ has enlightened you withal for me, and be a witness against you all in
the day of judgment, who holds up those things which the Prophets, Christ and
the Apostles cried against, as you may read in those Scriptures before
mentioned, and whereas Stephens Son slandered George as an heretic, and lied,
and said none ever knew the thoughts, so he was proved to be of the Devil, a
liar, as you may read, Job 21.27. And said Elijah did not judge or know the
heart, when Elijah did, read, i King. 21.20.2i. And again they called him a
blasphemer, because he said he had seen God face to face. Jacob was no
blasphemer, who saw God face to face, as you may read, Genesis 32.30. And the Lord
spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend, as you may read,
Exodus 33.1i. And Job saw God as you may read in in the last Chapter of Job: And
here you who calls this blasphemy, do manifest your selves to be ignorant of the
Letter. And Priest Swayne said that George had cleared Stephens of adultery,
because he said it was in the Land, and this was not at all to clear him nor
any of them who are found in the steps of the false Prophets from God
adulterated, and walks in lies, so both here are judged, and all of them with
the Spirit of truth who out of the truth are found.

A discovery of Spiritual Whoredom, Drunkenness, and Lewdness, and Envy,
Lightness, and Profaneness of such Priests and people, as is proved by
Scripture, and as their fruits makes them manifest, etc.
YOUR Teachers is such as go in Cains way, envying the righteous seed, brought
forth, who are found of God and into the covenant of life brought, and such the
teachers of the world envies, which goes in balaams way, and receives the wages
of unrighteousness, who are the scoffers and mockers that the Scripture speaks
of, as you may read, 2 Pet. 2. and Jude i1,18. verses. And they are covetous,
which has a form of godliness, but denies the life and power, as you may read,
2 Timothy 3. And through covetousness with feigned words, do they make Merchandise
of you, as you may read, 2 Pet. 2.3. And they are such as serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and by good words and fair speeches,
deceives the hearts of the Simple, as you may read, Romans i6.i8. The Scriptures
are the good words, given forth from the Spirit, which the false Teachers have
gotten a form of, and deceives the Simple withal, and uses their tongues and
says, the Lord says, and the Lord never spoke to them, as you may read, Ier.
23. And the Priests said they have not that Spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures, then they have another, the Spirit of error, judged with the Spirit
of truth out of their own mouths, and they are such as bear rule by their
means, and hold up the horrible and fylthy thing committed in the Land, and the
people, love to have it so, as you may read, Ier. 5.30,3i. Like people, like
Priest, as you may read, in Hasea 4.9. And they are such as run and the Lord
never sent them, for they confess they have not the Spirit that gave forth the
Scripture, and so it manifests the Lord never sent them, for whom the Lord
sends it is by his Spirit, and therefore they profit not the people at all, who
be out of Gods counsel, for both Prophet and Priest are profane, and they are
Prophets of the deceits of their own hearts, and profess lies, for they say,
the Spiritual man does not jduge all things, and the Scripture says he does,
i Cor. 2.i5. And they that add or diminish, the plagues of God is added to
them, as in Rev. 22. and cause my people to err by their lies and by their
lightness, as their fruits does make it appear in Drayton grave yard, for much
lightness and wantonness, vainness was found in both Priest and people, as you
may read, Ier. 23.23. And they are profaned both the Priests and Prophets, and
given to Filthy Lucre, 1 Timothy 3. and are greedy of it, Verse 8. and are proud
and perverse, and strife about words, in Railing and evil surmisings, perverse
disputing of men of corrupt minds, and destitute, concerning the truth,
supposing that gain is godliness; from such we are to withdraw, as in the i
Tim. 6.4,5. and their wives are slanderers and not grave; as you may read i
Tim. 4.ii. and they are drunk, but not with wine as they was, in Isai. 29.9.
and they are the mockers, whose bonds are made strong, as you may read, Isa.
28.22. and they have taught their tongues to speak lies, and bend their tongues
like bows for lies, but are not valiant for the truth upon earth; their tongues
is as an arrow shot out, it speaks deceit, one speaks peaceably to his
neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart lays wait; and as Troops of
Robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way, by
consent, for they commit lewdness, Hos. 6.9. and they are gone a whoring from
God, who is the wise man that may understand this, as you may read, Ier. 9. and
their lewdness and their whoredoms which are from the Lord, discovering their
nakedness, as you may read Ezekiel. 23. And they are the daubers with untemperd
mortar, one builds up a wall, and another daubeth with untempered mortar:
these are Prophets which are like Foxes in the deserts, as you may read, Ezekiel,
i3. with lies they have made the hearts of the righteous sad, v. 22. and they
are such as cloth with the wool, and seek after the fleece, and makes a prey
upon the people, which Ezekiel was sent to cry against, Ezekiel. 34. and with
for^e and cruelty do they rule the people; but the Lord will deliver his flock
from their mouths, that they shall be meat for them no longer; but they shall
lie down in a good Fold, and they thrust with Side and Shoulder, as you may
read in Ezekiel. 34. as aforesaid, and they are such as bid peace, peace if they
put into their mouths, but put not into their mouths, and they prepare war
against you, and are the hirelings that preach for hire, which the Lord sent
Micha to cry against, and they are them that build up with blood as in Mich. 3.
As your persecution may witness who are found full of envy, and he that envies
his brother is a murderer, and no murderer has eternal life abiding in him,
read 1 John 3.15. And so thirst after the blood of the Saints, to make your
selves drunk with it, Rev. 51.4,5,6. Who go a whoring from the living God, as
you may read, Exodus 34.16. And their whorish hearts departs from the Lord, as
you may read Ezekiel. 6 9. And they are such as seeks for their gain from their
quarter, which are greedy dumb dogs, which can never have enough, which the
Lord sent Isaiah to cry against, as you may read, Isa. 56.i0,1i. And they are
such whose hearts are surfetted and drunk with the cares of this life, Luke
2i.34. and are out of Christ's doctrine, found standing praying in the
Synagogues, and having the chiefest seats there, and are called of men Master,
whom our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe against, as you may read, Mat. 6. Mat.
23.Your blessings is cursed, and your seed is corrupted and the Lord will spread
dung in your faces, and this commandment is to you Priests, as you may read,
zach. 2.i,2,3. and Malach. 2. cap.

WHereas many of the Children and Servants of the Lord God, which are of the
world scornfully called quakers, which are termed to be Disturbers of the
Peace; Violence to no man we do, neither do we lift up the hand against any
man, as to wrong him, or to strike him, but against all such things we stand a
witness and do deny them, and are brought to preach the Gospel freely, as we
have received freely, God having given his Spit it unto us according to his
Promise; but under violence do we go, beatings, prisonings, stockings
whippings, scoffings, stoneings, and all manner of false accusations, and
slanders, and evil reports, and cruel usage of men, such as profess
Christianity, as though we were not worthy to live upon the earth; but now is
the end of all profession seen, who they are that have the form and not the
power: the letter, and not the substance; therefore be ye awakened ye Rulers of
the earth, to Righteousness; to the light in your consciences I speak, which
comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, it is our witness in you all, and will be in
the day of judgment, and all your condemnation that hate it, says Christ; Oh
therefore! fear God, and wait for wisdom from God, that with it you may order
the Creation: and then with it you will witness us to be the greatest friends
to Righteousness and Justice, and to stand against all in justice and Tyranny;
from them who love your fouls, and do see what the sword is to be upon,
violence and all false accusers, there is discontent and there is all evil
hatchings, and must be ruled by the sword, and that in all consciences shall
answer and witness us to be true Ministers of God, who covet no man's Silver,
nor Gold, nor Apparel. Therefore you take warning what your sword you do lay
upon.

FINIS.

