A FAMOVS VICTORY OBTAINED By Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, against the Lord HOPTON, and
the PRINCE his Army, at Torrington in the WEST.

3000. Arms taken. 50. Colonels. Majors, Captains, and other Officers. 700.
Common Soldiers. 150. Horse. 100. Barrels of Powder. The Magazine, and all the
Enemies Bag and Baggage. Two Trunkes of the Lord Hoptons, Plate and Money
taken. The Lord Hopton, The Lord Wentworth, Sir John Digby, Major General
Harris, and others fled, and the manner of the pursuit. Torrington Church blown
up, and the great danger his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax escaped.
There was also in the said Church one hundred Barrels of Powder, and one
hundred and forty of the Enemies Officers and Soldiers, which were all
destroyed in the said place.

Certified by Letters to the Speaker of the House of Commons, on Thursday last,
the 19. of this instant February, and the Heads thereof published in several
Churches about London.

LONDON: Printed by B A. February 20. 1646.

(...) For which purpose, the Lord Hopton begins to make a great flourish,
draws what strength both of Horse and foot he can out of Cornwall, sends a
party to relieve Dunster Castle, fortifies at Chimley, and Mr. Rowley his
house, and ^akes up his head quarters at Torrington, near Barnstable.

From hence he sends out Warnings, commanding the Country to bring provisions
is to heir Forces, all the youth drives the Cattle, and several Parties are
daily abroad, plundering and ger^ing Horses to increase their strength; and
then intend either with assistance that is expected from France, or the
conjunction of other of the Kings army from about Oxford, to work their own
ends, or prolong the wars: The strength they have to effect this, was about 4
or 5000 horse and foot; which doubtless (having been left at quiet would have
increased in a short time, and have become more formidable.

Which his Excellency Sir Thomas Faisfax perceiving, and being at that time
before Exeter, he hastened the perfecting of the Bridge over the River at Topsam,
finished his Posts made good the several Guards and Posts, and consults with
his Council of War, and left Exeter block't up, with the Foot commanded by
Sir Hardresse Waller, and Col. Sheffeilds Regiment of Horse, and advanced
himself in person with Eight Regiments of Foot, and five of Horse, to Crediton,
and Colonel Pickerings (that was) by Tiverton.

The 16. instant being Monday, his Excellency marched from Crediton toward
Chimleigh, and in his march some Parties of ours lighted on some of the
Enemies, and bad some small skirmishes, and about 100 in all of the Enemy were
taken and brought in prisoners.

The Country for the most part showed themselves very joyful at his
Excellencies approach, and brought in much provision to our Army.

By some of the Country we also understood, that the Prince was yet in
Cornwall, and great endeavors were used to draw forth the Trained Bands, but
they generally refused to go out of their own Country.

As for Sir John Greenvil he used the like violence against the poorer sort of
people, as his Kinsman Sir Richard did, causing them to be dragged forth, and
tied two together with Match, and others appointed to drive them on.

There was also a Gentleman came from Pendennice, with a message from Duke
Hamilton, now prisoner in that Castle, to desire a Pass for him to go to the
King: wherein he was referred to the Parlirment, to know their pleasure.

Thus have I given you the heads of several Letters out of the West; but this
day came another Letter to our hands, which does more particularly import the
great Victory obtained against the Lord Hopton, which I shall give you thus,

Another Letter from Sir Thomas Fairfax his Quarters.
SIR,
THe sixteenth of this instant February, we marched from Crediton toward
Chimleigh, and in our passage we had some sinall skirmishes with parties of the
enemy, that we found abroad, and we took about one hundred prisoners in
several places: When we came to Chimleigh the enemy was gone, and had
plundered a great part of the Town:

Our design was to fall on the Lord Hoptons head quarters, which at that time
we understood were at Torrington, where they kept a strong Guard, and had made
some strong Fortificstions. But before we came thither, we had Intelligence
that about a hundred of the enemy kept a guard in Squire Roules his house:
whereupon a party of our horse and Dragoons marched thither, but before they
came there the enemy had gotten the alarm, and quitted the House,

After this, we hasted to Torrington, and fell on the enemies quarters, and in
an instant entered the Town, in which was three thousand of the enemy, who upon
our entrance, threw pown their arms, some crying for quarter, others shifting
for themselves.

The muskets lay so thick in the streets, that it was some interruption to
our Horse in their march through the streets, a thousand and upwards were
presently taken up near together.

The Lord Hopton left his dinner on the Table and fled, leaving behind him his
Trunks of Plate and Silver, and other Treasure: we had some prisoners of the
themies in the Church, where was a hundred Barrels of powder, to which they
gave fire, which blowed up the Church and themselves, and battered many houses
in the Town. A sheet of Lead fell within nine yards of the General, and many
Tyles and other combustable matter, which did much endanger his person; but
blessed be God, he had no hurt at all. The enemy is fled toward Barnstable and
Sturton, and our horse are in pursuit of them, great store of prisoners are
taken, and more continually brought in, sixty came together; but as yet I
cannot give you a cettain Relation how many we have taken in all.

Torrington, February 17. 1645.

From other hands we hear, that there was taken 800. prisoners, whereof many of
quality, and about three thousand Arms.

Me thinks before I leave this subject, I should put you in mind how seasonable
this and other mercies come to us; For it is seldom, that we have solemdized
any day in thanksgiving for one blessing on our army, but that very day we had
news fresh cause of thankfulness, As the last Day of Thanksgiving for
Dartmouth, came the news of the Surrender of Chester, and the cay set a part
commeunerating that mercy, came the Leteers of this great and renowned Victory,
which for your better satisfaction, I shall here in the conclusion give you a
perfect List, as follows.

In the next place (as near as I can gather from several Letters) I shall give
you a List of the whole,
3000. Arms taken. 50. Colonels, Majors, Captains, and other Officers. 700.
Common Soldiers. 150. Horse. 100. Barrels of Powder, Match proportionable, All
the Enemies Bagg and Baggage. Two Trunks of, plate, and money. The Lord Hepton
fled. Major General Harris. Sir John Digby. Col. Trelange. The Lord Wentworth.
Major General Web. The Church blown up, and: 140 of the Enemy officers and
others in it. Torrington taken. Chilmley quitted. Esquire Roules house quitted.
200. Head of Oxen taken. 300. Sheep. Great store of Bacon, Cheese, and other
victual, which they had gotten out of the Country. With other rich prize
FINIS.

