THE PHANATIQUES CREED, OR A Door of Safety; In Answer to a bloody Pamphlet
ENTITLED A Door of Hope: OR, A CALL and DECLARATION for the gathering together
of the first ripe Fruits unto the STANDARD of our Lord, KING JESUS.

Wherein the Principles, Danger, Malice, and Design of the Sectaries, are
Impartially Laid open.

London, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1661.

THE PHANATIQUES CREED, OR A Door of Safety, etc.
ALthough That Party might very justly be denied the common Benefits of
Indulgence, and Protection, that Declares it self against the Common Rules of
Religion, and Society: Yet His Majesty is rather pleased, by a gentle
Interdiction of their Private meetings for the Future, to Prevent more
Mischief, then by a Total Extirpation of the whole Faction so Principled to
Punish the Outrages they have already Committed. God grant they abuse not This
Mercy too, as they have done That already, by virtue of which they do at this
Instant enjoy their Lives and Fortunes. Never was so Foul a Villainy Seconded by
an Equal Madness. For a Small, Poor, Rash, Divided, Hated, and Despised Party,
to Invade the Numerous, Potent, Sober, and United Interests of the Nation. A
People, that enjoyed all the Privileges of Englishmen, and Citizens, without
any Provocation either from Necessity, or Oppression. These are your Men of
Tender Consciences; -- your streight-lac'd Christians. -- The Spirits that some
Twenty years since, were Raised, to Call for Justice upon Delinquents, and
Taught to Tumult for a Gospel Ministry. The Cross, the Surplice, and the
Common Prayer, -- are an Abomination; but Rebellion, Blasphemy, Murder,
Sacrilege, Spilling of Christian Blood like Water; (Playing the Devil in the
Name of Jesus) This they call -- Following of the Lamb. -- Rising against the
seed of the Serpent: In fine, they ascribe to a Divine Impulse, the lewdest
Actions that ever proceeded from Corrupt Nature. To Reason with them, were to
do too much honor to their Gross, Wild Opinions, and Time Lost to oppose
Argument against pretended Revelation. It shall suffice me, to expose their
Principles, and leave the World to judge whether they favor more of Christ, or
Belial. To that end, I have extracted the sum of the Phanatique Creed, from
one of their own Pamphlets, Entitled

A Door of Hope: OR, A CALL and DECLARATION for the gathering together of the
first ripe Fruits unto the STANDARD of our Lord, KING JESUS.

NOw, your Attention to the Language of the Saints.- After an Invocation of the
Holy Spirit; Thus does our Libeller discourse of his late Glorious Majesty,
(Page 1.)

This beginning of Reformation, and the honest Party engaged in this Quarrel,
(however by far the less number) God did abundantly own, and witness too from
heaven, by opening his Salvation, and making bare his own Arm, against the late
King, who was justly out off as a Murderer, (see Decl. of Parl. 11. Feb.
1647.) Tyrant and Traitor, etc.

Soon after in the same Page he goes on, -- Nevertheless, God has now taken
away all our bancks, and permitted this old Enemy, to come in upon us as a
flood, Isa. 59.19. And now C. S. the Son of that Murderer is Proclaimed King
of England, whose Throne of Iniquity is built on the Blood of precious Saints
and Martyrs, and on the Blood of all our Brethren in the late Wars, etc.

Not to trouble the Reader with his Nauseous Calculations, and forced Glosses
upon Texts, in favor of his Delusion: my Business is, in as Few words as may
be, to show how Dangerous to the Civil Magistrate, and to the Public Peace,
People of this persuasion are: Their Dreams of Zion and of Babel; and their
setting Daniel and the Revelation together by the Ears about the Number of the
Beast, concern not me. Those tedious Fooleries omitted, as beside my Purpose; I
pass on to his second Page, where speaking of the Royal Party he proceeds in
these Terms.

For as he raised up Pharaoh, so has he them, to show his Power in them, and
that his Name may be declared throughout all the Earth Romans 9.17 They are
brought as Foxes into the Snare, and as Birds into the Net. We say when we
consider these things, we are so ^ar from being dejected, that we cannot
restrain from singing and prais^, knowing that this will make much for Gods
Honor, our good, and this Works advantage, and they shall not be able to touch
one hair of our head; nay, we were very much confirmed in our hopes of the
sudden appearance of this Work, by the coming in of their poor wretched King,
at whom (as the Daughter of Zion did at that great boasting Assyrian) we laugh,
and have them in derision.

And when we consider the great opinions of this year, the wonderful effects
it is like to produce, the sweet harmony and agreement of the Prophecies, the
visibility of those things therein foretold to fall in the time of the
Witnesses death, the great likelihood of the Witnesses Resurrection, the great
New Covenant-Promise of the spirit made to this Work, the wonderful undeniable
signs of the times, and how miraculously we have been cut out, and preserved
for this Work, of which we shall speak in a brief Treatise by it self: And also
having our hearts broken with the Love of Christ, and boiling over, and having
tasted through choice distinguishing grace, the Preciousness, Power and Love,
of a soul-endearing Jesus; we are mightily awakend and stirred up, and that
Fire that has been hid under our Ashes will break out into Flames, n^d that
Fountain of the Rivers of Living Waters into Streams, as the bubbling Springs
that searches the ground, and finding entrance gusheth out. Our Lives, and
every thing else that is dear unto us upon a worldly account, we despise as a
mean thing in comparison of the glory of that Name, which is to us as precious
Ointment, and we lay all down at the feet of our Lord Jesus, resolving if we
perish to perish there.

His Zeal grows now a little warm, in these words, Page 3.

We therefore freely, of a ready mind, and with a most cheerful heart
(accounting it an Honor too great for us, poor worms, who are the meanest of
Men, the greatest of Sinners, and the least of Saints, to gird on a Sword for
Christ.) Give up our Lives and Estates unto our Lord King Jesus, and to his
People, to become Soldiers in the Lambs Army, abhorring Mercenary Principles,
and Interests. And for this works sake we desire not to love our lives unto the
death, neither will we ever (if we may speak so great a word with reverence in
the fear of God) sheath our Swords again, until Mount Zion become the joy of
the whole Earth, a Mountain of holiness and a habitation of justice, until
Rome be in Ashes, and Babylon become a bissing and a curse, the border of
wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord has indignation for ever,
there being left unto her neither Name, nor Remnant, Son, or Nephew. For that
we are not purposed, when the Lord shall have driven forth our Enemies here, in
these Nations, and when we shall in a holy Triumph, have led our Captivity
Captive, to sit down under our Vines and Fig Trees, but to go on to France,
Spain, Germany, and Rome, to destroy the Beast and Whore, to burn her Flesh
with Fire, to throw her down with violence as a Millstone into the Sea, that she
may be found no more at all, Rev. 18.21. Jer. 51.35 to bring not only these,
but all the Nations to the subjection of Christ, that the Kingdom may be the
Lords, and to perfect the deliverance of all the Saints, the remnant of the
Waldenses, and all the Children of the Freewoman, who are yet groaning and
crying under the Tyranny and Persecutions of Antichrist, and to avenge the
blood of all the Martyrs, which we earnestly remember, and which is an especial
motive unto us, the cry of which is very loud in our ears, and much more in the
ears of God, unto whom vengeance belongs. And this is much more than a
National Quarrel, that which is the Test now, being the interest of Christ, the
blood of the Butchered, Murdered, Martyred, and Massacred Saints, the Interest
of the good People, the Liberties of all men, and the undoing of all the
sinful oppressions and yoaks of the whole Creation.

The Controversy now lies between Zion and Babylon, Christ and Antichrist; and
therefore we assert, That it is lawful for the true spiritual Seed, the
legitimate Heirs of the promises and the World, Romans 4.13. To RISE UP against
the carnal, serpentine, accursed seed, who are the destroyers of the Earth,
Ren. 11.18. To possess the GATE of their Enemies, to bind their Kings in
Chains, and their Nobles in Fetters of Iron. And we being called of God, and
cut out without hands or human contrivement, in whom is shown forth his Power;
RISE UP on Gods behalf (free from the guilt of the breach of Oaths and
Covenants upon our Consciences) to conflict with this profane persecuting
Spirit of the Dragon, and the Worshippers of the Beast that dwell on the Earth.
And we Call all that have a Life to lay down for their King and Savior, to
come forth against them with the Sword, and execute upon them the judgments
written. Are you a poor despised Remnant? why, God has formed you for himself:
As Christ was a tender Plant, and a Root of dry Ground; so may his Kingdom
arise out of a poor, obscure, illiterate, and (such as the World calls)
Fanatic people. And out of them shall come forth the Corner, the Nail, and the
Battel-bow; we look for a righteous Spiritual Magistracy out of the new sharp
threshing Instrument.

From hence, after another Page, divided betwixt Raylings against Bishops,
Ceremonies, and Cavaliers, and the Recommendation of a well-ordered
Commonwealth, which he says is Intended by his Kingdom of Christ, having
Called in All to his Assistance, that either Hate the One, or Love the Other;
he pronounces the King to be a Professed Enemy, a Rebel, and Traitor to Christ,
[Page 5.] And half a dozen Lines further, Shall we Quietly (says he) give up
our Necks to the Yoke, and suffer the Common Prayer, Organ, etc. to be imposed
on us? Is Israel a home-born Slave, that we should bore the Ears of our Souls,
and Bodies in their Posts? What can we expect from them, if we will not take
their wicked Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, that which we cannot do,
though we should Dye, because they are against both the Priestly and Kingly
offices of our Lord Jesus, etc.

Did but this Miserable Creature Think of Christ's Doctrine, while he Prates
thus Impertinently of his Offices, he might Remember that we are to Obey, not
to Destroy our Governors, for the Lords sake. Does not our Blessed Savior say
himself, My Kingdom is not of this world? But why do I contest with Whirlwinds,
or with Shadows: with a Phantome, that is nothing but Fury, and Delusion? To
Follow him through All his wanderings; he runs himself Quite out of Breath in
the next Leaf, against Popery, and the Design of Crushing the Reformed
Interest. He tells us further of Massacres designed by the Jesuits, but
whether by Those of the Society of Jesus, or These of the Kingdom of Jesus, may
be another Question. Upon the Whole, he concludes the Necessity of Taking
Arms; and here follows his Christian Invitation to that Purpose. Page 8.

Who so loves God, his Country or his own Rights which Christ purchased for
him by his Blood, and cannot sell his Body, Soul, and Conscience to the Devil,
to wicked men and their lusts, to commit sin with greediness, and run with
them to the same excess of all manner of filthiness and wickedness, must now
take up the Sword against this Beastly crew, as the last remedy God has left
us; for such is the unparalled iniquity of this day (we hope the Devil is
playing his last game in England) that a man that has but Sobriety in his
looks, can scarcely pass without the brand of Fanatic.

And these men themselves have set us free from the Bonds of Subjection; for we
have no benefit by the Government of this bloody Family, neither are we
comprehended within the Verge of their Protection: Wherefore they cannot justly
challenge any obedience from us by the Law of Nature or Nations: For a man is
not bound to pay him Subjection who seeks his Destruction.

But although, The Children are brought to the birth, there is no strength to
bring forth; the hour is now come, and we are traveling in pain to be
delivered, for the Name of our God, the Noble and Precious Interest of his
Christ, and the Deliverance of his Saints and People; and O how are we
straightened till it be done! We have been with much fear and trembling in this
Work, and much wrestling have we had with the Lord: for so far as he has
revealed our selves unto us, we had rather suffer all things, not only to the
loss of our Names, and Estates, but even our very Lives for his sake, who
since we believed is made precious to us, then dishonor his great and holy
Name; and our Souls are sweetly quieted in the Lord, and abundantly satisfied
in the time; and certainly if we be deceived, God has deceived us. And now the
Love of Christ has constrained us in the face of the greatest perils and
dangers, none of which move us, so we may finish our course with joy, and serve
our Generation in the works which God has committed to us, according to his
will. And we profess we have nothing but the naked Arm of the Lord to trust
in; and if we perish, we'll perish in believing his promises, in serving and
promoting his Cause, in cont^nding for this Noble Truth of the Kingdom of his
dear Son. And this is our joy, that our God has bound himself by his Promises
(in his fear we speak it, and with reverence) to appear for his People: And if
God should not appear for his poor Remnant of Jacob, and suffer then for whom
his precious blood was shed to fall before Papists, and Cavaliers, and
profane, drunken, damning, swearing, Idolatrous, Adulterous, wicked and
ungodly men; and should suffer the Cause of the Papists, of the bloody Family
of the Stuarts, of the old bloody, Popish, wicked Gentry of the Nation, of the
drunken, dumb, Popish* scandalous Clergy, to get the upperhand of his own
Cause, and should suffer all our Reformation to be lost, then what would become
of his great Name? It was because he could not bring them into the good Land,
(will the Enemy say) that he has destroyed them in the Wilderness: What will
become of his promise made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their Seed? How
will the New Covenant sealed with the blood of Christ, and the Oath he swear
unto David in his holiness, be verified.

Now therefore, to come to the matter of our Declaration, that we may lay the
Groundwork of so great a Building, and stir up and provoke our Brethren in all
the Countries, as also in the City of London, to share with us in this honor,
and be partakers in this work, and now to prepare themselves, and in all points
to be ready, in order to a general rendesvouzing on Mount Zions bottom, We
declare, etc.

Thus far, the Saints Call to the Standard; Now, Their Declaration, which
consists of Three Heads. 1. The Renunciation of Antichristian Magistracy,
Ministry, Tithes, etc. 2. The Establishment of Civil Liberty upon the
Foundation of the Visible Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. The manner of
Disposing of the Spoil which shall be taken in Battle.

The Substance of their First Proposition runs thus, page 9.

We contend for a Righteous Magistracy, that may be a terror to evil doers and
a praise to them that do well, and for a true Gospel-Ministery with their
Maintenance: And we own and declare our Lord Jesus Christ (unto whom and whose
Laws we will alone submit, as unto him who is the Fountain and Original of all
just and lawful Power) to be the Supreme Head and Lawgiver of these Natious,
the alone LEGISLATOR, who has right to make and give Laws for the governing of
the Commonwealth, and who is King of Saints and Nations, whose Royal Laws and
Precepts must be submitted unto in Church and State, and Tyranny, Monarchy, and
Antichristianism destroyed and rooted up in both; his Laws and Statutes
contained in the Holy Scriptures, and remaining in force since his death, to be
the Law by which these Nations shall be governed and judged; and his Saints
(without respect had to any particular form or judgment) on whom shall rest
the spirit of council and wisdom, shall be the Administrators thereof, or shall
have the executive Power. So shall we have Magistrates like Job, that will be
eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and Fathers to the poor, that will
break the jaws of the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of his teeth, Job 29. And
we shall be the blessed of the Lord, whose habitations shall be full of the
blessings of heaven and earth, and full of Peace on the foundation of Truth,
and we shall be the happyest people in the world, having the best Laws and the
best Governors, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8.

Having in a word said enough of the Second Head, concerning Civil Liberty; I
pass to the Third, (Page 10.) which says,

That the chief of the Spoil which shall be taken in Battle, and all the
Estates which shall be forfeited through Treason and Rebellion, shall be
brought into one common Treasury, according to the Word of God, Their Gain
shall be consecrate to the Lord, and their Substance to the Lord of the whole
Earth, Mic. 4.13. That it may not feed the Fowls of Prey, or enrich and
corrupt particular Person, as of late, but carry on the Work of God with the
Army of the Lamb, in which every Soldier shall be sufficiently provided for,
by a certain honorable constant Revenue, issuing out of the said Treasury,
according to his Place, Degree, Services, and Family.

And for accomplishing and attaining these great and weighty ends, we Declare
also for the Razing, Destroying, and perpetual Rooting out of the whole
Constitutions and Foundations of the Antichristian Laws and Government of these
Nations; for the removing of Taxes, Tithes, Excise, and Customs also, so far
as Oppressive and unlawful; slavish Tenures of Land, Oppressions of Landlords,
Monarchy and Lordship as well in Church as State; so also in Cities, Societies,
and Families, wherein the Rights of younger Brethren will be vindicated
according to Law, (the nature whereof is Justice, Mercy, and Equity, wherein is
no footing for such fictions as this wicked Law teaches to distinguish between
Courts of Justice and Equity) and the Nimrod-spirit and Monopolies of elder
Brethren (unto whom as Kings in the Family, the younger Brethren are Slaves and
Subjects, which is one grand branch of Tyranny, and Interest of Monarchy)
pulled down, whose Interest nevertheless, by right of Primogeniture, is
asserted according to the Kings Law, to wit, twofold; For the balance of
Lands must be adaequate to the Government of the Commonwealth.

And as our great desire is to take off all yoaks and oppressions both of a
civil and spiritual nature from the necks of the poor People; so shall we
endeavor to cast the wing of Protection over them, their Persons, Families,
and Interests, to preserve them from Free Quarter, Plunder, and all other
Injuries, and violence whatsoever, being resolved first to offer up our own
proper Estates for our necessary maintenance. For it shall be our great and
indefatigable care to preserve an excellent and strict Discipline in our Army,
that not the least wrong of how small value soever may be done, always
respecting Propriety; so that all Persons (other than such as shall oppose and
rebel against this righteous Interest) may expect the fruition thereof in their
peaceable Demeanours of themselves, in their lawful Occasions, and Family
concerns.

Our Pamphleter's next Care is the Free Course of the Gospel and he tells us
for our comfort, (page 11.)

That the Remnant of Jacob shall be as dew from the Lord, when Magistrates and
Soldiers shall preach the Gospel, and teach the people knowledge, as well as
those appointed unto the Word and Doctrine; for this Cheat of the Whore of
Rome, and Innovation of Antichrist, Monopolizing the Work of the Ministry (to
make a trade of the Gospel, and Slaves and Souls of men) into their own hands,
limiting and appropriating it unto Persons in Ecclesiastical Offices, shall be
taken away.

And finally, We most earnestly desire, and call all that love our Lord Jesus
Christ, and wait for his Kingdom, to offer themselves willingly with us in this
Work, that as in that renowned History, Judges 5.9.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23. Out
of Ephraim there may be a Root of us against Amaleck, after thee Benjamin among
thy People; out of Machir shall come down Governors, and out of Zebulon they
that handle the Pen of the Writer: The Princes of ^ssachar with Deborah and
Barak on foot in the Valley. And if Reuben will continue in his divisions, and
abide among the Sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of the Flocks; Gilead abide
beyond Jordan, Dan remain in Ships, and Asher continue on the Seashore, and
abide in his breaches; yet Zebulon and Napthali will be a People that will
jeopard their lives unto the death in the high places of the field; and Meroz
shall be accursed, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty. And our heart being toward you that among all
the people offer your selves willingly to the Work, we beseech you set all
things in order prepare your selves, and let the Rich help the Poor, that with
one mouth we may all say, Thine are we David, and on thy side thou son of
Jesse; Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; for thy God
helps thee, And if any of the old Army which God has laid aside, whose
hearts he has touched, do quit their Interests, and come to us on this alone
lasting Foundation, they shall be willingly received.

From hence, to the End of the Pamphlet (no less then 5. full Pages) I find
nothing Remarquable, or useful. It is a Tedious, and Confused Discourse, full
of Wrested Applications, and Evident Disagreements, concerning the Two
Witnesses in the Revelation. The scope of it, is to persuade, that the Dwellers
upon the Earth, are ( as he expresses himself, Page 14.) the Old, Carnal,
Cavalier, Popish Party; -- who Quarrelling with the Witnesses about the
Finishing Testimony, (as page 6.) will probably be now destroyed by the great
Day of the Witnesses Rise, in this present year, 1660. His great Confidence
being founded upon Mr. Mede 's Clavis Apocalyptica, I shall only relate one
material Observation concerning that Gentleman; and apply my self then, to the
Dispatch of what I have to say. Mr. Mede, (otherwise an eminent person) was so
absolutely persuaded, that the King of Swede should destroy Antichrist, that so
far as possible, he cast all his Calculations upon That Subject, to That
Byasse: at last, he found his Error, the King was slain, and the Impression of
that Mistake, in the Judgment of his nearest Friends, cost that worthy
Gentleman his Life. This is enough said upon this Subject.

I shall Endeavor now to make some use of what I have extracted from this
Hellish Libell; by drawing up in Short the sum of All; That done, I shall
discourse upon it, as I see convenient. Take now the Fundamentals of this
Reprobated Faction, with a brief View of their Design.

The Fanatiques Creed.
I Do Believe all Governors, Governments, Laws and Constitutions, to be
Antichristian, save Christ himself, -- his Deputies, -- his Visible Kingdom,
with his Laws and Statutes: of which Laws, his Saints shall be the
Administrators; (but without any Literal Direction, for upon them shall rest
the Spirit of Counsel and Wisdom.) I do Believe, according to the Prophets,
that in this present year 1660. all Carnal Powers shall be Destroyed, and that
the Controversy lying between Zion and Babylon, I am bound to List my self a
Soldier to the Lamb, and called to Rise on Gods behalf, to Bind Kings in
Chains, etc. -- to Raze and Root out all Constitutions Antichristian
whatsoever, and wheresoever: and never to sheath my Sword, till the Beast and
Whore be destroyed, till Rome lie in Ashes, and Babylon become a Hissing and a
Curse, etc.

Wherefore let all that have Lives to lay down for their King and Savior, come
forth against the Wicked with the Sword, and execute upon them the Judgments
written: As for the Late King, he was a Murderer, a Tyrant, and a Traitor: so
is his Son; and further, an Enemy and Rebel to Christ, and we owe no
Subjection to that Bloody Family.

CAn any Loyal, Modest, or Christian Ear, hear this Language without Tingling?
Can any Sober or Politic Constitution, harbor these Vipers, with either
Honor, or Security? I do confess, if This were but the Madness of some Few,
a man might Charitably impute it, either to some unhappy Distemper of
Complexion, or a more deplorable Delusion. But These are people, only Frantique
in their Opinions; Their Actions have a Face of better Reason, in Order to the
Execution of their Damned purposes. I grant; for Number, and for Interest they
are not considerable in the Nation, and yet what Mischiefs will not Twenty Bold
Rogues effect, if left at Liberty, that are of This Persuasion? We need not
look far back to see the bloody Determination of these wretches. For my own
Part, I have but little Interest with those that sit at the Helm; If I had
more, I would employ much of it, to These three Ends. 1. To procure a strict
severity against Seditious Preachers; for 'twas the Pulpit first Engaged and
Licensed this Rabble; though for another Interest; which having served Long
enough, they set up for Themselves. Nay; come to the very point of their late
Tumult, it is more then probable, that Venner's Preachment blew them into so
sudden Action. In the next place; the Press I would advise should be well
Looked to. That Preaches to the Whole Nation at once. It Is True, some
Pamphlets, with the Printers and Authors have been discovered; but there are
Others, of a more Dangerous, though of a smoother Composion; that pass as
current, as if they had an Imprimantur, not so much as looked after, to the
right End. (but of Those, I intend to say something further ere long.) Now my
Third Care should be to disappoint the Intended Outrages of the Phanatiques.
And to That Purpose; I would move that such of their Principles as are
Inconsistent with the Constitution of this Nation; and Destructive to it; and
Owned for Theirs, by themselves, in This their Late prodigious Libell, might be
summed up together, and offered to all suspected Persons; and whosoever should
Refuse, under Hand, and before Witnesses, to disclaim the said Opinions, I
would have him commanded to depart the City, and upon a Penalty not to be
suffered to come within Twenty Miles of London, without License.

If it be objected, that This would make them Desperate; I answer, that their
Principles render them so, more then any thing else can; and that while they
reteyn Those Principles, they are not to be Trusted; when they Quit them, they
are not to be Punished. Alas, with how much Ease and Safety, may this be done!
I was about to say how hazardous may it prove to leave it undone. I am
persuaded, that the Fear of Danger where none is, produces the Greatest
Dangers. Can it be Imagined that among so many Prostitute Devotes (as they
reckon themselves) there are not some Combinations as well Personal, as
Public; to Act, what I cannot even Conceive without Horror? If so, Where,
but in This Town; by whom, but by this Faction, can such a Villainy be Attempted?

It Is True, their Private Meetings are forbidden, Yet they meet still, in spite
of Authority, and in contempt of the Proclamation that forbids them. If any
further Mischief ensue, let those that are to Look to it, Answer for it. I have
here opposed a Door of Safety, to their Door of Hope; with the Submission of my
Private Thoughts to due, and Fair Correction. I am no Public Minister, but
one that Truly Loves his Country, and that heartily says, GOD SAVE THE KING.

As to Their Jewish, and Ungrateful Revilings of their Lawful Prince; That
Prince, who to save the Lives of these Unmannerly Rebels, has exposed his Own;
I shall not trouble my self to Reply upon it. His Blessed Father, was ended with
a Superlative, and Fatal Tenderness; The Best of Men, and the most Unhappy of
Kings met in the same Person. That our present Sovereign may be as Little the
Latter, as he is Perfectly the Former, shall be my Earnest and Concluding
Prayer.

January 15. 1661.
FINIS.

