A FAITHFVL DISCOVERY of a treacherous Design OF MYSTICAL ANTICHRIST DISPLAYING
CHRIST'S BANNERS, But attempting to lay waste Scriptures, Churches, Christ,
Faith, Hope, etc. and establish Paganism in ENGLAND. Seasonably given in a
Letter to the Faithful in and near to Beverley. Containing an Examination of
many Doctrines of the People called QUAKERS in Yorkshire, Together with a
Censure of their Way, and several Items concerning the designs of God, Satan,
and Men, in these things, recommended to the consideration of them who are in
good earnest for Christ.

London, Printed by H. Hills for Thomas Brewster, and are to be sold at the
Three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard, 1653.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To the Reader.
IF in any age the devil has transformed 2 Cor. 11. 1. 3, 14.
himself into an Angel of light, or his Apostles and Ministers have transformed
themselves into the Apostles and Ministers of Christ, They have done so in this
Apostatizing age, in which we live; yea, they have been more cunning, subtle,
and seemingly spiritual in transforming themselves in this age, than ever they
were in any foregoing generation: Satan is now acting his part upon his stage,
with all deceivableness of unrighteousnes, and shall continue to act like unto
himself, and beyond his former actings, until the Angel cast him into Rev* 20.
3.
the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he may
deceive the Nations no more, etc. For by how much he shall perceive his Kingdom
nearer unto a period, by so much every day he and his Factors will show
themselves politickly active for the supporting and exalting of his hellish and
tottering Kingdom; and as God has, does, and will enlighten his Saints and
witnesses more and more toward the end of Antichrists Reign, and the beginning
of the calling of the Jews to Christ; so the Dragon, that old Serpent, has,
does, and will more and See Call. de sur Sect. Liber.
more fill his Agents, and instruments, with a diabolical spirit of madness, and
delusions. Hence it is, that whenever God has drawn near unto any Country
or City in the light of his Gosspel, to dispel Popish and Antichristian
darkness, the Devil has usually in such Countries, and Cities, raised up a
sort of new and spiritual Antichristians, which are far worse than those
gross and Popish Antichristians, who live in the midst of Antichrists
Babylonish territories and dominions. And as the summers sun is accompanied
with diverse catterpillers, and venomous Creatures, so many venomous principles
and practices have discovered themselves in the profession and lives of some,
where the Gospel has gloriously shined for the inlivning and enlightening Ecl.
7. 25.
of others. Wherefore as Solomon did apply his heart to know wisdom, and the
wickedness of folly and madness; so Christians are not to be discommended, who
do endeavor to know the mystical errors of the new Antichristians, which are
risen up among us, that they may avoid them; and may be furnished with
abilities to declare against them. And the pains and labors of such are worthy
of commendation, who by their tongues or pens, do endeavor to lay open the
riddles and mysteries of Satan and his instruments unto a discovery. Among whom
these Brethren are to be justly, and deservedly honored; who have pithily,
solidly and Christianly, discovered some of the serpentine errors, and delusive
mysteries of the Familists and Quakers. The blessing of him who dwelt in the
Bush, be upon the endeavors of these Brethren, and prosper multum in parvo.
this small book, which has much in it for the battering of error, and the
maintaining of truth according to Scripture, which is the prayer of us, who can
subscribe our selves, Friends to all Saints.

Christopher Feak.
John Simpson.
George Cokayn.
Lawrence Wise.

To the READER.
Reader,
PRovidence has by sundry steps led us thus to write, and after that to
publish these Papers, Beside our first intentions which aimed them for the use
and Edification of certain our Friends near us, wherefore thou have them so
directed.

The occasion of our writing was the dispersing of some Papers amongst us, out
of which we drew those Doctrines and Exhortations which we examine. And having
the advantage of some former knowlodge of that way which helped us to look
beyond their insinuating expressions, and principles, more accommodated to the
relish of many Professors, we took warning (though it is our grief and
hinderance) to hold a sword in one hand while we build with the other.

We do not mention the names of Persons, nor transcribe their writings, because
they are well known to them to whom we wrote, and we know our innocence in not
accusing falsely; Besides that since we wrote we have seen some papers printed
containing the like things.

To insist on that wherein they differ not from us we think it needless,
besides that the difference is so great that we cannot comfortably in this
place join in any testimony with them.

Our brevity craves thy better attention, but we do advertise thee that the
Deceipts lie so much out of thy sudden view (if thou have read their papers)
that if thou have not patience to weigh our Reasons, and ponder our Scriptures,
thou may do the Truth and us wrong, and thy self also; yet may thou suppose
that we would not thus write if we were not ready to pass by the scornful,
despise the railers, and answer the sober that shall further examine us, or in
modesty reprove us.

If thou think our labors might have been spared, and that these delusions
will fall of themselves shortly, we say Amen to it as thy Prayer; in the mean
time we may not despise a Temptation, or neglect our friends. If thou blame us
for not doing it so well as thou could do, or wishest it were, bear with the
extravagancy of our love, and if thou will own the sin of thy silence, we will
own the shame of our weaknesses, who indeed have neither skill nor time to do
as we would.

Nevertheless such as we are, we would be faithful in a little, and if our
God will accept our mite, and bless our labors herein for the discovery of
Error, and preserving our Christian Friends known and unknown (if not also for
the recovery of them who are in the snare) then have we some answer of our
prayers, and recompense of our labors, who ever shall be (through Grace)

The Lords and his Peoples more than our own, JOHN POMROY, PAUL GLISSEN, JOSEPH
KELLET.


The Courteous Reader is desired to amend the misprintings here mentioned, As
PAge 2 line 33. for same, read fan, p. 14. l. 19. blot out his, p. 20. l.
31. for varily, r. verily, p. 21. l. 2. for to his, r. in his, l 4 for it, r.
them, p. 26. l. 19. for of Jesus, r. to Jesus, p. 33. l. 1. for at it last may
becomes, r. at last (it may be) comes, p. 35* l. 6. for fits, r. fits, p. 37.
l. 8. for what this, r. what of this, p. 44. l. ^4. for propiety* r. propriety,
p. 46. l. 1. for boasts, r. boasted, p. 51. l. 10. for all false witness, r. all
false; witness -- p. 46. l. 4. for proof this, r. l proof of this.

To our dear and Christian Friends in and near to Beverly, who are of doubtful
mind in this hour of Temptation, enquiring after the way of God more perfectly,
which some say is found among the Separated people, called Quakers, Truth and
Peace be multiplied.
GOD, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, having given us, of
his mere grace, to know something of the mystery of Godliness, and the mystery
of Iniquity (which now works) has moved our compassions toward the scattered
Lambs of the Flock of God round about us, and engaged us to overlook our
weaknesses, and (in this time of sinful silence) to cast in our Testimony to
the Truth of the Gospel, while some privily bring in damnable heresies, denying
the Lord who bought them.

We cannot wonder, though we cannot but grieve, that many simple-hearted should
listen to the voice of Strangers, who come in the Semblance of Christ,
remembering that we our selves have been tempted, and some of our feet had
almost slipped. Now therefore by our faith, hope, and rejoicing in Christ
Jesus, and from our observations and experiences of Satan's devices, we testify
to you, that the Deceiver of the Nations has found out a way wherein one may
retire from the Faith and not be called a Back-slider, but a Christian of
Higher growth. His designs are deep and desperate, but in subserviency thereto,
he does (through the sufferance of God) make use of some (otherwise
wel-meaning, yet overhasty of belief) as stales and Coies to bring the simple
into his Nets, while he in others lies in wait to deceive. Prove. 1. 17.


We shall not mention those doctrines of devils, which some embrace, and the
basphemous notions of religious Atheism, though those are but higher degrees of
that light, or rather darkness, which we shall advertize you of in these
papers; but we shall examine certain doctrines and exhortations which are
contained in sundry papers which are scattered in the Country, and asserted by
some who go about deceiving, and being deceived.

We do confess that there are many words of Truth, and some of precious
concernment, that come from some of them, and sundry things which have an aim,
as it were, and guess, at the state of the Church, when the New Jerusalem
comes down from Heaven: But what design the Deceiver has to forestall those
blessed Expectations, or bring an odium on them, and by those cloking truths to
out off many corrupt notions, will be manifested in our discourse.

Surely could we see a simple tendency in those warnings, rebukes,
exhortations, which they abound with, to awaken this perverse Generation to
look after Jesus Christ, and direct their steps into the way of righteousness
and true peace, we should rejoice that there were so many touched at heart, and
brought to the Lord, though they walk not with us: nevertheless we shall not
forbear to own what words of truth we shall find, though we think it meet,
especially intending brevity, not to insist upon those doctrines wherein they
differ not from us, for the word of the Lord came not out from them, neither
came it only to them; but where they seem to us to be mingled with deceits,
those whatsoever, in what moderation the truth allows, we shall make to pass
under the same, For what is the chaff to the wheat? says the Lord.

Now dearly beloved we beseech you to observe how by a kind of Majesty of
seeming Oracle they do, as by authority, sit down in the chair of Judgment,
and as the only skillfull to direct the paths of the children of men they give
their advice, saying,

Forsaking all your Teachers without.

Mind the light which is in you, which they say is Christ, and --

is Pure, and --

That it discovers every evil which arises in the heart, and that Power
accompanies that light in them that yield up themselves to it, to subdue all
the evil it discovers; they also say, this light is the sure word of prophecy,
and --

The Anointing from the holy one, so that they that have it, as they say all
men have, need not that any man teach them, but as that Unction teaches them,
which is truth and no ly.

O how is their wine mingled with water, until it lose its virtue, its color,
though it keep the name of Gospel! It must always be remembered that they
intend that light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the world,
wherefore this exhortation is by them directed to all them John 1. 9.
expressly who are the children of this world.

Now let him that hears when they say Mind the light in you, and observe not
any outward Teachers or teachings, consider

1. Whether this makes not the Scriptures of the Testament of God unnecessary;
which through the abounding Mercy of the Father of Lights are Superadded
revelations Ephe. 3. 3, 4, 5.
of his mind and love, which are no where found but there.

2. Whether this Admonition brings not down the glorious mysteries of the
Scriptures to the Censure of the Spirit of light in Man, yea in every man, and
so natural men; although the Scriptures say they grope after God, as men at
midnight Act. 17. 27.
or without sight.

3. Whether this intends not to disoblige you from every rule or duty which is
not yet in your mind, leaving you to be guided by Conscience, whether rightly
or wrongly informed, there being no appeal left from the apprehensions of our
uncertain minds to any standing, certain rule without, contrary to Isa. 8. 20.

4. Whether this establish not Heathenish Philosophy, which seeks the repair of
Natural light, without Scripture principles, as equal with the Scriptures,
which some in this way elsewhere who are scholars have avouched, although Paul
rejected it, Col. 2. 7. 8.

We write thus from a Godly jealousy, lest as the Serpent 2 Cor. 11. 3. 4. 16.
beguiled Eve, first weakening the Authority of the word, afterward denying the
Truth of it, so he should deal with some of you.

5. Consider whether this take not away the advantage of having the Oracles of
God (Romans 3. 2.) which was committed to the Jews to transmit unto the
Generations to come, that the Gentiles might be acquainted with, and built upon
Ephesians. 2. 20.
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles.

6. We leave it further to the spiritual to judge how far this reflects
disparagement on Jesus, who owned, expounded, and commanded to search the
Scriptures, answered Satan and Men out of them.

7. Also how it reproacheth the End of Gifts, Ephesians. 4. 12. for the perfecting
of the Saints (who are far beyond natural men) and the order of the Churches.

8. And the ordinary standing way of God for the Conversion of sinners by the
Preachers or Publishers of the Gospel, Romans 10. 14, 15.

For if every one that comes into the World has light in him sufficient to
salvation, and that they ought to mind that light only, what less can follow
than what has been propounded?

But you are not ignorant, Brethren and Beloved, that there are sundry things
to be attended as Gods will and mind, in Commands, Prophecies, Promises, etc.
which are not known by any light of nature, of which sort is the whole doctrine
of Faith, and Hope, or the Gospel,

Which never entered into the heart of Man, in the 1 Cor. 2. 9. 14.
highest seize of Nature, to conceive, neither can the natural man receive
them; neither can the prudence of man in the flesh be subject to, or in amity
Romans 8. 7.
with them, but opposes the hearing of Faith, until Gods outstretched Arm work
faith, accounting it Isa. 53. ^. 1 Cor 1 23 (...). Col. 1. 21. 22.
Foolishness; we being, until Faith, alienated and Enemies to God in our
Minds, reconciled only by or in the body of the flesh of the man Christ Jesus,
who is God blessed for ever.

Romans 2. 14.
There is indeed a Law from Mount Sinai, which is a repetition of that Law
which was once written in man's heart, which cannot but own what it could not so
fully dictate; If then that light in man was not sufficient to its proper end,
namely to direct and judge, in matters of Moral Righteousness, but it was
necessary that the Law should enter (on Mount Sinai) as an exact rule, that
offenses, Romans 5. 20. Romans 7. 9. Romans 3. 19, 20, 21. Isa. 2. 2. 42. 16. Heb.
10. 20.
which before were not manifest, might abound in the eyes of the Sinner, how
much less could that Law which brings the knowledge of sin and the curse,
justify and glorify? Wherefore the Gospel or Law from Mount Sion, the Law of
Faith, leads us in a Newway, by the Mediator who came to do what the Law on
Mount Sinai, or in man's heart, could not do, Romans 8. 3.

Hence is it that man naturally runs to Mount Sinai for righteousness and life,
in his personal obedience, which these men put you upon, and man so easily
closes with, contrary to Phil. 3. 9.
the Gospel, which is not first known by seeing within, but hearing tidings
without, Isa. 53. 1. Romans 10. 14. Luke 24. 47.

As for the nations that never heard, or do not hear the Gospel and Scriptures,
we will not enter into Gods Secrets, but this we are bold to say,

Isa. 53. 11.
1. That the knowledge or Faith of Christ justifyes, and there is no other name
under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, Act. 4. 12.

2. But we conceive not how Christ is preached out but by them who bring the
word of God, whose feet are beautiful. Romans 10. 14. 17. It is true that as the
Sun, described Psalm. 19. does from East to West proceed to enlighten the world,
so has the Sun of righteousness (whose Tabernacle is in the Heaven of the
Church) enlightened the Eastern Countries, which this Sun has left in the dark,
though he now shines amongst us. Thus is the word nigh us, Christ in his Gospel
coming to our doors, and not leaving us to travel to Jerusalem (as of old) to
hear the word of the Lord, which yet is nigh to us (though he be in heaven and
we on earth) by Faith, ver. 8. 9. Ephesians. 3. 17.

3. But yet if it should be evinced to us that the Gospel (...) Col. 1. 23.
was preached in every creature, yet it proves not that it is so preached in
every individual man, woman and child, as The Preposition (...) often signifies
inter, ad etc. It is also preached to every creature, that is, it was sent to
All, and not any one is excluded by the straightness of the commission of
Gospel publishers, as Mark 16. 15. Joh 14. 28.
the Ministry of Paul (in the same verse) shall be needless, or that it was so
before the Incarnation of Christ when as this mystery was hidden from Ages and
Generations (v. 26.) and was manifested by preaching, as we read Tit. 1. 3.
Compare this also with the sixth verse of the said 1 Col.

As for this nation in which we live,

1. It cannot be denied but that in England the most have in their minds the
history of the Scripture, though they had not known it but for outward teaching.

2. We know also that the Scripture Light which they have attained is not
minded by them as the word of Christ which shall judge them; which it were well
they were more told of, and did believe.

3. We acknowledge that every unregenerate Man has more power than he does
improve to obey light.

4 It may not be rejected by us as unlikely, That God by his Spirit, which
works by way of Remembrance, may bring to mind words of Gospel Truth, which a
man has read or heard without understanding or affection, and thereby quicken
and turn men without any actual reading or hearing. Yet in such a case,

1. It is the Spirit brings to God by Faith in Christ.

2. And it is by Scripture light, even the testimony of the Apostles and
Prophets, which once was read or heard, else he could not know it.

3. It is not Gods ordinary way, who usually for diverse ends which might be
mentioned, for the conversion of sinners makes use of his people and servants,
according to the standing appointments of the Kingdom of Christ.

Whereby you may see the aim of these Doctrines (as managed by them) is to
hinder the Gospel, pervert the faith, and destroy at once all the good which
ever was done or is like to be (through the grace of God) by a Godly Ministry.

Nay how this Tenet fights with their own practices, who leave not men to the
light in them, but by words and papers industriously suggest to them their
apprehensions; And though they often quote the Scriptures,

Yet, 1. it is but partially,

And 2. not as the ground of their Faith,

But 3. chiefly as a staff to beat others with, or to shoot with them in their
own bow.

But blessed is that people whose ears hear that Gospel which Peter preached
Acts 10. even of Christ dying at Jerusalem for sinners, and rising again for
justification of all them who shall believe, etc. yea rather blessed are they
who receive it in word and power also, 1 These. 1. 5. and that not as the word
of man (though ministered by man) but as it is indeed the word of God, cha. 2.
13. And blessed are they to whom God sends his Servants, as Paul, to speak to
them, and watch over them, for if by any means Satan can, he will hinder the
people of such a benefit, as ver. 18. For they are to be esteemed highly,

1. In love;

2. For their works sake;

3. Because they are overseers of them in the Lord,

4. And do admonish them, 1 These. 5. 12, 13.

5. And it is but ingenuity to acknowledge such who addict themselves to the
Ministry of the Saints, by whom also their spirits are refreshed 1 Cor. 16. 28.

But we shall proceed to enquire into that doctrine which says, The light in
you (which also enlighteneth every man that comes into the world) is Christ.
WHat then is become of the Person of the Mediator, the man Christ Jesus? 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 7. 24. Mind how they do secretly withdraw you from eying his
death, resurrection, intercession, etc. for us, without us, while they make
that (at best) but a shadow of what is done in us. So making the first and
second Adam not to be two men, but two things in every man.

Dear Friends, does nor the Scripture speak to Saints (not every man) when it
says Christ in you the hope of Glory, Col. 1. 27. and that it was a mystery
hidden from ages and generations, that (when the Partition wall was broken
down) the Gentiles should be fellow-heires, and that it was manifested now, but
only to the Saints to whom God would show the riches of the glory of this
Mystery, Christ in you, Collossians, Gentiles?

Moreover Paul speaks of the Saints, when he says 2 Cor. 5. 26, 27. We know no
man after the flesh, no not Christ, (...).
which words after the flesh, may be referred to know as well as to Man, and
then it will be thus much, We know no man carnally or in the judgment of the
flesh, no not Christ; Besides it is a most evidently sound interpretation, We
know no man as Jew or Gentile, circumcised or uncircumcised, bond or free, or
in any such carnal consideration, to be advantaged or disadvantaged by it in
order to salvation, but as he is a new creature or not. Nay though the Apostles
have seen and known the Lord Jesus, a Man, a visible Shepherd, an outward
Teacher and instructor of them, and they had looked on him as the Jews kinsman
after the flesh, and thought afterward that the Jews should only have the
benefit of his coming, and that he would then have restored the Kingdom to
Israel, but now henceforth (even since his Ascension, and since our Faith in
him) we for our parts know him so no more, but if any man be in Christ, or of
his Body, he does so know him, as to become by this Knowledge and Faith a New
Creature: as also we read Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22, 23.

But if any man contend to destroy our faith, and slight the person of our
glorified Savior (for some of them say Christ without will do us no good) let
such a man know,

(...)
That the Body of Jesus Christ at Jerusalem was offered up to God for an
Atonement once for all, Heb. 10. 10. and that no man comes to God but by Him,
He. 7. 24. 10. 19* and that in this name only is salvation and remission of
sins to be preached, Acts 10. 42. and that he that abides not in this
Doctrine is a Deceiver and Antichrist, and may not be received into your
houses, 2 John 9. 10. nay that we are not ashamed of that Christ whom the Jews
slew and hanged 1 Cor. 1. 21 23.
on a Tree, nor the foolishness of this preaching, whereby he does and shall
save them that believe.

Far be it from us to think that Christ is equally God incarnate in that Son
of Mary, and in all Saints (nay in Ioh. 6. 51. 63. 64. Gal. 2^ 20, 1 Cor. 11.
25.
the whole Creation, as some say) for how is his Flesh and Blood given for the
life of the world, taken and eaten by Faith, and lived by; exhibited in the
Lords Supper for a memorial from age to age until He come?

How near such come to trample on the blood of the Covenant as a Common thing,
Heb. 10. 29. we leave it to them (...).
with fear and trembling to examine. In the mean time it is most freely
confessed by us, that God is the Father of Lights (...) ut (...) non ut (...).
and lives, Jam. 1. 17. Psalm. 36. 9. natural and spiritual, and that the
Eternal word lightens every man's candle, the spirit of man being the candle of
the Lord, Prove. 20. 27. whereby man sees the Eternal power and Godhead of God,
Romans 1. 20. But nothing of the Mystery of the FATHER, and CHRIST as Mediator
is seen but only by the children of God, John 1. 13, 14* John 16. 3. Matthew. 11.
27. Col. 2. 2.

Further they say, This light (before mentioned) is Pure.
But how does vain man justify what God condemns? and would persuade us that
Nature is not corrupted, but that the soul is Pure, and by its flesh comes to
be clogged, and by ill examples (pride and passion etc. begetting or rather
stirring up the like in others) diverted from the rule of righteousness in the
mind.

Its true, if the eye were single, the body would be full of Romans 3. 11. Luke
11. 35. 1 These. 5. Ephesians. 5. 8.
light, as when the bright shining of a Candle does give thee light; but as the
case stands, the Scripture that concludes all under sin, concludes all under
ignorance, saying, There is None that understands. Their light in them is
darkness, and they children of the Night (for a dim or bright candle 1 Cor.
3. 19. 20.
makes not day) and of darkness, yea darkness it self. Their wisdom is
foolishness, and the eyes of their understanding fast closed, until the
spirit of wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of Christ open them, Ephesians.
1. 17, 18.

(...).
Wherefore, as the Disciples were cleansed by the word of the Gospel which
Christ had spoken to them, Ioh. 15. 3. so we conclude that the unbelieving are
blind, and impure in their consciences, Tit. 1. 15. which concludes directly
that the light of, or in conscience, before faith, is not pure.

Moreover they affirm, that This light discovers every evil as it arises in
the heart.
WE answer, that the light which lightens every man that comes into the world,
discovers not the greatest evil, which is unbelief* only those sins which are
against the Moral Law, as Pride, covetousness, oppression, etc. which these
cry out against, but never against unbelief, Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. I ohn 8. 24.
which is the condemning sin, and does bind the guilt of all transgressions on
the back of a sinner.

Now as the evil it discovers is Legal, so is the righteousness this light
brings in; these principles directly establishing the works of the Law.

But though the Law teach Sin-denyall, yet its the Gospel teaches Self-denial,
even to live out of our own righteousness (though performed by the grace of
Christ) seeking peace and righteousness in and from him who dyed for us at
Jerusalem, Phil. 3. 9. Romans 5. 1, 9.
who is now exalted to the Throne of the Heavenly Majesty, from whence he sends
the spirit of truth to convince the world of sin (and we hope will convince
some of these deluded ones) because they believe not in HIM. John 16. 9.


But concerning other evils, we testify, That when the Lord opened our eyes
with his eye salve, we saw iniquity abounding like the sand on the Sea shore,
and yet grace superabounding. We are not like to know how much we are beholding
to our glorious Redeemer, who has borne them away, though they are
innumerable, Psalm. 40. 12. Who knows then O Lord the Errors of his life, and
his secret faults? for though some may dare to say their hands are Psa. 19. 12.
Prove. 20. 9.
clean, yet who can say his heart is clean, which is deceitful above all
things, who can know it, Ier. 17. 9. though he watch its motions.

We intend not in all this to cherish the sluggishnesse and watchlessnesse of
people, but to show to man the impossibility of re-entering Paradise (by
obedience) the same way that he left it (by disobedience) or that by any less
light than of the Sun we can discover those secret sins, especially unbelief,
which are not discoverable by the Candlelight of conscience as it comes into
the world.

Yet further they boldly conclude, that Power accompanies that light to destroy
every evil as it appears in them that yield up themselves to it, and watch
that their vain minds draw them not from abiding in the pure light of Christ,
Thus, they say, is help laid on one mighty to save, even Jesus Christ, who is
the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him.
IT were a small thing, O all ye that pass by, if we and our names should
sleep in the dust in everlasting silence, and contempt. But will not the stones
cry out if we hold our peace while these deceits seem to lay all upon Christ,
and his Spirit, while as in truth they lay nothing at all upon him? Is the
light of Nature, the light of Christ as Mediator, nay Christ himself, and the
strength that accompanies that light, the strength of Christ? Then how is man
become the Author of his own salvation, while you change the name and call it
Christ?

Moreover, here is jealousy administered to the eye of an experienced soul,
notwithstanding their fair speeches, by laying such stresse upon the watchings
of man, as if Man rightly do his part by watching and yielding up himself to
the light in him, he shall be ruled and directed by it, and his vain and evil
thoughts shall be brought into subjection, yea so, that he may possibly
compass an exact obedience to the Law of Christ, or dictates in his heart, in
this life, and so ly down in the bosom of the Father in the everlasting rest
which is prepared for the People of God, which rest these assertors are
displeased at if we refer the Saints for, to the resurrection and coming of our
Lord.

Now however this light so shining in man being attended, and the evils it
discovers being watched, and opposed by the power which accompanies this light,
which is Free Will, may be brought to a mavelous Reformation, yet it reaches
not the work of Regeneration (which may be collected out of this assertion duly
minded:) Moreover it reserves to Man a power of turning away from the Lord
Jesus, and by his disobedience or vain mind, notabiding in this light, he may
fall from that eternal salvation, which began to be wrought in him by the power
of light while he did abide in it, as this Doctrine implies.

It is further observable, that there is no mention made in any of their papers
we have yet seen, of eternal salvation from the wrath to come, or condemnation
of Hell, by any Atonement, price, or purchase, or blood-sacrifice of our
Mediator without us, but of an Eternal salvation from the Dominion of evil, by
Jesus Christ, who is eternal life in us which we partake of as we abide in him
(in obedience) Thus making this eternal light of life to be in every man, but
not every man in it; which a man may truly, in their sense, be said to partake
of, and again to fall short of, as he is guided by this light, or his vain
mind, every day.

But having given you the import of these sayings, we shall proceed for your
further satisfaction in this Argument to declare our faith and experiences,
leaving you to judge in your selves how far they agree or differ from us, or
rather whether they or we do differ from the revealed mind of Christ.

Mat. 28. 20 Ioh. 16. 8. Ioh. 5. 21.
First we believe and know, that, according to the word of Promise, there does
go forth Power from the Father and from Jesus Christ, who by the Eternal
Spirit, does quicken whom he will, by the Gospel, 1 These. 1. 5. so he makes his
Gospel his Power, his Arm, Romans 1. 16. Isa. 53. 1.

Isa. 30. 18. Luke 15. 4. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Thus does he who waits to be gracious seek and save lost sheep, beseech and
overcome rebellious sinners, who did not, could not, pity themselves.

The day will discover how in a mystery the work of salvation is conducted
through those intermissions in which for some months and years sometimes a
soul once awakned sleeps again, until the resolved outgoings of Free grace at
length quicken, and work Faith unfeigned in such a one; so that if thou can
tell how the bones do grow in the womb of Eccles. 11. 5
her that is with child, then may thou come a little nearer to trace out
this work of God.

We are then the children of God, being not born of blood, John. 1. 12, 13.
or obtaining this privilege by a carnal descent from, or good education under,
godly parents; nor of the will of the flesh, which is will composing it self to
religious observations for carnal ends; nor of the will of man, though
improved, heightened to the utmost of humane activity (though to close with the
Gospel sound by power of free will) but of his own will begat he us by the
word of truth, James 1. 18.

Indeed here is the hiding of his power under exhortations, admonitions,
rebukes, persuasions, offers, and promises in the Gospel, because, as all
creatures glorify God in their kind, so man, as rational must glorify God his
Maker* in closing with the Chief Good and eternal life in the Redeemer, which
is therefore so offered as the most reasonable thing, most feeding, perfecting,
and making happy, the capacious and necessitous souls of men. Yet the secret
interposures of Almightynesse in his regeneration are so undeniably affirmed in
Scriptures, and sealed up in the experiences of the sanctified, Romans 9 16.
Ephesians. 1. 9. 1 Cor. 4 7. 6. 11. Tit. 3. 5.
that it does appear, it was not their Watchings, strivings, willings, runnings,
but his mercy and compassions, according to the mystery of his will, that
engaged him to make a difference where he found none; yea often taking of the
worst of men to bring them unto Christ, that it might yet more fully appear to
all men that of his Mercy he saves us.

Secondly, But in the next place when any soul by this Preventing grace is
brought to Christ, having once tasted how gracious the Lord is in his dear Son,
he is taught to 1 Pet 2. 3. Isa. 32 2.
wait on Christ for the Renewings of strength, morning by morning, and does
desire the milk of the Word, that he might grow thereby.

Thus does the remembrance of the loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the sights
of his glory in the true sanctuary, engage him (as David Psa. 63. 1, 2, 6, 8.)
to seek, wait and follow on Hosea 6. 3.
to know the Lord.

Yet to the praise of his Grace, the Father does not only meet halfway his
returning Prodigals, or backsliding children, but in the continuance of his
preventing Mercy, seeks, saves, calls upon his own while they are in the
wilderness, forgeting Psalm. 119. 176. Jer. 3. 1, 12. Is. 30. 21. Is. 64. 5.
Psalm. 84.
their duty, or turning out of his way to the right hand or to the left.

Its true, he that waits cannot be exempt from the reproof of the sloathful
servant, if he be not exercised in Gods ways, as Prayers, Meditations,
Assemblies of Saints, watching, obedience, etc. Thus he that waits and walks
shall renew his strength to wait still until the Lord come as the latter and
Is. 40. last 16. Hosea 6.
the former Rain upon the earth. But though this be Man's duty, yet it is the
pleasure of the Lord to make his wind blow when he lists, and check, chide,
and call home the wanderings of his people, to make his grace exceeding glorious.

Thirdly, Nevertheless though we are tied to all Means, yet has the Lord tied
himself to none, so as that he may not in his Sovereignty withhold mercy until
his own time.

But if power always go with light, what shall we think of Paul who found the
Law of his Members warring and leading him captive against his Will, though he
gave up himself to the Law of his inward man? Romans 7. 14. unto the end.

Surely, the topstone of the whole frame of Spiritual graces and privileges is
not laid until the resurrection and second coming of Jesus Christ, which is
cleared in the Scriptures calling it our Adoption (as it was written of Christ,
and of Romans 8. 23. Acts 13. 33 Col. 3. 3. 2 Cor. 5. 7. Tit. 2. 13. Romans 8. 2. 1
Pet. 1. 3. 1 John 3. 2.
the day of his resurrection, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee)
also making our Life to be hidden, until then; stating the life of a Christian
now to be in Faith, and hope, which looks beyond death, and charactering a true
Saint by his waiting, looking for, and loving, the appearing of Christ, Heb.
10. 37, 38. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. Heb. 9. 28.

Gal. 3. 26. 1 Pet. 1. 16. Gal. 6. 2.
Blessed are they who are the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus* though
all their life time they be found groaning under the burden of sin, buffetings
of Satan, and are in heaviness (if need be) through various Temptations, which
are to make them vile and little in their own eyes; knowing what 2 Cor. 12. 9
makes them to differ; And that Jesus might perfect his strength in their
weakness, and his Grace in their guiltiness; 1 Pet. 1. 7. Heb. 6. 19. Romans 8.
24. 2 Cor. 1. 20, 21, 22. Heb. 11. 13 Romans 4. 6. 2 Timothy 4 7.
And might try their faith, which shall be found unto praise and glory at the
appearing of Christ, the hope of which is as an Anchor to their souls, which
Saves them from sinking under their pressures, and perishing in their storms.
Then shall they that now die not having received the Promises (which are sure
to all the seed) receive them, and the Crown of righteousness at that day who
fight the good fight, finish their course, and keep the faith.

This puts not the day of the Lord far from us (as some, charge us) no more
than did Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who saw the Promises a far off, and
because they apprehended themselves not likely to inherit them in this life on
earth, therefore they confessed themselves Pilgrims and strangers, whose
portion was not in this life, Heb. 11. 16.

Nevertheless as we look for complete victory over all, and the last of
enemies Death, at the resurrection, so we are to hasten to it, (2 Pet. 3. 12.)
in all holy conversations and godlinesses, if by any means we might attain unto
the resurrection (Phil. 3. 10, 11.) by being as like Christ as may be, who in
that he died, he died unto sin and the world, and in Romans 6.
that he lives, he lives unto God; though for the changing our vile,
corruptible, mortal, natural bodies, like unto his glorified body, the Apostle
looked not for it, nor his Crown, until the coming of Christ. Phil. 3. 21.

But that we may take the foxes, and the little foxes that spoil our vines
which began to have tender grapes let us yet make search and see how for the
driving on the great design of overthrowing the Gospel as administered by Man,
and weakening the Authority of the holy Scriptures, they seek to persuade all
Men, that that light in them is the Gospel, and the sure Word of Prophecy, to
which they would do well to take heed, until the day dawn, and the day star
arise in their hearts.
It may be the Accuser of the Brethren will say we are zealous in our own
cause, though our Consciences tell us we ought to be angry (yet without sin)
when we see the way of life stopped up from the children of men, which we doubt
not to demonstrate to the seeing eye, in reference to the Gospel it self, and
its ministration.

First then to manifest that this assertion puts men quite beside the way of
Salvation; We pray you to consider, that if it be not the voice of the Gospel,
but of the Law man's heart, who has no more light than the eternal Word
enlightens him Joh. 1. 9.
with (as every one that comes into the world) then who so bids him seek
righteousness, peace and life, in attendance and obedience thereto, puts man
beside the way of life, Romans 9. 32. Romans 4. 5, 14. Gal. 2. 16, 21.

But that it is the voice of the Law, and not the Gospel, has been proved
before by sundry couched Arguments, as, that Romans 2.
Scripture and experience makes the moral Law the Counterpane of the Law
engraven in every man's Conscience, Also that Man naturally establishes his own
self-righteousnesse, which is of the Law. Beside the book of Natural Conscience
is the Phil. 3. 9. (...)
Creation and Providence, which administer in themselves to the discursive
faculty the knowledge of the Godhead as binding Man to glorify God as God, not
as Father, Savior, or Romans 1. 20.
Redeemer. Should we here grant, that he that walks up to the Law or light of
Nature, shall have the light of Grace or Gospel revealed to him, (although we
never read nor knew the Gospel bestowed on any Person or People upon that
account, Gal. 3. 2.
or the Spirit received by the works of the Law) yet we do more than doubt
whether ever there stood before the throne of Glory, or shall, any such who
without Gospel Light and grace, did obey the Law, please God, or rightly
approach Heb. 11. 6. Romans 4. 24, 25. 2 Pet. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 5.
unto him; for we know that faith in Jesus, as dying for us, and rising for our
justification, is the first stone in the spiritual building, and the Fountain
of Love (Man loving God because he is first beloved of God) without which man's
specious works, and most upright worships are abominations threapt on the
Lord. Wherefore the Lord builds not on the first Phil. 3. 6. Isa. 26. 16. 2
Cor. 5. 17
Adams foundations or Covenant of works (on which the higher man builds the
more loss he suffers when he is brought to Christ) but lays a Foundation in
Sion, even Christ, in the Law of Faith or Covenant of Grace, and thereupon
builds all things new.

Secondly, Moreover we add, that if this Position take away the true and proper
ministration of the Gospel, it must needs shut up the Kingdom of God from Men.
For what are good tidings if they be not told?

But to the best of our understandings by this Assertion is the ministration of
the Gospel taken away. For we do not know that ever the gospel was published or
promised to be made known, without the ministration of man, or without hearing;
But rather as Jesus Christ said, I am with you in teaching to the end of the
world; so intended he teaching to be to the end; also it was the Apostles care
that the truth might be committed from one to another from age to age, 2 Timothy
2* 2. likewise the promise is Isa. 59. the last verse, that the Word should not
depart from the mouth of Jesus Christ and his seed, and his seeds seed for
ever, and that the Spirit should accompany the word in the mouth of the seeds
seed or successive Saints from age to age.

We confess, that though reading the Scriptures or Scripture Truths in books
may be a means of Faith through the Holy Ghost working therewith, yet this may
be fitly comprehended under hearing of the Apostles and Prophets by their
writings, by which they being dead, yet speak, and does still confess the
Gospel administered by Man, and not by any other Creatures, or by secret
communication of light to the mind by God immediately, which these Assertors
affirm, and we shall have further occasion to examine.

We contend not herein for any particular sort of Men, or them who do most
readily call themselves the Ministers of the word of God, though we shall always
acknowledge the Order and Offices of the Church of God, but our chief
contention is for the Gospel as administered by Man, whether in word or writing,
as not knowing how any should believe unless they hear the Testimony of the
Apostles (John 17. 20.) or their Word.

For truly, we should bear more easily the laying aside of Man or his
Ministration (though none may adventure to do it but Christ) who has declared
his mind as we have observed and shall) if these that advance themselves above
him who is the true Christ did not aim to beguile you of the Scriptures
themselves, even while you are looking on, and think not so.

Wherefore while they say this Light or Gospel is within you, they proceed to
say it is the sure word of Prophecy.

Is then a Prophetic light in all men? or what does it prophecy? of life and
righteousness for sinners in a Mediator, or of Death because of disobedience?
or if this be the light that shines in a dark place, what is the day star and
the Sun of righteousness, if this be Christ, as was before affirmed by them?
But as the legs of the lame are not equal, no more are these parables; but that
we may show their distance from the truth rather than from themselves, we
beseech you to consider that by this means,

Either first, The Scriptures are laid aside, not only as not useful, but as
not true Scripture to you, nor truth to you, if they be not particularly
dictated in your hearts after the same manner as to them that wrote them. Thus
they call it a 2 Cor 3. chapter
dead letter (which word was applied to the Law) whereas though the ink and
paper be dead, yet the Truth or meaning 1 Cor. 1. 18
of those words is called the Power of God, and has a Majesty, Authority and
Grace above the words of man stamped upon it, and is said to convert, comfort,
quicken and make wise the soul, which is done no otherwise than by the
conjunction of the Word with the Power of God, Psalm 119. 50. 105.

Romans 15. 4. 1 Timothy 3. 15, 16.
Surely the Scriptures were written for our learning, and are able to make wise
unto Salvation through Faith in Christ, and may be used for Doctrine, Reproof,
Correction, and Instruction in righteousness, that the Man of God (or a man
who from God, or for God, is to attend upon the work of the Ministry (Any
Christian not excluded.)
) may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work. As for the expected
dictating the Scriptures by the Spirit to us as to the writers, it is
groundless, but we shall touch on that afterward.

Secondly, But if the evidence of Truth constrain them to return to the word of
the Scriptures as binding in it self and useful, yet by their Doctrine the
Scriptures are turned into Allegories, and so their frothie conceits, and
catches of wit, are established as the sure Word of Prophecy. Thus does the
deceiver suck the Eggs, and lay them in the nest again; and while they allow
the Scripture a nominal authority, yet it must not be heard but as their
conceivings put a sense upon it; and (in short) thus is the Scripture judged,
but is not admitted to judge spirits and apprehensions; but if they speak it
must be an oracle* and as the Pure testimony of Jesus (or the light in them)
which must be credited, but not disputed; of this more in the sequel. This
calls to mind a sentence in one of Luthers Letters; varily (says he) God must
incessantly be implored with fear, humility, and earnest supplication that we
may have his assistance and protection; otherwise truly it may soon come to
pass that the Devil will present before our eyes such a Phantasm, that we
should swear it were the true Holy Ghost it self, as not only those ancient
Heretics, but in our time also examples which have been and still are great
and dreadful do forewarn. This he wrote concerning this Generation that we
contend against, which began to his Time.

Some dare not quite lay aside the Scriptures, neither turn it into Allegories,
yet do not look in them to learn, because they think it is to build up
themselves in Carnal knowledge, which darkens the workings of the Spirit, and
again, because they judge that none can open its seals but the Lamb, and
therefore they will not meddle* at least not to search for understanding therein,
until the Spirit in them open it to them.

But let us consider,

1. Jesus Christ spoke many things to his disciples which they understood not
at that time until after his resurrection, Luke 18. 34.
and the fulfilling of them: which doubtless he would not have done, if his
wisdom had not judged it meet to treasure up knowledge in their memories for
hereafter, though they had not the present understanding of them, or present
benefit by them.

2. Our blessed Savior calls them fools and slow of heart because they did
not believe All that the Prophets Luke 24* 25*
have spoken (which taxes them for negligence, non attendance, and willful
ignorance of the Scriptures, though the seals were not opened to them) and
beginning at Moses he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things
concerning himself, v. 27. which was a teaching of knowledge from the letter of
the word, and he opened their understandings that they might understand the
Scriptures, which they had surely (as they ought) read before.

Likewise it is observable that the Lord seeing the Eunuch Acts 8. 32, etc.
reading a Scripture in a conscientious way, for he was a worshipper of God, v.
27. though he understood it not, v. 30. sent unto him Philip to open that
Scripture, and from that to preach unto him Jesus: so will God do with others
in the like condition.

3. Instruction of children in the Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15. was commended
as a way blessed of God. In this way Ephesians. 6. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 6.
seeds are sown, which spring up it may be by way of remembrance long after, for
conversion or further increase in knowledge, which they sooner make when they
have the spirit, if they keep in memory what they read or heard in the time of
their ignorance.

Most true we find it, its not having but eating the Book does us good* and the
word does not profit us without faith; nevertheless searching, reading,
hearing the Scriptures is man's duty; faith and understanding is the gift of
God, yet ordinarily in this way, Prove. 2. 4, 5.

But to conclude, Concerning the real word of Prophecy 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. 2 Pet.
1. 19.
which signified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and the glory which
should follow, that was in due time fullfilled in its kind, the same Apostle
says, 2 Pet. 1. 17, 19.

1. Its more sure than a voice from the excellent gl ry, at least to others,
and more argumentative.

2. More to be attended than the words of one risen from the dead, Luke 16. 31.

3. Nay our Lord Jesus himself said, that if they believed not Moses Writings,
he did not expect they would believe his Words, John 5. 47.

Moreover they affirm, That this Light (the same which they say is in every one
that comes into the world) is the anointing from the Father, that they need
not teach one another.
HOw great a progress (O thou most holy) will thine Enemy and the Truths make,
if this doctrine were embraced?

Cant. 4. 12.
1. To break down the wall about the enclosed Garden, the Church, and make
Common the choicest favors of the King of Saints, who endeared himself of old
to his people by the promise of his Spirit, whereby we know that he dwells in
us, and we in him, because he has given us of his Spirit, John 16. 7. 1 John
4* 13.

This is the Spirit which the world cannot receive, because it sees him not,
neither knows him, Joh. 14. 17.

Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. 4. 30. Romans 8. 23.
This is the Spirit of Promise (promised to believers) whereby they are or shall
be sealed unto the Day of Redemption of the Saints (who are the Purchased
Possession) from the Power of the grave unto the Perfection of Liberty and
Glory; It being in the mean time the Earnest of our inheritance which is 2 Cor.
1. 22. 5. 5, 6.
reserved in heaven for us.

Is not this the oil wherewith our Lord and Savior was anointed above his
fellows, who are his brethren, partakers 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5.
from his fulness? Psalm. 45. 7. John 1. 16. Ephesians. 4. 7.

2. Moreover, how daringly does this attempt (if it were possible) to pull the
seven stars, Rev. 1. out of the hand of Christ? and how easily does this
conclude against Apostleship, Pastorship, Doctorship, Eldership, etc.
admonitions, exhortations, reproofs, and that with a high hand, although God
has set them in his Church for the perfecting of the Saints, and edifying of
the Body, and that until every member be added to his Church, and every member
already in it be grown unto the fulness of the measure of the stature of
Christ? Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 12. 28.

Let the wise judge whether this doctrine teach not one member to say to
another, I have no need of thee. But if 1 Cor. 12. 19, 20, 21.
any rejoice in the Covenant of Promise, we also will bless the name of the
Lord who has established the New Covenant upon better promises than the old
Covenant. For to the people whom he takes to himself, he will give not only a
Law without, but in their hearts also, and whereas in the dispensation
Mosaicall, there were many Brethren in that outward ministration who knew not
God, yet in the new Covenant there is not a Brother need say to his brother,
Know Hos. 4. 6.
the Lord* as if he was ignorant of the Lord, though the least of all Saints.
Yet surely if this promise exclude all outward Teachers, why should Christ give
Teachers to his Saints? and Peter stir up their minds (their pure minds) by way
of remembrance, and endeavor by his Epistle, that after his Ephesians. 4. 2 Pet.
3. 1. 1 chapter 12, 13.
decease they might have the Gospel in remembrance; and John write to Believers
of all ages in the Church, that they 1 Ioh. 2. 14 27.
abide in Christ, notwithstanding that they had the anointing in them?

All which expresses the unspeakable love of Christ, and care toward his
People, knowing their weaknesses, which favor man would reject to his own
loss.

3. But as if it were a small thing (O you that fear the Lord) thus courteously
to rob, and friendly to betray you, this doctrine proceeds (if the Authors
understand it) to cut off at once all instruction and reproof of Enemies and
ungodly; and states not a Brother but an Enemy and child of ignorance twice
over to have no need that any man say unto him, Know the Lord; because it
says, every man that comes into the world is enlightened by the light, which
is the Anointing, which, as these Doctrinists say, excludes all need of outward
Teaching.

Ioh. 16.
If any man say, The Spirit convinces the world of sin, therefore every one in
the world has the workings of the spirit.

It is answered, The holy anointing oil is not poured upon Exodus 30. 32. 26 etc.
man's flesh, nor the stranger, but on the Tabernacle, Altar, etc. Aaron and his
sons, which makes this Mercy peculiar to the Saints, the holy Priesthood, and
not common, 1 Pet. 2. 8. 54.
or like the convincing operations of the Spirit, which do not appropriate such
a Person or consecrate him to the Lord.

Besides, this Conviction does not exclude the Teachings of man, but rather
implies it, For it convinces of unbelief, which is not the sin of them that
have not heard, Rom 10.
Romans 10. ver. 14. He will say then, Have they not heard? Is not the word
nigh them, yea in their hearts? verse 8.

Most true, it is in the hearts of them that believe; yea verily their sound is
gone forth into all the earth, even Theirs who were preachers of Glad tidings,
v. 14, 15. who carried the report which was not believed of some, v. 16. even
the Acts 13. 38; 30 42* 45, 46* 47.
word of God, v. 17. which being received by the Gentiles became a provocation
of the Jews to jealousy, because it was first offered to them, and they
received it not, v. 19. it pleased therefore the Lord of All to send forth
tidings of Grace into all nations, and his Spirit to convince the world
(contradistinguished to the Jews, Romans 11. 15.) of sin, because when they
hear they believe not, until convinced that it is their sin not to believe in
Christ, or submit to him, accept him as King, Priest, and Prophet, when offered
to them.

It might seem strange to you, dearly beloved, should we say that these
discoursings on their part are but a blind to veil what is farther intended. It
may be their confessions will sometimes give you it that you and all men ought
to believe in Christ in them, and that they perish for not believing that
Christ is manifested in their flesh, and that you are saved by the dying,
rising etc. of Christ or the light in you, and not by any Christ without you.

To the evidencing of which in part, be pleased to hear them using the word of
the Scriptures, saying, The Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17. 21.
(and this they say of and to all the children of this world)
TO which we answer.

1. That the Kingdom of Heaven the Jews expected to come as the Kingdoms of
the Earth and Men: but it came with no such pomp or show, wherefore the
Pharisees Mat. 11.
were not aware, or observed not that it was ever since the days of John the
Baptist, and that it was ((...).) in them, or among them, and they knew not.

2. Most true it is that wherever the Kingdom of God comes with power and
efficacy it sits down in the heart, and does subdue the thoughts, wills,
affections and actions of Luke 10. 5. 9 Luke 19. 44. Mat. 21. 43.
Men to the Scepter of Christ. But it comes near to many in the Gospel or
outward message of peace (though they know not the time of their visitation)
and again is taken away from a nation when the Gospel is taken away.

3. We do indeed firmly hold against all the sons of formality, that it is
not talking of God, but walking with Rev. 11. 12. John 4. 23.
God, not the form of Godliness without the power, that sets one further than
the outward Court, and that God is not worshipped in Truth, if he be not
worshipped in Spirit.

Also we hold that all the visible order and regiment of the Church, as suited
to the present Condition in the body, is not of the substance of the Kingdom
that cannot be shaken, but shall cease at the second coming of Christ

4. Yet during the imperfect state of the Church (as Ephesians: 4. 12, 13, 16.
we mentioned before) and the Love-conveyances from one member to another for
the increase of the body, there cannot be any thing trans-acted but in some
form.

And for the standing forms of Gospel-appointments, as Church Order,
Sacraments, etc. we judge them added to (as appendixes of) the Kingdom, and
they are unalterable by the wisdom or will of Man until the appearing of
Christ. 1 Timothy 6. 14.
Their end is to testify our blessed subjection of Jesus Christ, as Banners and
flags hung out to the view of the world to 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8. Acts 2. 40* 41. 1
Cor. 11. 26. 1 Thessalonians. 5: 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
make known the People that own Christ crucified. Also they are channels of
Spritual Grace (Scripture and experience witnessing) and may not be neglected
under pretense of avoiding formality, or present indisposednesse, or dullness,
which many times is removed by a conscientious attendance upon these exercises.

Wherefore we conclude, that to set up the form without the Power, or the Power
to jusle out the form of Godliness, are both errors, and is beside the Rules
and practice of those Times which abounded in glorious gifts, and wonderful
Grace, who yet were most observant of, and exactly conversant in Church order,
Pastors, Teachers, Elders, etc. Baptism Acts 20. 7. Mat. 18. 16, 17, 18.
with water, the Lords Supper in the Elements Bread and Wine, receiving in and
casting out of visible societies by the Power of Christ binding on earth, and
loosing offenders Acts 2. 42. 43. 1 Cor. 14.
(when penitent) continuing in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and
public Prayers, and prophecyings, as 1 Timothy 2. 1, 12. 3. chap. 1. 8. 4. chapter
14. 5. chap. 1. 7. 9. 17. 19. 22. compared with 3. chap. 16. v.

But it suffices not to our Adversaries to have left things in General, but
they also affirm that Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists and such
differing forms, are all in the Kingdom of Babylon and in the confusions of it.
TOuching which

1. It is our earnest desire that such so differing would not rigidly dwell
upon their conceivments in Externals to make a breach in the Body of Christ
which is but one, by rejecting all (though godly) that are not in their way of
Discipline. Faith in Christ, and Love to all Saints, are joined together, Ephesians.
1. 17. Col. 1. 4.

2. Yet we do abhominate those unjust aspersions of Babel-confusions cast on
these effects of an inquisitive mind, desiring to know the mind of the Lord,
which thou O vain man reproachest, though thy conscience would tell thee (if
thou had not silenced it) that there are many godly persons, in those
mentioned ways, who rest not in the form, but in obedience to God as they
understand exercise themselves therein, having also the Power of Godliness.

3. But it is observable they meddle not with Popery and Episcopacy, etc. for
indeed these principles make all externals indifferent, unless that they are
more violent against Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, because they
stand more in their light, neither may Familism speak ill of its native Country
and old friends; We mean the Romish Antichrist.

Some indeed say that Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Churches and such
administrations ended with the Apostles age, and that it is not for us to seek
them, but a more spiritual way.
1. BUt its manifest Apostles were but to plant, such as Apollos, Timothy,
Titus, etc. came to water, (1 Cor. 3. 16.) Thus does one enter into another
labors, one lays the foundation, and another builds thereupon, (v. 10.)
wherefore Paul (according to the wisdom given to him) ordered that in every
Church or City where the Church was, there should be Elders, whose Place and
work it was, some to Rule well, and some to labor in the Word and Doctrine. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Act. 14. 27. Tit. 1. 5, 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. Also we read of Teachers, Ministers, Churches, Overseers, Deacons, where
the Apostle of the Gentiles was not, Col. 1. 7. 2 chap. 1. likewise the Angels
of the seven Churches in Asia (2. and 3. of Rev.) long settled. And the Phil.
11.
Church in the wilderness, during the Apostasy from Primitive Peace and Purity,
has witnesses that feed her 1260. (Prophetical) days or years, Rev. 12. 6. 14.

3. But it is above controversy, If our Lord has given gifts to men they must
employ those Talents, though they are not so eminent as in the Primitive times,
being according to the measure of the Gift of Christ and his Grace, Ephesians. 4. 7.
Romans 12. 3, 4, 5, 6. Now that the qualifications of an Overseer, Elder, Deacon,
may be found in these our days is manifest if we consider the 1 Timothy 3. 2.
etc. Tit. 1. 6. as not containing any extraordinary Grace. That we must not
expect them to be sent forth as the Apostles immediately, is manifest, for
though they are to have an open door in their own hearts, Yet they are set down
as such (1) That may desire the work, 1 Timothy 3. 1. (2.) Are called to it by the
Saints and Eldership trying and approving them, 1 Timothy 4. 14. 5. chap. 22.
Titus 1. 5. And (3) such as are instructed for the further fitting them for
their work, 1* Tim. 4* 6. 13, 14, 15. 2 Timothy 2. 2. likewise such (4) as being
qualified in some measure, yet through modesty, or fear, or other respects, may
be unwilling to feed the flock of God, though called thereunto, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2.
reserving still the honor to the chief shepherd (v. 4) and that this is a
rule to be continued in the Church is evident, 1 Timothy 3. 15. chapter 6. 14. So
then, though they have not these extraordinary endowments, or miraculous
operations, its nothing material for the Church, and the doctrine needs it
not as at the beginning. 2. Also that Timothy, Titus, and the Angels of the
Churches, and Elders after the Apostles, never did miracles that we read of. 3.
Miracles also being in the last times signs of Antichrist rather than of
Christ. 4. And signs being not for them that 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. Mat. 24. 24*
do believe, but for them that believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22.

4. If the Saints have now as much need of those appointments as then, nay more
(if we may say so) then why should any seek to be loosed from their own
Mercies? We confess we have read and heard of, seen and (through Grace) humbly
despised the vain boastings of them, who said they were perfect, and were above
hearing, praying, believing, hoping; speaking Great swelling words of vanity,
who have turned aside first from the holy Commandment, and Jude. 16. v. 20. v.
after that from the pretense of it: which should awaken us to edify one
another on our most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, that we might not be
led away with the Error of the 2 Pet. 3. 17
wicked, and so fall from our stedfastness.

It is most freely confessed, that when things come to practice in this time,
which is neither dark nor day, many doubts and questions do arise among many:
yet as some of us have tasted of the goodness of God in this way, so we may not
but acknowledge it; and farther Pray until the day break, and shadows flee
away* Turn O beloved, and be as a roe or young heart on the Mountains of
Divisions: Cant. 2. last.


Surely, the Doctrines of these Men which we oppose, are levelled to subvert
all Order, Churches, in whatsoever is done outwardly, For they say its Babylon,
and all the worship, and Teachers without are of the Beast and Antichrist.

Judge us O Lord, for why should Men in thy name rise up against thy Son and
us for his sake; 1. Rejecting thy care, 2. Condemning thy Wisdom, 3. And the
Generation of the Just in all ages, 4. To establish themselves and prepare a
highway to Paganism?

It is not a Pleasure to us (Beloved in the Lord) to open these painted
Sepulcres, but since we have begun we will proceed to show yet more, that you
may see and wonder, and beware. They bid you Speak no more than you have
experience of, and than you live in.
WE confess it is and shall be to us for a Lamentation that the religion of
very many consists in talking of God and Christ, and Scriptures, and
Churches, and is but a sound of words without knowledge and faith, and so do
rather darken than make manifest the Truth, and because it is without
obedience, their conversations destroy their confessions: And did these sayings
aim at the reformation of this, we should not dare to cross them, but we have
grounds from certain discourses personally had with some of this way to declare,

1. That this is to silence you from ever mentioning the histories and
prophecies of the Scripture; Creation of the world, Garden of Eden, Adam, Eve,
Flood, History of the Church, coming of Christ into the world, the Day of
Judgment, Resurrection of the Body, and such like, which being Past or to
come, we can have no present experience of: And some of us speaking of these
Scripture Records have been blamed for speaking without experience.

2. Or Secondly, by this means all the Scriptures must be construed as
Metaphorical in an Allegory, making the Creation an Allegory (and so the
world without beginning) Adam, Eve, the Serpent, Paradise, Cain, Abel, Seth,
Noah, Ark, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Egypt, Wilderness, Canaan, Kings, Prophets,
Records, to be mere allegories, Nay Christ, his flesh and blood, his life and
death, his Cross and Crown, Scribes and Pharisees, Jerusalem, Herod, Pilate,
Churches, Elders, Anti*christ called Babylon and Egypt, etc. (and what not) to
be fulfilled in the Allegorical construction of particular experiences.

But concerning Experience we are satisfied,

1. That to speak without Experience in experimental affairs is to darken
counsel, as they do that speak only from the hearing of the Ear, (Job 38. 2.)

Heb. 11. 1.
2. But Faith is the Evidence of things not seen, and a subsistence of things
hoped for; though its evidence be not of the nature of Sense, Science, Opinion
or Experience, being of things unseen by the sense, not known from the search
and rational comprehension of Causes, nor entertained from the Probable
testimony of wise and holy Men, nor tasted in the Presence thereof: yet after a
spiritual manner seen, known, and experienced by Faith in the Divine Testimony.
2 Cor. 4. 13.


Wherefore having believed, we also will speak of the sacred Records, and
gracious Prophecies which are delivered to us in the holy Scriptures, of which
and in which God 2 Cor. 5. 5.
has caused us to trust, giving us also the Earnest of the Spirit, which as
Joseph's wagons to Jacob does ascertain us of Genesis 45. 27.
the Truth of the tidings; And the gracious operations of the holy Spirit in our
hearts, from and by Scripture Truths, gives us to believe the Histories and
Prophecies interwoven to be also of Divine Authority.

3. We do also judge the Word of Faith, which is Divine Testimony, to be more
safe, Certain and Constant ground to speak of and from than experience.

In this we are not for a dead Faith, which is the fruit of freewill closing
with the Word from the testimony of Man; which leaves the mind wavering through
carnal reasonings, which cannot be satisfied* But for a lovely Faith, even the
work of the Spirit with Power, settling the mind on the Divine Testimony, as
such.

As for speaking no more than we live in, if it intend not to stop the mouths
of all those who dare not pretend to perfection and blamelessnesse, but those
who speak from Notion and yield not up their souls to the things which they
deliver to others, we testify the same thing.

As for Allegories

1. We allow very many in the old Testament, beside the Ceremonial Law, which
was a shadow of good things to come, Persons, Offices, Places, Actions, Things,
which the Ecchoings of phrases wisely and warily observed give hints of, and
puts the beginning of every Allegory into our hands as the Apostle took it in
Gal. 4. from the 54. of Is. 1. verse) which yet must be wisely followed, as
Scripture Ecchos proceed to encourage, yet not to impair the truth or use of
the Letter and History, Allegories being but accidental thereto, and a fruit
of the incomprehensible wisdom of God, that sets one thing to answer to another.

But in the New Testament, although Jesus Christ spoke many parables and used
similitudes which he opened to his Disciples, yet the Gospel Ministration
properly so called, not only in the language thereof, but in the Actions,
persons, 2 Cor. 3. 12.
things thereof, is in much plainness, and not as Moses who had a veil upon his
face, but the Messiah discovered himself by speaking plainly and without a
Parable, John 16. 29. his parables in his public preaching being chiefly for
judgment to the wilful Jews, that seeing they might not see, Matthew. 13. 13.

We gladly own Christ in us by his Spirit to crucify our flesh, and raise us up
in our hearts, in this world, and at his second coming our bodies in the
resurrection, to a new Phil. 3. 10.
and spiritual life; and this we own as the Power of his resurrection and
fellowship of his sufferings: but we detest that doctrine that destroys the
Atonement in his blood, and the Truth of his humanity, and his personal body,
besides his mystical the Church, so taking away the representation of John 1.
18.
God in the Mediator the Man Christ, which a believing eye fixes on, and
leaves the Mind (which is far from knowing God in any competent certainty out
of Christ) to seek about for God, as individuum vagum, or something he knows
not what, and at it last may becomes to this Notion, God is in all and all in
God; blasphemously adding that he is no other than the world, or what he is in
the world, clothing himself with changeable appearances; and so the mind
proceeds until it be spoiled with vain and blasphemous Philosophy.

2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. Col. 2. 18, 19.
We conclude, that it is a sign of a rotten heart, and a roving head, to be
loathing plain Scripture, and longing after curious speculations, and witty
allusions; though in this we prejudice not the modest searchings of those whose
hearts are it may be more than ordinarily prepared, and senses exercised to
discern into the veiled Truths of the Scriptures, as Heb. 12. 13, 14. compared
with Heb. 7. etc.

Moreover they admonish that we wait in silence until God open our Mouths.
WE answer, if that were the intent of this Admonition to show to man his
dependence on God, and that he especially that waits on the Word and Prayer,
take his goades and nails from the chief Shepherd, and pray in the Holy
Ghost, we should not appear further in this matter than to own it. But we
cannot but conclude from our observing the managerie of this Assertion, and
their practice, that they would not have any to read, teach, pray, in their
families or in the assemblies, but when the Spirit of the Lord does lead them
by strong impulses and irresistible Motions to such actions, And he that does
otherwise is by them accused of Pharisaical imitation, or stealing the word of
the Lord from them that spoke it with power.

Isa. 64, 7. 2 Timothy 1. 6. (...)
Which we cannot close with,

1. Because it is the will of God that the Gift which is in us should be
stirred up as fire, which sometimes is covered with ashes, hitherto are
referred the exhortations to diligence, and improvement of Talents, 2 Cor. 8.
7. 1 Cor. 9. 25. Mat. 25. and many other places.

2. It lays wast the experience of them who have in the midst of infirmities
and indispositions acted in the Faith of their duty, and Gods promise, and have
been made blessings to others in their speakings, wherein also they have
gathered warmth and enlargement before their work was over.

Afflicted, imprisoned souls have most need to be exercised in Prayer.
Temptations will abound from Satan and the weakness of the Flesh, to hinder
the profitable, soul-inlarging exercises of prayers, reading, exhortations in
Public and private, if we break not through those hindrances to close with
the revealed command leaning on the Promise of Grace.

3. Unless we think (as this Doctrine implies) that the motions of the Spirit
are the only rule of Duty; which, if so, must be attended and obeyed without
respect to the Scripture command, saying, not saying, or gainsaying in the
Letter of it, there being (by this doctrine) no obliging rule but the Law of
the Spirit.

Now if it be more moderately affirmed that the Scripture as written in the
heart, or the inward-heart-dictates as written in the word, are the rule, yet
it will follow that if there be not a conjunction of the word and Spirit,
moving with enlargement, there is no rule or obligation actually, and so no
transgression to forbear, though days, weeks, and months pass over the heads
of them that pray not, or preach not, though necessity is laid upon them in
respect of their work, and service, and the call of the need of others, 1 Cor.
9. 16, 17. compared, Mat. 6. 11. 1 Pet. 5. 2.

4. To the best of our understandings we judge the Assertors to be against any
constant preacher or course of prayer; so allowing every man or woman equal
liberty in Assemblies to teach or pray, and this they say is the true Ministry,
and all other by the will of Man: notwithstanding 1 Timothy 2, 12.

1 Cor. 14. 31. 1 Cor. 12. 28.
It is indeed said you may all prophecy one by one, but its said also, Are all
prophets? we wish all the Lords people were Prophets.

The Assemblies of the Saints of old were constant, and they had men who
attended on the word and prayer, who gave themselves to it, prepared themselves
(waiting on God) that they might act to the edifying of the Saints in love,
Act. 20. 7. Act. 6. 2. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 13, 14, 15, 16.

5. This does (to our discernings) tend to the establishing of the sayings of
them who speak after their trembling sits with an extended voice, as the
Oracles of God, and leaves us not the liberty of the Commended practice of the
Bereans, to try the sayings of an Apostle by the Acts 17. 11
Scripture.

The simple believes every word, Prove. 14. 15. But in this case we have
learned that the spirits of the Prophets are subject to other Prophets, for
examination whether they accord with the Standing Vmpire of all questions, the
holy Scriptures. 1 Cor. 14. 32.


But that they intend to magnify their writings and Epistles above or into an
equality unto the holy Scriptures seems very probable, in that they put their
papers very diligently into one another hands, but not so the Scriptures, and
do some of them say, That it is alike for to take a sentence out of their G. F.
affirmed to J. K.
letters and preach from it, as to take a sentence out of Paul's Epistles.

We confess we cannot find that ever man came to claim credit to the words
that he spoke, but he was to give proof of it, either by the mighty operations
of the Spirit of God Heb. 2. 3, 4.
by him, or by the Testimony of Truth given by them who did come with such
works, or else if he were a Prophet, the event was to declare whether he were
of God; yet if the matter of his exhortation was to withdraw them from the
known will of God, Deuteronomy. 13. 2. though his signs and wonders should come to
pass (as the man of sin shall abound with such, 2 Thessalonians. 2.) yet hearken not
to him, for the Lord proves you whether you will keep his commandments.

6. The Experiences of many tempted souls may seasonably be heard in this
matter, who under the former pretenses have waited until their hearts grew so
carnal that they had almost lost their savor, had not the Lord showed them
that it was their part to give heed to their duty leaving the inlargements of
soul to the incomes of the Spirit, which graciously met them in the way of Gods
commands.

As for the Accusations of Imitation and Stealing the the word of the Lord from
others, we shall say, Take the mote out of thine own eye. Who more notorious
imitatours of Apostles and Prophets without the Call or Gift of either, and who
more steal the word from others, then they who have received their notions from
Scriptures, Teachers, and Leaders, and phrases also, and yet do acknowledge
neither one nor other but as it were of themselves?

He that quotes the Scripture steals not the word. He Cant. 1. 7.
that imitates the Practices of Saints in foregoing ages, going forth by the
footsteps of the flock (not desiring singular ways) seeking Christ in his own
standing appointments by the Shepherds Tents, and holding fast the true
sayings of the holy Tit. 3. 8. Jude 3.
Scriptures, erres not if he speak and contend for the Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, though it be not so delivered to him by immediate
inspiration, or confirmed with miracles as it was to them, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 14, 15.

Furthermore these who come unto you in the imitation and resemblance of
Christ, Prophets, Mat. 24. 24.
Apostles, with their deemed Oracles and great wonders, do show themselves in
the most composed garb of humility, as the greatest friends to the cross of
Christ, and the only bearers of it, dissuading you From your own wisdom,
will, righteousness, Pride in apparel, Diet, etc. giving and receiving honor
of men, and such like, which is the cross you must abide in, and through it
(they say) pass unto everlasting rest.
WE Wish heartily that all that wear the sheeps clothing were sheep indeed; but
there is one that judges. Let us search and try these Doctrins and let
judgment of persons result freely.

Of widom.
First then, we are fully satisfied that he who has learned Arts and Sciences,
and has read over Systems or Bodies of Divinity, and Exercitations concerning
it, must come to Christ as a little child, and be abased in all his Pride of
Mat. 18. 2. 1 Cor. 1 30 Jer. 9. 23.
Flesh in Gods presence; For all these make not one wise unto salvation: but
what this man has before Christ he is puffed up with it, knowing nothing as he
ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 1.

Yet does not this subvert Schools of learning, but it sets learning in its
place. Surely it is clean to the clean-hearted, as meat and drink, and being
rightly improved, yields a larger tribute to Jesus Christ, than the worlds
external goods. For want of which its easily observable how these pretenders to
the Cross, do often mistake in the English idiom or phrase of translation to
wrest the sense.

We affirm also that he that is wise to buy and sell, and shift in shaking
times, to raise himself while most do fall, must give up himself to Jesus
Christ, seeking first his kingdom, and minding his will, without consulting
with flesh and Gal. 7. 16. 1 Cor. 4. 10.
blood, though he be counted a fool for Christ's sake.

Yet does not this cross the will of Christ, for him that has wisdom in his
Generation to buy and sell, and provide liberally for himself and his, if riches
increase by the blessing of the Prove. 10. 22 Luke 16. 12.
Lord, and not the covetous pursuit of them that would be rich, Still
remembering, that of him that has more there is more required, and that Man be
faithful with that that is another (for he can carry nothing out of this
world) being rich in good works. Also considering he that has most has most 1 Timothy 6. 9. 17. Prove. 30. 8. Of Will.

Acts 9. 6.


Temptations, which is enough (if wisely weighed) to stop the greediness of Men
after more than food convenient.

Secondly, we are assured, that who so comes to Christ must forsake his own
will, as guided by fleshly wisdom, or deceitful lusts, or expressing it self
in opposing the will of Christ.

Nevertheless this superintendency of the holy Spirit, overawing the will of
Man does not abolish, but regulate it, For Psalm. 110. 3.
the people become willing in the day of his Power.

Neither does it follow that such or such a Motion is therefore of God, because
it crosses natures desires, though if the clear will of God do so, it must be
readily obeyed.

Of Righteousness.

Phi. 3. 7, 8, 9


Thirdly, we are confident that whatever Man has done or received before he
knew Christ, which he accounted gain and boasted of, hoping for Gods favor
therefore, he will reckon his loss when Christ is revealed to him; because he
was held contented in those snares of Pride without Christ, and he will no more
desire to be found in his own righteousness, which indeed are as filthy rags;
unless when he is under Temptations,

Yet we also believe that the righteousness which is performed by faith, or
the Power of Christ in us, is not to be rested in, as that in which we are
accepted, Ephesians. 1. 6.

Also that the Externals of Religion, before rested in, become not now
abolished to the New Creature, as Ceremonies which might be used or not used,
but the Externals 1 Cor. 11. 28. Rev. 3. 19. James 2. 2.
of the Gospel are to be used with the Power of Godliness upon a new account
transacted to the glory of Christ.

Fourthly, touching Apparel, We confess and may not deny that in the
Church-relation, and in presence of Christ, we may not have respect to gay
clothing and a gold ring, For then all eyes should be inward while soul
affairs are 2 Cor. 5. 16.
transacted; And we may not here know men after the flesh, but as they are
enriched with Faith and gifts of Grace, and as they stand in the judgment of
the Spirit.

Wherefore Apparel concerns the outward Man in the capacity of Man, though it
is (as all other things) to be ordered and directed by the grace of God. And
here we know not how to excuse this wanton nation that generally shows it self
Hab. 2. 6.
childish in nothing more than by respecting gay clothing, which sometimes
covers an infirm and deformed Body and Spirit too, and in its self only seems
to show a man that has more thick clay than another. But see thou a man
boasting in his Apparel, be not troubled, for it may be its all his Portion and
rejoicing in this world.

We know the Scriptures that declare against the Pride and wantonness in
apparel, Is. 3. 1 Pet. 3. 3. 1 Timothy 2. 9. and that which judges this wantonness
in women condemns the like in men also, yet we will consider (and that a little
more, because this is so much insisted on by the Assertors) what allowance is
by God given to men, though not for a cloak of Pride.

Genesis 3. 7. 21. Pro. 31. 21. Deuteronomy. 22. 5. Mat. 11. 8.
1. Apparel was instituted to cover shame, to defend from weather, and grew
into use, for distinction of sexes, and qualities of Persons; but for the shape
of garments its left to man to attire himself Prudentially, and because he is a
member of Societies, Prudence directs to use the modest customs of the Country
(as in other and greater matters.)

2. As all creatures were given to man for his use, so some for his
convenience, delight, and ornament as a Genesis 9. 2.
Man; else the bounty of God in the variety of creatures must be denied. Man may
serve himself of any Creature, so that 1 Timothy 6. 17. Esther 5. 1. Luke 15. 22
Mat. 22. 11. Cant. 3. 11.
he be helped in his way, and honor his God by it: Thus in days of gladness
the Scripture allows more than ordinary garments, after the manner of men.

3. Pride does not lie in putting on of Apparel, though it be above what Poor
men can compass; Poor men may be as proud in their best clothes, as Rich men in
their costly garments.

4. Though neither men nor women professing godliness are so to adorn
themselves with gold, silver, and pearls, as 1 Timothy 2 9, 10.
seeking praise in garments and not in good works; yet surely God has allowed
men in Eminent Places, civil and military, to put on those badges of Honor
that belong in a civil way to Mat. 11. 8. 2 Chronicles. 18 29. Romans 13.
to their offices, so as that the brutish part of mankind (that are taken with
nothing but Pomp and Power) may not rudely assault their Persons and offices
which are to keep order in this world; which is a curse threatened, Isa. 3. 5.

Prove. 31. 21. Eccl. 5. 19.
Neither does this only extend to persons in place, but their very household,
and wherever God has given plenty we know not any thing against a cleanly
modest apparel, unto a decorum and some ornament, according to the sinless
customs of the Times and place of residence. This remembering, that they must
give an account to God for the spending of wealth, who would have each thing
served in its place, upon which account the costlinesse of apparel (within the
forementioned bounds) seems to be according to the surplusage or remainder of
estate, after works of necessity, Piety, Hospitality, Charity, which are of
more concernment than to comport or comply with Pedigree or Place, etc.

In all these cases its best to keep within compass, and not fashion our
selves according to the Lusts in our ignorance, and 1 Pet. 1. 14.
conforming our selves to this wanton world, but to what is most comely and
honorable for them who should have all Psalm. 8. 6.
things under their feet.

Touching diet, we need not speak, having so much insisted on raiment which is
in the same rank, This knowing Mat. 11. 19.
that the son of man came eating bread and drinking wine, and yet was in
hunger and thirst, to teach us to want and to Phil. 4. 12.
abound (which is unspeakable happiness to them that have so learned) and that
we are to walk as free yet not using our liberty as an occasion to the flesh.

Of Honor.
5. We know it of unquestionable verity, that whoever being in an honorable
Condition in this world, are called, Heb. 11. 24.
and come to Christ, should embrace the reproaches of Christ, and gladly crowd
through honor and dishonor, else they are Luke 9. 62.
not fit for the Kingdom of God, neither can they believe if they be resolved
to keep honor among carnal and Worldly John 5. 44.
Men.

Yet we profess against that unchristian unhumane throwing off all subjection
to and acknowledgement of Superiors by word or deed, found among the
maintainers of these Doctrines which we contend against; and do declare that
their show of humility is most abominable Pride* in denying all respects to
men, whom God has said we should honor, Romans 137. 1 Timothy 5. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 1,
2, 3. Ephesians. 6. 2. and not only Magistrates, Elders, Masters Parents, as such,
who may be Luke 1. 3. Act. 26. 2. 25. 2 John ver. 1.
godly, are to be honored by the faithful, but he says also Honor all men, 1
Pet. 2. 17. which honor Luke, Paul, John, etc. gave to persons godly and
ungodly, in the phrases usual and distinguishing.

We might mention that honor which Job, Joseph, Mordecai, Daniel, and the
Kings of Judah, and faithful men of old received in their conditions of
Advancement: Paul also was honored with many Honors, which he acpted, Acts
28. 10.

Psalm. 37. Dan. 2. 44. 7. 27. Mic. 4. 8.
Times are in the Fathers hands, he that said is faithful, The meek shall
inherit the Earth, and to the Daughter of Sion should come the first Dominion;
And as the first coming of Jesus Christ was attended with the cross and
persecution of all that followed him, so some do think that at or before the
second coming of the Man Christ Jesus exalted, Jerusalem Rev. 19.
which now is a Praise in heaven, shall be a Praise in Earth, as Babylon has
been. Now distinguish of the Isa. 62. 7.
Times and you may reconcile these and the like Scriptures with them that lay
Tribulations and persecutions upon all the Followers of Christ. God has taken
off much of the yoke from his persecuted in England.

Its most true the Jew inwardly desires not the praise of men, yet God will
make his enemies bow before them, and acknowledge Romans 2*
them the seed which the Lord has blessed, when he calls his servants by a new
name, having taken away the Isa. 61. 5, 6, 7, 9. cha. 65. 7, 9.
names of reproach.

This we should not plead for, as knowing the error is commonly on the other
hand, in too many complements (yea among Saints) but that we see Morositie and
rudeness imposed by them upon us as conformity to the cross of Christ:
neither do we yet think the Saints are fit for such a condition, (until we see
more of the fine Linen in use, Rev. 19. 8.) or that they should press after
worldly honor, but what righteousness, holiness, and the image of Christ by
the grace Isa. 58. 8.
of God in Providence casts upon them.

Isa. 23.
God will yet more stain the Pride of all glory and bring into contempt all the
Honorable of the Earth that are not willing to decrease that he might increase.

Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true (and not fantastical vain
shows) grave (and not ridiculous or disorderly) Phil. 4. 8. (...),
whatsoever things are just (giving each their due, God and Caesar, Saints and
all men) Pure (and not defiled with wanton mixtures of pride and vanity)
whatsoever are lovely (and not rude and harsh) and of good report (among men
judging rationally) think on those things, And let not the ungodly outstrip you
in any true excellency, nor reproach you as if Christianity did not perfect
humanity. Thus shall Rev. 21. 26.
the riches of the Gentiles be spiritually brought into the new Jerusalem.

Furthermore, we think it convenient in this place to add something touching
Propriety and Community in worldly things, because we have sufficient reason to
persuade us to judge that the Maintainers of the forementioned Doctrines which
are opposed by us, do think it unreasonable that one man should have so much,
and another so little, and some of them are not free to be Tenants to other men.
OUR Intentions are not to countenance that churlish, private spirit found
among men (which indeed too much leavens the upright) neither to ty up any from
giving all their goods to the poor, if they wrong not their relations and
Creditors: But we do oppose the Law of Community, which some (did they speak
out) extend to break marriage bonds, while they do but tamper in words,
questioning what Scripture Ministers have to join people together in Wedlock.
But they know it is not time to vent these things yet, for one chief among them
did say, he is a fool that speaks all his mind to every one.

We dare not encourage those grinding oppressions of, and proud insultings of
ungodly men over, the poor and needy, as if Nations, Towns, Tenants, Servants,
etc. were born for no other end but to be their Drudges; but we must affirm it
as most reasonable to submit to the Will of the Lord, who orders the Plenty
and Poverty, increase and diminishing, high and low estate of Persons and
Nations, Psalm. 107. 36. to the end.

We desire it may be considered, that besides the general interest which the
Sons of Adam have in the good creatures, which was lost in the first Adam,
and repaired in the second during the day of Patience, we say, besides that,
there is a particular interest or propriety in the Creatures, whereby one man
may say this is mine and not thine, which may be considered as diversely
obtained.

1. By the general distribution of the earth to the Fathers of the Nations.

Genesis 11. 2.
For when the whole Earth was of one language and dwelt in the plain of Shinar,
their proud design of building Babel provoked the Lord to confound their
languages (in the days Genesis 10. 25.
of Peleg) Then were they scattered upon the face of the earth, and then did the
most High divide unto the Nations their Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
inheritance, and the people of one language that sat down in any Country not
yet inhabited (according to the Providence Acts 17. 26.
of God setting the bounds of their habitati n) took it for their inheritance,
and while there was room enough fed Genesis 13. 9.
their cattle at large, and removed their herds and flocks to fr sh feeding;
what wells they dug were their own, each Genesis 21. 30.
family removing together and planting together in the Cities which they
builded; The Elders of families being the chief Genesis 14. 14.
rulers, and the children of their Servants became also their servants; Yet
where others had planted, they had leave Genesis 19. 9. Genesis 21. 34. Genesis 23. 16.
also of the Inhabitants to sojourn with them, and if they desired a piece of
ground they did use to buy it of them.

Hitherto we may refer Isreal's title to the Land of the Canaanites because it
was given them 430. years before they Genesis 15. 13, 16.
did inherit it, yet after a peculiar and unparalleld manner to Abraham their
Father, because the children of Canaan that Servant of Servants were a wicked
people, and because Gen 9. 25.
it pleased the Lord to choose Israel for his inheritance. Yet here did the Lord
provide that each Tribe had their part by lot, which did descend to their
posterity by inheritance.

2. Which is the second considerable in the obtaining of Propriety.

Children are surviving parts of their parents, and have a true right to their
Fathers inheritance by the Law of God, Nature, and Nations: And though it may
seem not so consonant to reason to make such wide differences in dividing
inheritances among many Brethren, as some do use, yet it was the Law in Israel
that the eldest Son should have a double Deuteronomy. 21. 17
portion to his brethren, which by the appointment of God most just, did
perpetuate propriety, and that in a way of inequality, one having more than
another. And not only so, but for the preserving each private Interest, the
Lord commanded solemn curses to be pronounced against Deuteronomy. 27. 17*
him that should remove his neighbors Land mark.

3. But a private interest in worldly goods is also had by purchase, which is
an exchange of things equally valuable in Genesis 23. 16
lieu of each other.

4. Also by the Victorious Issue of Lawful War, when nations offer injuries
and violence to their neighbors, reparation may be sought in War, and the
wrongdoers Judges 20. 13.
refusing to give satisfaction, forfeit what they have to the Law of Justice, to
make Reparation for the damage.

But however propiety may be had, it may not be violated, no not by the desire
of one after his neighbors house, wise, Servants, Ox, Ass, or any thing that
is his, Exodus 20* 17.

Surely he that has more of worldly goods than his Neighbors, if his heart be
prepared to serve his God, and his generation, has an advantage to honor God
probably more than ten men, were that estate shared among them, though they had
like noble spirits.

But we think it needless to add yet more in this matter, saving that the
Experiences of other Countries give us warning of tumultuous attempts from this
Generation.

But if it be disclaimed that any such thing is intended or desired of the
crooked, selfish, proud, griping, injurious neration which we live among, as
the casting up each ones propriety in what they have, under pretense of
submitting them with the lowest of the people to serve the publ que (which is a
bait for the sons of disorder and violence) if the preservation of each ones
rightful Possession by Law and Magistracy in way of force be taken away, and
that this be only aimed at, namely that they who are of the household Faith do
as in the primitive times enjoy all things in common;

Our answer is,

That as for the practice of the Churches of Judaea, Act. 2. their love did
rise high at the first prevailing of the Gospel, and propriety was cast up by
no law or persuasion but that of Love, as may be seen Acts 5. 4. But that is
not all; surely the Holy Ghost foresaw, that shortly no man should have the
benefit of house and lands, because the Romans should come to take away their
place and Nation. But it is clear 1 Timothy 6. 17. 2 These. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
by Scripture-evidence, that there was richer and poorer among the Churches of
the Gentiles, but the rich were charged to be rich in good works, and the poor
to work for their own bread.

As for the giving one Coat of two to him that has none, binds you not to give
your coats to any beggar that first coms, but the Lord Jesus has left his
people to the prudence of his Spirit in them, and discretion, to see the time
when to give, and out of their abundance to supply another convenience, and
Psa. 112. 5.
out of their convenience another necessity, and out of their necessaries
another extremity. There are certain other commands which are to be obeyed in
their time with prudence.

For our selves, we are not ignorant how our souls were carried after the Lord
in the day of espousalls to give up all into his hands, Soul, Body, Estate,
Credit, Relations, etc. resolving to hold nothing, but under his favor, who
gave us them to have and hold by a new tenure, abiding his pleasure, to whom we
hope we shall never deny whatsoever he calls for in the manifest junctures of
his word, Providence, and his Spirit in our hearts, who may sometimes make an
extraordinary case, and call us as once Abraham, Genesis 12. to leave his Fathers
house, and friends, to try us, as that young man who boasts of his obedientiall
heart, Mat. 19.

Finally, they say That God is now come to redeem his people from all outward
Teachers, and teach them himself, and for proof this Prophecy they bring 1 John
2. 26. Jer. 31. 31. Isa. 54. 13. Joh. 6. 45. Heb. 8. 11. Ezekiel. 34. 11, 12. Jer.
23. 23.
COncerning Teachers, Order, and Church administrations, we have written what
may be here seasonably remembered, withal declaring, that we know not any
prophecy in all the Scriptures that does foresignify the taking away of all
outward Pastors and Teachers until the 2^. coming of the Son of Man, who is
not yet come, though these false prophets and false Christ's say, Lo here.

As for the Scriptures by them mentioned, they make out nothing peculiarly for
this age, more than they did signify at the time of their writing, which far
exceeded these times in abundance of teaching, which (though it was better than
ours) yet differed not in substance from what is in some measure practiced by
many godly in the nation; But when you see any (O ye people) when you see any
teaching of another Christ, or not as the anointing teaches; when you see any
denying the new Covenant, and speaking to a Brother, saying, Know the Lord
(making him a Brother though altogether ignorant of God) when you see any
drawing people from looking after Joh. 6. 44, 45. 2 Thessalonians. 4. 9. Psa. 143. 10
Isa 48 16. Heb. 8, 10
Gods teaching them to Believe, Love, do his will, Profit, and the lively
impressions of truth, stamped on the Affections as well as Conscience, Then
speak, and spare not to apply those Scriptures; Moreover, when you see a
Shepherd that comes not in at the door of the fold, and that feeds not but
scatters the flock; when you find them that strengthen the hands of the wicked
by promising him life in his evil wais, and sadding the hearts of the righteous
by their lies, and false applications, and lightness and profannesse, that
stand up in the name of the Lord, and he has not sent them, Then if you be
full of power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of Judgment, and of might to
declare unto them their transgression, go on and prosper; but forbear those
railing accusations wherewith you load as well the precious as the vile, boldly
denying, That ever one gat good by outward Teachers.

We should write more fully unto you that fear the Lord, if we thought the
matter stuck upon those circumstantial allegations which these preaching
Anti-preachers make hand-over-head against all that mention the name of God in
the public Assemblies of the Nation.

Briefly to clear them who are Godly from the pretended guilt of certain
Matters, For whereas their enemies say

They are not Ministers of Christ.

Because

They take wages; which the Apostles and Prophets did not;

And Have their particular houses to preach in;

Are called Masters;

Study for their Sermons, in which they use Method;

And Expound, which they call adding to the Scriptures.

Also because they hold the use of Learning in and about Divine things.

We answer to the first concerning wages,

1. It is one thing to take a supply of necessaries, yea unto convenience, for
ones self and family (if you call it wages) Gal. 6. 6. 1 Cor. 9. 7* etc.
while they administer to the people spiritual things, and another thing to be a
hireling (though we fear there are many such.)

2. As for the practice of the Apostles and 70 disciples in the ninth and tenth
chapters of Luke, we read of their coming in as well as going out in the same
chapters. They were not to go to the Gentiles, but whither Christ himself would
come; their message required have; two Coats would cumber, to salute any by the
way might occasion diversion or delay; And for their going without money it was
to encourage them whom he intended to send into the Nations far off, to trust
him, by an experiment of his Providence in their own nation (as you read Luke
22. 36.) So that that restraint was taken away, they did forbear working, went
not at their own costs, and yet had wherewith to lead about a sister Peruse the
2 Cor. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 12, 13, 14, etc.
a wife, 1 Cor. 9. 4, 5, 6. in which when they straightned Paul and Barnabas
(who contended with the false Apostles who boasted of their preaching freely)
Paul insisted on, and by many undeniable Arguments asserted his liberty in the
rest of that chapter.

3. We know some that own not themselves as Pastors of Parish Churches, but
gifted Brethren approved and called by the Saints, called and countenanced by
the Magistrate to instruct his People; and for the Maintenance the State
allows, they know not by any solid reason to deny it, but account it a mercy if
Providence give them all their time for the word and prayer taking care
otherwise for their subsistence.

To the second Allegation concerning Particular Houses, which they say Apostles
and Prophets had not,

We answer,

1. Apostles were itinerant preachers or traveling Messengers of Christ, for
the planting of Churches.

Prophets were transient, or for some particular service, and so neither
Apostles nor Prophets needed any constant meeting-places to which they were
bound, but the ordinary and settled Ministry of the old and new Testament had
constant meeting-places, as twill appear to him that reads, so far as
persecution in the Apostles time allowed.

2. It is used by some but as the place which is most convenient for the
peoples assembling, who have liberty, and gladly use it, to meet with the
upright* which was in the times of David of distinct consideration, Psalm. 111.
1. Those great houses being most convenient for great and mixed Assemblies;
being also pure to him whose conscience is pure.

To the third exception we answer,

1. Should they be called Masters as Christ is Master, it were high indignity
to the chief Shepherd; but they have it but as a civil respect to their
public employment, who can, and do, own the meanest Saint as a Brother and
fellowdisciple of Christ.

Their Pulpits are but convenient stands, and for the better hearing of the
people, as Ezra used. Neh. 8. 4, 5.


Their chief Seats at Feasts is but the respect which the Master of the Feast
may give to any Guest whom he judges more honorable, according to Christ's
rule of good manners. Luke 14. 8.


Concerning this point, impartially weigh 1 Timothy 5. 17. Heb. 13. 17. Phil. 2.
29. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 13. which speak of the Ministers of the Gospel, and Servants of
the Churches.

But them that honor God, God will honor.

To the fourth, fifth and sixth objection against them for studying, using
Method, and Exposition;

We answer,

1. Timothy the Evangelist was exhorted to use such means as are here blamed, 1 Timothy 4. 15, 18. 2 Timothy 2. 15. and chap. 3. 14, 15.

2. Solomon the Preacher says, The Words of the Wise, even Words of Truth, are
as nails and goads, when managed as himself used, Eccles. 12. 9, 10, 11. He
gave good heed, sought out, and set in order many Parables, and because he was
wise he still taught the People knowledge. For want of these, meditation and
method, men speak in a circle with wearisome repetitions, and not like the good
householders variety, as Christ exhorts.

Acts 8. 31, 35* Luke 24. 27, 44. Act. 28. 23. Neh. 8. 8. 1 Cor. 14. 26.
3. The Scripture is not bare words but sense; Philip opened the words of
Isaiah to the Eunuch; Christ expounded to his Disciples; Paul to the Jews at
Rome from morning till evening; Ezra read the Law distinctly, and gave the
sense; There is also in the Church a word by interpretation; and how is this
adding to the Testimony of the Scriptures their fancies, because they expound,
while their expositions agree with the sense of the words, and the scope of the
place, and other Scriptures of the like Argument?

2 Timothy 3. 16
4. The Scripture was given for doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction,
which is the foundation of a variety* discourse from any Scripture; Method is
prudential, and variable, Psalm 1. 2 Timothy 2. 15
according to occasion; Study or meditation is duty and blessed, which should in
a Teacher express it self as in a workman that needs not be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth, by explication giving each word its due, and by
application each their portion.

As for Learning, it is but subservient to the understanding the Letter of the
Scriptures, gives a more distinct utterance, helps to significant words, and is
an advantage that equals them to their Adversaries armed with learning against
the truth. But some contend against learning, because they know it not: as for
these people, we suppose, had they learning, as their Leaders and Abbettors
beyond the Seas, and in England did, so would they use it to the utmost against
what they oppose.

There be many railing and impertinent applications of Scriptures made by them*
which every one may see into that has not darkness on his right eye, and we
shall not mention; only remembering, its not any person or circumstance so much
that is aimed at, as the Ministry it self, or all outward Teachers; in which
Argument they discover more Envy, Pride, Passion, than in any other. But be
assured, if the Magistrates had not a material sword, as the Ministers have
not, their language would light as heavy on their heads, and more than so.

In all this we plead not for the ignorant, ungodly, persecuting men called
Ministers, but do sadly bewail that after all the Petitions from the Nation,
Declarations of the State, and Proposalls from the wise hearted, there is yet
any thing hinders the doing of something to purpose to withdraw the Public
encouragement from the corrupt Ministry with whom God has a controversy.

Concerning that they say, God is now coming to redeem his People from all
their Teachers, and teach them himself We do declare our apprehensions of such
approaching desolation on many things which are in high esteem among men, that
(should they be spoken) would make many ears to tingle: But God will provide
for the household of faith, and send them Pastors after his own heart until the
new Jerusalem come down from Heaven, which these pretend to, but know not.

But as God is about a great and strange work, so is Satan, who now comes with
all deceivablenesse in the Mystery of Iniquity, which answers line for line
with the Mystery of Godliness, in bringing in a false Christ, and false
Kingdom, consisting in a Righteousness, peace, and joy, all false witness,
the lying Prophets, strange wonders, strong delusions, religious Profaneness
found amongst us in England, triumphing in the abolishing of Good and evil,
Heaven and Hell, and the transcendent speculations concerning God incarnate in
all things; Apparitions, voices; trances of and to persons manifestly deluded
and bewitched with the spirit of lies.

Touching their seeming Mortification, we advertise you that who so diligently
apply themselves to the Law (as they rightly advise, if righteousness were to
be sought by the Law) such may find, by minding their light, and standing on
their watch, a great measure not only of Mastery over outward Actions, but a
nipping of the root of evil for a season. And how far Imagination may work
when the mind is wholly subjected to it; and composed to a contemplative
sequestration from all outward objects, is partly known to them, who by nature
or custom are addicted to Melancholy. But how far the jealous God may give up
over-credulous and unbelieving Minds to sink into these deeps of strange
delusions, must be left to him who is just, yet unsearchable in his ways, yet
has given us to know what should be in the last days.

Now as there has been a black and long Parenthesis, or dark space, in the
days of the Apostasy or back-fliding from Primitive Purity in doctrine and
Discipline, and according to the Scriptures we are admonished of a happy and
peaceable state of all the children of Sion after the Destruction of Luke 17.
Babylon, the Lords own cannot but rejoice in the remembrance of the Days of
the Son of man, hoping the return of them, which they desired to see so long,
but have not seen. Now being in some forwardness through the Judgments of God
begun in the Nations, they are supposing the time is now come; upon which the
Deceiver takes his advantage, saying, Lo here, and lo there, and when he saw
that bare forms would not satisfy the children of the Kingdom, he addressed
himself in a more glorious and taking way, saying, Now are the days of the Son
of man, Now has Christ sent forth his Disciples, as of old the twelve
Apostles, and 70 disciples, without Staff, Scrip, or money, etc. See here be
miracles, there be multitudes flocking in, Here Is the great Power of the Holy
Ghost, there are men falling down, and saying, God is among you; Here is the
spirit poured on the hand-maides, and there upon the children.

Galat. 1.
But we have learned, that if an Angel from Heaven bring us another Gospel,
Christ or Spirit, let him be accursed. We consider that as evil Angels
suggest evil, so do Angels of light good motions; now Satan transformed into
an Angel of Light (which is an Emblem of knowledge, righteousness, innocence,
peace, meekness) is suggesting and helping on good motions, and fair
compliances with rules of right, to an ill end.

Wherefore

1. Go not after them, nor follow them, lest you put your selves from under
Gods protection, if they come to you it is safer.

2. Hold fast to the Authority of the Scriptures.

3. Exercise Faith much on Jesus Christ the Mediator.

4. Have and hold a form of sound words that cannot be condemned, 2 Timothy 1. 13:
Tit. 2. 8. A better form of words cannot be than the words of the Wisdom of
the Spirit in the Scriptures.

5. Take heed of judging ordinances as unnecessary or indifferent things; yet
let your souls wait on God in them; else if you be beguiled of the Marrow,
you will be easily persuaded to throw away the Bone.

6. Give diligence to more entire communion among your selves, Two are better
than one.

7. Whatever is offered to you from Scripture, do not only examine the truth of
the Doctrine, but also whether it be the true meaning of that Scripture.

8. Discourse not with these People about circumstances, but first enquire
whether you agree in the main things, the Scriptures, Christ, Faith,
Resurrection of the body; etc.

9. Remember that if your hearts be established with Faith, and in the Love of
God in Christ, you shall not be as little children tossed to and fro with every
wind of doctrine.

10. Consider also the End of this Generation in Germany and in many places of
England.

We shall conclude, pointing you to some serious thoughts concerning the
Doctrines and practices of these people, which God may order for good ends;
AS first, To awaken our souls that are apt to slumber,

1. To take heed of the evils of the times, Pride, Covetousness, Formality,
Oppression, etc. which these declaim against.

2. To prove our standings, and understandings; O it is not a time to be a
Professor without the root of the matter in him. Job 19. 28.


3. To learn all our Lessons over again, which any of us embraced too much on
the Testimony of Man, which now shakes, and will fall if not grounded on the
Testimony of God received by a lively faith.

4. To enquire after the way of God more perfectly, and not to rest in
National-Church-Constitution.

5. To look abroad among the faithful scattered in the Country, whom few look
after.

6. It may come to awaken us to walk before our God more lively, lovely, meek,
holy, dis^re^^, savoury, living at he me more (in self examinations) seeking
after full and clear enjoyments of Christ in his ways.

Secondly, The only wise God may by means of these make way for the clearing
up,

First, Of the glorious mysteries appertaining to Saints experience by
provoking them,

1. To take notice of the Knockings, Offers, Motions, of the beloved putting in
his finger to open their hearts, which sleepy souls under the Temptations of
Ease mind not, as Christ desires and deserves; This is an occasion of many
souls mournful walking, feebleness, and unacquaintedness with Christ.

Secondly, The urging of these Doctrines, and boasting of such inward
experiences though falsely grounded, should provoke us to enquire after,

Isa. 33. 22. Romans 8. 2.
1. The royal dignity of the King of Righteousness on his Throne in a Saints
heart, effectually guiding thoughts, words, actions, with a princely freedom
of enlarged soul.

2. And of the frequent instructions of the Great Prophet, Ephesians. 4. 21.
who shall awaken their ears to hear whom he takes in hand to teach, writing
the Law of God in their heart.

3. Likewise the glorious liberty of the children of Sion adopted from under
Sinai's curses; even the purgation of Gal. 4. 5.
the conscience by the blood of sprinking, by the Comforter, Isa. 41. 12. Cant.
who says, Fear not, I am thy God, etc.

Thirdly, We should be stirred up to enquire more in our experiences, after the
sweet and familiar intercourse from conjugall Love between the King and Queen
of glory, walking, talking, living, resting together in Joh. 17. 23.
that oneness which is the beginning of heaven.

All which, with what concerns this head, are not only consistent with, but do
absolutely require Faith in Jesus, who was crucified on Mount Calvary, who is
the Head of the Body the Church, by the blood of whose cross we have received
Phil. 2. 8, 9. Col. 1. 18, 19, 20.
the Atonement, and are admitted into the presence of God, Heb. 10. 19, 20. Ephesians.
2. 16, 17, 18.

Secondly, the jealous God being displeased with the many false glosses, and
carnal interpretations of his holy word, which do rather shut than open it,
may by this means awaken the upright, and wise, to give diligence to the most
plain, convincing, evident, and simple interpretation of the Scriptures, which
are not enclosed in a private interpretation (or application) only to, or of
the persons to whom they were directed, but always reach the like state, spirit,
condition, wherever and whenever, they being of more public interpretation,
1 Cor. 10, 11.
as that Josh. 1. 5. is applied Heb. 13. 5. and Hos. 11. 1. is also fulfilled
Mat. 2. 15.

Thirdly, The head and husband of the Church may hereby make way for the
clearing up the primitive institution and exercise of Church-administrations,
and by means known to himself to work out those rotten members of Church and
Ministry, shaking down what is not right, that that which cannot be shaken may
remain.

Thirdly, these things will also tend to the discovery of many giddy and wanton
Professors, and of them who are approved of God; Also whether we have embraced
the truth in the true light of it, and love of it, and so, whether we will
contend for it, etc.

Fourthly, Hereby God does chasten us for our Formality, Earthly Mindedness,
carelessnesse of the Saints scattered, whom we now see drawn away before our
eyes with these invisible Bands of strong delusions, which God only can
dissolve.

Some other things we have in our thoughts, which Providence will shortly
manifest, but we shall not now mention.

But whatever the thoughts of God are, surely the Enemy the Devil thinks not so.

But to destroy persons and truths not a few, by laying wast Scriptures,
Churches, Graces, Experiences; which is the first lesson these teach their
Disciples, even to forget and forgo all past principles and experiences.

And to bring an odium upon the glorious affairs of Christ's Kingdom (which
hasten toward us in their time) which these imitate, and boast of, but have
not.

And to hinder the progress of the Gospel by weakening the hands of the most
faithful preachers thereof, who heretofore were silenced by the Prelatical
Power.

Yet however Satan's designs may be laid, surely there Mat. 16. 23. Jude 22.
are many simple-hearted who may do him service unawares, as Peter once did;
wherefore on some have compassion, making a difference.

Five things are partly observed, partly conceived, to occasion honest and
simple minds closing with them unawares.

1. The badnesse and ignorance of many in the Ministry (so called) in most
places, by whom God does not speak to their hearts, and they cannot be
contented without it; which occasions their looking out, and listening to these
who come as it were with the presence and power of God.

2. Some present deadness in their hearts, occasioned either by formality in
duties, or through grieving, the Spirit which then retires and leaves them in
sadness, which they are weary of, and so close with these as the first
Physicians that come plausibly to direct their way to regain their loss.

We might here show you that the deceitful heart reasons it self out of the way
of the Lords Mercy, saying, The Lord is gone out of the public Assemblies, he
will use the Ministry no more, for I have prayed and endeavored, and yet have
not found quicknings there, when it may be that soul went to the watchmen that
beat and abused him, or else went not in Faith, and hope fixed on God above men
and means, or were impatient of the tarrying of God, and so concluded in have
(as some of that way impertinently in this case use to say) He is risen, he is
not here* but read Cant. 1. 7, 8.

3. They are persuaded that God is doing some great and wonderful thing, from
the Scriptures, signs of the Times, and sayi^gs of the wise; and having made
trial of many ways *at least in their Minds) at length come to this as the
most wonderful, which first they for a while admire, and not being able to see
thorough their words to their meaning, and beyond the golden pretenses of
glory, and Spirit, and cross, etc. come to be persuaded there is some Divine
thing among them, and so are engaged to wait among them, and in waiting, the
mind (partly by desire, and partly by sympathy, affections and tremblings,
provoking others to the like) we say, the mind is put forward to meet the
Temptation halfway, and so fall into the like feelings* which we doubt not to
say proceed from the mighty power of Satan.

4. Grappling with some corruptions, and being foiled by neglect and
slumberings, and being in this way made to look more to their watch, the Truth
heretofore manifested to them comes forth: And why may not Satan help on
mortification, and a righteousness of works, for such an end as 2 Cor. 11. 15.
to take away the death of Christ as for us without us, and the hearing of Faith?

5. Some that are witty, having gotten some speculations by the end are fed in
their fond desires after high things, and finding the clew run well for a
while, trace these notions, until they find them stick, and because for shame
(it may be) they cannot retire, they get another end, and after that another,
until they have lost themselves, and be indeed constrained to return to the
plain sense of the Scriptures. But that is mercy from God to redeem any from
these snares. The wonder is great in this Temptation, because when once the
mind is biazed, and has drunk in the bottom of these principles, he shall read
the Scriptures with such spectacles, that he will think all the Scriptures confirm
his way, and by one allegory or other will wrest the Plainest Scriptures
against them to stand on their part; and this wicked wit some have by this
means, ready at hand, and as it were natural to them. As for those who yet
are not of their way, whose affections are good, but whose judgments serve
them not to discern the mystery of this way, they warn them, to take heed of
speaking evil of what they know not, and opposing the work of God which may be
for ought all men know that are not of their way, carried on among them.

Those who are in their snares are held,

1. By denying them liberty of discoursing or reasoning with them that are not
of their way, urging them to believe the pure testimony of Jesus in them;
although had we time or desire to render them dispicable to the enemies of the
Truth, we could show what inferences they make, and how things hang together
like ropes of sand.

2. By setting them at utmost enmity to, and distance from, them who are most
able (by the Grace of God) to convince them, and oppose their deceipts, by
representing them under the most hateful names of Scribes, Pharisees, Priests,
Dogs, Swine, Idolators, Samaritans, Sorcerers, Babylonish, and what not that is
naught?

3. By denying them liberty to try what is commanded them in their hearts,
under pretense of giving up themselves to God to do what he will with them; the
sad consequences of which are known by some instances lately, by this means
drawn to what modesty hates, and some to baspheme, and attempt lying wonders.

4. By frequent meetings and multiplied papers; and it is manifest how the mind
is strengthened by daily conversing with them only of one way.

5. By fitting them with things suitable, whether they have been Church Members
or not, or whether discreet or less knowing.

6. By applying all the Scriptures which speak of the sufferings of Christ, and
the Apostles, and Prophets, to prove themselves partakers with them, as if they
were the only hated persecuted people for Christ's sake; when as indeed some do
expose themselves to sufferings more than wisdoms ways lead to, or God
requires, out of an ambition to be persecuted.

Nevertheless, although many otherwise honest hearted may be thus ensnared and
thus detained, yet we have cause to judge that some think to raise themselves
by levelling others; or make themselves considerable by some new thing, which
yet is not new; or to bring us under the yoke of Rome again, which has these
probable grounds.

Considering the concordance between these principles and the Popish in the
righteousness of works, etc.

Also that some of them say Papists are as near the Kingdom of God as
Protestants;

Again, remembering that Familists have ever been greater enemies to Puritans
than to Papists or Prelates.

Again, that many writings of Papists are applauded and used by diverse of this
way, above and before Preston, Sibbs, Perkins, etc.

Likewise that some printed Books show something of the designs of Jesuits and
others, turning and changing their cloaks to deceive, divide, and break us.

But he that sits in the Heavens laugheth, the Lord has them in derision.

Wherefore by what we have written, and a short time will bring forth, you may
see something of those specious impostures, which we warn you of in the name of
the Lord; O watch and pray that you fall not into this Temptation.

Romans 16. 25
Now to him who is of power to establish you a ording to the Gospel and the
preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the Revelation of the mystery which was
kept secret since the world began, but was made manifest since the coming of
Christ, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of
the everlasting God, made known to all Nations for the obedience of Faith, To
God only wise be glory, through Jesus Christ for ever.

Amen.
At Beverly this 11th. of Febr. 1652/3 From your Brethren in the Faith of
Christ, and hope of Eternal life by Him, Joseph Kellett. John Pomroy. Paul
Glisson*


FINIS.

