The Fatal Blow: OR, The most Impious and Treasonable Fact of HAMMOND, In
offering force unto, and hurting His SACRED MAJESTY: Discussed, and REPARATION
pressed, by a sudden Dissolution of the Tyrannical Power of this present
PARLIAMENT, A Summary of whose wicked Practices tending to the subversion of
MONARCHY and Murder of His MAJESTY, and the Enslaving of this Nation is
premised.

There-establishing of RELIGION, and re-enthroning of His MAJESTY by Force and
Arms is propounded and justified.

Dedicated and directed to the People of ENGLAND.

Now know I, that the Lord saves his Anointed; he will hear him from his holy
Heaven, with the saving strength of his right hand.

Psalm. 20.6. For the King trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the
most High he shall not miscarry.

Thine hand shall find out all thine Enemies; thy right hand shall find out
those that hate thee.

Psalm. 21.7, 8. LONDON printed, Anno Domini 1648.

Good People of England,
CAn you be so dull complexioned, that you cannot in seven years learn (and
what has been so often whipped into you) one Lesson, This Parliament will have
no King? will you be baited into a slavery, and held fast by the gills, by the
old juggling, and deluding persuasions, of Religion, Liberty, and Property?
Shall the infusions of these Givens any longer continue you transformed from
Men into Beasts, to lie down like Asses under your Burdens, and to conceit
that a slavish rest is good? Can these Sorcerers make you any longer believe,
that they are the great Power of God, when they are the manifest, and skild
operators unto the Devil? Surely the Tolleration of all Religions and
Heresies, the keeping of an Army (modeld unto their own purposes) still on
foot, the Circumvention of your Liberties, the visible and cunning Invasion of
your Properties, their whole Process with His Majesty, and all the present
practices in order unto the Subversion of Monarthy in this Kingdom, and
setting up for themselves, cannot but state it for a most unquestionable and
measured Truth with you, O people of England, that this present Parliament will
have no King, but reign, and rule themselves, how and as they list; and this
will be beyond dispute, if you suddenly survay their whole Conduit of this
Design: By their disposing the three Kingdoms unto an Aptitude to receive
their Impressions, and the universal Taint of Rebellion, by their practices
with the Scots (an Irritable people) whom by their mere Encouragements, they
draw into a Posture of Hostility against His Majesty, through their suggestions
that He would introduce Popery, and an Arbitrary, and Tyrannical form of
Government over His People; By their corruption of discontented, poor, yet
powerful, and Leading Persons of Scotland to improve their Design, By their
Treachery unto and desection of His Majesty and His Army, raised (and able) to
suppress that Sedition, upon Terms of greatest Disadvatnage unto His
Majesty, and of highest Dishonor unto this Nation; By Necessitating His
Majesty to call a Parliament (as the only remedy for the present Distempers)
the Members whereof were for the prevailing part, an industriously packt Crew
of Disaffected Persons unto His Majesty, unto the Government established, and
who did only drive at their own Ends; By their violent Ejection of Persons
well-affected unto the King and Kingdom, out of both Houses, and all places of
Trust and Importance; By their sending abroad their own evil
Ministring-spirits, and hired Emissaries, those Sampsons Foxes tied together by
the tails, and firebrarnds betwixt them, their factious, illiterate,
prostitute, and phanatique Clergy, to set the standing-Corne of the people into
the fire of Rebellion; By their publishing, and countenancing Scandalous and
Seditious Pamphlets, and Petitions against His Majestyes Royal Person and
Government: By their enforcing the Irish into Rebellion (who made modest and
humble Addresses unto them for Liberty of Conscience, and the Protection of the
received Law^ of that Kingdom) through their Menaces, that that Kingdom
should be no longer (...) Nursery of Popery, and of sending thither an Army of
ten thousand Scots, to be maintained by the 9d. a Sunday to be levied upon
Recusants; least that Kingdom remaining entire, might come into His Majesty's
Rescue, when these Men intended to perfect their purpose of Vn-throning Him: By
their levying Men and vast sums of Money, under pretense of suppressing that
Rebellion, but employing them against His Majesty only; for this purpose also,
By their making desperate, and exasperating the Irish, both by the selling and
re-selling of their Lands, (and much more than is in that Island) and taking
from them all hope of Pardon, and denying unto them Quarter. By their sending
unto that service (almost) only such Commanders and men, as were of His
Majesty's Army in the North, doubting of their affections here, and then
abandoning them unto all want and misery there. This Parliament (besides that
they occasioned the Rebellion, and the first Effusion of blood in Ireland)
having spilt more English blood by the wilful neglect of them there, than the
Irish did by their swords: By their defrauding the poor Protestants of Ireland
of the Benevolence of the Dutch, and converting it unto their own uses: By
their breaking the late Peace in Ireland concluded by His Majesty's Auhority,
through their trans-actions with the Spanish Ambassador, who dealt so
effectually with the Popes Nuncio, and Owen Roe o Neale (both Factors for
Spain) that they not only hindered that Peace, but in order unto this
Parliamentary Design, seized upon the best strengths of the English in
Counaught, and almost all the English Holds and Quarters in Lemster: By their
sithence in-effective prosecution of the War there, and so only as to engage
and entertain both Parties there, as that they might only not be able to looks
upon themselves here, through which many thousands have perished: In the
entrance unto their Design here, By bloodily tearing from the Kings sides, His
most faithful, and consult Counselors and Servants, and either illegally
taking away their lives, or constraining them unto flight: By their taking away
first the Votes of, then the Bishops themselves, and by silencing and
imprisoning the Orthodox Clergy, who might conscionably inform the people of
their Duties, and of the Necessity of Christian Obedience unto the Supreme
Magistrate His Majesty: By extorting from His Majesty Acts prejudicial unto
His Crown and Dignity, and such only as might serve to advance their own Ends;
(that for continuation of this present Parliament being forced to save the
Queens life.) By their Abbetting men of most impudent Ambition, and Avarice,
those Members (not to be named without an Atonement first made, trained up in,
and furnished with all Anti-monarchicall and dishonest Principalls) and that
against the very face of the King: By their stirring up of Tumults,
Insurrections, and Mutinyes, of the abused people and multitude, against His
Majesty and His most Loyal Subjects, thereby forcing Him, and them to leave
London. By their Necessitating of His Majesty (divested and made naked of all
Habiliments and Military Preparations) unto a War; By their prosecution of that
War, with so much subtilty and cruelty: By their Ordnances to raise Money and
Men against His Majesty, upon pretense to redeem Him out of the hands of His
evil Council: By the Preaching of their Sycophant Clergy unto the people,
largely to contribute to this Work, (who as Aaron did the Israelites) to bring
forth their Calf, the Idol at Westminster, made the people naked unto their
shame, and cheated them of their Plate, and the Women even of their Jewels and
Rings: By their planting an unlimited and Arbitrary power in themselves: By
their subversion of the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and establishing the
boundless Dictates of their own Ordnances: By their endeavors to dispirit and
enslave the people of this Kingdom, by the over-awing power of an Army, heavy
Impositions, and Free Quarter, to enure them unto Bondage: By their
Propositions in all Treaties, of matters unfit for Subjects to demand, and
unsafe for a Prince to grant: By their Banishment, or Impoverishment of all
that adhered unto His Majesty: By their enriching themselves with the whole
Wealth and Spoils of the Kingdom: By their exportation of great and incredible
sums of Money out of this Kingdom, and storing it up in those Seminaries of
Schism, in New England, the Islands, and the Low-Countryes: By their drawing
together of the ignorant, unconscionable, and their waged Clergy under the
reputation of a National Synod (with exclusion of the Orthodox) to forge forth
such a Body of Doctrinalls and Discipline, as might best be shaped to uphold
their Anti-monarchicall Principles and Practices. By their Poisoning the
Fountains of Knowledge, the two Universities, with the Satanical Infusions of
their Heretical Doctors: By their conferring Preferments, and all places of
Profit and Trust upon their own Creatures only: By their translating all Trade
and Traffic unto their own Partakers: By their most subtle and perjurous
gayning His Majesty out of the hands of the Scots, upon all assurances of
Freedom, Safety, and Honor: By their sithence several Confinements, and
Imprisonments of Him, as to breed a Contempt of Him in His People, so
unparaleld occasions of discontent, and the sad effects of that in Himself,
and to compel Him unto such Conditions, as might make Him to pull the Crown
from off His head, with his own hands, and to set it upon theirs: By hireing
his trusted Servants, under pretense of Safety to decoy Him into a place of
strongest, and strictest durance, and greatest mis-usage: By their glorying
with the people in their late Addresses unto His Majesty in the Isle of Wight;
And offering such Acts there as Subjects yet never tendered unto a King, or was
possible for His Majesty to grant: By their adding unto the weight of all their
Crueltyes against Him, for His denial of Subscription, and Royal Assent unto
the Acts presented; in the removeall of all His Servants, and
Closet-Imprisonment: By their making an Ordnance, that no further Addresses
shall be made unto His Majesty, and that they will take a further course to
establish the Kingdom without Him. i. e. To settle the Kingdom upon
themselves, unto which they make way: By their most false and forced
Accusations of His Majesty; both to disaffect His own people at home, and to
fore-stall their aid, and to breed Contempt, and Neglect of Him abroad,
publishing in all Languages of Europe, scandalous and base Untruths of His
Majesty, to prevent foreign Succors: Representing His Sacred Majesty unto
the Protestants, a Papist, unto the Papists a Tyrant, and unto both a man of no
Faith and unfit for Government: whereas nothing has so much contributed unto
the present Power of this Parliament, as the Contrivances of the most rigid of
Papists, the Spaniard, or so much hindered His Majesty of due Succors: Yea,
this their Design is further manifested, by their suffering the decay of his
Majesty's Houses, by their sale of his Lands, Household Stuff, and of the very
Coats of his (...) by their mean and inferior nurture of his Children here,
(for Prince Charles is a (...) away,) put into such hands as have neither the
principles of Honor, honesty, or Li^^^^^ Education in them, to embase the
Spirits, to dwarf the growing Endowment of these Royal Branches, and to
dispose and fit them to parity and the constitution of Leveller: by their
denial to his Majesty an opportunity (so frequently importuned by Him) to dear
Himself of those odious Crimes they charge Him withal; as though they feared
He Would leave the Load of all the late Mischiefs at their own Door, or rather
that they intended to condemn Him (though uncondemned) unheard.

What does the Total of all these Severals reckoned and summoned up amount
unto, but that they intend an Assassination, and privately in plain English to
murder his Majesty, to divest his Royal Posterity of all Regality, to usurp
the Imperial Crown of England, and to divide it amongst themselves; to attain
the more easily to which, they now offer to the Scots (not to interrupt them
here;) what ere in Ireland is in the Parliament power: and to give you further
testimony unto this Truth, because they cannot trust any ingenuous men, of the
Gentry, and whose present Estate might interesse their Endeavors in the Good
of the Kingdom, they have placed the whole and sole command of the Army, and
all Places of Importance in men of as low, base, and desperate Fortunes, as
they are of contemptible Education, and such whose Merits giving unto them no
Rise or advantage of Advancement, can promise that unto themselves [onely]
(being for the greater part broken Tradesmen) in the continuance of the usurped
Power of this present Parliament, which they are engaged to support; and into
one of these Confiding Men's hands, have they contrived His Sacred Majesty, into
Jailer Hammonds; who (notwithstanding his most solemn Protestations unto his
Majesty to treat Him well) promises this Parliament, that He will obey all
their Commands, although never so contrary to his sense and honor; id est, his
former Engagements to his Majesty; so absolute is he their Creature. And to
show us how true he is unto this last Engagement, in his Majesty's late
Resistance of him in the Search of some Papers, He has most impiously and
traitorously wounded his Sacred Majesty. The whole Earth will be amazed at this
Fact: the Christian World will tremble, and be highly offended at this greatest
Profanation of God in his Image: the Ears of posterity will glow to read,
God himself thus blasphemed and hurt in his immediate Delegate, Gods Vicar,
Gods Anointed, our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES. It was questionless the
Glory of Martyrdom these Men meant, when they promised to make His Majesty a
glorious Prince, for he has been already A most worthy Confessor, the late
condition of his Life being but a lingering Death: and indeed, what Kings of
England have been imprisoned, whose Lives also have not been taken away? This
passage no doubt is the Prologue unto the Tragedy they intend to Act, the
horrid Murder of our Sovereign: if the People disgust not this Fact of
Hammonds, they promise unto themselves impunity in their bloody intendments
against the Kings Life. This is the blessed Reformation of Westminster, the
Divine Religion derived thence. See what an harmony it has with the Word of
God: Touch not mine ^ed, Psalm. 105.15. (says the Spirit of God.) Who can
stretch forth his hand against the Lords ^ed and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26.9.
says David. Th^^^ is no rising up against a King, Prove. 31. says Solomon.
Here are Gods Letters Patents for the Kings Inviolability. But alas, an
Ordinance of this Parliament can nullify these, and warrant Hammonds violence
unto his Majesty. King Saul was a bloody Tyrant, dis-obedient unto Gods own
Voice, possessed with the Devil, an Idolater, and consulted with Witches, he
did most maliciously persecute David's Life, who had Gods Grane in Reversion of
the Kingdom; yet he could not entertain the thought of this Impiety in
himself, nor receive the violent Impressions thereof from others, when King
Saul was in his power, he says, God forbid that he should lift up his hand
against Gods Anointed; 1 Samuel 24.6. Yea more, His heart smote him when he cut
off the skirt of Saul's garment, only to testify his Integrity unto his
Prince. The young Amalekite but for hastening Saul's Death, (who had already
received his Deaths wound) although rescued from the Enemy, and presented David
with the Crown and Regal Ornaments, was by David sentenced to die, for not
fearing to touch Gods Anointed, 2 Samuel 1.10. and 14. And shall these Men escape
punishment who persecute a most pious Prince, whose whole carriage unbespeaks
all the malicious suggestions of men wickedly busy to undermine the public
peace, and meets with all the needless Iealousies of peevish people. How has
he in order unto peace condiscended to put down the High Commission and
Star Chamber Courts, the envied secular power of Bishops, willingly consigned
his Forts, Magazines, and Navy into the Dispose of the Parliament; and
notwithstanding the abuse of all these against His Royal Person and Crown; yet
how has He sought peace, and pursued it, by the Gracious Offer of An Act of
Indemnity; the Payment of the Army; by regard unto tender Consciences, and the
satisfaction of all Interests. All these things loudly proclaim his integrity
and great love unto his people, and his royal cle^^ncy unto all, so grossly
abused by the Avarice and Hypocrisy of these desperate Practicioners upon the
Body politic, whose Deeds sufficiently convey this Truth unto us, That this
Parliament will have no King; and to that end, it is more than a probable
conjecture, that they will murder the King.

Let us no longer lie in that Lethargy the wicked practices this Parliament
has cast us into, but redeem his Majesty out of Captivity and the Jaws of
Death, and vigorously, and effectually endeavor the re-establishment of our
first Reformation in Gods Church, and of his Majesty in his Throne. Not to
hinder a sin when it is in our power, implies an approbation thereof, and makes
the Guilt equal in the Permitters with the Actors of it: if we suffer these (as
Pilate did the Jews) to crucify Christ, Gods Anointed, the whole Ocean cannot
wash off the guilt of it from us, But his Blood will (also) be upon us and our
children. Let us then quit our selves like men, and reinforce our first
Reformation and his Majesty's Rights; Sacred Truths, for which we should be
valiant; God having given a Banner unto all them that fear him, because of his
Truth, let us all draw up together under this Banner, to be set up for Truth,
for God and King CHARLES; for our Religion and King, If we ought to lay down
our lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. How much more now, when our eldest
Brothers Life, our Kings Life worth ten thousand of our lives, and of many
thousand others our suffering Brethren nay, the life of (...) Religion and
Liberty lies at stake: let us avoid no danger or hazard to preserve the liv^^
(...) these; let neither Scots nor Irish, or Forraigners, prevent us of the
glory of this Christian and pious Enterprise, and our bounden duty, but let us
all rise as one man, from Dan to Be^rsheba, and join our power to remove the
Chair of violence, and Counsel of the Vngo^lly (...) Westminster; let these
Impostours, and Deceivers of the People (who can plead no privilege they have
so highly abused all) be brought to condign punishment, And as they have done
let it be done unto them, let their Reward return upon their own heads. Obad.
^^. To which purpose, let us in the Name of God Arm and Join with those who
will declare for the Re-establishment of Religion, and his Majesty: which
course as it discharges but our Duties unto God and our Prince, so it will
avoid the effusion of Christian Blood, save a vast expense of Treasure, prevent
the Devastation of our Country, continue our present, and beget a future
plenty, re-instate the Kingdom in her former happiness, vindicate us in our
long sufferings, and render us honored to the present Age, and glorious unto
posterity: let these our common and great interests, (sufficient Motives to
engage the most fearful spirits in the greatest Dangers) animate us unto this
great and good Work. King David's prayer for his own safety, and his Enemies
confusion shall supply the Conclusion.

Let not them O Lord say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it: let them not
say, We have swallowed him (the King) up. Psalm. 35, 25, 26, 27.

Let them be ashamed, and brought to confusion together that rejoice at his
hurt, let them be clothed with shame and dishonor that magnify themselves
against Him.

Let them shout for joy and be glad that favor his righteous Cause; yea, let
them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which has pleasure in the
prosperity of his Servant [King CHARLES] And let all good People of England
say, Amen.

FINIS.

