LIX. EXCEPTIONS AGAINST THE BOOK OF Common Prayer.
May 28th 1644
THe Book of Common Prayer contains in it, sundry things that are contrary to
the Word of God; For,

1. It appoints a Liturgy which in the whold matter and form thereof, is too
like unto the Masse-booke. 2. It appoints a Liturgy which by the length
thereof, does in many Congregations oft-times necessarily shut out Preaching,
viz. When Baptism, the Communion, Marrying, Churching and Burial concer
altogether (as often times they do) in great Congregations. 3. It approves of a
ministry as lawful which wants ability to preach. 4 It contains in it
sundry popish errors, or such things (at least) as tend strongly to the
maintenance of popish superstition. As, 1. The minister of the Gospel is
throughout the book, called Priest. 2. It comm^nd^^h the observation of many
Holy Days, and requires the minister to bid them, and prefers them (in
some sort) before the Lords day, For the ordinary Lessons appointed in the
Calender for the Lords day, must give place to the proper Lessons of that
holy day that falls on the Lords day, and Athanasius Creed is appointed to be
read only upon certain Holy days. 3. It appoints Saints Eves to be kept as
fasting days, and commands the Minister to bid the^rso. 4. It appoints the
time of Lent to be kept as a religious fast, and pervetteth both the example of
Christ's fast, and sundry other places of Scripture, to the justifying thereof.
It prescribes a special service for the first day of Lent, and appoints the
Commination and other special prayers and exhortations tending to repentance,
to be read upon that day only, and it affirms that, It was a godly
discipline in the Primative Church, (the restoring whereof is much to be
wished) that notorious sinners at the beginning of Lent, were put to open
Penance. 5. The week before Easter only of all the weeks in the year, has
prescript service appointed with Epistles and Gospels for every day, as
solemn, as the holy days are wont to have. 6. The Friday before Easter is
called Good Friday, and has three special Collects appointed for it, as has
no one day of the year besides. 7. It commands every Parishioner shall
receive the Communion at Easter. 8. It appoints the Congregation to pray that
God would give them that, which their prayers dare not presume to ask. 9. The
Catechism (in delivering the number of the Sacraments) says, there are two
only as generally necessary to salvation. 10. Theminister (as if Baptism were
of absolute necessity) is allowed not only to Baptzie in private, but to use
the words of Institution, and the element, though he have not so much time as
to say the Lords Prayer. 11. The Minister is allowed and directed to administer
the Communion to one sick of the Plague, though there be not one more to
communicate with him. 12. Interrogatories in Baptism are ministered unto
infants (as if repentance and faith were requisite in them, before they may be
baptized) and it is said in the Catechism, That Infants perform faith and
repentance by the Sureties who promise and vow them in their names. 13. Every
child baptized as if out ward Baptism did conset grace to all that receive it)
is said to be regenerate and in the Catechism it is said, that we are by
Baptism made the children of grace, and (in the Rubric immediately before
catechism) that is certain by Gods word, that children being baptized have all
things necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. 14. The
Minister is appointed to command that children be brought to the Bishop to be
Consumed, yea none may be admitted to the Co^mmunion till ^e have b^^
Confirmed. In Confirmation children are said to be certified thy the sign of
the imposition of the Bishops hand) of Gods favor and gracious goodness
toward them. And Confirmation is said to be ministered to them that are
baptized, that by imposition of hands and prayer, they may receive strength and
defense against all tentations to sin, and the assaults of the w^rld and the
devil. Yea confirmation is dignified above Christ's Sacraments, in that none
may administer it but a Bishop. And it is said to be administered after the
example of the holy Apostles, and warrant thereby. 16. It says that Matrimony
does signify unto us the mystical union betwixt Christ and his Church, and
that God did consecrate the state of Matrimony to such an excellent mystery,
that it is signified and represented the spiritual marriage and unity between
Christ and his Church. And the ring in Matrimony is appointed to be laid on the
Book, and the Priest to take it and deliver it to the man, and to teach him to
say thus, With this Ring I thee wed, etc. And the priest is appointed in his
prayer unto God to say, That the Ring is a token and a pledge of the Covenant
and vow made in Marriage. 16. The Priest is appointed to absolve every sick
person (that finds his conscience troubled with any weighty sin, and makes
special confession of it) in this form, By Christ's authority committed to me,
I absolve thee from all thy sins in the name of the Father, etc.

And in another place the people are appointed to come to the minister to
receive the benefit of absolution.

17. Burial is made a ministerial duty, and a prescript Liturgy is appointed
for it to be said at the grave, and we are appointed to pray thus. That God
would hasten his kindome, that we with this our brother, and all other departed
in the true faith of thy holy Name, way have our persit consummation and
bliss, hoth in body and soul. 18. Churching of women is commanded and made a
ministerial duty, and a prescript Liturgy appointed for it, and the woman is
appointed to kneel neele to the place where the table stands, and the Priest
to stand by her, when he Churcheth her, and that she must offer her accustomed
offerings. 19. Both in that place and else where, in the book, offering days
and an Offertory are allowed. 20. In the Catechism it is said, That the Son
of God has redeemed all mankind, taking that phrase in a larger sensethen for
all the Elect, as is evident by the words immediately going before, and
following after.
5. It appoints sundry things that end directly to the profanation of the
holy Sacraments either by prostituting them to unworthy persons, or
administering them unreverently. For, 1. All Priests and Deacons in Collegat
Churches are commanded to receive the Communion, every sunday at least. 2.
Every Communicant may choose whether he will give notice of his purpose to
receive, till after the beginning of morning prayer on the same day that he is
to Communicate. 3. All new married persons must receive the Communion the same
day they are married. 4. Private Baptism in some cases is allowed to be
administered without any prayer, doctrine, or exhortation.
6. It avoucheth sundry, manifest, and apparent untruths. As 1. That in the
Calender (so much as may be) the reading of the Scripture is so set forth, that
all things might be done in order without breaking of one piece from another.
2. That nothing (by this book) is ordained to be read, but the very pure word
of God the holy Scripture, or that mhich is evidently grounded upon the same.
3. That this book is so plain and perfect, as that the Curates shall need no
other books for their public service, but this book and the Bible, and yet it
injoynes him to read Homilies. 4. That all our Ceremonies pertain to
edification, and are apt to stir up the dull mind of man, to the remembrance
of his duty to God, by some notable and special signification. 5. It calls
certain chapters of Esaias, Jeremy, loel and the Acts, Epistles. 6. It appoints
us to say every day, from Christmas day, to Newyeares day in a Collect, that
Christ was born this day And upon Whitsunday, Monday and Tuesday, God which on
this day have taught, etc. 7. It affirms that Michael (mentioned, Rev. 12.)
is a created Angel. 8. It peremptorily affirms sundry things that (if they be
not manifestly false) are doubtful. As, 1. That the Infants whom Herod
murdered, were innocents, and Gods witnesses; and that they confessed his
praise by dying. 2. That there are Archangels. 3. That every one that is buried
is a brother, that God has taken to himself his soul, that we commit his
body to the ground in sure and certain hope of resurrection to eternal life.

8. It appoints sundry things that bring great disorder and confusion unto
the worship of God. As 1. That the people should say after the Minister, whole
sentences of Prayer and Scriputre; yea the Minister one part of the prayer, and
the people another. And in sundry parts of the Letany, the people make the
prayer, and the minister only directs them what to pray for. 2. That the
Minister is appointed to say some prayers kneeling, some standing, some in one
part of the Church, some in another. 3. That one of the people is allowed, to
make the general confession of sins at the Communion in the name of the
whole Congregation. 4. That at some one meeting of the Assembly the Lords
prayer is to be repeated eight several times, and Gloria patri twelve times.
5. That the holy Scriptures are so mangled into shreds and pieces, in the
Epistles and Gospels. 6. That the words of the Institution are to be pronounced
and repeated to every several Communicant. 7. That the Churchwardens are
appointed to go about on Communion days to gather the devotion of the people
in the midst of divine Service.
9. It contains sundry things that are ridiculous and absurd, and such as no
reasonable sense can be made of; for 1. It commands the reading of such
Homilies as shall hereafter be set forth by public authority. 2. It commands
every parishioner to communicate at Easter, and also to receive the Sacraments
and other rit^^. 3. It ministers Interogatories to Infants, which their
Godfathers answer unto, and says that Infants perform faith and repentance by
their Godfathers. 4. It appoints (in some cases) Baptism to be administered
conditionally in this form; If thou be not Baptized already, I Baptize thee,
in the name of the Father, etc. 5. It requires that every husband be taught by
the Priest 10 say to his wife (in the solemnization of Wedlock) With my body
Ithee worship.
20. It contains in it sundry evident contradictions; for 1. In the 2 Articl^
of the Rubric after the Communion, the Minister is forbidden to celebrate the
Communion, except there be a great number to communicate with him, and in the 3
Article of the same Rubric, he is allowed to cilebrate it, if there be but
three to communicate with him. 2. In one place it i^ said that, It is thought
good to follow the custom of the old Church (in ministering Baptism, but twice
a year) so near us convemently may be, and yet elsewhere, it allows
Baptism to be administered not only every day of the year in public, but
also every hour, either of day or night in privatei 3. In the Catechism it is
said, there are but two Sacraments, and in another place the book gives to
confirmation whatsoe^er (...) the definition of a Sacrament set down in the
Catechism) belongs to the nature and essence of a Sacrament. 4. In one place
it us said, that children should be brought to the Bishop to he confirmed; so
soon as they can say the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments; In
another it says, that our custom is agreeable to the usage of the Church in
times past, whereby it was ordained, that Confirmation should be ministered to
them that are of perfect age.

London printed for R. B. 1644.

FINIS.

