Zealous Believers are The best Subjects to CAESAR Or An exhortation to all
good Christians to pray for their princes: there being nothing wherein they can
better show their allegiance.

Published Invindication of the Saints against the false imputations of such as
count it rebellion to be religious.

by I. F.

Imprinted in the year, 1643.

Psalm. 120: 2. 5. 6. 7. DEliver my soul, o Lord from lying, lips, and from a
deceiptfull tongue. VVo is me that I sojourn in Mesech: that I dwell in the
tents of Redar. My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace. I am for
peace: but when I speak they are for war.

Revel. 3: 8. 9. 10. 11. I Know they works; behold I have set before thee an
open door, and no man can shut it: for thou have a little strength, and have
kept my word, and have not denied my name. Behold I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, and are not, but do lie: behold I
will make them to come, and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have
loved thee. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep
thee from the hour of tentation, which shall come upon all the world, to try
them that dwell upon the Earth. Behold I come quickly: hold that fast which
thou have; that no man take thy crown.

To the right worshipful John Brown Esquire Lord of the manor of Frampton in
the county of Dorset, and one of his Majesty's Justices of peace for the same
county, grace and peace from him that is, that was, and that is to come.
SIR
I could have published this small treatise without any particular dedication,
but that the remembrance of the manyfold favors which I have from my childhood
until now received from your worp, and your worthy family, obliges me to make
some public acknowledgment thereof, least I should be unthankful: desireing
therein to imitate the example of the blessed 2 Timothy 1: 16. 17. 18.
Apostle toward Onesiphorus; whom, I am commanded to 1 Cor. 11: 1.
follow as he followed Christ. Luke dedicated his Evangelical history to his
noble Theophilus, Paul an epistle to his beloved fellow laborer Philemon, and
the Disciple whom Jesus loved a letter to Gajus his host; and why not I this
homely piece (which is of public concernement) to you my noble landlord, to
w^^^ I owe (by the law of our la^^) both suite and service? W^^ch seeing I am
(by the calling wherein God has set me) restrained from civil performance of,
I can not but think my self bound to do you service in that which I have. Sir, I
have bin the more earnestly provoked hereunto, by some information which I have
lately received, of your being a member of that hoble house of Commons now
assembled in Parliament, and entrusted with the care of our County, in helping
to reform and settle the present enormities and distractions. I know that many
invective speeches (whereof that honorable Court is not ignorant) have bin
cast out since these troubles began; against the way Acts. 24: 14.
wherein I worship the God of my fathers, believing all things which are
written in the law and the prophets, which is by many accounted heresy and
doctrine of Lue. 23: 2.
rebellion; and men are prone by nature to follow the voice of the Ex^. 23: 2.
multitude, and very easily to be drawn to condemn that which Jude verse 10.
they know not. To the end therefore that your worship and that ho: ble court
with you may not (through misse-information) call Isa. 5: 20.
light darkness, and condemn the innocent without cause; I have bin constrained
out of 2 Cor. 5: 14.
love to God, and for the honor of the truth, to cast my mite into the Lord's
treasury; and to give you a taste of the fidelity and loyalty of those that
do truly profess separation from Babylon (spiritually so called) to the
higher powers. Who, if they shall nevertheless be still condemned as
evill-doers; yet, I hope, by their patient suffering, and 1 Pet. 3: 16.
good conversation, shall in the end make their enemies ashamed, who falsely
accuse them. The religious carriage which I have in my youth always noted in
your worcester:p, and your whole family, and the redressing of the public
profanation of the Lord's day and other profaneness in the place where you
have authority, at your first coming to the enioyment of the estate of your
deceased father (like an other Nehem. 13: 15. 16. 17. etc.
Nehemiah) wherein I hope you persevere, makes me to be confidently persuaded
of many good things which the Lord has wrought in you, and that you will be an
instrument in the hand of the Lord, to countenance and encourage such as walk
in his fear. Worthy Sir, if this my endeavor may be acceptable to God and you,
and profitable to any, I have my reward. In the mean time though I am absent
in the body, yet I shall not forget to commend you and your whole family, and
the proceedings of that honorable Court whereof you are a member (if I be not
misinformed) together with the present calamities of my native country, unto
Almighty God in my daily prayers; and be ready to do you and them any
service in the Lord.

I. F.
Amsterdam in Holland this 4th of the 5 month called May 1643.
To the well-advised Reader.
IF ever man might excuse himself of speaking in the cause of God before the
princes and people of the earth, by saying I am not eloquent, but slow of
speech, and of a slow tongue. Exodus 4: 10. or Ah Lord, God! behold I can not
speak; for I am a child, Ierem. 1: 6. then may I: who am constrained (by the
knowledge of mine own weakness) to confess my self of all men most unworthy
to open my mouth in the gates. For the which cause I have (though often moved
by the present distractions, to speak in way of defense of the gospel of
Christ, which now undergoeth as great reproach and as unadvised censures as
ever) restrained the bewraying of mine own illiterature and weakness to the
world; still hoping that God would stir up some more able instrument to have
minded those things whereon I have had some thoughts, and to have published
that which might have bin suffitient to remove the stumbling block. But having
hitherto failed of my expectation, and the fire still burning within me (Psalm.
39: 3.) I have now at length adventured to ease my mind in this homely
treatise. Wherein (Courteous reader) thou have the substance of some doctrines
which were long since delivered (on a day of public prayer commanded by the
states of the Netherlands for the good success of those Countries against
their enemies) to a Congregation of believers who are commonly (but corruptly)
called Brownists, some of whom have bin many years a go banished out of
their own native Country for the profession of the gospel, and not to this
day called home again, though they may say with the prophet Daniel that before
God innocence was found in them, and before the King they had done no hurt,
Dan. 6: 22. wherefore the Lord has preserved them unto this day, and provided
for them an hiding place from the stormy wynds and tempests of his wrath,
which are fallen upon our English Region. And who can tell but this may be a
scourge upon them for their banishing and cruel persecuting of the Saints,
whose cause the Lord does to this day justify by his gracious administrations
toward them, and whose righteousness he shall bring forth Psalm. 37: 6. 9. 39. 40.
as the light, and their judgment as the noone day; for evil doers shall be cut
off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the Earth. For the
salvation of the righteous is of the Lord: he is their strength in time of
trouble, and the Lord shall help them and deliver them: he shall deliver them
from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him.

In this treatise thou may plainly perceave, if thou be not prejudiced by
partiallity or worldly mindedness, how unjustly the people of that profession
(espetially those that sojourne at Amsterdam) are charged of being disturbers
of the Commonweal, and enemies to Kingly powers on earth, whiles they approve
such doctrine to be taught amongst them, as has bin always their profession
from their first separation from the Church of England, as may be seen by their
Apology or defense published against the groundless imputations of the
Oxford-doctors in the year 1604. and dedicated to K. James of famous memory.
By which Apology thou may perceive, for whom it is that I make this defense,
not for all that are called Brownists (for I must confess with the Ansvv. to
the K. decla. concering his victory. Oct. 3. 1642.
honorable court of Parliament of England, that there are many now a days
that go under the name of Brownists that come far short of the principles
which those which heretofore have only had that name cast upon them do hold,
such as are Semi-seperatists as they are termed, who can hold one foot in the
Church of God and the other in the Synagogue of Satan, partake of the Lords
table and the table of devils, and many forward professors, whom I leave to
stand or fall to their own master, knowing that God is also able to make them
stand, Romans 14: 4.) but only for a small company of poor despised Christians,
who are constrained to dwell in a strange Country Rev. 1: 9.
for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus Christ. But blessed be the
great God of heaven and earth the father of mercies the God of all consolation
who always causes them to 2 Cor. 2: 14.
triumph in Christ, and has 2 Cor. 1: 4.
comforted them in all their tribula^ion, and made them able to comfort others
that have bin i^ trouble by the comfort wherewith they themselves are comforted
of God.

For the substance of the treatise ^ hope thou shall find it agreeable te the 1
Pet. 4: 11.
word of God; for I desire to utte^ nothing in public, but what the scripture
has first spoken, or endited to me by which Rev. 2: 29.
the Spirit speaks unto the churches. But beautiful o^ lofty style (to
please humane fantasies) thou may not expect from on^ that is no scholar in
humane sciences and studyeth for no greater learning than to speak the truth in
plain English nor such sobriety and gravity as dot^ befit so weighty a subje^t,
from one the is so tender in age, and has bin bu^ four years in the school
of Christ and is full of like Acts. 14: 15.
passions and humane infirmities as other men are. Wher^fore if any thing be
let fall through m^ unadvisednesse herein, not beseemin^ the gospel of Christ,
and the ministry of the same, I know those that fear God will not rejoice in
it, and the wise will lovingly reprove me for it; and I (by God's grace) shall be
ready to acknowledge it, and an other time to amend it if I can.

I have bin moved to the publishing hereof by the diverse speeches, and
declarations which have bin given out (on all hands) in these troublesome
times, wherein those that fear God and separate from sin as much as in them
is, have bin inveighed against, as a company of scismaticall, and troublesome
spirits to the State. Yea writings have bin published in the name of the King's
most excellent majesty (whom we ought all under God to reverence as the father
of our Country and God's vicegerent in his dominions) wherein have bin great
imputations of evil against such under the name of Brownists, as if they and
Anabaptists with the assistance of K. Declar. against the Parl. assessing dat.
Dec. 8. 1642. Page 5.
vicious and deboished persons of desperate fortunes take upon them to break
up and rifle houses, as public and avowed ministers of a new invented
authority etc. and afterward it is said, whilst Scismaticall, illiterate, and
scandalous preachers fill their pulpits and churches with blasphemy,
irreverence, and treason, and incite their auditors to nothing but murder and
rebellion, etc. And again page 7. These are the men who joining with the
Anabaptists and Brownists of London first changed the government and
discipline of that City, would undo the Kingdom, etc. And some thing I have
read in some former writings, striking at the godly people at Amsterdam also,
as if they were the original of these stirs and tumults (when as it is nothing
else but for the sins of the land that God's hand is stretched out against them)
Wherefore it is imputed as a blame to the Parliament and city of London, that
they maintain and countenance Brownists etc. See declar: of vict: Oct. 3.
1642. and his Majesty's answer to the Cities petition for peace, read in a
Common hall, etc. Now the law has required me, not to revile or Exodus 22^ 28.
Acts. 23: 5.
curse the ruler of my people, neither can I easily be brought to think that
these expressions proceeded originally out of his princely heart; which if yet
they did, far be it from me to censure him for them in my Eccl. 10: ^. 20.
thoughts. I have also heard and understood, and the current of writings makes
me somewhat to credit it, that it is a common practice of their parsons and
vicars in their pulpits (that they may curry favor with the bad counsillers
about the King) to inveigh against Brownists and Seperatists, as the only
seditious and rebellious persons of the Kingdom. But by the following treatise
thou majest plainly perceave (gentle reader) that whosoever are guilty of those
faults; yet that poor Congregation for whom I plead, who have their habitation
in a far Country are free and innocent of the same, and are such as do
neither plot or countenance the plotting of any evil, or sow any seed of
rebellion against the higher powers, but do owe and acknowledge them all due
reverence, as also the law requires, and their carriage does witness for them
in the place where they dwell, and perform all duties of honor and office,
without complaint.

I have therefore cumbered the press herewith, fearing least any should either
be discouraged by these rumor^ and slanders (which are and have bi^ hitherto
cast upon us) from embracing the truth, and walking in the right way or should
through misse-reports condemn the righteous with the guilty and also to stop
the mouths of gainsayers, who if (notwithstanding the^ shall see this defense)
they do still persist in their opprobrious calumniations, shall be left without
excuse before the face of God Romans 2: ^.
whose judgment is according to truth against those that commit such things. I
have sought herein, nothing, but the glory of God, and the vindication of the
truth from unjust contempt; which if it shall notwithstanding suffer, I shall
desire of God that I may be accounted worthy to suffer with it. And for a
conclusion, it is mine hearty desire, that all people whatsoever which do
make any profession of the truth may approve themselves such in their
conversations, as Pro. 24: 21.
fear God and honor the King and meddle not with them that are given to
change: but Heb. 12: 14
follow peace with all men and holiness, without which no man can see the Lord,
meddling with their own callings, and be not busy bodies in other men's matters,
that those which 1 Pet. 3: 16.
speak evil of them may be ashamed who falsely accuse their good conversation
in Christ. But if any of them do under color of religion or Conscience,
resist the lawful commands of their prince or governor, and do suffer for
it, let them thank themselves, and confess the justice of God upon them, for
Romans 13: 4.
they are his ministers, appointed to execute vengeance on them that do evil,
and they bear not the sword in vain.

2 Timothy 2: 7. Consider what I say: and the Lord giv^ thee understanding in all
things.

1 Thessalonians. 5: 21. Prove all things: hold fast that which i^ good.


An exhortation to pray for Princes.
1. Ep. to Timotheus Cap. 2. verse 1. 2. 3. I exhort therefore, that first of
all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men: for Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

For this is good, and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, etc.


THis exhortation (as also the whole epistle) was written and sent by Paul the
blessed Apostle of Jesus Christ to 1 Timothy 1: 1. 3.
Timothy the Evangelist, whom he besought when he went to Macedonia, to abide
at Ephesus a renowned city of Asia, wherein the Lord had planted a famous Rev.
1. 11. and 2: 1.
Church of Saints and true worshippers of his name, notwithstanding the
heathenish service of that great goddess Diana and the image which fell down
from Jupiter did there so greatly flourish (Act. 19: 24. 27. 28. 35.) where the
Lord wrought by the hands of Paul many miracles (Acts 19: 11.) where the
Apostle fought with beasts in the manner of men (1 Cor. 15: 32.) and wherein
there was a great door and effectual opened to him, though there were many
adversaries, 1 Cor. 16: 9. The end of the abiding of Timothy at Ephesus in the
Apostle his absence, was to supply that service which the Apostle himself
should have done if he had bin present, namely, 1 Timothy 1: 3.
to charge some that they should teach no other doctrine than that which the
Apostle had taught them, or than was agreeable to 2 Timothy 1: 13.
sound and wholesome words of faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. Now as
persons of greater place and authority, leaving others more inferior in wisdom
and power, to discharge some duty for them in their necessary absence (or to
attend upon a service which they themselves are called from by occasions
elsewhere) do give them not only commission, but also direction how the same
should be done: So the Apostle Paul (the master builder of the Churches of the
gentiles, 1 Cor. 3: 10.) not only gives Timothy commission to tarry in his
stead; but also counsels and directs him how to behave himself in the
house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of
truth, 1 Timothy 3: 16. And amongst the many most excellent, divine, and
infallible rules of direction, which he gives him, we are now called upon to
consider and attend unto one of the chiefest and principallest things which he
gave him in charge; the which he does not in commanding and lordly terms, but
with meekness and love, saying, I exhort therefore that first of all, etc.

The Apostle's intent and purpose in this exhortation, is not to Timothy alone,
that he should perform this; but that he should teach it to the Church of God,
as the mind of the Apostle, which was the 1 Cor. 7: 40.
mind of God himself, wherefore the Apostle says I exhort therefore, etc. as if
he should say, If any man shall resist or refuse thy exhortation to, or example
in the performance of this duty; let them know that it is the exhortation of me
Paul the Apostle of Christ, who have with power and demonstration of the Spirit
approved my self among them by signs and wonders to be no fabler or leight
fellow, to be no seducer and deceitful worker, but the minister, legate, and
messenger of God himself, who has put his word in my mouth, which if they
obey not, they may have cause to repent it.

As this exhortation was at the first intended and penned by the Apostle, for
the instruction of the church of God, and the substance of this treatise
thereupon delivered to a congregation of Believers (as is noted in the preface)
So the intent now of publishing it, is not to exhort wicked and worldly men to
make prayers and supplications unto God, or to assure them of any benefit by so
doing; for the scripture says that the sacrifices of the wicked are
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15: 8. and 21: 27. and 28: 9. and those that
call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, but how shall they call upon him
in whom they have not believed? etc. Romans 10: 13. 14. And if they say they do
believe, then the scripture says again, that faith without works is dead,
Jam. 2: 17. 20. 26. and they that profess they know God, and in Tit. 1: 16.
works deny him, and are abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work
reprobate; they have the 2 Timothy 3: 5.
form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, and therefore we are bidden
to turn away from them; (I should rather exhort such, to repent, and be
converted that their sins may be blotted out when the times of refreshment
shall come from the presence of the Lord, Acts. 3: 19. and then they may come
with boldness to the throne of grace, and be sure to find grace to help in
time of need, Heb. 4: 16. for they must be purged even as gold and silver,
before they can offer to the Lord an offering in righteousness, Mal. 3: 3.)
But my purpose in manifesting this discourse, is partly to put the Church of
God in mind (as in duty and by calling I am bound) what is the best and most
safest means to be used by them in these troublous times, to help to allay
the distractions of our native Country; and that such a means as whereby they
(though absent from them yet) may help them, and that more effectually than if
they should run home and fight for them; to wit by their earnest prayers,
tears, and strong cries unto God, which prevail powerfully when sword and
spear can do no good: and partly (as has bin before touched) to give the
world and all juditious readers to understand (if they will understand any
thing) that those faithful Christians which go commonly (though falsely)
under the name of Brownists, are not so corrupt in doctrine and manners as has
bin (since the session of this present Parliament of England) diverse times
intimated against them by persons of no mean quality, whose words (by reason
of their place and dignity) do call for credit when they affirm any thing
inword or writing, and that not only such as assist the King, but also some
that seem to plead for the Parliament as if Brownists as they term them were
the only and chief foisterers and fomentors of these dissentions, and the only
masterlesse and unruly persons in the common wealth, and such as can not endure
Kingly government or authority over them. And this I have attempted not for
the credit of the persons of the professors (for they can have no greater
credit and honor upon earth, than to be falsely accused for the name of
Christ, Math. 5: 11. 12.) but for the truth's sake, that such as desire or
inclyne to the embraceing thereof, may receive no stumbling block or offense by
these aspersions, but may Iam. 1: 21.
with meekness receave the ingraffed word which is able to save their souls;
and that they who have already received it may not so faint in their minds,
that they should by these reproachful slanders be turned aside from the good
way whereunto the Lord has called them; but have something to answer those
that shall thus accuse them; and by their perseverance in well doing put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men, and Gal. 6: 9.
never be weary of well doing, knowing that in due time they shall reap, if
they faint not.

In these verses therefore and so forward The scope.
unto the end of the 7th verse of this chapter, the Apostle exhorts to the
careful and diligent performance of public prayers, wherein he teaches, that
we are not only to be myndfull of our selves, but ought to remember all men in
our prayers to God, and espetially Kings and all other magistrates, of whom
there might have bin then great occasion to doubt whither they should be prayed
for or seeing they were such bitter enemies to the Church of God. But for them
espetially the Apostle proves that Christians ought to pray, by an argument
drawn from the profitable effect which should and might come thereby to
themselves, viz that they (by their prayers seeking and procureing the safety
and preservatio^ of Kings and magistrates, and their equal and just
administration of their office) might live a peaceable and quiet life in all
godliness and honesty. And for all men both kings and people, by an argument
drawn from a certain and assured effect which ca^ not but follow upon our
faithful and ferve^t prayers in this kind; viz that therein we should please
God* How ever it goes with us in respect of the King and people, though he
continue^ to be a tyrant against us, and regard not the benefit which might
come to him and hi^ land by the prayers of the faithful, and they do continue
still in their ignoran^ refusing of the knowledge of God: ye^ our praying for
them shall return into our own bosoms, it shall not come home empty; for: 1:
this is good, that i^ a greable to the will of God, profitable and benefitiall
unto our selves. 2ly acceptable in the sight of God our Savior: A thing
wherein he is much delighted as, with the sweet incense and Psa. 14 1: 2:
evening sacrifice. The which goodness and acceptablenes of prayer the Apostle
proves by another argument, taken from the end whereunto God would have all
men to attain, which is salvation. Wherein we may apprehend the Apostle's
argument to be to this effect. He that wills or is well pleased with the end,
the same wills also and is well pleased with the use of the lawful means
for attayning to that end: But God wills all men, that is all sorts of men
as well Kings and other magistrates as people to be 2 Pet. 3: 9.
saved: Therefore God wills and it is a thing good and acceptable in his sight
that prayers and supplications be made for them that they may come to the
knowledge of his truth and so be saved. Verse 4. Now that God does will the
salvation of all sorts of men he confirms by a double reason, Verse 5. and 6.
first because there is but one God of all sorts of men, that is, because one and
the same God has chosen his people in and out of every order and condition of
men, whom he has ordained to be objects of his favor. There is not one God of
the King, and an other^ of the subject; not one of the rich an^ another of the
poor; not one of the Romans 3: 29.
Jew^ and another of the gentile; but he only that justifies both Jew and
gentile, i^ able to save both king and people; it i^ the Romans 10: 12
same Lord over all that is rich unto al^ that call upon him; and he alone
knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2: 19. Secondly because there is but one mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who has given and offered up him
self to the father, as the price of redemption for all those whom the father
has given him out of every kindred and nation and kingdom and people, out o^
every sex and condition. Amongst whom he puts no difference, but alike dye^
for them all, for there is Col. 3: 11.
neither gree^ nor Jew, circumcission nor uncircumcission, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond nor free ^ but Christ is all and in all, and all are one in him, whom the
Lord will have to be testified in due time to his elect of al^ sorts and
conditions, to the end that they might believe in him, and believing might have
life through his name; an^ Acts. 15: 1^,
known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world. Now prayer
is an espetiall means whereby the word of this salvation is made 2 These. 3: 1.
to pass and take effect upon all and unto all whom God has predestined
unto the Ephesians. 1: 5.
adoption of children by Jesus Christ unto himself according to the good
pleasure of his will. So that this, to wit, the testifying of Jesus Christ unto
all, may be another argument to move us to pray for all.

Or (if we would have the division Division.
shorter, and such as we may more easily comprehend, then) thus we have it.
First, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. Thirdly, it is good and acceptable in the sight of God, etc. as if the
Apostle should say, whatsoever is good and acceptable in the sight of God, that
w^ ought to be careful to do and perform ^ But to pray for all men, is good
and acceptable in the sight of God (how ever it go^ with us, whither they
persecute us or giv^ us liberty) I Exhort therefore, that first of all
supplications, prayers, Intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all
men.

Before we come to the handling of the duties here mentioned, it shall be worth
our labor, to mind the occasion of the Apostle's putting Timothy in mind o^
these duties, and the manner how he commends them to him, wherein he is a^
example or pattern to Timothy, how he shall commend this to the church o^ God.

The occasion is contained in the illative particle, therefore, I exhort
therefore ^ which calls upon us, to look back upon the matter or substance of
the foregoeing chapter, espetiallie that which is se^ down in the verses
imediatly goeing before this exhortation. Wherein the Apostle remembereth
Timothy of the dangerous condition of such as 1 Timothy 1: 4. 5. 6. etc.
give hee^ to fables, etc. of such as swarved from faith, charity, and a good
conscience, turnin^ aside after vain jangling, and disputations about the law,
etc. and of the mercy of God showed to himself in particular, in accounting
him faithful, and putting him into his service who before was a blasphemer,
etc. And having concluded the occasion of his writing this epistle with Verse 17.
thankesgiving to God, he proceeds to give Timothy his general charge,
wherein he shows to what end he writes this charge unto him, namely, that he
by the peophesies which were before of him might war a good warfore, holding
faith and a good conscience, the which he should have the more care of, for
that he knew of some already that had made shipwrak of faith, of whom were
Hymeneus and Alexander. From which general charge the Apostle proceeds to
this first and principal duty to be observed by the Church, of which Timothy
was to have care. So that in the former chapter the Apostle seems to make a
general entrance into this epistle, wherein he prepares Timothy to receave
his direction and commandments; and now he begineth to handle the particular
things whereof he was to have a Care, as a faithful minister of Jesus Christ.
Of which the first and principal duty which he was to perform, and to see
performed, or to exhort others unto, was to prayer, etc. The two general and
more ordinary duties of the ministers of the gospel are described Act. 6: 4.
to be prayer and the ministry of the word. These are the things whereunto
they are to give themselves, as the Apostles in that place resolved to do for
their parts; for indeed all things are 1 Timothy 4: 5.
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. The performance of these duties of
piety prayer and thankesgiving, are espetiall means to confirm and keep us in
the true and sincere worship of God, to nourish and increase in us faith and a
good conscience, which some had put away, as the Apostle complains in the
imediatly foregoeing verses; wherefore it is not in vain, but to good purpose
that the Apostle begineth first with this duty, saying, I exhort therefore that
first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be
made for all men.

As concerning the manner of the Apostle his laying down these duties, it is
not in any dominereing and commanding way, with threatenings and lofty terms
or gesture (as the manner of Lordly prelates is to behave themselves toward
their clerks) not as if the Apostle were Timothy's 1 Timothy 1: 2.
father in the Lord, not as if Paul were an Apostle which was a chief office,
and Timothy but an Evangelist which was more inferior, but as if they were
equals, fellow servants (as indeed the Apostle does account the meanest
ministers of Christ that served with him in the work of the Lord, Philem. Verse
1. 2. 1 Thessalonians. 3: 2. Col. 4: 7. 11. Coloss. 1: 7. Philip. 2: 25. and 4: 3. 2
Cor. 8: 23.) for he says (...) I exhort, beseech, pray, and persuade; or by
the reasons and arguments preceding, and following, I move, counsill, and
stir you up, as the word is diversely rendered by our translators. In Romans 15:
30. I beseech you brethren by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the
Spirit, that you help together with me in your prayers, etc. Romans 12: 1. I
beseech you therefore brethren by the mercies of God, etc. 2 Cor. 6: 1. we
beseech ^ou also, etc. 1 Timothy 6: 2. These things ^each and exhort. Tit. 2: 6.
Exhort ^oung men to be sober minded, etc. (See ^lso, 1 Thessalonians. 5: 11. 14.) that
is, by sound and wholesome reasons and arguments in doctrine persuade and move
them. Wherefore we shall find that the Apostle seldom or never uses this word
exhort in his own person to others, but he either prefixeth or affixeth
reasons to move the^ to the doing of that which he commends to them. And
John the Baptist is said when he preached to be Luc. 3: 18.
(...) exhorting, and the Apostle calls his own doctrine 1 These. 2: 3.
(...) exhortation. Whence we may learn what are the weapons that faithful
Bishops and overseers of the souls of God's people must use to provoke and
prick forward the flock committed to their charge in the doing of good duties,
and to resist and oppose such as do withstand the truth; they must not be
carnal and fleshly weapons (of processes, citations, injunctions,
threatenings, imprisonings (take him pursivant, a dowtie argument to come out
of a preacher's mouth) such as have bin used by some who have called themselves
Bishops but may be termed bad-ships o^ late years in their ecclesiastical
(tyranicall) courts and consistories) but they must be mighty through God
pulling down the strong holds of Satan, 2 Cor. 10: 4. 5.
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ; they must not be the customs of the Church, nor the laws
of the magistrate (much less of a few corrupt men in lane sleeves and
foursquared caps) that must be their shield and buckler, but it must be by Tit.
1: 9.
sound doctrine that they must both exhort the one and gainsay the other; which
must be produced out of that well spring of learning the holy Scripture, which
is given by 2 Timothy 3: 16. 17.
in spiration of God and is (only and suffitiently) profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be perfect thoroughly furnished unto all good works? For whosoever Isa.
8: 20.
speaks not according to the word which is written in the law and in the
testimony, it is because there is no light in him; and whatsoever he be (though
an Angel from heaven) that shall seek to draw us by any other doctrine or
arguments than what are learned thence, we may not hold him a minister of
Christ, but an instrument of Satan 2 Cor. 11: 15.
transformed into the likeness of a minister of righteousness, that he may
deceave the better; and such an one is pronounced to be Gal. 1: ^.
accursed.

Erasmus notes that Ambrose an ancient Annota: in locum fortasse legit (...)
writer rendereth this word Exhortare in the imparative mood, and second
person, as if the Apostle would have Timothy exhort others viz the Church of
Ephesus. Howsoever we take it, it still serves to show what meeknes and care
the ministers of the gospel should use in directing the church of God in
performance of her duty. Meekness, in that it must not be with terror and
masterlynes; but with soft and gentle admonitions and exhortations. Care, in
that it must not be only in soft and still words, but those words must be
sound and forceable; words which must carry with them their force of argument.
For it is not enough to speak unto the church, but it must be to purpose, with
understanding, using such arguments and reasons, as may convince the
conscience, and persuade the heart ( as the 1 Pet. 4: 11.
oracles of God) to obedience, and take away all doubt and scruple which may
any wise hinder from the doing of the duty, or believing the doctrine. For, to
lay one stone upon an other is not to build, that is but to heap up stones; but
to fit the stone for his proper place, and to fasten it in with mortar, that is
the work of building. So, they that edify the Church must not do it by
heaping up words and speeches (the Prove. 10: 19.
multitude whereof does darken I^b 38: 2.
counsill, and therein iniquity can not be wanting) pressing to this or that at
random (as it were) and confusedly: but the exhortation being laid upon a good
foundation (some solid and sound doctrine or thesis of truth) must be fitted to
it is proper place, and then be beaten in with the hammer or trowell of God's
law, semented or fastened in its place by suffitient arguments, drawn from the
profit and benefit which shall accrue to them in the doing of such or such a
service, and the loss and damage which comes by the neglect thereof, and
illustrated by examples and lively similitudes, whereby the same may be the
more pleasing and delightful to the eye of the mind. And this is to speak a
word to edification and exhortation. The like b 1 Cor. 14: 3.
may be said also of comfort, which is by wholesome and sound words and
arguments, (drawn from the causes and ends of affliction, the grace and mercy
of God, and the comfortable promises thereof which he has made unto us in his
word) to encourage those that are in affliction and calamity to lift up their
heads, and to have cheerful Spirits waiting patiently upon the Lord who shall
give a good issue to all their adversities. Whereof we have an exact president
commended to us by the Apostle, Heb. 12. verse 1. etc. verse 5. and. verse 12. to
the end. Wherefore our new English translation and the old latin render this
same word in (...).
1 Thessalonians. 5: 11. Comfort your selves together, which our old translation in
English and the newer translations in latin express thus Exhort one an other.
Which (if we approve of both) may give us to learn that true comforting is by
sound and godly exhortations, which must be framed as before.

We may further observe (in the manner of the Apostle's laying down this
exhortation) the season time or order of performing these duties (...).
first of all or before all things. Some will have the genitive case ( of all)
to be referred to supplications prayers, etc, as if the Apostle did require the
prayers of all the church to be made. Which I take rather to be a niceity in
the interpretation (an humor which many men are troubled with, who would feign
vent some conceits which others dream not of) than to have any appearance from
the text seeing the verb (...) ( be made) comes between (...) ( of all) and
(...) ( supplications) whereas if the genitive case had agreed with
supplications, etc, it should have bin set either imediatly before or after it
and the other. Yet (notwithstanding this wrested interpretation be not approved
of) I take the Apostles meaning to be, that all the church should perform
those duties as has bin declared in the general scope. Others will have these
words first of all to be understood according to Christ's precept first seek
the Kingdom of heaven, etc. Math. 6: 33, not so much to respect the order of
time as the dignity of the thing to be performed. Which understanding either of
the words of Christ or of the Apostle I can not take to be the most current or
strictest, though in some sort I should grant, that God does not so much esteem
the first performance of a thing in respect of the outward order or
circumstance of time, as that it should have the first and principal seat in
our affections and desires of our hearts: yet I can not withal but mind, that
what the heart does most principally and earnestly desire, that the tongue will
prefer to the first place in the outward expression, for our Savior says
that Math. 12: 34.
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. And surely if our hearts
did most of all in sincerity Mat. 5: 6.
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and our affections were not set on
things below but on things in Col. 3: 1, 2.
heaven, ou^ prayers and petitions would in the first place tend to that
purpose, according to that perfect platform which Christ has Mat. 6: 9. etc.
taught us, wherein he has set the petitions which imediatly concern God and
his glory, before those which do more nerely concern our selves. And for my
part, I dare not in any case have a though^ to question the perfection of that
form^ of prayer, either in substance or circumstance; though yet I do not
intend to put a bond upon the Spirits of the Saints, without the observation
whereof their prayers can be no way acceptable. But I fear, least our
preferring (in our form of prayers) the praying for the forgivenes of sin and
Gods grace and blessing to be poured down upon us in particular, before the
seeking of the sanctifying of his name, the doing of his will, and coming of
his Kingdom, do not proceed out of a self-love, and greater desire we have of
our own salvation, than of Gods glory simply.

Therefore in simplicity, if we take these words to be the Apostles exhortation
(which is the agreement of most interpreters, and the best gramaticall
construction of the word exhort, as appears by the use thereof in other
places) then I can not but conceave his intent to be, not only to note the
dignity of these duties, but also the very order of performance, that they
should be done in the first place, and before all other things. And indeed the
Apostles (who had as little need to pray as any, being not prone to err in
their doctrines) do place it first in order of their ministerial
administrations viz Act. 6: 4.
prayer and ministry of the word: and if we consider well the worthiness and
difficulty of this duty, it shall not only have the preferment in our
thoughts, but also in our practice. Wherefore I conclude hence, that it is an
approved and laudable practice which the Churches of the Saints have learned,
and do use, and good it is that they should continue the reverent observation
thereof, namely, that before they enter into the administration of the word of
God, they make prayers supplications, inrercessions, and giving of thanks to
God. For indeed it is by prayer, that we procure help and assistance to
administer, hear, and understand the word. Prayer and thankesgiving should
therefore be the first and last, the beginning and end, the opening and
shutting up of every Christian assembly. Begin there with, that we may have
help to perform the work we are taking in hand. End therewith that we may
have that accepted and blessed, that has bin done.

And if such be the carriage of Gods people in their coming together before
God, then may they confidently expect to have him that walks in the Revel. 2:
1.
midst of the seven golden candlesticks, and has the seven stars in his
right hand to be with them, for he has said Math. 18: 20.
where two or three are met together in my name there am I in the midst of
them: and the Apostle exhorts saying, whither ye eat or drink or whatsoever
ye do, do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10: 31. and again, whatsoever ye
do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to
God and the father by him Colos. 3: 17.

Here the church of God may (by the way) further take notice of a point worthy
of consideration; namely that if prayers and thankesgiving be such principal,
necessary, and worthy duties to be performed in their public assemblies, then
they ought to take care when they elect any to minister the word unto them,
that they be such as are endued with the Spirit of supplication also, and that
in no less a measure than with the Spirit of prophecy; and that because these
are the chiefest and principal duties: and indeed when men have well and
effectually performed this duty, a good half of the work is done; and there is
no doubt that seeing prayer and ministry of the word are the most ordinary and
frequent administrations of this kind of church officers, that whom the Lord
has fitted for the one, is also endued with ability to perform the other. And
therefore hereby may be seen the ignorance of those people, that have admitted
those to be thrust upon them, as curates of their souls, who though they have
made shift, now and then, to tickle them with an homily, or (it may be) to
pronounce a long studied for sermon, yet have bin no way able to pour out upon
all occasions prayers and thankesgiving to God, otherwise than out of a book,
or a stinted form which they have with much a do collected together, and
learned without book, which they have used as a common hackney in their
devotion.

If we take these words as spoken to Timothy, that he should exhort, etc. then
we must understand that these words first of all, do commend unto him the
dignity and necessity of these duties; and it will serve to inform us, that
the doctrines concerning prayer and thankesgiving are such, as should be upon
all occasions taught in the Church, and the people of God be earnestly exhorted
to the practice of them, and that as principal and espetiall duties to be by
them performed. Yea and if we mind the Apostle's omitting to set down any
particular persons, whom he does exhort (though it be before in the entrance
intymated that he intends principally the Church of Ephesus, yet naming none)
he shows that neither Timothy the Evangelist to whom he writes this epistle,
nor the Church in general, nor any par^iculer member thereof, high or low,
rich or poor, learned or unlearned, but were obliged to, and had need to be
exercised ^n these manifestations of their faith and love, as things well
pleasing to God, and profitable to themselves. Therefore I ^ope that none will
think this an unworthy thing that I have now taken in hand, which is in these
times of trouble wherein iniquity does abound and the love of many does wax
cold, and there are not only two, but many yea a great ^omber who like Hymeneus
and Alexander have put away faith and a good conscience, and concerning faith
have made Shipwreck) to stir up 2 Pet. 3: 1.
the pure ^yndes of God's people, to the diligent and careful performance of
supplication and prayers unto God, which is the surest and powerfullest means
which can be used by us for the obtaining of an happy issue of all these
distractions; for says the Psalmist Psalm. 107.
then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivers them out of
their distresses: the rather because the present occasion of our assembling does
call upon us for such meditations, for we are met together this day to seek
the face of the Lord in the behalf of our selves and the people among whom we
sojourne, and with whom the Lord has made us partakers of many great
deliverances from the hands of their and our enemies, and with whom we are
still in danger of them, their fear is our fear* their distress ours, their
deliverance and preservation ours; and amongst them those that are in authority
being the chief pilots (under God) who do guide the helm or rudder of this
our common wealth. Those that go before us i^ fighting the battles of the
Country abroad, and keeping peace at home, by their well ordered government,
if they b^ cut off our ship is like to be exposed t^ great danger, if not
shipwreck: wherefore we have great reason to pray if for all men, then
espetially for them. To which purpose tend these words of the Apostle (which I
have thought also to suite well with our present occasion) saying I exhort
therefore that first of all supplications prayers intercessions and giving of
thanks be made for all men: for kings, and for all that are in authority, etc.

The sum and substance of which words is to exhort us to prayer and
thankesgiving, as we have heard before. In the laying down of which two duties
the Apostle uses four several words as if they were so many several duties
to be performed; as first (...) Supplications which some translate obsecrations
or deprecations, that is prayers against evil or for deliverance from evils.
Secondly (...) prayers, which are by some translated, orations, petitions; that
is craving or desiring some good thing to be bestowed on us. 3ly. (...)
inter^essions, which some take to mean complaints we make of those that hurt
us, but then it should be rather rendered inter^ellations: others take
intercessions in this place to be for the turning of the hearts of our
persecutors; but most agree in this that they do signify the requests or
desires which we make unto God one for another, whither of the first or second
kind which seems to be the clearest interpretation of this word seeing it is
used Romans 8: 34. Heb. 7: 25. where the text gives the direct and simple
meaning of it. Others make this distinction, that by the first word is meant
all kind of prayers in general; the second, when some certain thing is
desired; and by the third is signified prayers made for others. All together
then thus, humble and earnest seekings unto God, for any blessing spiritual or
temporal, for our selves or others, or deliverance from any danger to trouble.

I shall not dare to trace the paths of curious speculations about the
etymology of these words and the distinction of prayers into several kinds
and sorts required in this place; but rather take the Apostles scope and
purpose to be in these different expressions both to set down a perfect
general rule, which should contain in it all particulers, that thereou^ might
be no starting hole for any uncharitable mind, to warrant the omission of any
kind of prayer for the persons herein after mentioned; and also to press us
earnestly to the performance of this duty. The which freedom and fullness of
speech the Apostle uses in other places when he says Ephesians. 6: 18. (...).
praying always with all (...).
prayer and (...).
supplication, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication
for all Saints: and Philip. 4: 6. Be careful for no thing: but in every thing
by prayer and supplication with thankesgiving, let your request be made known
unto God. And this I inclyne unto the rather for that in the hebrew text of the
old testament I find several words used by the holy Ghost for these things;
yet he does not intend any curious or necessary distinction, but a more earnest
and plentiful expression, the more to set out the excellency and perfection of
his own scripture. For I find the word Thepilah in 2 Cron. 6: 29. translated
prayers which word has its derivation of Paalal to judge, appease, or
de^ermine causes, for which appeals are made. See Psalm. 106: 30. Sometime to
conclude by thought and imagination upon some ground induceing the mind
thereunto, as Genesis 48: 11. I had not thought to see, etc. yet the holy Ghost
does not thereby make any strict distinction, for in 1 Samuel 2: 25. ( If one man
syn against an other, the Gods shall Pilelo.
judge him: but if a man sin against God, who Iithepalel-lo.
shall entreat for him) there it may be rendered intercede, or mediate. So like
wise in 2 Cron. 30: 18. But Hezekiah prayed for them, that is, interceded for
them, etc. And in Jsa. 1: 15. when you make many Thepilah.
prayers, I will not hear, there it is not taken distinctly for any one kind
or sort of prayers, but generally all of what kind soever. So also I find
Thechinoh (which comes of Chaanan with signifies to do a thing gratis Jud.
21: 22. Pro. 26: 25. and is used to set forth the free grace and mere good
will of God, Exodus 33: 19.) in 2 Cron. 6: 29. and 1 King. 8: 33. translated
Supplications, so also in Hest. 4: 8. Job 8: 5. Psalm. 30: 8. and 142: 1. Jsa.
45: 14. 1 King. 8: 59. and intreatyes Pro. 18: 23. Job 19: 17, which is an
earnest seeking of the face: but by 1 King. 8: 30, I find that the holy Ghost
intends no curious distinction by this from the first phrase, for there it is
said thus, And hear thou the supplications of thy servant, and thy people
Israel, which they shall Iithepale-lu.
pray in this place; where both the words are indifferenlty used, for they are
said to pray their supplications: And in 2 Cron. 33: 13. it is said of Manasseh
the king of Judah, that in his affliction he humbled himself greatly before the
God of his fathers, And prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him and heard
his supplication, etc. where both the former words are also indifferently used,
for his prayer is called supplication. So also in the 1 King. 9: 3. the Lord
said unto Solomon, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication which thou have
made, etc. in Heb. which Hithechananethah.
thou have supplicated; where he is said to have supplicated his prayer as well
as his supplication. The like maybe said of (...) Isa. 53: 12. which is
translated will make intercession See Jer. 36: 25. Isa. 36: 25. Isa. 59: 16. it
comes of (...) which signifies properly (as the learned note) to meet, or run
upon one, to fall upon one, Genesis 32: 1. Judge. 8: 21. Isa. 53: 6. the Lord has
laid on him, etc. Heb. the Lord has caused our sins to run upon him, like a
swift stream or flood running from an hill into an hole or pit in the bottom
(if I may believe my author) and by a metaphor, to run or step in between, to
intercede, to step forth either with the body or words to mediate or make
intercession, according to which it is used in Jer. 27: 18. let them run (or
make intercession) to the Lord, etc. Genesis 23: 8. but according to the propriety
of the word it may signify any addressing of our selves unto the Lord as it is
used, Job 21: 15. if we pray unto him, there it can not be (properly)
intercession. Wherefore to confirm and ratify this exposition we shall find in
Jer. 7: 16. diverse words indifferently used to one and the same purpose, Pray
not thou for this people, neither lift up Rinah of Ranan to cry out for sorrovv
or joy.
cry, not Thepilah.
prayer for them, neither make (...)
intercession to me, etc. By all which terms the Lord intends no other but
to stay Jeremy from becoming an intercessor for the people. But enough of this.

The three words hitherto spoken of, tend only to the setting forth of the
first duty here exhorted unto; the second duty is commended to us in the 4th
phrase only, which is giving of thanks, that is a thankful acknowledgement
unto God Almighty (who is the giver of every good and perfect giving) for the
delivering of men from evil, or for any blessing bestowed on them. It is a
thankful retribution, or rendering again unto God of la^d and praise both
with heart and voice for his benefits bestowed upon us o^ others. It is called
in Scripture the Psalm. 116: 13.
cup of Salvation, and the Hos. 14: 2.
calves of our lips, which Heb. 13: 15.
in and through Christ Jesus our mediator and Redeemer (being offered upon that
golden altar) are more acceptable unto God than all Psa. 50: 8. 14.
burnt offerings and sacrifices.

Prayer and thankesgiving, is either private, when a man pours out his soul
in secret unto God, Math. 6: 5. 1. Tim. 2: 8. or public, in the Congregation
of the Saints, with the church and people of God. They are not here restrained
to either of the two in particular (though the Apostle does principally intend
the public performance of them, as has bin before touched) therefore it
follows that both kinds are included in this exhortation. Whence arises
this observation, Doctrine. Necessity of prayer and thanks.
viz That prayer and thankesgiving to God, are duties necessary to be performed
at all times, and by all degrees of persons in the Church of Christ. They are
here the first and principal duties exhorted to by the Apostle. As for prayer
which is the first here mentioned God has the Rev. 19: 16.
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, by him who is the Nom. 27: 16.
God of the Spirits of all flesh, in whom we Acts. 17: 28.
live move and have our being, who is the Iam. 1: 17.
father of lights from whom comes every good and perfect giving, who can give
us richly all 1 Timothy 6: 17.
things to enjoy, and has promised to give us 1 John. 5: 14.
whatsoever we ask according to his will. Our manyfold wants and necessities
do call upon us with all earnestness, yea require us to be myndfull of this
duty. We have an heavy yoke and unsupportable burden lying upon us, which
without his mercy and compassion will press us down to Hell, namely, the
guilt and pollution of original sin, that deformity and depravity of nature,
which we brought into the world with us, from the loins of our first parents;
for we were Psalm. 51: 5.
borne in sin and conceaved in iniquity, and by Ephesians. 2: 3.
nature we are the children of wrath as well as others, by which we are become
so defective and unprofitable that we are not 2 Cor. 3: 5.
suffitient of our selves so much as to think a good thought, much less to
do any good deed; for though we have sometimes a desire or will to do that
which is good, yet we can not find how to Romans 7: 18.
perform the same, when we would do good evil is present with us: And this
yoke and burden can be no wise taken off our necks, or we any ways eased of
the same, but of the abundant grace of God, in and through the merits of our
Savior Christ, which we then feel to have obtained when we have received the
Spirit of Zach. 12: 10.
grace and supplication, by whose effectual operation in our hearts we are
imboldened and enabled with penitent hearts and full assurance of faith to go
unto his throne of grace and pray saying, Mat. 6: 12.
forgive us our sins as we forgive them that trespass against us. We are in
continual perrills and fears both from without and within our selves, Our
hearts are deceitful and Ier. 17: 9.
wicked above all things, who can bear them? our flesh is so weak it is no
way able to resist, yea it is rather ready and inclyning to Iam. 1: 14.
tempt and draw us unto maniefold inconveniences. Our adversary the Devil is
always busied as a 1 Pet. 5: 8.
roaring lion walking about with us whithersoever we go, or whatsoever we do,
seeking all occasions and oppertunities to devour us, desirours to sift us as
Luke 22: 31.
wheat is sifted with a sive, to rob us of whatsoever good thing we have, if it
be possible; and we are 2 Cor. 2: 11.
not ignorant of his divises, what a crafty, deep, and subtle politician he
is, Rev. 2: 24.
full of enterprises, and baits which he lays to catch us, as the (...)l. 9:
12.
silly fish is caught in the net, sometimes transforming himself into an 2 Cor.
11: 14.
Angel of light, as he did to our first parents, making them believe that they
should be Genesis 3: 5.
as Gods, that he sought nothing but their good; and as he did unto our Savior
Christ himself, he assaulted him with a sentence of Mat. 4: 6.
Scripture, as if he sought to persuade him to no thing, but that which was
agreeable to the will of God, when indeed he is a John. 8: 44.
liar and the father of lies: like unto whom are his ministers, they can turn
themselves into the shape of the 2 Cor. 11: 15.
ministers of Christ, making the simple believe that prelaticall Episcopacie is
of divine right; that the worship of God is not pure and holy, unless it be
performed in a consecrated church or chapel; nor the Supper of the Lord
reverently received, unless the piece of bread be adored by prostrating of the
body before it; that we honor not the name of our Savior, unless we bow the
knee, or put off the cap, whenever we hear the name of Jesus (whereby many
ignorant ones (it may be) sometimes mistake Where the Apocrypha is allowed to
be read in public.
Jesus the son of Syrach, or Jesus called Justus, or Acts. 7: 45.
Jesus who brought in the Israelites into the possession of the gentiles, for
Jesus our Savior who is the son of God) and many other things which are
commonly taught by his servants, yea and ushered in with many quotations of
scripture and fathers, as if their doctrines and fantasies were Oracles of
God, undeniable truths; when indeed they are no thing but error, and falsehood,
the very 1 Timothy 4: 1.
doctrine of devils, Idol service and Col. 2: 18.
will worship, according to the Col. 2: 8.
traditions of men and not after Christ. Against whose subtilties and crafty
devices where with they Ephesians. 4: 14.
lie in wait to deceave we are no way able to resist, unless the Lord of his
mere grace in Christ do give unto us the Spirit Ioh. 16: 13.
of truth, by whom we may be led into all truth, and made to discern between
good and evil and cleave to that which is good and forsake that which is
evil, the which Luke 11: 13.
holy Spirit he has promised to give to those that ask him. Behold then what
great necessity we have every one of us to pray night and day unto God for his
help and assistance against this our deadly enemy, for we Ephesians. 6: 12.
wrestle not against flesh and blood but against principalities and powers, yea
Spiritual wickednesses that are in high places; wherefore we shall find that
the Apostle advises us to the practice hereof as a maine weapon to Ephesians. 6: 18.
resist the fiery darts of the Devil, that having done all things we may
stand Ephesians 6: 13.
fast in the faith. And our Savior comma^deth us to Math. 26: 41.
watoh and pray, that we enter not into temptation. Every day brings with it
evil Mat. 6: 34.
suffitient for the day, whereby we are incombred with maniefold necessityes,
for we have not food or raiment of our selves, no not the least health,
strength, or ability of body, by our own wisdom; it is God that Psalm. 136: 25.
gives food to all flesh, Mat. 6: 28 29. 30.
that clotheth the lillyes and feeds the ravens when they cry, whose is Psalm.
24: 1.
the earth and the fullness thereof, whose Prove. 10: 22.
blessing it is that makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it, without whom
all our labor toil and industry is but as water spilt upon the ground, for
except Psa. 127: 1.
he build the house the worke-man works but in vain, except he keep the
city the watchman waketh but in vain: wherefore we can never have assurance to
have these our bodily wants supplied from day to day, unless we be careful to
seek it of God by prayer, as our Savior has taught us saying Mat. 6: 11.
give us this day our daily bread. And if I should here insist upon the
dangerous times in which we live, and the daily fears where with we are
encompassed, now that we hear of wars and rumors of wars in all quarters
and parts of the earth, now that the stroke is come even to our doors, our
native Country (which has bin famous and renowned amongst all nations for
traffic and manufacture by sea and land, mighty in conquests, famous for
riches and learning, surpassing others in the light of the gospel, which was
more or less spread abroad over the whole Kingdom) lies here and there
weltring in the blood of her own slain; and we have continual talk and
discourse of the great number of bloodly enemies that are among us, as so many
Serpents in our own bosoms, ready to bite and devour us: it might be a
suffitient and powerful argument to be produced for the proof of this point
to show the necessity offervent fervent and faithful prayers to be poured out
to the God of hosts whose name is a Prove. 18: 10.
strong tower whereto the righteous run and are safe; but I fear to darken
counsel by a multitude of words without knowledge, I know our own hearts and
daily thoughts can not but press this home unto us with greater efficacy than
I can speak it. And who is there that is now so sottish or senseless, as not
to mind, that if ever, now are the times wherein the Saints are to come often
Mal. 3: 16.
together, (and every one in his Zach. 12: 12.
house and closet a part) to pour out strong cries and tears unto him that is
able to make us overcome all difficulties, for if God be with us Psalm. 118: 6
we need not fear what man can do unto us.

They that Psalm. 107. 23.
go down to the sea in ships, and occupy in the deep waters, they well know
how needful an anchor ^s to a ship; for it is one of the principal implements
which they are careful to preserve: So may prayer be said to be to the soul
of every true Christian; for it will help to beget and work in us ^ope, which
is the Heb. 6: 1^.
anchor of the soul, ^oth sure and steadfast and it enters into that within
the veil, where Christ ou^ high priest sits at the right hand o^ God. And
as a key is necessary for the opening of a door that is fast locked: So is
prayer necessary to open the shut door of our heart, to open the door of
Acts. 14: 27.
faith unro us, to open the door of Col. 4: 3.
utterance unto us, yea the door of heaven it self* whereby we may have
entrance unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4: 16.
to ask grace to help in time of need. Wherefore a learne^ doctor calls the
just man's prayer Oration justi clavis est coeli, ascendit precatio and
descendit Dei misericerdia. Aug. ser. de tom. 226.
the key of heaven, because it ascending up to God draws down his mercy upon
us.

The reverent and faithful performance of this duty is a note whereby w^ may
know the Saints of the most high; and

The frequent performance is also very the state wherein we live, or of the
church whereof we are members, or particulerly of our selves; for the Lord has
promised us help and deliverance herein if we will but call upon him, for he
says Psa. 50: 15.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Is the judgment or affliction already upon us, be it a common
calamity, as the sword, captivity, plague, famine or the like, or particular
chastisement, as sickness, banishment, poverty, distress etc? See what
pregnant proofs we have in Scripture of the validity of prayer in such cases.
When the King of Assyria had sent railing 2 Kings. 19.
Rabshekeh to revyle the people of God, and good king Hesekiah; and to threaten
war against them: Hesekiah went into the house of the Lord, and prayed unto
him with earnest affection; and the Lord did not only destroy in one night an
hundred foureskore and five thousand of the King of Assyria's host; but also
shortly after the king himself was slain and that by his own sons. We have
read what captivity and bondage the children of Israel were in under Pharaoh
King of Aegipt and his people: yet the Lord heard the Exodus 3: 7.
prayers of his people, and of his servants Moses and Aaron; and brought them
out from thence, with a strong hand and out stretched arm; and so did he also
afterward deliver them from many other servitudes wherein they were. Manasseh
was for his idolatry taken prisoner by the host of the King of Asshur, and they
put him in fetters, bound him with chains, and carried him away captive into
Babel: and when he was there in tribulation, 2 Cron. 23: 12. 13.
he prayed to the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his fathers; and God was entreated of him, and heard his prayer, and brought
him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. When the pestilence was inflicted so
sore upon the people of Israel, as that there dyed in three days seventie
thousand persons; King David raised an altar unto the Lord and offered 2 Samuel
24. Last.
burnt offerings and peac^ offerings: and the Lord was appeased toward the
land, and the plague cease^ from Israel. 2 King. 20: 3. 4. 5.
Hesekiah when he wa^ sick, he turned his back to the wall an^ prayed, and wept
sore; and he receave^ presently a message from the Lord, by the mouth of Isaiah
the prophet, that his life should be prolonged, and he should recover. And the
Apostle James assures us that the Iam. 5: 15.
prayer of faith shall save the sick. Yea prayer is a special remedy for the
sickness of the soul which is the Prove. 15: 15.
greatest sickness that we can be afflicted withal in this life.

Is the judgment or affliction not yet fallen upon a people, but threatened
against them as it is against us at this day if we repent not? let us know then
that prayer (if it be fervent) is an espetiall means, a sovereign remedy to
avert and turn away the same. A proof whereof we have in the people of Jonah.
3.
Niniveh unto whom though the Lord sent his prophet with an express message to
denounce his judgment against them for their sins, telling them directly (as if
there had bin no recalling it) yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed:
yet the people of Niniveh believing God, and humbling themselves with fasting
and crying mightily unto the Lord; the text says that the Lord heard them and
repented him of the evil which he had threatened against them. Jacob hereby
prevailed with God when he was Genesis 32: 7. 9. 28.
in fear of his brother Esau: and so may we too, if we pray with faith and
waver not.

Which serves both to reprove the too Psalm. 42: 1.
the brooks of water) to appear before God in those his public ordinances and
administrations? be not discomforted: but always have recourse unto God in
prayer, Dan. 6: 10.
three times a day with Daniel, Psalm. 119: 164.
seven times a day with David, always as our blessed Luke. 18: 1.
Savior teaches, and 1 These. 5: 17.
continually as the Apostle Paul instructs us, and above or before all
things as we learn in the text. Offer up this sacrifice to God morning and
evening, saying with the sweet singer of Israel, Psa. 14 1: 2.
let my prayer ascend unto thee as incense, and the lifting up of my hands as
the evening sacrifice. Let it be thy first and ^ast work every day. Make it
even the key to open the day, and the lock to shut up the night, that thou
may rest in ^afety, and thy sleep may be sweet, and ^one may make thee
afraid. Let the ^erformance hereof go before they re^eipt of thy daily food,
and conclude ^he receipt thereof with giving God ^raise: So shall the good
creatures of God ^e sanctified to thee. In a word, what^oever thou go about
or layest thine and unto, though thou have not time or ^pportunity solemnly
upon thy knees to utter a prayer in words, yet learn of Nehem. 2: 4.
Nehemiah to lift up thine heart unto God.

Art thou assaulted by Satan, or his instruments; and by him or them tempted to
any evil? pray to God to give thee strength that thou be not led into Mat.
6: 13.
temptation, but may resist and over come: and if thou receave it not at the
first, leave not off, but pray with Paul 2 Cor. 12: 8.
the second and third time. Have thou yielded and given way in any respect to
the inticement of the flesh, and art so far overcome that thou have don evil
and sinned against thy God? Despair not yet; but pray unto God to give thee
repentance, that thou may have assurance of the pardon of thy sins, and
reconciliation to thy God. Do thou find in thy self upon examination of thy
conscience, that thou have deserved God's judgments for thy sins; and that they
hang over thine head, ready to be powered down upon thee? pray unto God that he
would take away thy sins that are the meritorious cause of those judgments; and
if i^ be his good pleasure to remove the judgment also from thee. Has God
after ^ long time of thy living in sin and wickedness, found thee out though
thou thoughtest thy self sure enough, deluding thy self in thine own heart,
saying tush Ezekiel. 8: 12.
God sees not, etc? and has he laid his scourging hand upon thee to bring
thee home to himself? humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, rip up
thine heart, examine thy inward parts, consider thy life past, confess thy
sins, and pray earnestly for deliverance, either by removal of the judgment,
or lessening it; or to give thee strength and patience to bear and undergo
whatsoever he shall lay upon thee.

As for the duty of thankesgiving, if we Thanksgiving.
perform not that, we are in danger to lose the good, which we have gotten;
neither can we be sure to obtain any other thing we are in need of. Thanks
is the sacrifice which God requires of us, and the end wherefore he bestows
his blessings upon us Psalm. 50: 15. Therefore be thankful. Much more might be
spoken of the necessity, profit, and use of prayer, and to urge us to the
frequent performance thereof: but I think that there is no one subject or
point of doctrine, whereupon so much has bin, and is continually spoken, and
written, as on this; therefore all that I can speak will be but a casting of
water into the sea; and a long detayning you without suffitient cause. There is
none that have truly learned Christ, but are continually so sencible thereof,
that they are able in their own hearts to comment largely upon this principle.
Yet thus much I have spoken for the present necessity, aiming not so much to
instruct, as to quicken and stir up the mynds of the godly, to a zealous
delight in approaching near unto God, who is a liberal Heb. 11: 6.
rewarder of those that seek him. And as for giving of thanks I could well be
contented to insist more largely upon that also, the rather for the provoking
of our selves, who do enjoy singular blessings in a strange land by the
goodness of our God, who moves the Magistrates and people of the same to show
favor to us notwithstanding our sins have incurred both his and their
displeasure. But something remaining in the text yet untouched (unto which I
hasten all that may be) does hinder me, and it would ask much time to handle
every point at large.

The next particular in this exhortation worthy of our consideration is for
whom the Apostle would have prayers and thankesgiving to be made; and that is
not for our selves only, but also for others, both those that are with us, and
far from us, whither friends or foes.

Our Savior Christ and his Apostles To pray and give thanks for others.
do commend unto us in many places the loveing of our neighbor Math. 22: 39.
Joh. 15: 12. 1 John 2: 9. 10. 11. and by the parable of the good Luc. 10: 30.
etc.
Samaritane he shows whom we are to repute our neighbor. Now as our
neighborhood extends not only to them that are near but also far off unto
all men: So the duty of love is manifest not in one, or some, but in all good
things. Therefore pray for all, which are the very words of the Apostle I
exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men. And this is to be done in no degree or
manner less and weaker than for our selves; but with the same fervencie love
and earnestness, esteeming their wants and necessities as our own: for we
know not but they may be of the same body with us, though for the present the
condition of some may seem otherwise. Wherefore we may not think it strange
that we are commanded to pray for all men, both good and bad, godly and wicked.
The wickeder they seem to be (so long as they are not past hope) the more need
they have of our prayers, that if it be the will of God they may be amended,
that some change or reformation may be wrought in them. This point is plainly
proved by the precept and practice of our Savior Christ, who has taught us to
pray for our Mat. 4: 44.
enemies, those that cruelly persecute us; and if for them then no question,
but we should pray and give thanks for others. But may their hearts were
obdurate in their Idolatry, and God had manifested to the prophet, that he
would without fail send his Judgment upon them. Wherefore he forewarneth his
prophet not to pray for their deliverance whom he had purposed to destroy. So
if God do by his spetiall word (as he did the prophet) forbid us to pray for
such and such a people; who shall dare to pray for them? or what hope can he
have to be heard? The Lord has commanded in his law that man shall not Exodus
20: 30.
kill his neighbor, and he that sheddeth man's blood by Genesis 9: 6.
man shall his blood be shed: but if God command Genesis 22: 2.
Abraham to slay his son Isaac, he must do it, and shall have praise for so
doing. The second place is of such as have committed that great sin against
the holy Ghost, of which there is no pardon to be obtained Math. 12: 32. In
such a case though we cry never so much for his forgivenes; yet the Lord will
not hear us. As for the Saints praying against some, we must note that they
were such as they have had spetiall information of them by the motion of the
Spirit, that they deserved to be prayed against. And for that of our Savior
Christ that he says I pray for them (meaning his elect) and not for the
world,, that is the wicked reprobates, we must understand that speech with verse
11. where our Savior notes what it is he seeks for them, namely to keep
them through his own name that they might be one as the father and son are
one, etc. Now to pray thus for the wicked and damned hypocrites, which are only
known to God, were a plain resisting of his will and labor in vain. For to
what purpose should we seek salvation and eternal life to them who are
ordained unto eternal destruction from the presence of God and the glory of
his power? To what purpose were it for us to seek the conversion of those that
have nothing to do to Psa. 50: 16.
take the ordinances of God in their lips because they hate to be reformed? But
those things being secret are only known unto God, and we being ignorant who
it is by name that is reprobate and who not, but known unto God are all his
works: we are therefore to follow his revealed will, which Deuteronomy. 29: 29.
belongs unto us and to our children, and therein we are taught to pray for
all men, that is, for all sorts, estates, and conditions of men, high and low,
rich and poor, Kings and subjects, Jews and gentiles; and that because God
will have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of his truth. That
this is the meaning of this word the scripture otherwhere teaches, Mat. 4: 23.
Luc. 11: 42. Ephesians, 1: 3. 1 Cor. 10: 25.

The Apostle uses a general term because it might contain and include all
particulers, Exceptis excipiendis; and teaching us thus much, that there is no
condition or degree of men whatsoever whom we may or can conscionably exclude
or debar from having benefit by our prayers, so long as they do not (as
Julian the Apostate) manifest a resolute and malicious forsaking of God and
resisting of his truth. So long as men are in ignorance, though their malice
seem to be great, and their wicked zeal outrageous; yet there is hope for
ought we know, and therefore we must not desist the manifesting of our love, in
seeking the salvation of their souls, or any other good they stand in need of.
Wherefore let us put in practice this duty according to the Apostle's
exhortation. God shows himself to be no Acts. 10: 34.
respecter of persons, nor to desire Ezekiel. 18: 32.
the death of him that dies; but has offered the manifestation of his grace
to all: let us then imitate God herein, by offering up our prayers and thanks
for all, as occasion does require. And in particular for Kings and those that
are in authority, etc which is the 3d point here commended by the Apostle, to
wit, the persons whom in an espetiall manner we are bound to pray for. What the
Apostle Paul means here by Kings and all that are in authority is expounded
by the Apostle Peter in these words 1 Pet. 2: 13. 14.
whither it be to the King, as supreme; or unto governors, as unto them that
are sent by him, etc. By King then the Apostle intends the supreme and chief
magistrate of the land where we live; and by all that are in authority, he
means all other civil officers, into whose hand the sword of justice, or any
power of government, is committed, or deputed, according to law. Under which is
comprehended all civil parliaments, counsels, Judges, justices, Majors,
baylifs, and whatsoever other courts, or persons, they be, that are orderly
appointed, and set, for to rule or govern the Kingdom, Country, city, shire,
or corporation in which we inhabit. From whence this note arises clearly;
That it is the duty of every Doctrine. Christians are to pray for the civil
governors.
true Christian both in his public and private prayers to commend unto God all
persons that are in civil authority in the Common wealth, both superior and
inferior, both King and other magistrates. And good reason too, for the very
Therefore Kings should be the supporters, not destroyers of their people.
basis or foundation of the people, being he that excels among the mortal
rulers of this world: wherefore Christ is called Rev. 17: 14.
(...) King of Kings, because he is above all the Kings and princes of the
earth; and his Kingdom shall stand, when all theirs have an end, and they
themselves are become like other men, their honor being laid in the dust; for
Luc. 1: 33.
he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there
shall be none end. It comes of (...) which signifies to reign, to be in
authority, to be a King, to bear rule and sway, to be governor of, to bear a
great or chief stroke in a matter or thing. In latin they are called Reges of
rego to govern or rule, upon which title or denomination Eleutherius bb: of
Rome writes thus (if my Acts and mon. Pa. 96. Col. 2.
author fail me not) unto Lucius king of Britain about the year 169. viz A
King has his name of ruling, and not of having a realm. Ye shall be a King
while ye rule well, but if you do otherwise the name of a King shall not
remain with you, and you shall loose it, which God forbid. The Almighty God
grant you so to rule the realm of Britain, that you may reign with him for
ever whose vicar you be in the realm.

The word which is here used for those in authority signifies those that are
set in excelencyes, high dignities, or preheminences, to go before others, or
to have charge of others. All which serves to show that lawful civil
governors of what name or title soever, are set in great place and authority,
and our prayers to God for them may do much in helping them in the
administration of their charge and government.

Secondly they are ministers of God for the good of those that do well, and to
execute wrath upon him that does evil; Romans 13.
wherefore they stand in need of our prayers that God would fill them with
wisdom and understanding, to discern between good and evil, between right
and wrong; to administer justice to the oppressed, and to punish the oppressor;
that they may know their obedient and loving subjects, from proud and
traitorous rebels, for Virgil:
Regum est parcere subject is and debellare superbos, it is the property of
Kings to spare their subjects, but to suppress the proud and rebellious. And
as they are the ministers of God; so their office and power is the ordinance of
God, he has appointed that there shall be Romans 13: 1. 2.
governors and rulers over the people; and in his power it is, to set up and
pull down whom he pleases. From whence it may he reasoned thus, whatsoever
function or administration is ordained and appointed of God, (whither it be for
the good of the body or soul of man or both) whosoever shall be lawfully called
to the executing of any such charge, are to be prayed for, and thanks to be
given to God for their good, or the good which we receave by them: But Kings
and those that are put into lawful place, are so ordained and appointed of
God; and therefore to be prayed for etc in obedience to Gods ordinance, and that
it may be sanctified unto us.

Thirdly the burden of all the civil Ps. 72: 1.
Give the King thy judgment o Lord and thy righteousness to the Kings son?

Fourthly they are appointed of God Isa. 49: 23.
nurssing fathers to his Israel. For the Pro. 21: 1.
hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord; and as the rivers of water he
turns them whither soever it pleases him.

Fifthly, how ever it come to pass,

Which may serve for the just condemnation though he be an enemy to the truth,
and seeks to destroy thy body and goods, because thou can not with good
conscience obey his humane laws, which thou find to be contrary to God's
law? yet cease not to pray for him, yea know, that in such case thou have
greater reason to pray for him; that God would turn his heart. And what
know thou, but thy fervent prayers may prevail so far with God, as to move
him to inclyne his heart, to show favor to his people, and to suffer the truth
to flourish; or at least to favor thee in thy particular. We have the
comfortable experience here in this land, of God's power in this kind; witness
our feedome of the gospel which we here enjoy, far otherwise than ever any
of our fathers could obtain in our native Country (the more is the pity, the
Lord lay it not to their charge) and can not the same God work the same in the
hearts of other princes and magistrates? doubtless his hand is not shorter in
one place, than another; but for ought thou know, it is because thou art
slack and negligent in calling upon God to power his Spirit upon thy prince,
and to give the Senators wisdom, and inclyne their hearts to show pity to his
heritage. Besides, is the King or the magistrate an enemy to thee? take heed
how therefore thou seek to Romans 12: 19.
avenge thy self of him by withholding thy prayers from him: for this is
displeasing to him who has commanded thee to Math. 5: 44.
love thine enemies, bless them that curse thee, do good to them that hate
thee, and pray for them which despite fully use thee and persecute thee. If
ever the Christian people of the English nation stood in need to be stirred up
or awakened in this kind, now is the time; for me thinks I hear diverse
complain of the distance and discord which is between the Kings majesty, and
the honorable Court of parliament; and the unreasonablenes of the malignants,
whom the King seems to countenance; and I hear diverse and that religious
people too, bemoaning the parliament and blaming the King: yea preparation is
made of weapons of war, and that by religious people; the forwardest and most
godly labor to show their zeal in helping the parliament with men and money:
and I hear also of fasting and prayer for the good of the land and
preservation of the parliament; but I hear few or none of the better sort
utter good desires concerning the King (though I can not but think that they
intend the King with his parliament as necessary adjuncts) and all because they
take him now to be misled and carried out of the way by wicked counsel. Is it
so that the King seems to be led aside from the way of Justice, and (it may
be unwittingly to his majesty) running upon the rocks of peril and poverty, and
hazarding the whole kingdom thereby? what great cause is there then for the
faithful, to lift up strong cries unto God, to confound and turn to
foolishnes the counsels of the 2 Samuel 15: 31.
Achitophels, and to remove the wicked from the throne of the Pro. 25: 5.
King, and so over rule and persuade the heart of the King, that as a father he
may tender the lives and estates of his children, his subjects, and as a prince
of God, may so administer the affairs of the kingdom, that peace and truth
may kiss each other; that such as profess to fear that great name of God may
under him lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty which
is the fourth particular considerable in this exhortation, and the last point
which I shall be able at this time to handle, as the end wherefore Christians are
bound to pray for those in authority; or the good fruit which we may by God's
blessing reap, if we be not sparing in sowing the powerful seed of our
prayers for them. In which clause as there is plainly set down a suffitient
argument to enduce us to pray for Kings etc: So there seems to be included
what is the duty of magistrates in the common wealth, or where to God has
ordained them, and what he requires of them, viz to see to the maintenance
of: 1: peace and quietness. 2. godliness and 3ly honesty.

Peace is the profit and increase of the Duty of princes.
common wealth, whereas war is the overthrow and ruin of it; as may be seen
in great kingdoms and Countries, which have bin utterly wasted, and
depopulated, by having the seat of war within their borders. So that there is
great reason, that those in supreme authority, should have a care to preserve
peace; for in so doing they preserve their own, and the Country's riches, and
safety. Happy therefore and renowned among men is that King or supreme
magistrate who bears not only in his Chrest, but also in his breast this
divine Mottoe Blessed are Math. 5: 9.
the peacemakers: but sad thoughts can not but be of those princes, who like
unnatural and hard hearted parents, shall not only with dry cheeks behold
their children (their subjects) sheathing their swords in each others bowels;
but also countenance and defend the ringleaders and abettors of such bloody
enterprises. Surely such (if such there be) are far from being sons of peace.
Should not the shedding of their own blood touch them, and make them withdraw
their hand? yea doubtless; otherwise they bewray themselves, to be unfit to
govern; for he that rules over men must be just: 2 Samuel 23: 3.
but how far such demeanor is from Justice, a tender capacity may soon
determine.

Civil peace is also the tranquillity of the Churches of the Saints, who in
the days of rest and quiet do flourish as a green baytree in the garden of
God, spread abroad over nations and kingdoms; but in the days of trouble and
persecution is driven into the wilderness to hide herself from the rage of the
wicked; where yet the Lord nourishes her and makes her to yield her savor
like the Camemal; which the more it is trodden upon and depressed, the sweeter
smell it sends forth. In the days of peace and quietness the people of God
sit under their vines and figtrees, eating and drinking and making melody in
their hearts unto God; flocking (like doves to their windows, like Eagles to
the carkase) in multitudes to the celebration of God's ordinances. Whereas the
times of trouble and persecution make them to sit down in mourning and hang by
their harpes, as not able to Psalm. 137.
sing the song of Sion; but remembering the Lord a far off, as one that
turns his back upon them; which makes them to sigh and groan and to cloth
themselves in sackcloth, and to have ashes for their meat, and mingle their
wine with weeping. Their meetings together then (if at all) are in fear and
sorrow, still looking for their enemy to come upon them, to make a prey of
their lives. Let then every true Christianlike heart never cease praying for
Kings and those in authority that under them we may live a peaceable and quiet
life.

Godliness is the pillar of the common wealth: for where that is cherished,
upheld, and maintained, by the higher powers; that kingdom is doubtless stable
and firm, and so shall continue. For there is neither treachery or rebellion
at home, or open invasion from abroad, that shall any way distract that prince
who makes the Lord his hope, and serves him continually: nor hurt that people
that walk in his fear.

Wherefore it is a principal thing which God requires in princes, that they be
men Exodus 18: 21. 22.
fearing God, and the sweet singer of Israel says, that they must 2 Samuel 23: 3.
rule in the fear of God. I can not here omit something that I have lately
read written by one Joshua de la Cave.
of our times in an Epistle to the states of Holland and West-Frisia, to this
effect, Vbi religio est locum habent bonae leges, ac bona disciplina, ex quibus
fortunati felicesque eventus in expeditionibus praecipu^ bellicis nascuntur:
sieut ^ contra etiam sublata religione corruere rempublicam oportet: quonia^
sublata Dei timore sequitur impietas, and ruins Imperiorum.
where religion is, good laws and good discipline have place; by which come
prosperous and happy events espetially in warlike expeditions: as on the
contrary religion being taken away, the common wealth must fail: because when
the fear of God is taken away ungodlines follows, and the ruin of Empires.
And again, Duo fundamenta t^ tius bonae societatis sunt religio and Iustitia,
ubi c^ptum ab illis declinari, and pro modulo minuitur felicitas Reipublicae:
subditos rebellare in se sentit ordinario Iure, qui Deo rebellis est.
Religion and Justice are the two only props of a good society: when once men
begin to declyne from them, the happiness also of the common wealth does
diminish: he ordinarily feels the rebellion of his subjects against him, that
is himself a rebel against God. And afterward Cum pura manet religio, tum
been ordinata stat politia, and a Deo conservata incolumis.
when Religion remains pure, then the civil state is well ordered, and is
kept in safety by God. Now princes may be said to maintain godliness, first by
abolishing and rooting out of their kingdom (as much as in them is) all false
ways, invented and feigned religions, all Idols, and superstitious vanities.
But if they be on the other hand seekers to root out godliness and the fear of
God from among them, by persecuting the Saints, forbiding preaching, suffering
Idol-service; tollerating the blaspheming of the name of God, and breach of his
sabaths; they shall never be able to hold up their heads, when the King of
Kings shall call them to an account. Secondly, by upholding and maintayning the
true Christian religion, defending the Churches of Christ from the abusing
hands and tongues of wicked persecutors. But if they themselves be persecutors
of the godly, restrayning them of their liberty of public service of God,
inflicting fines, amercements, imprisonments, and other corporal punishments,
upon men that make conscience of the way of Gods service, and the true
religion: what will they say when God shall visit their iniquity with a rod,
and their sin with scourges?

This is the principal charge and duty of princes, if they did but know their
duty; namely to further the honor of God, and his worship and service. First
except it were given them from above: and therefore good reason that they should
use it principally in the furtherance of godliness. See Dan. 2: 21. 37. Pro.
8: 15. Joh. 19: 11. Ezekiel. 29. 19. 20. Romans 13: 1. 2. 3. 4. Jerem. 27: 8.
Secondly, God has honored them, with I have said ye are Gods, etc. Psalm. 82:
1. 2 Cron. 19: 6. therefore it is their shame if they should ^ishonour him;
which they do if they ^eeke not by all lawful ways and means ^he promotion
of his worship and service. Thirdly this appears by the administra^ion Dan
and Bethel, which Jeroboam the son of Nebat had set up. And how did he plague
Pharaoh and all Aegipt, for that they would not Exodus 5: 1.
suffer the childeren of Israel to go and do service to their God, as he had
commanded them? which example (me thinks) were alone enough to make the
hearts of all Kings, princes, and magistrates, be they of supreme, or inferior
authority, to tremble and quake; who know that history of God's fearful^
judgments upon that king and people* and yet are guilty of the same sin; for
they will not suffer the people of God, to 2 Cor. 6: 17.
separate from their Idolatries, and to serve the Lord upon the Rev. 14: 1.
With Zach. 2: 7.
Mount Sion where he has commanded to be worshipped by his Saints. They will
have the Saints of God, the holy ones of the most high, to pollute themselves
wit^ their Egyptian Idols, to hold communion with their Babylonish Synagogue,
and to approve and justify them yea to accompany with them in their
unfruitful works of darkness, Idol-service, and Image worship; or else fire and
faggot* halter and gibbet, sword and persecution shall follow them: yea and such
new kinds of torture, as never before these evil days have bin heard to have
bi^ inflicted upon the Saints, as if men for conscience toward God were to be
notcht and cut or marked like dogs, rogues, or open perjured varlets. If this
be no^ a great oppression of the poor weakling, and a depriving the free borne
subject of his liberty, (nay his liberty of conscience which is more dear than
life) and making them slaves and vassals to men's wills and malicious practices,
whither right or wrong, I am ignorant what is: whereas man being a reasonable
creature, and having a spirit of wisdom and understanding given him from the
Almighty, should be governed by rational laws, grounded upon the law of God,
and light of nature; and when he is found after due conviction to be a rebel
then is it time enough to punish him: but if a man be able with meeknes and
fear any wise to manifest, that that which is put upon him, is contrary to the
word of God, and he can not do this without sining against God, and the
scripture says it is better to obey God than man; then to compel such a man
to do any thing against the check of his conscience, or to punish him for not
doing it, or for doing the good which is contrary thereunto, is not ruling
but tyranie. Oh that now at length the Psalm. 2. 10. 11. 12.
Kings of the earth would be wise! and that the Judges and rulers of the world
would by that and such like examples learn to serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice in trembling! Oh that they would themselves and their people with them,
cast off that affinity which they have made with that Arch-enemy of Christ the
man of sin; and would kiss the son least he be angry, and they perish in the
way when his wrath shall suddenly burn, and none shall quench it! for it is
the will of God that Job. 5: 23.
all men should honor the son as they honor the father: he that honors not
the son, honors not the father, which has sent him. But is it so that they
will not honor the son by submitting themselves, their crowns and scepters at
i his feet, to serve him Rev 21: 24.
and his church by being nursing fathers unto his people (Isa. 49: 23. and 60:
10.) if they will not Ier. 22. 3.
execute Judgment and righteousness, and deliver the oppressed from the hand of
the oppressor, and vex not the stranger, the fatherless or the widow: but
will do violence and shed innocent blood? will they not set before them the
law of the Lord God of heaven, and Deuteronomy. 17: verse 18. 19. 20.
read therein, and learn thereby to fear the Lord God whose name is Jehovah,
and keep all the words of his law to do them; but will have their hearts lift
up above their brethren, and will oppress them and make them submit to their
humane laws and ordinances, which they have themselves sucked out of the
poisoned cup of fornications in the hand of that great whore, that rides upon
that scarlet beast, whose name is a a Mystery, great Babylon, the mother of
whoredoms, and abominations of the earth; and will Rev. 17: 13. 14.
have one mind, and give their power and authority to the beast, and all, to
fight against the lamb, and those that are with him, who are called and chosen
and faithful: Then let them know that if they turn not sudainly, he that is
Rev. 19: 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.
faithful and true, who judges and warreth righteously, whose eyes are a
flame of fire, and on whose head are many crowns, whose name is THE WORD OF
GOD, who has a company of warriers following him upon white horses, clothed
with fine lynnen white and pure, out of whose mouth goes a two-edged sword
wherewith he smites the nations; who is the king of kings and Lord of Lords,
and has all Mat. 28: 18
power given him both in heaven and earth: that he (I say) has Psol. 7: 12.
bent his bow and made his arrows ready to shoot at those wicked persecutors;
and sudainly will he speak unto them in his wrath and vex them in his sore
displeasure. Then shall they be slain with the Rev. 19: 18: 21.
sword of him that sits upon the horse, which (sword) comes out of his
mouth; and their flesh shall be given for meat to the fowls of heaven. Remember
what the Lord did for Israel his people, how he avenged the wrong that was
offered or done unto them by the princes and nations of the earth; how he
overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the red sea, he smote Ps. 136: 15.
great Kings and slew famous kings, Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og the King
of Bashan, and gave their land for an heritage unto Israel his servant; yea he
suffered no Ps. 105: 14. 15.
man to do them wrong, but reproved Kings for their sakes, saying touch not
mine anointed nor do my prophets no harm. Who ever has fought against God
and prevailed? it is Acts. 9: 5.
hard to kick against the pricks: now they that molest and persecute the
members of Christ, fight against and resist Acts. 9: 4.
Christ; for they that touch them touch the Zach. 2: 8.
apple of his eye, and precious in the sight of the Lord is Ps. 116: 15.
the death of his Saints. Therefore let them not think to uphold themselves by
their present power and dignity, which they do enjoy, as if there were no
possibility to prevail against them: but let them consider with fear and
reverence, that he by whom Pro. 8: 15.
Kings reign and princes decree justice, who lifts and Dan. 4: 25.
sets up Kings, and pulls them down again at his pleasure, can turn the
hearts of their nobles and people against them, and make them be cast out (like
Dan. 4: 33.
Nebucchadnezar) to eat grass with the beasts of the field, till they know
that the most high rules the kingdoms of the earth. Yea, when they shall say
peace, peace (pleasing themselves in their wickedness, and making sure, to them
selves the bringing to pass of their purposes) then 1 These. 5: 3
shall come upon them sudaine destruction, as travail upon a woman with child,
and they shall not escape.

And Honesty. This is the honor and safety of a common wealth. The shameful
sins of the heathens were the causes, wherefore their lands did spew out both
them and their princes. Therefore it can not but be an espetiall duty of Kings
and all that are in authority, by the sword of justice committed to them, to
cut down sin and iniquity; that it be not suffered, much less maintained, in
their dominions: For sin and iniquity abounding is the cause wherefore the Lord
does bring great and terrible judgments upon the nations of the earth. A
fruitful land (says the Psa. 107: 34.
psalmist) becomes barraynnes for the iniquity of the people that dwell
therein. And this doubtless is the controversy which the Lord has at present
with the Inhabitants of England, because there is no Hos. 4: 1. 2. 3.
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land, but by swearing and
lying, and killing and stealing and committing adultery, they break out and
blood touches blood: Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that
dwells therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field and with the
fowls of heaven, yea the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away. Whereas the
rooting out of wickedness and vice, and the maintaynance of true religion and
virtue, has bin, is, and shall be an espetiall means to procure God's
blessing both upon King and people; as may be seen in the examples of the good
Kings of Judah, when they brake down the Images, put away the Sodomites and
witches etc out of their land (2 Cron. 30: 14. and 34: 33. and 33: 15.) and in
Jehu the king of Israel, who is commended for pulling down the temple of Baal,
etc. (2 King. 10: 26. 27. 28.) though he abode in the sin of Jeroboam still:
and for his service herein, and destroying the house of Ahab, he had the
kingdom of Israel confirmed to his sons to the fourth generation. We see then
how much it concerns princes, to look to themselves and the people committed
to their charge, and how they should with Solomon crave of the Almighty 1 Kin.
3: 9.
a wise and understanding heart to discern between good and evil, to uphold
and maintain them that do well, but to drive from their courts, counsels, and
countenance, all dishonestie, and iniquity, all oppression and evil doing,
that so their thrones may be established with Justice. And he has placed us in
this Country, where though we live among a people of another speech, yet God
has bin pleased so to inclyne the hearts both of princes and people, that we
live a peaceable life under and amongst them: Let us not then receave such
great good from the hands of God, without rendering due thanks and praise to
him for this good gift which he has bestowed upon us. Consider what misery and
affliction our friends and brethren in our native country do suffer at present,
while we enjoy felicity and quiet. Oh, that our ingratitude, and careless
walking, deprive us not of it! Secondly, let us know that we are bound in Ier.
29: 7. 3.
their peace we have peace. And lastly seeing we enjoy here a peaceable and
quiet life, let us walk in all godliness and honesty. Have we quietness and
freedom o^ conscience to meet together to serve God without let? let us then
take heed how we turn this grace of God into wantonness, how we abuse this
peaceable life we have from them, by an unquiet life among our selves. Be
therefore zealous of every good work, careful of sanctifying the Lords day,
making his sabbath a delight unto us, spending it altogether in the service of
God publicly and privately: and toward men let our conversation be in all
temperance sobriety and equity, not doing injury to any, Romans 12: 17. 18.
recompencing no man evil for evil, but as much as in us is live peaceably
with all men. Let our Mat. 5: 16.
light so shine before men that they may see our good works and glorify our
father which is in heaven. For the grace of God that Tit. 2: 12. 12. 13. 14.
brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works.

A word or two more and then I conclude. 2 These. 2: 4.
above all that is called God. It also reproves the error of those false
prophets who teach and say that subjection came in with sin, and Christ liberty
therefore must not be the servants of men etc, concluding thence an exemption
from the power of the civil magistrate. Wherein they do abuse the word 1 Timothy
1: 9. 10.
both the law and civil magistracy is appointed as a curb and bridle to
restrain their wicked and ravenous desires, who else would readily break
forth to commit rapine, murder, incest, and all manner of filthiness without
shame and remorse even openly and with high hand against God) but for
conscience sake toward God, who has commanded every Romans 13: 1
soul to be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, and
the powers that be are ordained of God. As for our redemption by Christ, it is
true, we are redeemed by him from the service of sin, and set free to serve him
in Luke 1: 74. 75.
righteousness and holiness all the days of our life. And therefore we hold that
so long as the magistrate does command that which is agreeable to righteousness
and true holiness so long we are bound to obey actively; and this commandment
is not grievous unto us, because it is that which God commands: but when he
commands otherwise, then we may and must answer, as the Apostles did in the
like case, Acts. 4: 19.
it is better to obey God than man; in such cases we are bound patie^tly to
suffer any punishment or persecution at their hands, willingly submitting our
selves unto death it self, rather than to displease our heavenly father. And
so long as we thus behave our selves we shall neither bring our selves in
bondage to sin (for to whomsoever a man yeildeth himself servant to obey, his
servant he is whom he obeys) or incur the punishment of sin. But they
whosoever they be that under pretense, and the cloak of Christian liberty and
religion, do teach any doctrine that leads to rebellion against any
minister of God in the lawful discharge of his duty; they are so far from
standing fast in the Gal. 5: 1.
liberty wherewith Christ has made them free; that they entangle themselves
again with the yoke of bondage: and while they 2 Pot. 2: 19.
promise men liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption: for of
whomsoever a man is overcome of the same is he brought in bondage. And whiles
they break the Mat. 5: 19.
least of the words of Christ, and teach men so; it is to be feared that they
are the least in the Kingdom of heaven. And it is a thing taught us by that
great Doctor of the Church, and therefore must be received and obeyed as truth
viz that we in giving unto Caesar no more than what belongs to him, can not
rob God of any thing of his: for these two must stand together, Math. 22: 21.
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God, the things that
are Gods. What God has joined together let no man put a sunder. But
superiority to be given to the prince in Ecclesiastical causes (i. e as
themselves have interpreted the duties required in the first table of the law)
Wherein they err greatly, (not knowing the scripture, nor the order wherein
God has set mankind here on earth both for the upholding of his Spiritual and
civil estate, neither understanding well what they speak or whereof they
affirm) in that they perceave not that there are two kinds of government in
this world, a thing so plain as nothing is plainer. The one Spiritual, of
Christ in his Church; in which respect all are to be in a like subjection unto
Christ, both prince and people, noble men and them of low degree; and to be
governed by such officers and laws, as the Lord Jesus has for that end
instituted: and in this estate the prince and people are brethren, and of like
liberty and authority; neither may they be masters of one an others faith,
but fellow helpers of each others joy. The other is civil or worldly in the
common wealth; which government is also of God, and ought to be administered
according to his law, being the perfect rule of righteousness, according to
which all humane laws ought to be made, or else Judgment and justice can not be
rightly executed. In which estate we are to be considered in several degrees
and conditions, as namely, one is a prince or King, the rest are the subjects
and people; some are magistrates, others are those under their government; one
is a father, an other a child; one a master, an other a servant; and according
to these relations, the inferior is to be in subjection to the Superior in
the Lord. To deny the power of the magistrate in the common wealth, were to
enforce a denial of the power of masters and fathers in their familyes, seeing
one and 5 Com.
the same commandment of the law requires subjection to the one as well as
the other; and so to bring the fabric of natures-order, which God has so
wonderfully made, and so wisely and orderly disposed, to a confused chaos. So
that Christians to avoid this absurdity, must necessarily mind themselves every
one while he lives in the world in any governed city, Country, province, or
common weal, to bear or represent a double person or estate. 1. A member of
the church, wherein his dignity and honor spiritually in the sight of God is
as great as any other member or officer in the same body, and greater than any
King or prince of the world that is not a member of the Church of Christ. 2. A
member of the common wealth, a citizen of the city, an Inhabitant of the town,
or a member of the family; wherein he is either superior or inferior. If
fuperior; to rule and govern those committed to his charge, according to the
will of God, Col. 4: 1.
doing to every one that which is just and equal; knowing that he has also a
master in heaven. If inferior, he is to be subject and obedient to all things
that are agreeable to the word of God, whither they be things Spiritual or
temporal; and that not for fear but for conscience sake, Eph^. 6: 6. 7. 8.
not as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart as unto Christ, knowing that of
the Lord they shall receave their reward whither they be bond or free; for in
so doing they serve (not men properly but) the Lord Christ. Thus we may see
how the estate of a Christian does not overthrow but rather establish the order
of nature, and the civil governments of this life. But indeed thus much may
be intimated, by way of conclusion; that if it could so come to pass (which
we have no ground to expect) that a whole land or city were (both magistrates
and people, high and low) all faithful and sincere Christians, diligently
observing the rules of Christ for the redress of things amiss at any time,
there would be so little use of civil power, as if it were a needless
administration. But seeing God has in his divine wisdom foreseen, that after
the fall and transgression of Adam, there would be always a mixture of
believers and Infidels in the world; and that the wicked should be as pricks
and thorns in the eyes and sides of his Saints to try their faith and
patience; and has to the end that the wickedness of men (who are ready by
nature to break forth into blood oppression, and open violence to the
destruction of the creature which God has made, and which it stands him in
hand to preserve, that so his mercy may be seen both to just and unjust) may be
restrained and kept in some order, appointed Kings princes and estates, with
the good will and approbation of the people, to rule and govern, that the
wronged may have right, and the oppressed may be delivered, and violent
wrong-doers may be terrified by the sword of Justice; and it has bin, is, and
shall be always the portion of the little flock of Christ to have their
residence or sojourning in some Common wealth or other: let us therefore admire
the wonderful wisdom of God in thus restayning the rage of man; and let us be
so far from 2 Pet. 2: 10.
despiseing governements or principalities, as that for conscience toward God
we do submit our selves unto all manner ordinances of men for the Lord's
sake, 1 Pet. 2: 13. etc.
whither it be to the King, as unto the Supreme, or unto governors, as unto
them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the
praise of them that do well. For so is the will of God, that by w^ll-doeing we
may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, as free, and not having the
liberty for a cloak of malitiousnes, but as the servants of God.

1 Pet. 2: 7. Fear God, honor the King.

Prove. 24: 21. My son fear thou the Lord and the King: and meddle not with
them that are given to change.


THE END.
A postscript wherein some thing is spoken not altogether unworthy of
consideration in these times.
HAving taken in hand thus far to speak unto thee (loving reader) have
patience till I have uttered a few words more, and then judge as the Lord shall
give thee discerning. I have heard and read many grievous complaints since the
sitting of this present Parliament against Brownists and Brownistically
affected, as the great enemies at this day in common account, against whom
almost all men's mouths are open both to King and Parliament, as if they were
the only cockle, darnell, and evil weeds, the unprofitable branches, which
hinder the growth of the good corn, and spoil the vine of of the common
wealth; and as yet I have not seen or heard any information or description,
what they be for men and women that may rightly and truly be so named; for
countenanceing and favoring of whom the Parliament has bin much complained
of; and yet for ought I know they are at a great stand about the true knowledge
of that sect, seeing by their own confession, all Ansvv. to K declar. of vict.
Octo. 3. 1642.
well affected persons are called by that name. Forasmuch therefore as they have
bin only hitherto named, but their nature not defyned, yea that has bin a
nickname cast upon those to whom it does not of right belong; I shall with as
much brevity as I can (mynding the unworthines of the subject) set the saddle
upon the right horse, and that not as an Ad consilium ne acceseris antequam
voceris.
advertiser to the King or Parliament (for who am I that I should speak unto
Pharaoh? Exodus 3: 11.) but as a well willer to the common people, and one that
desires to do my country good (or at least to labor the discharge of mine
own conscience) and therein I hope I shall approve my self loyal and
faithful both to the one and the other. It is (we know) a received custom in
the world, to call the men of one sect, religion, or faction, after the name of
those that have bin chief broachers, maintayners, or faithfullest witnesses
thereof (and not of such as return again from their received practice to
their former course) as the Nicholaitanes are called of Nicholas, who was their
false Apostle; Lutheranes are so called of Luther, who was a faithful witness
of the light which was revealed to him; Calvinists of Calvin, who was an able
and worthy instrument of spreading the light which he saw; and so Arminians of
Arminius, which was a cunning deceaver, and stood stoutly to profess, teach,
and publish the false doctrines unto which he fell away; etc: or else they are
called after the false doctrines which they teach as Anabaptists because they
deny baptising of infants, and men of age though they have once received true
outward baptism yet coming to them must be again baptized; papists because
they hold the doctrine of the pope and church of Rome, and honor the pope as
head of the Church etc. So I also take that generally the common people in
England and elsewhere, do understand by Brownists or Brownistically affected
(seeing the name can not agree to any point of doctrine) such as do follow
that doctrine and discipline which one Brown was a prime author witness and
constant maintayner of by word and writing: which to prove concerning the
doctrine and discipline professed by those who separate from the church of
England as a false Church, not daring to have any communion with her. for fear
of defyling their garments) and hold the discipline of every true church to be
independent, would be hard for any of those that so call them, be they never so
learned history-graphers to do.

But indeed thus much I confess, that I have both heard and read of one Brown
who lived about the latter end of Q: Elizabeth, or beginning of K. James his
reign, and had received once some taste of the good word of God, and made some
profession of the truth; but afterward revolted from the countenanceing of the
way of God (it seems for the 2 Timothy 4: 10.
love of the world) and turned like the dog to his old vomit; for he took
again upon him his Antichristian ministry, and countenanced the Church of
England to his death, though I have also heard, that when he has bin put upon
it in discourse to show reasons against the way which he did so discountenance,
he could say little or nothing: yet because of the flesh pots of Egypt, the
garlic and the onyons wherewith his belly was filled (and having (it may be)
tasted or seen the poverty of the Saints, and hatred of men against them which
is one of their Ioh. 16: 33.
badges here in this world) he was loath to leave it by personal separation.
Wherefore I see little ground why the professors of separation should be called
after his name as if they were his disciples. But rather I conceave, and I have
the witness not of man but of God in my behalf, that he returning again to the
state of the Church of England, and dyeing in the testimony thereof,
countenanceing it by his communion and society therein, and being a preacher
thereof; has thereby manifested to the world and to men, that 1 Ioh. 2: 19.
he was not of us: for if he had bin of us he would no doubt have continued
with us: but he went out from us that he might be made manifest that he was not
of us. Whence I conclude that they may according to the signification of the
word (more properly than any) be called Brownists, who for the love of their
earthly benefits, and to avoid the hatred of men, do continue still in, or
return again unto the countenanceing of the Antichristian estate wherein the
Church of England was at that time; and those indeed are they that are
Brownistically affected i. e. affected as Brown was. Wherefore my hope is that
whenever the high court of Parliament shall proceed to their well settled
reformation (though I expect not that by the ordinances of men the truth of God
shall be ever established in the sincere profession thereof, and that because the
Lord himself says Psa. 110: 2.
that his people shall be voluntaries in the day of his power; and our Savior
plainly declares that no man Ioh. 6: 44.
can come to him but whom the father draws, for it is not Zach. 4: 6.
by might (or armies) nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts)
they will manifest to the world their utter dislike of P. Ansvv. to the K.
declar. of his vict. Oct. 3. 1642. page 10.
Brownisme according to the real and proper signification of the expression,
that is those that follow Brown in the countenanceing and approving of the man
of sin and his Antichristian Hierarchy. And to this understanding of this
nickname they are necessarily bound by the rule of charity upon their own
grounds: for if they hold separation from the Church of England to be an error,
and that Brown was once in that way; then when afterward he returned from
that, and gave them such satisfaction as that he received again his ministry,
he repented of his former error. Now for to make him a patron or father of
that whereof he repented and which he cast off, is a great breach of charity,
not beseeming such as account themselves ministers of Christ to put upon their
follow-labourers. I have spoken thus much upon this slight occasion only for
this end that the professors of the truth and all that are well minded may take
notice, that there is at this day no religion, heresy, sect, or faction, that
does so unjustly and improperly bear the name wherewith they are usually named
by their opposites, as does this poor despised people. But let them be
comforted that it is for Christ's sake, and their separation from the
unfruitful works of darkness that they are so named, and happy are they
therein, for great shall be their reward in heaven.

I have perceived also now in these days of England's trouble, the presses to
be employed more freely than they have bin in times past; and many are bold to
publish their conceits, and opinions in matter of Religion, and to be
counsillors and admonitors to* that high and honorable court, which is the
great Counsill of the Kingdom, how they should behave themselves, and what they
should inclyne to, in their reformation of Church-goverment. Which me^ do seem
to me, to spend labor, and trouble that Court, in vain; for if they did
rightly consider the nature of Christ's kingdom, they need not seek unto men,
but (if they be servants of God, they need only to seek) unto him who is the
Nom. 27: 16.
God of the spirits of all flesb, to send forth his word, with the power and
demonstration of his good Spirit, which would be (as indeed it is) the only
and suffitient way and means for planting and establishing of his true Church;
and only advise the Parliament, to approve themselves the ministers of God in
suffering his truth to flourish, and cherishing the professors of the same; and
to restrain (by their power) the malice of wicked persecutors, (as did that
noble King Darius of Persia, who commanded the enemies beyond the river Ezra.
6: 6. 7. 11. 12.
to be far from hindering the Jews from building the house of God, yea
whosoever (says he) shall alter this word, let timber be pulled down from his
house, and being set up, let him be hanged thereon, and his house be made a
dunghill for this. And the God that has caused his name to dwell there,
destroy all Kings and people, that shall put to their hand to alter and to
destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem) and to make such wholesome and
good laws, as might enable and authorize the civil magistrates, and Courts of
justice Mr. Nevvcomen in his sermon: before the Parl: 5 November 1642. page 44.
Next to this as a second means for the suppressing of popery, I would subjoyn
the casting out from among us all appearance of popery, every thing that looks
like Rome, every thing of which the papists may say* This you borrowed from
us, etc. I condemn not every thing received from Rome as simply evil, but
certainly as long as the papists see any such things among us in our public
vvorsbip, they will but scorn us, and our religion as imperfect, and unable to
furnish us in the service of our God without being beholding to them. If ye
know these things happy are ye if ye do them. John. 13: 17.
in all parts of the kingdom to demolish all Idolatrous relics, and
superstitious monuments, (as they have already most worthily begun with that
great Image of many faces in Cheapside) to punish open Idolatry, blasphemy,
swearing, cursing, Sabbath-breaking, and all such as are lawless, disobedient,
traitors, ungodly, sinners unholy, profane, murderers of fathers, murderers of
mothers, manslayers, whoremongers, defylers of themselves with mankind, men
stealers, liars, perjured persons, etc. 1 Timothy 1: 9. 10. but to uphold and
maintain those that walk godly, righteously, and Tit. 2: 12.
soberlie among them, though it should not be just in that way and manner of
public worship, which the Parliament shall set up. For I can not but hold well
of that which that faithful and able minister of the gospel Mr. Henry
Aynsworth has long since written (Counterpoy: Page 232.) concerning the
Parliament of England, saying, Howsoever all subjects are, and ought, to submit
to the good civil laws there inacted, and obedience may be enforced by the
sword (Romans 13.) if any resist: yet in cases of conscience every man must live
by his own faith, Hab. 2: 4. Nen must gladly receave the word (Act. 2: 41.)
out of which all religion must be gathered, all Kings and Kingdoms submitting
unto the laws and ordinances in Christ's testament, (Psalm. 2: 10. 11. 12.) if
they would have blessing and salvation by him. With which agrees well that
excellent note of an ancient writer (and there are many that reverence
antiquity in matter of religion, and indeed it is the old way, in walking
wherein we find rest) who teaches us that Bern: in Cant.
fides suadenda est, non imperanda. For the Apostle plainly declares that none
can Romans 10: 14. 15. 17.
call upon him in whom they have not believed, neither can they believe in him
of whom they have not heard, and hear they can not without a preacher, and
none can preach except he be sent of God, and furnished for that service; So
that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, not by the
commandments or traditions of men, which are of no such power to persuade the
conscience, as the word of God is. And if the heart and conscience be not
persuaded in fear of God to yield obedience, what will come of it, but an
enforced hypocrisy, a drawing near to God with the lip, when the heart is
far from him? which is a service abominable in his sight, and wherein there
can be no true inward comfort and assurance, which is the life and marrow of
religion, and that which begets true loyalty to the higher powers. For
surely it is a true saying that was once spoken unto this present Parliament in
a public sermon by one of their own ministers Junij 20. 1641. viz That there
are a great many ministers that are not resolved what to do etc., they will
wait for what the Parliament will do, you may set up what religion you please
they will be of your religion still. So also may be said of others, they will be
of what religion the king is of, so long as he has any power to support them
and any boones or offices to give them. Yea some think it high presumption to
be of any other mind that way, than the king or Parliament is of. If this be
not a serving God after the will of man, I know not what is. Let us not
therefore Romans 14: 13.
judge one an other any more: but judge this rather that no man put a stumbling
block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way; but let every man be fully
persuaded in his mind, Verse 5: 23.
and do no thing without faith in this kind, for whatsoever is not of faith is
sin, and Heb. 11: 6.
without faith it is impossible to please God. Now Ephesians. 2: 8.
faith is the gift of God, wrought in the heart by his holy Spirit, useing
thereto (as the outward means thereof) the ministry of the word of
reconciliation; and be sure of this, that so soon as the heart is truly moved
by the work of the Spirit, there cannot but be a most free and ready joining
to the Lord in faithful submission to his will, for says the Spouse, Draw me
Cant. 1: 4.
and we will run after thee, and the prophet David, I will run the way Psalm.
119: 32.
of thy commandments when thou shall enlarge mine heart. And until the heart
of the people be moved all that the kings and parliaments of the earth can do
by their outward force and power, shall not prevail to establish the service
of God in its due and right order; yea though they should be as godly and
zealous as Iehoshaphat the King of Judah, of whom the scripture notes that he
walked in the way of Asa his father, and departed not from it, doing that
which was right in the sight of the Lord: 2 Cron, 20: 32. 33.
Howbeit the high places were not taken away: for as yet the people had not
prepared their hearts unto the God of their fathers. And if such a zealous and
powerful prince as K. Jehoshaphat could not prevail in the reformation of
external and visible abuses in religious worship, and that because the peoples
hearts were not prepared etc: Much less shall any earthly prince or potentate
be able by his worldly power to make this people to Ioh. 4: 23.
worship the father in Spirit and truth, and such he seeks to worship him.
The reason is because the kingdom of Christ is not of this world, neither can be
planted or established by worldly power, for so long as the veil 2 Cor. 3: 13.
is over men's hearts, they can not look to the end of that which is abolished,
but when the Lord shall mollify their hard and stony hearts, and give unto
them hearts of flesh, when he shall enlighten their minds and open their
understandings, and so turn them from Idols to serve the living and true God
then the veil shall be taken away. Now the Lord is 2 Cor. 3: 16. 17.
that spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty, to wit,
from the bondage of sin to serve God in righteousness and holiness all the days
of their life. Gal. 5: 1. Romans 6: 22. and 7. 6. Luc. 1: 74. 75. Wherefore that
was a good decree of King Cyrus who being appointed to build the Lord an house
in Jerusalem, did not force or compel all his people to set on that work, but
gave out proclamation saying Ezra. 1: 3.
who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him and let him go
up to Jerusalem which is in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of
Israel etc. and the text says afterward Verse 5.
Then rose up the chief of the fathers etc, with all them whose spirit God had
raised to go up to build the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. With
which agrees the decree of Artaxerxes after that, which he sent unto Ezra the
Scribe saying I Eza. 7: 13.
make a decree that all they of the people of Israel and of his priests, and
levites in my realm which are minded of their own free will to go up to
Jerusalem go with thee. For indeed this is a thing that must needs be done,
before the service of the house of God can be set in order, to wit, that there
should be a people fitted and prepared by the Lord for the making of his
temple, and these stones must be hewea in the mountain, they must be fitted
and prepared before they can be joined into the holy covenant. Of this fitting
and preparing neither the K nor parliament can be competent Judges, but they
must be those workmen, that have squared them for the building which must judge
of their fitness, they must be men learned and expert in the scripture (which
is the golden rod, or rule, the line, and plummet, where by the matter of this
spiritual house is tried) that must be the masons and workmen, that must be
the overseers and chief rulers in this work. And when they are fitted, there
must be a willing giving themselves to the Lord, and adjoining one to another,
to serve God with one consent; they must not be drawn by force, it must be the
love of God that must constrayne them, or all will be lost labor. Wherefore the
Jews when their adversaries would by fraud and deceit have thrust themselves
into the work of building, they would not permit it, but said You Ezra. 4: 3.
have nothing to do with us, to build an house unto our God; but we our selves
together will build unto the Lord God of Israel, as King Cyrus the king of
Persia has commanded us. And be sure God will not neglect his own work, but
in his good time will inlighten the minds of his elect, and call them to the
knowledge of his truth. And for them that are not of that number, what have
they to do says God, Psalm. 50.
to take my covenant in their lips seeing they hate to be reformed? Thus for the
Parliament to behave themselves in point of religion, I doubt not but would be
an espetiall means to bring peace to their Kingdom, free them from that sin
whereof the man of sin is declared guilty, who sits as God in the temple of
God, oppressing and compelling the consciences of men by his laws and canons,
when the canon of the Scripture is neglected or received but in the second
place; and to make this the most renowned parliament that ever was assembled in
that land. It would ease them and the whole land of great trouble and expense,
if they would only look to the Civil government of the land according to the
law of God, and the just laws of the Kingdom; and take off that yoke of
oppression which has bin by former parliaments laid upon the consciences of
the freeborn subjects of that Kingdom, who have by the law of the land (or
by the misunderstanding of the Judges of the law) bin excommunicated, fined,
imprisoned, banished, corporally punished, yea and some put to death, for
dissenting and seperating from their Idolatrous and Antichristian assemblies.
Then should their fasting be accepted before the Lord, and their prayers be
heard on high (or at least the prayers of God's people for them) and I can not
be otherwise persuaded, but that then the Lord would soon be moved to turn
away his wrath, which now is burning against that nation: for Isa. 58: 6. 7. 8.
9. 12.
is not this thefast (says the Lord) that I have chosen? to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and
that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thine house? when thou see the
naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own
flesh? Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall
spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the
glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall
answer: thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here am I. if thou take from the
midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity
etc. And they shall be of thee that shall build the old wast places: thou shall
raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou shall be called the
repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwell in. By this means also
they should soon find out who are the Achans that bring trouble upon the
Kingdom, and the laws and Courts of justice might seize upon, and punish
them. For liberty being thus given unto men (or more properly, men being left
to the work of God's word and Spirit, in matter (or rather manner) of religion,
and nothing imposed upon them by the State, but only injunctions to walk
orderly and justly) it would soon appear who are the faithful subjects, who
are they that are obedient to Kings and those in authority, who are they that
wish most the good of the land; and on the contrary, who are they that deserve
to be punished, imprisoned, and (if their fault so require) banished, namely,
Psa. 101: 8.
the wicked if the land; those that live in riot and drunckenesse, in
chambering and wantonness, in swearing, cursing, Idolatry, Sabbath-breaking,
oppression and villainy; for they are those who (being left unpunished or
countenanced by authority) bring down God's judgments upon a nation; and not
those that Eccl. 12: 13.
fear God, labor to keep his commandments, and seek to save their souls,
by Nom. 16: 26.
seperating from the Communion and society of such wicked persons, as are
before named. For these are the righteous, who by their prayers, and tears,
upon all occasions, do turn away the wrath of God, and save the City or
Country wherein they dwell. Job 22: 30. Eccles. 9: 15. Genesis 18: 25. etc. Genes.
30: 27. Acts. 27: 24. These few words have I uttered further, out of zeal to
God, love to my native Country, honor to my prince, and that honorable Court
of Parliament, and for the discharge of mine own conscience, that it may not
be at that day laid to my charge that I had once a time to speak, and held my
peace. And I beseech Almighty God to turn away his fierce wrath from our land,
to give his gospel a free passage, that the kingdom of his son may be
increased, and the kingdom of Satan, and Antichrist be more and more consumed
by the sword of his mouth, and at 2 These. 2: ^.
length wholly destroyed by the brightness of his coming; that we may with the
Apostle John hear that great voice of much people in heaven, saying Alleluja,
Rev. 19: 1. 2. 3. 4.
salvation, and glory, and honor and power unto the Lord our God: For true and
righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great whore which did
corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his
servants at her hand. And again they said, Alleluja: and her smoke rose up for
ever. And the four and twenty elders and the four beasts fell down, and
worshipped God, that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Alleluja.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. l. 12. r In vindication. page 18. l. 23. r stop. page 33. l. 13. r
warfare. page 40. l. 14. r verse 5. etc. page 53. l. 19. r (...) page 54. l. 17.
r nor page 61. l. 10. r watch page 64. margent r misericordia. page 97. 8. is a
mystery. page 117. l. 4. put out. page 120. l. 2. r satisfaction page 121. l.
1. put out. page 123. l. 16. r. men page 126. l. 26. r make his.


