A FEVV PROPOSITIONS SHOWING THE LAWFULLNESSE OF DEFENSE Against the injurious
attempts of outrageous violence.

It is this eighth day of June, An. Dom. 1643. Ordered by the Committee of the
House of Commons, concerning Printing, that this Book entitled, A few
Propositions, etc, be Printed.

JOHN WHITE.

LONDON Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND, at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
churchyad, 1643.

A few propositions, showing the lawfulness of defense against Injurious
attempts of outrageous violence.
1. Lawfulnes of private defense against private assaults of Life.
I. BY the law of nature, it is lawful for any one to defend themselves,
against any private person, that assaults them to take away their lives or puts
them in danger.

Neither can it be, that the law of any Country can justly deny this: For all
just laws are with respect to common safety; which is none at all, if the
lives of particulars may not be by themselves defended from private violence.

2. of Chastity.
II. By the same law of nature, it is lawful to defend themselves against any
private man that would offer violence to their chastity.

Never law fully violated
Neither can any law of any Country justly deny this; For chastity is an
Inherent good of which there can be no pretense, why any should be robbed, or
deprived of it. And in one respect it is more Inviolable then life. and are
many cases, wherein it is lawful to deprive others of their lives, and for a
man to yield up his own life patiently; but none, wherein it is lawful to
deprive them of their chastity, or to yield that up: It being ever a sin
against the Law and light of nature.

3. of Goods.
III. By the law of nature, also, it is further lawful for any to defend their
goods from any private person that offers to take them violently away.

But this not in all cases.
And no law of any Country, can justly deny this defense even of goods
altogether. For otherwise they expose all the country to rapine and spoil.
Only it must be remembered that in this case of of goods (as also in lesser
injuries to a man's person) Christian meekness, recommended and charged upon us
by our Savior, Matthew. 5.39.40. requires that sometimes we suffer to some
degree, rather then defend our selves even by law Civil, and therefore much
rather then by our own hand. Namely when our defense might endanger more harm
to be done by us, them we are like to suffer, (or to hazard our own suffering
worse) and when our suffering may give hopes of overcomming evil with good or
the like. But otherwise, God no where disallowes absolutely the defense of our
very goods, and so of our persons, from the outrages of any private violence.

4. Even against Officers violence altogether allegall.
IV. Moreover, in any one of these cases, one may defend themselves against any
Officer or inferior Magistrate, that without all authority of law offers
injurious assaults, of outrageous violence.

No Law of any Country can justly deny this neither. For though there is no
absolute necessity of this or that formality of Law, where the officer and his
authority is known to all; and there is an evidence notorious of the fact for
which (by way of justice, and punishment) the goods or life of any is taken
away: Yet otherwise such an Officer or Magistrate is no more privileged to
do, (or in doing) any such act, altogether beyond the bound of his lawful
Office, than a private person is. But even any such officer and inferior
Magistrate is liable to punishment (even Capital) for his Robbery or Murder
practiced (or attempted by him) as well as any private person, when legally
convicted of it.

Though therefore there is (which is to be remembered) a constant honor due to
every Officer and Magistrate, according to his degree; so long as he carries
himself, not altogether contrary to his office: Yet when he attempts to do any
such acts altogether contrary to his Office (as all outrageous violences
infallibly are: his Office being properly to preserve others from such
violences) it cannot, but in reason and justice be equally lawful to defend
ones self against him and his assaults as against any private person.

5. Notwithstanding the command of the supreme Magistrate. against law.
V. The command of the Supreme Magistrate, without due process of law, to take
away ones goods (unless his authority be absolute to lay what taxes he pleases
upon any at any time) and much more the life of any; or upon any pretense
whatsoever, their chastity; can, in no sort authorize any private person, or
even any Officer or inferior Magistrate so to do: or deprive the assaulted
persons of their just defense, before argued for.

No absolute Monarchy in point of life.
Neither can the law of any Nation be supposed to contradict this. For as for
goods, if the law subject them to the Supreme Magistrates pleasure; it makes
or declares him then to be an absolute Monarch; and then his will any way
manifested is sufficient process of law. But for life, there is not, (neither
can be justly) no not in the hand of the greatest Monarch, any absolute
authority to command the taking away the life of any, merely at his own will
and pleasure. For all Monarchy (and even all authority among men) is primarily
and principally for Gods glory, and then for the good of the whole society; and
but subordinately for the honor and greatness of the Monarch. But as it
cannot be conceived how it should be to Gods glory who has so pereptorily
forbidden the shedding of innocent blood so is it not imaginable that it should
be for the good of the whole Society, that any one man should have absolute
power of the life of all the rest, or even of any one, merely at his own
pleasure no true good to the Monarch himself, none to the commonwealth and
least of all to the person of such a subject, that should be put to suffer it.
So that no such thing can in reason be liable to a command, But that still (for
all, that any should command against him in that sort) there is still the just
liberty of defense, by the law of nature forenoted.

God maks none, neither can man.
Whereunto may be added that no man can pretend any authority, but with God in
nature or scripture has certainly given, or subjects have consented unto, at
least in their Ancestors. And it is certain that God has given no man in
nature or scripture any such authority to take away the lives of others at
their own mere wills and pleasures. And neither can any Nation (by the
allowance of God in nature or Scripture) consent that any should have such
absolute power over their lives at pleasure. For they have it not themselves,
and none can give another that power, which they never had themselves, (though
they have for their goods, reserving but enough to keep life and soul together)
and this holds also for ever. For chastity, God gives no man power to violate
it, nor can any man or men, give any such power.

6. Notwithstanding his presence.
VI. The Presence of the supreme magistrate, adds nothing to such outrageous
illegal commands to authorize them so, as to frustrate any of their just
defense, as aforesaid

No Law among men, will or can reasonably oppose this also: For the supreme
Magistrates authority is the same, whether present, or absent: no act of his
authority necessarily requires his presence to see it executed, nor has any
validity, merely by his presence. Still then against any violent illegal
outrages though countenanced by his presence, defense is lawful and just.

7. Defense may be (if it must be) with offense, but the least that may be.
VII. In all defense though it be allowed to proceed to the offense and even
killing of those that offer outrageous injury, to life or chastity, if the
necessity of the defense require it, yet a man is bound to offend as little, as
may be, those against whom he defends himself.

8. Defense of one lawful against many.
No Law can gainsay this neither, 1 because to deny this liberty of offense
were in effect, and by certain consequence in many cases to deny the defense it
self. Mere defense in many attempts of strong and violent assailants, is no
defense at all, neither can any certain bounds be set to such defense, which
will not wholly make it void and vain. Only for matter of goods, because they
may be diverse ways recompensed again, and a man may subsist though spoiled of
all for the present, a Law might forbid the killing of a robber; And God did so
of one that broke up a house in the day time, though in the night he allowed
such to be killed in the defending ones house and goods. So that a man must
look to the law of the nation, for any such allowance. 2 But all laws of God
and just men will and do require that if a man can defend himself, without
offense of another, or very little, that he proceed not further.

VIII. If more then one come to assault any, the defense is no less just and
lawful, but rather the more, and so if they come with arms in a warlike
manner, even though the defense could not be without killing more then one of
them.

No Law of any nation can be conceived to prohibit this: for how many soever
there be of them, a just Law, cannot but hold them all malefactors, and the
more set upon mischief, and notorious malefactors, by how much greater their
number, and their preparation of Force, and so it cannot but prefer the good
of one innocent before a multitude of such lawless persons.

9. Defense of neighbors lawful.
IX. Where the assault is not against ones self personally, but against ones
neigbours, their lives, chastity or goods, it is lawful for any to ioyn with
such, as are so assaulted in their just and necessary defense.

Neither can any Law, justly deny this, which common equity not only allows,
but calls for: I am to love my neighbor as my self, and do to others, as I
would they should do unto me. Also Gods Law, that punished adultery with
death, supposed if a woman cried out in the city against a ravisher, she
should be rescued by one or other: and he severally threatens a requital of
those that rescue not such as are ready to be slain: and without this, the
weaker should every where be exposed to the stronger, and all single persons,
to any number, that would offer violence.

10. Joint defense of many lawful, ever, with Arms
X. Where the assault or attemp is not only against single persons, but diverse,
and the number of assailants be great, and they come with force of arms, still
it is the more lawful for the assailed, (and their neighbors) to join
together in their mutual necessary defense, by all Laws forementioned of
nature, and nations.

11. Lawful for officers to command defense.
XI. Those that are appointed officers in any nation by law to preserve the
peace, are specially authorized by their places, and offices, to defend the
innocent against such iniurions assaults and namely, to charge all those that
are under them, (as many as needs) to ioyn together in such defense, and
moreover, for the apprehension of such malefactors as disturb the peace by
such attempts of Violence, also those that are under Authority are bound, (and
therefore, much more is it lawful for them,) to ioyn with such Officer, who
legally charge them to help them keep the peace. And all this notwitghstanding
any pretended command from the supreme Magistrate, or his very presence of ring
to warrant violent outrages.

No laws of any nation can be supposed to contradict even this wholly, for
though laws may possibly make void all inferior Officers command, in the
presence of the supreme, or in case any command from him prohibit them in any
particular case, yet at least as private persons (as before,) they may defend
themselves, and their neighbous, and if the law of the nation does not wholly
suspend their authority upon the pleasure of the supreme, then even as officers
they may defend, and call to defense as aforesaid, as being the proper end of
their offices.

12. Preparations for defense lawful,
XII. Where it appears evidently, or upon just ground may be suspected, that
Violence is intended against any, though not instant nor presently to be
executed, One or more may before hand make their preparations, according to the
nature of the assault intended for their sufficient defense.

No law can reasonably deny this to such as are not under some censure of the
law, themselves: Because otherwise, it might be too late to provide for
defense, when the danger suddenly breaks forth.

13. Upon warning of public watchmen,
XIII. Where any are employed to be public watchmen, and they give notice of a
danger which they see at hand, or descry a far off, though parties endangered
(or some of them) cannot so fully discern it, or be suddenly or clearly
convinced of it, yet credit may lawfully be given to them, so far as to
prepare for a suitable defense, at least so long as they are not proved to have
needlessly frighted men, with false Alarmes

14. Special causes of giving them credit.
No law can be imaginable to contradict this, for that were to contradict the
office it self, which the law has constituted to discover dangers; And to
forbid preparation for defense in such case, is to be guilty of their own
mischief, by wilful betraying their own safety.

XIV. 2 It is yet more lawful, to give credit to such watchme, (accordingly to
prepare) when they are persons of experienced discretion and fidelity, or
justly recommended for such. 3 And yet more, when there has been experience of
the practices of such against whom they war, like those they mention. 4 And
still the more when they see signs, that such men are still of the same mind
they were formerly, to do outrages and violence. 5 And yet further, when they
make preparations for it, at least in such fort as will enable them to make
their assaults when they please. 6 And most of all when they are already
practicing such exploits by way of beginning in other places.

15. Lawful to meet and assault, those that are preparing to Assault.
No law can be supposed to refuse this which all rules of prudence and policy
plead for. And to do otherwise, were to gratify those that intend such
assaults as much as they need to desire, and more then they can possibly expect
from Rational men.

XV. Where the assailants are likely to be many, and furnished with Arms and
warlike provisions, The nature of defense does not enjoyne (nor admit) to keep
altogether close, and stay ever at home. But allows as lawful (and even
requires as necessary) to march forth against them even armed, to meet such
assailants and keep them from coming too near their dwellinge. And if meeting
the, they appear resolved to proceed in their violence, they who come forth for
defense, may begin to assault their adversaryes, and it is still but a defense.

16. Peaceful mind necessary, yet lawful to secine themselves for present and
future probably.
No law can justly or wisely oppose even this: Because by delay and waiting,
till the attempters of violence begin actually to make their assault, they
may have gotten irrecoverable advantage and irresistible strength against the
defendants. Therefore defense being allowed them, they transgress not the just
limits of it, by setting first upon those that appear minded to assault them as
soon as they are ready; at least so far at to disarme them, and disable them
from doing the mischief intended.

XVI. 1 As in all defense it must be remembered, that it is nor lawful to
offend the assailants beyond necessity. 2 So special care must be taken, (...)
Mor^^n, and (...) to Propositions of Peace and Accord, as far as may stand with
any safety and prudent security. 3 Notwithstanding which, none are bound to
disable themselves from a future defense in case of future danger.

No law can justly refuse this last clause. Otherwise all that was before
affirmed would instantly become less and worse then nothing. Where defense is
just, nothing but prudence has author^ty to command any to disarme themselves;
and that can never giv^ such a charge, but upon a moral probability of the
danger being so sufficiently over for this time; that before another can arise,
there may be again sufficient means of defense.

17. By standers not to be injured, yet somewhat of theirs may be made use of.
XVII 1 Also in all preparations and actions of defense, care must be taken not
to injure others, that take not part with the assaylants. 2 And yet in
extremity, it is lawful to make use of somewhat which belongs to others. 3
Provided they afterward have full recompense made them for any damage then
sustained by the defendants, if at least the benefit of the defense (though
they did not own it) redounding even to them, make them not sufficient
recompense, of it self.

No law can with equity altogether refuse this liberty also to defendants in
great danger, In as much, as every one is bound by the law of nature to be
helpful to the innocent in danger, at least insome degree, so far as may be
without his own ruin. Also the good of many being in danger, or a greater
good then is hazarded by what is used of a by-stander; Use may be made of it
upon the Terms forenoted without any Injustice, even against the present will
of the owner. Who the more unwilling he appears, the more he gives cause of
suspicion, that at least he favors the Assailants more then the Defendants;
especially when as otherwise himself might be in danger as well as the rest of
the Defendants. And then to borrow somewhat of him, or secure him from doing
harm, cannot but be included within the limits of the necessary defense, and
so be allowed as lawful.

18. Lawful for a country or Kingdom to defend themselves from slavery, and
true Religion established from subversions.
XVIII. If the danger be to a whole country, and much more if to a whole
Kingdom; and that there be attempts, apparent or justly suspected to enslave
men's goods and persons (and yet more if the true religion established by law, be
also aimed at and in danger to be subverted) a joint, and even general defense
is so much the more lawful and even necessary, calling all officers to their
duties respectively, and all private persons too, specially with them, though
also even without them, it they be false, stupid, or faint hearted.

No law can justly forbid that to a country or Kingdom, or to any considerable
part of the one or the other, which is granted to private persons single or to
a few, for their concernments, as this before has been proved allowable to
them.

19. Lawful for a Parliament to command the whole Kingdom to defend
themselves and apprehend disturbers.
XIX. When in any Kingdom or common wealth, there are States (or Parliaments)
which represent the whole body of the Subjects, they are not only the public
watchmen, and great Council of the kingdom, but the Great officers, and
chiefest Court of Justice of the whole Kingdom, and so entrusted and charged
above all others, with the keeping of the Peace, and defense of the innocent,
all the Kingdom over, and so their authority reaches throughout the whole
kingdom, and to command all inferior Officers, and Magistrates, and private
persons, to do their duties respectively, (whether others do theirs or not)
for the necessary defense of themselves, their neighbors and the whole
Kingdom, and to this end, to arm themselves, and march orderly into any part
of the Kingdom, for the suppressing, and preventing and apprehending of all
notorious violators of the Peace, or suspected practisers against it.

No law of a kingdom, (that has such State, such a Parliament) can rationally
be supposed to deny them this authority. for if all officers and Judges within
their limits may lawfully, and authoritatively charge all under them to keep
the Peace against all the disturbers of it, and even Arm against them, if need
be. And every Judge in Capital Crimes, has power to send to apprehend those
that are to be judged by him, or else all their authority is a mere pageant,
and a mockery. The States then of a Kingdom, who are the great Officers, and
Judges of Judges, (even of all other) cannot be denied the forenamed power,
throughout the whole Kingdom, indefence of the Peace, and punishment of the
violators of it, even though countenanced by the Kings presence and command.

20. Lawful to make captains, and a General with sufficient authority.
XX. By all the foregoing Propositions, it appears that in the fore mentioned
cases, it is lawful even for private persons, and much more for Magistrates,
and Officers in their jurisdictions, to defend themselves and their neighbors,
and that with Arms, and most of all for the States of a Kingdom, to defend the
whole Kingdom against all Violators of the Peace, and Justice of it. Whence it
also follows undeniably, that they may in such exigents of necessity, appoint
Captains and other Officers of war, and a General over all, whose wisdom
and authority may manage their authority, to the right ends and purposes of it,
and such they may invest with all necessary authority, for the right ordering
of their soldiers, and all others for the common good, and this specially,
when the ordinary Officers of justice, (or Captains of the soldiers, if there
be any) either will not join in such just and necessary defense, or have not
skill, to manage and conduct the forces.

No law, that yields to all that went before, can be supposed to refuse this,
which were utterly to disappoint the defense undertaken, and reduce them into a
worse condition then before, because their offering at a Defense the more
provokes their assailants, and their want of skillfull commanders, and their
ordering their affairs, will expose them to the Violence of those, that will
not fail, to come against them, with all the advantages that may be.

Thus far to show what the law of nature allows to all, and the law of Nations
does not deny to any, nor can be supposed rationally to forbid it. And this
under what government soever, being but the voice of nature and Nations. If any
desire further to see how this agrees with the particular constitution of
Government in this Nation: I shall refer him for that to the Political
Catechism, and the Kingdoms Case.

FINIS.

