THE FIGHT in KENT Between The ARMY and the Kentish men.

ALSO The Lord Generals Message; And their Desires to the Parliament.

AND The Castle taken at CHEPSTOW: WHERE Sir NICHOLAS KEMISH was slain, all
his men taken prisoners at mercy:

20 Piece of Ordnance taken, 30 barrels of Powder, and above 1000 Arms.

May. 31. 1648.
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbott.



LONDON, Printed for H. Beck, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.

A LETTER from GREENWICH Dated the 30 of May. 1648.
Concerning The Desires, and proceedings of those that are risen in KENT.
Right Honorable,
YOu may (out of common sense) suppose what a sad condition we are in here,
every way encompassed with dangers; and cannot look over one gulf, before we
see our selves surprised with another.

If there be any Inhabitant here that refuseeth to comply with the Petition of
the County, he is environed with the scorn of all his Neighbors.

And those who do join with them for defense thereof, they are in danger of
the censure of the Parliament, and lash of the Army.

The desires of the Country are, to Petition the Parliament, that the King may
come to London, and that they will treat with His Majesty, that both Kingdoms
may be settled in peace; Money be raised to pay the Soldiery, and the Army to
be disbanded. This is the sum of their Petition, which they so strive to send
to the Parliament.

There are diverse persons of considerable quality that join in these desires:
Some Lords, nigh 20 Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, Farmers, and other
Inhabitants in abundance. And many Seamen comply also.

The intent was to have met together at Black Heath yester day, And there to
have drawn themselves into Brigades, or otherwise as should have been
concluded at Rochester the night before, where they thought to have left a
sufficient strength,

Many, came to Rochester that night from Canterbury, and other parts further in
Kent, And the Town was very full, their resolutions being to march the next
morning as aforesaid.

But they had advertisements that night, that the Lord General was in his
march toward them with diverse Regiaments, intending to fall upon them that
night, the Army being much enraged against them.

Hereupon the Gentlemen that manage the business consulted what to do, and
finding it not safe to march, least the Army should destroy them, as they
supposed they might if they should fall upon them, They resolved not to march
to Black Heath, as they thought to have done.

And whereas they thought this day to have sent their Petition to the
Parliament by 20 Gentlemen chosen for that purpose, And the body to have stayed
at Black Heath: they upon hearing of the Armies drawing thither declined it,
and resolved first to send to desire leave for such Gentlemen as they should
send, to pass to and fro, in safety.

Here are many come to join with this County in their Petition, both from
Surry, Essex and other parts, many come daily from London, the number
increases to many thousands, so that they are more troubled for Arms and
Provision then men.

Some Inhabitants have complained to the Gentlemen that they have had their
goods taken from them, whereupon Proclamation has been made, that none presume
to plunder or take away any thing from any man, Magazeenes and Arms being the
chiefest things they take now: But I do not see how they can subsist so long.

I pray God that some way may be found out, that there may not be that great
bloodshed and slaughter which is so much feared.

Do but consider what must of necessity follow if one party kill and destroy
the other to a conquest in blood, If the Army prevail, will they not (think
you) be as high as ever, and inrage not only this County, but many more. And
on the other side if they defeat the Army, how then will the Parliament and
the City of London be trampled on, and all authority slighted and contemned, no
better event can be expected to follow if this quarrel be ended in blood,
which God forbid.

Greenwidge this 30 of May 1648.
A Letter from the Quarters of the Army at Black-heathin Kent, concerning the
late engagement: And News come thither from Wales.
SIR,
AFter a speedy march we arrived here safe and shall stop all disturbances to
the Parliament this day.

The Kentish men have some knowledge of our coming to this place, so that they
march not hither to day. Yet there are very full about Rochester.

Things go on very well about Dover, so that those Forces will be ready (I
suppose) to our assistance.

There were some Country men coming this way, who seeing us upon the heath,
came toward Shouters-Hill, we discovered them, and ambuscadoed the way; not
knowing but they had been a Forlorn, to some Body approaching (but it seems it
was only a mistake in them.)

We marched up to them to seize on them as prisoners: but one of them shot one
of our Troopers, who is dead, as gallant a stout man as any is in the whole
Army.

We neither killed nor wounded any of them, but took about 30 prisoners, And
them the Soldiers changed clothes with, and brought them away bound with
matches.

Some Gentlemen have been taken on both sides, of whom there have bin some
exchanges. His Excellency the Lord General, is sending to them, to offer them,
that if they will lay down their Arms and go home, their Petition shall be
presented to the Parliament, and that his Excellency will mediate to the
Parliament for them.

We have received Letters from Wales, that Collo. Herbert has taken Chepstow
Castle in Wales, Sir Nicholas Kemish and his Lieutenant slain, many wounded,
and all the men prisoners at mercy. There were in the Castle above 20 piece of
Ordnance, 30 barrels of gunpowder, and above 1000 Arms

Shooters hill May 30. 1648.
Finis.

