The fifth of November, OR The POPISH and SCHISMATIC REBELS. With their
horrid Plots, fair Pretenses, and bloody Practices, weighed one against
another: AND In Opposition unto both Two things asserted. 1 That the supreme
Authority of establishing, reforming, and vindicating Religion is placed in the
King. 2 That Religion is not to be established or reformed in blood.


1 CHRONICLES. 22.7, 8, 9, 10. And David said to Solomon, My Son, as for me, it was
in my mind to build an house unto the name of the Lord my God. But the word of
the Lord came to me, saying, thou have shed blood abundantly, and have made
great wars, thou shall not build an house unto my name, because thou have shed
much blood upon the earth in my sight. Behold a son shall be born unto thee who
shall be a man of rest, and I will give him rest from all his enemies round
about; for his name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace and quietness unto
Israel in his days. He shall build an house for my name.

1 KINGS 6.7. So there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of Iron heard
in the house, while it was in building.

OXFORD, Printed for H. Hall and W. Webb. 1644.

To the Popish Rebel.
To the Schismatic Rebel.
I Take the boldness for the present to put you both together; for I need not
be at the charge of a several glass to represent you. If you will take the
pains to look upon one another eyes, you may therein discover your own
pictures. I know the comparison will be odious to you both, and you think that
none but a blind man would father this resemblance. Herein you are like two
women, equally famed for their deformity, yet cannot endure to be told, they
are of the same complexion. Why should you be angry, that I take notice of your
reconciliation, when all the world (that runs not a madding with you) see you
shake hands together? I have read of waters that run unmixt in the same
channel. What communion is grown betwixt you I know not: but your course speaks
you both, to have drawn and drunk at the same fountain. Neither of you commits
a wickedness so lewd, or broaches an Error so gross and palpable, but can
and does pretend an infallibility to warrant it. The Oracles of holy men
inspired were never uttered with more confidence and zeal, then your
blasphemies against both God and King; and both of you by murdering such as are
faithful to their Church and Sovereign, climb the ladder to your pretended
martyrdom. You have divorced that couple, which the Son of God came from
Heaven to knit together; and instead of Mercy and Truth, which were sweetly met
together, instead of righteousness and peace which were wont most lovingly to
kiss each other, your execrable practices have from time to time bin ready to
betray us to those fatal meetings, wherein blood touches blood. Though you be
together by the ears in other matters, you are together by the hearts in
treason and rebellion; and your design is as good as that, which procured the
atonement of Herod and Pontius Pilate. Since Lisymachus Nicanor did
congratulate your offer of the right hand of fellowship in the treachery, how
strangely have you (younger brethren) been encouraged? What a progress have
you made since you walked by the staff of his instructions? Me thinks the holy
leagues are entered upon the Stage of England, to play those parts over here
which they did in France in the time of the third Henry. The same designs are
here clothed with the same pretenses. Their intent was (says the Historian)
to incroach upon the King, and to leave him nothing but a vain shadow of Royal
authority, under the conduction and direction of their tyranny; and to make
their way to this devilish design, the fairer, they cast scandalous aspersions
upon all the Kings actions, to render them odious and intolerable. And lest the
smooth glass of peace should represent things in their true proportions, and
undeceive the people, the waters must be kept troubled to make them appear (on
the Kings part) crooked and distorted. The people are stirred up to oppose the
Kings edicts of peace, and desires of accommodation. In the interim the
Leaguers go on pretending they were for God, for the honor and increase of
Religion, the utter extirpation of Heresy, to preserve the estate and Crown of
the King, and to maintain the rights and privileges of the Subject; yet they
swore obedience to the General appointed without, yea against the Kings
commandment, and engaged their lives, honors, and estates to adhere unto him;
and all that would not associate in this holy league, were persecuted as
enemies to God, rebels to the state, and perturbators of the public good. I
beseech you what difference does the late Covenant bear, to distinguish it from
that holy League? Are they not as much alike, as a bond is like an obligation?
Do not therefore allow that in your selves, which you abominate in one another:
but take notice from one another practices how pernicious and detestable those
principles are, that your several sides do build upon. His Holiness can give no
better dispensatio^ for murder or rebellion then John of Leyden: and what is
treason in subjects that dissent in other matters from you, is a crime of the
same complexion in your selves, though your Assembly of Divines join with the
remnant of your Members to Vote it otherwise.

Therefore let me expostulate with you in the language of the Historian. What
think you to do, O you [Covenanters and] Leaguers, for God, for the faith, for
the King? You undertake Arms for God, who desires nothing but peace. You
publish Rebellion, he commands obedience: you trouble the rest and quietness
of a Christian King; God wills us to endure at the hand of a Prince although
he be a Pagan: you do it for God whose name you call upon, and deny the power;
you do it for God who detects your actions, and knows your thoughts; you do it
for God, that will confound al those that breed confusion among the people: you
undertake wars for religion, and nothing hinders that, more then wars: you
fight for holiness, and yet you authorize blasphemies, plant Atheism, impiety,
and despising of devotion in all places: you march under pretense of the
Churches cause, and yet spoil the Clergy, and destroy the Churches, etc.

You say t^s for the King; it it be, where are his Commissions? if for his
service, where are his commandments? If for him, why do you it without him? If
for his obedience, wherefore do you adhere to the head of that league and
covenant, which is made against him? can you serve two Masters and be bound by
one oath to two contraries? etc. Know. you not that all bearing of Arms is
treason without the Kings authority? That the Subject cannot make any league
without the Prince? etc. Pardon me I beseech you (says he) Nobles, Princes,
Prelates, Lords and Gentlemen, if I tell you that this fortress which you build
will be your overthrow, this fire you kindle will burn your selves, these
knives you forge will be tempered in your own intrails, and that thereby you
will leave neither of your selves, nor your league, but a most pitiful and
shameful memory. In the mean while Protestants will grow so famous for their
loyalty unto every truth reveled in holy Scripture, that the very name will be
amiable and had in veneration: and that Religion (no more shaken by the breath
of factious spirits, then the rays of the Sun are diverted by the wind) shall
stand immovable, as a rock against every storm from what point soere it
blows. And your selves, when you shall consider the patience, and constancy,
and success of this Church in bearing the sharp brunt of your malicious fury,
when you shall with a more sad eye look upon her whom you have so often
pierced, you will relent, I doubt not. But when you shall see her in bays,
triumphing over all her enemies, when you shall behold her dressed again in her
ancient attire of decency and order, wanting nothing but the neglects and
nakedness that are on the one side, and the rags and superfluities that are on
the other side amongst you, when you shall find her neither scandalous in the
choice and quality, nor defective in the number and proportion of her external
rites and ornaments, I am persuaded you will lay aside those prejudices that
kept you thus long from her communion, and with all alacrity cast your selves
into her secure bosom and most dear embracements. But if you be either Jesuits
or Anabaptists, I fear (though there be nothing else) your obstinacy will be a
sufficient rub in the way to your conversion, which is the only thing makes me
doubt of it.

The fifth of NOVEMBER.
THIS Day is consecrated to the memory of a happy deliverance from a bloody
horrible and odious act to God and man; a matter distasteful to me to remember,
Speed in the life of King James.
or to write of (says our Chronologer, that it abhorres my very soul to fill
my pen with ink, or to blot my paper with these black spots of darkness. A
stratagem invented by him, that blows the bellows of destruction; fashioned
in the forge of the hottomlesse pit. It was the Powder Treason, a plot to blow
up and destroy at once our gracious King of blessed memory, with his royal
Issue; the whole stock of Nobility, the glory of the Clergy, and the chief
flower of the Commons. A design so barbarous and devilish, that it was able
to make the earth to cremble, and the heavens to look black with horror and
astonishment.

But ala^! whilst I should pursue the flying memory of this, I am surprised by
another Powder Treason, which presents and gives fire upon me. A Treason so
like the former, that had not the first bin crushed in the shell, and this
latter nonrisht to the growth of a great gigantine stature, you might very well
have imagined them to be the issue of the same womb; and however you may call
them sworn Brethren, without any disparagement to your Judgments. They run
a great way parallel, at last these get the start, by committing actual
rebellion, and outrun them. They have both the same place, the same plot, the
same plea, for their execrable treason. 1. The stage upon which this Tragedy
was to have been acted by the Saltpeter men of Rome, was the House of
Parliament. The design was to blow up that, and so it has proved here. Our
wishes for the assembling of such a Senate, were rather passions then prayers
(as if omnipotency it self had had no other way left to restore and secure our
happiness) and Almighty God answered us (as it were) with another passion. He
gave us a Parliament, as he did Israel a King, in his anger: And under the
influence of this anger (which was more then enough to blast and blow up all
our hopes that way) some of that assembly abused His Majesty's grace and
clemency, they provoked him to anger too: He was driven our, and after him most
and the most eminent of the Lords and Commons, by which means we are deprived
of the present benefit of all those acts of grace vouchsafed by our Sovereign,
and that which should have been our Physic (had all the Ingredients been
tempered together,) is become our poison. Ibid.
As the place is the same, so the plot is the same. Their intent, when that
irreligious achievement had been performed, was to surprise the remainder of
the Kings issue, to alter Religion and the Government, and invade the Kingdom
by strangers. What aims here has been at an alteration you all know. The
standard of our public devotions is taken down; Church Government voted
down; Sir Edward Deerings book.
and it is asserted in print (by one that was sometimes an eminent man amongst
them) that it was concluded, if the Lords were brought down to the House of
Commons, and the King made as low as a Lord, the work were done. And if their
Cannon at Edgehill or Newbery had reached the King, and cut off the two Glive
branched now about his Table, what would be done with the rest of the royal
Issue, we may easily imagine. As for the invasion of the Kingdom by strangers,
they have endeavored and offered fair to make a purchase of it, having by
Commissioners to that purpose bidden earnest and struck hands with the
Brethren of the Covenant for their advancing in upon us in a warlike manner.
The plot is the same, the plea is the same too. Religion is made the stalking
horse to Rebellion, by both Parties. The Jesuited and Anabaptized party row
with the same Oars, sail by the same wind and compass, though their coasts
be as far distant as Amsterdam from Rome. They justify their Treasons and
King-killing, upon the same grounds and pretended authorities. They are like
Sampsons Foxes, though their faces look contrary ways, they are coupled by
the tails, where they carry those firebrarnds that destroy both Church and
State; and between them Christian Kings are crucified, as our Savior was
between two Thieves. The letter from Dublin of the third of October 1643. to a
Member of the House of Commons tells us what precedents the Rebels now in
England made for those of the Romish party in Ireland, the words are these.
There was a Friar taken in the last expedition into Conaight, about whom was
found a collection of all your votes, Ordinances and Declarations in England,
very carefully perused and marked, with short marginall notes by him, and out
of them a large manuscript, framed by himself and entitled, An Apology of the
Catholics of Ireland, or a Justification of their defensive arms for the
preservation of their Religion, the maintenance of His Majesty's rights and
prerogatives, the natural and just defense of their lives and estates, and the
liberty of their country by the practice of the State of England, and the
Judgment and authority of both Houses of Parliament in England. In truth so
unhappily penned, with so little variation of language, that but for the
alterations of Ireland for England (says that letter to the Member of the
House) and some great persons of this Kingdom in the places of some named by
you, your own Clerk would hardly know it from one of your own Declarations.
All that they do is for the good of the King and Kingdom. The King is trusted
with the Forts, Magazines, Treasures and Offices for the good and safety of the
people; if he does not discharge this trust, but is advised by evil counselors
and persons they cannot conside in, it is their duty so see this trust
discharged according to the condition and true intent thereof; that they saw
their Religion and Liberty in danger of extirpation and therefore they had
reason to put themselves into a posture of defense; that they are ready to lay
down these defensive arms as soon as the great Offices of the Kingdom are put
into such hands as they can confide in. Thus the Popish Rebels in Ireland fetch
their Materials from these here in England and both Babels are built upon the
same foundation, that has been laid in the Votes, Ordinances, and Declarations
of the pretended Parliament.

To return to the Fifth of November, whence we have digressed; It was one of
father Parsons maxims (which those old Powder Traitors built upon) that if any
Christian Prince shall manifestly turn from the Catholic Religion, and
desires or seeks to reclaim others, he presently falls from all Princely
power and dignity, and that before any Judge has passed sentence upon him, and
thereupon his subjects are freed from al bond of Oath of Allegiance. That they
may and ought (provided they have a competent strength) cast out such a man as
an Apostate, heretic, backslider and revolter from the Lord Jesus Christ, and
an Enemy to his own state and Commonwealth. Nay they go one step farther, if
he favors or countenances an Heretic (put in a Malignant too, and that is any
man they shall please to call so; for they will be accusers, and Judges to in
their own cause against their Sovereign) he presently loses his Crown, so
the King is to be deposed, and the Pope immediately to present unto the Kingdom
for whom the people are to fight upon pain of damnation. Out of which
detestable conclusion (says our Author) arose the first smoke of the
Gunpowder Treason. Speed ubi suprema.
And what is attributed to the Pope by the one side, the other with as great a
freedom and confidence assume unto themselves, for evidence whereof we need
refer you no farther, then their Pamphlets and Actions. The plea is the same.
Lastly, the means which they use to advance their design is the same too. For
their zeal those prayed, Ibid.
prosper Lord their pains that labor in thy cause night and day Let
heretics vanish away like smoke, Ibid
let their memory perish with a crack, like the ruin and fall of a broken
house. For case of conscience, Garnett, Gerrard and Tomson, three Jesuits, gave
it lawful to kill innocent with nocent, rather then the service should quail.
For plausibility of carriage at home, Catesby advised Winter, the King might be
solicited by petitions to repeal the penal statutes made against Catholics,
and to tolerate and range them among his other good Subjects. And to be
plausible abroad, Owen was employed to allay the odiousness of the fact with
foreign Princes, and to impute the treason unto others discontentments They
imputed their treason to the puritans, who (to be quit) impute this Rebellion
unto them.
They threw scandalous aspersions upon the face of His Majesty, and spread
supposititious letters in the Kings name to their own advantage. All which are
as like the practices of our times, as if the brains now on work had forged
them, or those souls being transmitted into these bodies. But above all they
are alike in their means of glueing and cementing their party together by
Oaths, sealing up their souls to a faithfulness in their desperate
conspiracy, and tying knots upon their consciences, least they might happily
have relenting thoughts, and with too much ease upon a sad remorse slip through
it. But herein they differ, that these transcend them in perjury; for the
obligation of one single oath was to them an end of all strise: but amongst
these, one protestation was not enough to extinguish or becalme their
jealousies, their fears issuing from so extreme a guilt of conscience betray
all those succors, that both reason and religion offer, and can admit of no
security. If any question should be made about the place, these may challenge
the right-hand-file, as out-stripping them in four or five particulars. 1.
They were to act their execrable villainy in a Vault of darkness, as it were in
the secret tyring-house, as if their hearts had still continued the command of
a reserve of modesty: But these (as if they had made an order for the
banishment of shame) play their prize upon the public stage, in the view and
to the reproach of Christendom. 2. The leaven of their malice had tainted but
some few measures of meal: but these have spread their infection so far,
that a great part of two or three Kingdoms are leavened, and by this means
the Church that bred and nourisht them, is turned into an Acheldema. And as if
all these were not a continent capacious enough for their bloody malice, they
have poisoned the waters too with their Rebellious practices, that if need be,
they may stain the Ocean with blood, and make a red sea of it for their
passage to another Canaan. Lastly, though the Complexion of their hearts be
equally sanguine, yet these have hands defiled in a deeper dye of blood. They
did but prime the pan: these have given fire in the very face of Majesty. What
those did but design, these have put in execution. And if out hearts rise
against such as have discovered but an intent to butcher our friends; how shall
we contain our hand, from them that have actually spilt their innocent blood?
Indeed the child of that first and monstrous conception, was come to the birth:
But there was no strength to bring forth. Here (I confess) is more strength,
but it shall be no more then may serve to lengthen the pains and exasperate
the sorrows of their travail. As that piece of the Psalmist might have been
their History: Behold he travaileth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief,
and brought forth falsehood (or a lie) he made a pit and dug it, and is saken
into the ditch which he made, Psalm. 7.14, 15. So may the next words be a
Prophecy for these, Their mischief shall roturne upon their own head, and
their violent dealing shall come down upon their own pate. That Cockatrice
egg which is hatched by themselves shall in the end prove a serpent only to
themselves; and herein I doubt not to be a true Prophet unless the sacrilege
and profaneness, the luxury and wantonness, the malice and security, with
the pride and other crying sins of this wrethed Kingdom have provoked
Almighty God to mark us out for utter ruin and desolation.

I Will add no more degrees to this odious, though most suitable comparison: But
address my self to the maintenance of those two assertions, so directly
opposed against them; the first whereof is this, That the supreme authority of
establishing, 2 Samuel 7. v. 1. 2 Psalm. 132.2, 3, 4, 5.
reforming, and vindicating Religion is placed in the King. David having
sheathed his victorious sword, bethinks himself of Gods worship and service;
sorry to see the Ark of the Lord worse quartered then himself; he resolves
the building of an House on purpose to lodge it in. Gods service is no more
circumscribed by place then his own essence, yet it cannot be celebrated with
that reverence, decency, and solemnity under hedges, as in a Temple. A Temple
therefore must be erected, and that so famous and m^gnificent, that it may be
in some sort suitable to his Majesty, 1 Chronicles 22.5. and cap. 29.1.
who is to be adored in it. And who so fir to bring the first store to this
holy pyle as Gods Anointed? The Philosopher observed that the King ought to be
Polity 3.11.
(...), the Governor of things appertaining unto divine worship, and the
reverend Prelates in the Council of Ephesus address themselves unto the
Emperor in the language of a supplication to that purpose: Supplicamus vestrae
Majestati ut fidem immotam custodiri sanciatis. When God was about to build the
Tabernacle (for his worship to be performed in) the Model was not of the
peoples fancying (their blind zeal suffered to run a whoring, never brought
forth better Religion, Exodus 32.1.4. Ps. 106.19, 20. Apud omnes Gentes, quae
vis administratio solennes erat sacerdotem, autoritas tamen suma sanciendae,
reformandae, vindicandae religionis, semper erat penes Magistratum. Reges
Israelitici and Christiani idem jus sibivedicarunt. Davenant. Deter. quaest.
19, Exodus 31.18. and cap. 34.32: 34.
that I can read of, then Calfe-worship) The pattern is not to be expected
from the people, nor given to them, no, nor yet to Aaron, to the Priest, it is
given unto Moses the supreme Magistrate, Exodus 25.9. So when God was pleased to
fix his worship, the pattern of the Temple (that he will be honored in) is
given to David, to the King, 1 Chronicles. 28.17.19. Neither is the King a mere
door keeper in the House of God: He is Custos utriusque Tabulae, the whole
matter and manner of that worship is committed to his trust, as well as the
place wherein it is to be celebrated. God has committed the Bible unto his
custody, not finding a safer place then the crown to lodge it in. The two
Tables are deposited in the hands of Moses, and he is to take care, that the
Priests impart them unto the people, and ever since, Defensor Fidei, Defender
of the Faith, has been a Title due unto all religious Princes. To this end the
Testimony, 1. King 15.11.12. 2. Kin. 18.4. and ca. 23.4.5.
the book of the Law, was wont to be delivered to them at their Coronation.
Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.20. 2. Chron. 23.11. It is the peculiar Elogie of good Kings, in
holy Scripture, to have demolisht the high places; and destroyed the Idols, the
perpetual brand of evil ones, not to have demolisht, not to have destroyed
them. It Is a duty so peculiar to the royal calling to survey, settle and
reform the Church, that the people (though never so zealous and religious) can
have no Authority to that effect without it. The people were never yet allowed
to be their own Carvers in a Reformation. Auferenda idola non potest quisquam
jubere privatus, Cont. liter. Petilian. l. 2. c. 92. Exodus 29.4.5.
says S. Austin. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image: Thou shall
not bow down to them nor worship them, is a binding law unto all Israel: but
to destroy Baal out of Israel, is an employment assigned over by God himself
unto the King of Israel. 2. King. 10.24. ^ King 12.18.
2. Kings 10.28. Fourscore armed with the authority of Iehu, of the King, are
enabled to root out Baal and all his worshippers, which seven thousand, that
had not bowed their knees to Baal, are not allowed to do. Ne simulacra quidem
falsoru Deorum, quae public ex^abant, dejectaunquam ^egimus, nisi ^^ssu,
aut^^pul^ in libera Repub. aut Regum cum regnabantur. G^et. de lu^e (...). lib.
1. c. 4. page 6
For a private man to have broken the brazen Serpent, against Authority, had
not been much better then if he had worshipped it; for who has required this at
their hands? The people of God are often taxed for worshipping the golden
Calves upon the example and command of Idolatrous Kings: but no Prophet ever
reprehends them (though they do for every neglect of duty in them) for not
taking away of Idolatry by force of Arms, whether the King would or not. God
challenges other duties from the hands of the people, duties of a more private
nature, and is very well contented, where he finds them. They must hold fast
the possession of their faith without wavering. Heb. 10.23. and keep themselves
from Idols, 1. John. 5.21. and sigh and mourn for corruptions of the Church,
Ezekiel. 9.4. and submit themselves under the utmost penalty that authority
inflicteth, rather then betray the truth of their Religion. So the three
children did, Dan. 3.18. so the whole race of primitive Christians did under
Idolatrous and bloody Emperors: This is the resistance we are to make with the
loss of our own blood, not to the shedding of others, Heb 12.4. This is the
only guard the Christian stands upon, this is the best and most offensive
posture he puts himself into for the defense of his Religion against that
Authority that is set over him. Instit. 5.20.
Defendenda religio est a privatis omnibus, non occidendo, sed moriendo; non
saevitia, sed patientia; non scelere, sed fide; says Lactantius. He that is
such a Defender of the faith, such a Christian Soldier is listed in the noble
Army of Martyrs: He is of Christ's own red Regiment, nay of his Lieu-guard, and
shall have more advance money then the rest of common Suldiers under his sacred
banner. It Is the highest favor God can vouchsafe his dearest children to draw
them out and command them upon his forlorn hope for the service of his Church.
Hereby God does them the honor to get the commendations for their faith, and
fortitude, and Christian resolution. By this means he lets the world see how
well they are armed and trained up in grace and virtue, and that they are good
marks men, and good fire-men: that they aim directly at heaven, and are
fervently zealous of his glory. This is not a common benefit, but a peculiar
favor. So the Apostle to the Philippians, Unto you it is given (not to every
one) in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer
for his sake. Philp. 1.29. The sharper the fight, the more glorious is the
Triumph. The more wounds, the more Baies. Those marks of the Lord Jesus that
we carry unto heaven in our bodies with us, Gal. 6.17.
will be our tokens, our evidences unto a richer crown of glory. These are the
duties which God has allotted unto private Christians, and expects no other
from them: But if any one, or a combination a knot of them out of preposterous
zeal, or out of an impertinent, troublesome, and odious officiousness take
upon them to do that which God has committed to the oversight and Managery of
his own immediate So the King is styled. Romans 13.4.
Minister, they must be admonisht to ply their own Oars: So S. Paul to his
busy bodies, 1. These. 4.11. We beseech you, brethren, that ye study to be
quiet, and to do your own business. If the staggaring of the Arc of Gods
worship should ominate the fall of it, 2. Sam. 6.6.7. 1. Chro. 13.9.10.
yet the people can pretend to no calling from God, neither can their own hands
subscribe them a legal Commission, to support it. It Is enough if their zeal
can keep warm their own bosoms. It Is not expected they should be kindled into
such a flame as should burn up all the corruptions of the Church. They would
burn up wheat with chafe, and good grain with tares for want of skill to
distinguish them. It Is well if they have salt enough in themselves to preserve
themselves from being tainted. It Is well they have a Broom for their own use,
and will take the pains to sweep before their own doors: but let them not
sweep up their filth (as the manner of some is) and conceal it in private
corners, nor cast their dirt and mire into the Kings high way to defile and
annoy others. Should they attempt a Reformation against law, the remedy would
prove worse to Church and Commonwealth, then the disease; for those that
think it a more safe and wholesome lodging to abide under the shadow of
Authority, would assuredly oppose as well their Novelties, as usurpation, and
so their blood might be mingled with their foolish, because unwarrantable
sacrifices. Should they go about to break down all the banks of Government,
and force open the doors of the Church to let in some of their Water to wash
it, whether it be the Holy water of Rome, or the sanctified Jordan of the
Anabaptists; This water would quickly be turned into blood, which would be a
means to profane and defile, and pollute the Sanctuary, more then cleanse it.
And thus we are entered upon the second point viz. That religion is not to be
established or reformed in blood.

David's purpose of building God a Temple received an approbation from the
Prophet Nathan, Note that Nathan was deceived, for the spirit of prophecy was
not upon him at that time. 2. Sam. 7.4.
and was refresht with a promise Gods blessing and assistance. 2 Samuel 7.3. God
lays aside the consideration of his own immensity, and takes delight in that
small model which was projected in the heart of his Anointed. Forasmuch
(says he) as it was in thine heart to build an House for my Name, thou did
well in that it was in thine heart. 2 Chronicles. 6.8. Notwithstanding thou shall
not build the House, verse. 9. God serves him with a Supersedeas, or gives him a
Quietus est, to discharge him of this business. He delights to dwell with him
in that Temple, which David had consecrated in his own bosom for him: but he
rather confines his own worship to a wandering Tabernacle, then allows David's
hand in the building of the Temple. The Reason that David himself avoucheth,
if you please to examine it, you shall find, 1. Chron. 22.7, 8, 9, 10. David
was a man of war, though he fought none but the Lords battles. He was a
man of blood, though he spilt very little but what was tainted and corrupted.
God will not have those hands engaged in the building of his holy place, which
have been once engaged in blood, though those engagements were just and of his
own warranting. (...) ^tiam, ^^ctis nisi pers^^sis non ^pe^e indultum est.
G^ot. de ^^^e Bell^. l. 3. c. 15. and 11. At si falsa apud ^^ct^s Religio, ne
vera ^pprimatur, ^e^te c^^abit vi^^or quod Constant^ fecit ibid. Idem in Epist.
Dedic^ejusdem operis laudat ^udo^^^i 13. Clementiam in (...) verba. Nec ^^ni
adse^s animis circa divna dive^sum a te sentientibus.
The work is reserved for Solomon, for a King of peace. ibid. Indeed besides
Doctrine and Discipline in the Church, besides preaching, exhortation,
reproof, castigation by spiritual censures, the proper duties of the Priestly
function; there is a necessity, a conveniencie at least, of a Coercive power
in the Magistrate to put the shackles of fear and terror upon insolent and
lewd men to restrain them. If Religion would be allowed any external form at
all, she would never be suffered to go without a scratcht face: Schisms, and
Sects, and Heresies would undermine, and invade, and corrupt the Church: Sin
would encroach upon holiness: profaneness would assault and justle our
piety, and blasphemy would put affronts upon God himself, if one armed with
the power of the sword did not awe men, (if not into a positive respect) at
least into an inoffensive silence. But for the establishing of the Church, for
the propagation of the faith, for the reformation of Religion by force of
Arms, by blood and violence, there is not the least title in the holy Gospel
to be alleged by way of justification. There are some in the world, that
think to destroy the men is the best way to confute and remove their errors:
But we know it is no Sovereign Antidote, that cannot expel the poison without
the ruin of the body. Habac. 2.12.
The holy Ghost has denounced a Woe against him that builds a Town with
blood, and will God have his own House built so? If you bath the floor of the
Chruch in blood, you can pave it with no stone so fair and firm, but the
voice of that blood will break through and be heard in heaven. If you paint
the windows of Gods Church with the blood of your brethren, they will not
introduce more light, but more darkness and horror. That grand reformation of
our Savior was not brought in by the sword, nor against the authority of the
supreme Magistrate. He conquered the world by his preaching, and by his
passion, and established his own Throne in the hearts of his Disciples, so as it
made the Throne of Caesar stand the surer. The holy Ghost distinguishes our
Saviors conquest over Sin, Satan, and the World, from all other kind of
conquests. Every battle of the Warrior is with confused noise, and with
garments rolled in blood: but this (of Christ) shall be with burning and full
of fire. Isay. 9.5. with the spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his
life and doctrine. And verse 4. Thou have broken the yoke of his burden, and
the staff of his shoulder, and the rod of his oppressor as in the day of
Midian. Now if you look into the seventh of Judges, you shall find the
conquest strangely gained in that day of Midian, not with swords and spears,
but with Trumpets of Rams horns, and empty pitchers with Lamps in their
pitchers. If our adversaries will address themselves into a Christian course,
let them not extinguish the Priests Lamps that were wont to be trimmed with the
purest oil. Let them not banish, nor imprison the more eminent of our burning
and shining lights, and so by their absence create a darkness on purpose, that
the blinking linkes of their Levits might be seen to shine in it. Let us have
the liberty to make our Trumpets sound, and let that sound have an equal
hearing: if they can this way accomplish it, we shall not envy them this
advantage of their Rams horns and empty Pitchers, let them gain as many
Proselytes as they can to their lewd and groundless Reformation. But to go
about to make men sull of humility, meekness, gentleness, patience,
obedience, brotherly kindness, charity, righteousness, peace and joy in the
holy Ghost (and these are those Evangelicall ingredients that make up the
constitution of a good Christian) to attempt to make men such by fire and
sword, is an experiment too apparently preposterous to be successful, unless
we think Christians may be made by an Antiperistasis. Mat. 26.55.
Are you come out, as against a theife, with swords and staves to take me?
(says our Savior) I taught daily in the Temple, and ye took me not. He that
is not taken with Christ, nor has a will to take him teaching in his holy
Temple; if he comes to gain him by the sword, the close of his design will be
Christ's shame, and his crucifixion, and he has no warrant to apprehend Christ
in such a manner, but what is sealed by the power of darkness. Luke 22.53.
The barbarous cruelty which the Spaniard exercised upon the poor Indians was
so far from working their conversion, that it provoked them to blaspheme the
God of Christians, that would suffer himself to be adored by creatures so
merciless and bloody, that they seem to be mere strangers to humanity,
Religion can never be fruitful in that soil that is tainted and overflowed
with rivers and streams of blood. A sound faith can never be begotten by the
sense of feeling, when the stripes and prints of the nails are made upon our
own bodies. The flaming sword was not put into Paradise to be an Allective, an
allurement unto the tree of life, It Is only the outward man, not the
conscience, that is wrought upon by compulsion. so that violence may be a
means to advance Hypocrisy, but can bring no advantage unto pure Religion. A
pillyon and Abaddon, (a destroyer) are not Christian names, but Antichristian.
And how much are they worse then Jews, that put all the innocent blood which
they pretend they have shed for the Cause of Christ, into the treasury of their
merits, whereas the Jews thought it not lawful to put the price of blood into
their Treasury. To conclude this point let Mahomets Religion be a vine that
thrives best, and brings forth most grapes, when it is watered with the blood of
those that think her clusters bitter. Let Jesuits draw so much innocent blood
from their fellow Christians, as may swell into a River, and then let them lay
the bridge of Religion over it to transport such as are reconciled (against
their wills) to the Church of Rome. Let Anabaptists pursue the same tracke of
blood to hunt after preferment for their religious Cause: But we have not so
learned Christ. This is away to winn Converts to the Church, that true
Protestants never yet travailed in. We are not ashamed to profess with the
Apostle. That the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but (yet) mighty
through God to the pulling down of stong holds, casting down imaginations,
and every high thing that, exalts it self agianst the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor.
10.4.5. The Church has no sword committed to her but that of the Spirit, and
their is no other way chalked out for her to travel by unto Heaven, but
Obedience, Patience, Meekness, even under the sharpest persecution, And as
many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God.

FINES.

