COLONEL FIENNES His REPLY to a Pamphlet ENTITVLED, AN ANSWER TO Colonel
Nathaniel Fiennes RELATION concerning his Surrender of the City and Castle of
Bristol by Clem. Walker.

Which said Answer is here Reprinted verbatim.

Ordered to be Printed.

London, Printed for Thomas Underhill, 1643.

The Epistle to the Reader.
HAving taken notice of a printed Pamphlet (so the Author himself calls it)
set forth in answer to a Relation which I made in the House of Commons,
concerning my surrender of the Castle and City of Bristol (which has long
walked in the dark, and now at length is peeped out, when the Author might
have an excuse to say, that his witnesses that should justify it are gone away
with Sir William Waller.) I earnestly desired the House that this business of
Bristol might be heard at a Council of War, whereupon it was ordered
accordingly, I having formerly desired the same of my L. General, who granted
my request, but it could not be done till such time as his Army returned to a
settled Quarter, but now I hope upon the return of his Excellency, the Order of
the House of Commons, and a Petition of my self, and most of my chief
Officers to that purpose, this matter shall be shortly heard at a Council of
War, and therefore shall content my self with a few Marginall Notes, in answer
to that lying Pamphlet, referring the full trial of the truth to a Council of
War, till when, I doubt not but every wise man will suspend his judgment,
and then he shall clearly see who has bin the liar, and who has bin the
Coward.

Nath: Fiennes.

Die Sabbati 25o. September, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That it be left
to my L. General (at the Request and desire of Collonell Fiennes) to hear and
examine the business concerning the Surrender of Bristoll.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Mr Walkers Epistle to the Reader.
Reader,
THough this Answer cost but few hours to compose it, yet was it a work of
some days to collect the materials thereof out of the several Reports of
many principal Gentlemen and Commanders present in Bristol, when it was
besieged; And when this Pamphlet was ready for the Press, I found the Press
obstructed, whereby I was enforced to keep it in a month before I could be
delivered of this Birth, Some malicious Juno sitting cross legged at the
labor.


This is a lie, if meant of Col. Fiennes or any of his friends to his
knowledge.

This is the reason it comes out so late after the Relation, that it may
seem to rub over an old sore, whose smart is almost past. But Truth is a
sluggard that uses to lie long in bed, after her base sister Falsehood is up
and stirring: Yet when Truth rises, with her sober constant pace, she will
soon overtake Falsehood, and tread on her heels. Reader, it is in thy
discretion that Truth lose not her grace for want of novelty. Although she come
forth with this further disadvantage, that almost all those Gentlemen and
Commanders that should wait upon her justification, are going out of Town with
Sir William Waller, yet let Truth be welcome without attendants, without
ornaments, it being one of her most natural ornaments to be stark naked.

Thine, Cle. Walker.


An Answer to Col. Nathaniel Fiennes Relation concerning his Surrender of the
City and Castle of Bristol. With Col. Fiennes his Reply to the said Pamphlet.
SInce the heart of man is deceitful above all things, and none can know the
issues thereof, we will not search over-curiously into the desires of the late
Governor of that unhappy City of BRISTOL, Colonel NATHANIEL FIENNES, Whether
he affected the Government or no? Yet seeing it is a point controverted by
himself, in his Relation, page 3. we will be bold to say,

FIrst, His undermining Col. Thomas Essex, whom he struck into the box, and
laid himself in his room: In this manner Colonel Fiennes brought a letter to
Bristol, from my Lord General, authorizing him to seize on, and send up
prisoner Colonel Essex, then Governor of that City, and this was so
underhand carried, that the Deputy Lieutenants and Committee of Parliament,
then resident in Bristol, to assist Colonel Essex in the Government, were
never consulted with to know what cause of suspicion they found in him: This
was an affront put upon the Deputy Lieutenants in point of integrity, or
discretion and industry.

A lie and scandal cast upon my Lo. General and his Order.

Secondly, His putting Creatures of his own (neither Soldiers, nor men known
in those parts) into Bristol Castle, to make the government more entirely his
own, contrary to the desires both of the Town and Country, which were to have
a Gentleman of honor and integrity, such as both the Town and Country could
confide in, placed there.

Two Lie.

Thirdly, His many artifices, to lessen the Reputation and abridge the power of
the Committees and Gentlemen of the Country (whereof more afterward.)

A Lie.

Fourthly, His underhand endeavors to draw a Territory of twenty miles
compass as annexed to that City, to be within his sole command, and to make it
independent upon the rest of the adjacent counties, thereby to exclude Sir W.
Waller and all others.

A Lie.

These considerations (we say) make us think he was as jealous of his
Government there, as any man is of his wife, and that he would brook no rival
therein; nor can his letters sent to his Father oversway our belief; Father,
and son being Testes Domestici, in the nearest degree; But to take off this
conceit (in his fourth page) he tells us he made certain Propositions to the
Gentlemen of the adjacent Counties for the settling and maintaining a Garrison
there, to which most of the Gentlemen consented; It is answered, he made a
certain Proposition in general to that purpose, to the Gentlemen of Somerset
and Gloucester, and the Letter dated the 20 of March, 1642. (published in the
Governors Relation, page 13.) was sent to the Lord Say, and the like to his
Excellency the Lord General, to see how the said general Proposition would
take: But when the said Gentlemen expected to be again advised withal for
reducing the said general into particular Propositions, he having got the
start of them, secretly sent up particulars of his own framing, (the same (it
may be) which he has published in his Relation, page 17. entitled, A draught
of the Ordinance) whereby he endeavored to weaken the power of the
Deputy Lieutenants and Committees, and to make Bristol, and the Countries
adjacent for 20 miles compass his Territory, himself in all matters of
moment, being of the Quorum:

A Lie, As shall be proved under his own hand, and the hands of diverse
Gentlemen both of Somerset and Glocestershire.

For example, in his said draught of the Ordinance, he projected, that

First, the Garrison which should have consisted of 3 Foot Regiments (besides
Horse) (whereof one to be raised in the County of Somerset, under the command
of Colonel Alexander Popham, another in the County of Gloucester) should be
raised by the Governor only.

Secondly, the money raised in the Easterne-Division of Somerset, in
Barkely-Division in Gloucester, and in the Cities of Bristoll and Bath, upon
the weekly Assessment, Twentieth part and Sequestration; nay and upon Excises
and new Imposts, should be assigned only for the use of that Garrison,

A Lie, If there was a surplissage it was to go to other uses.

with further provision in the Ordinance, that if all this be not enough, it
should be made up out of the said Counties respectively: and the Committees
appointed to pay the charges of the said Garrison and fortifications being
valued and made known to them by the said Governor of Bristoll, whose Warrant
and Receipt should be a sufficient discharge.

Thirdly, The Treasurers of the said Divisions not to issue out any moneys
without the concurring warrant of Col: Fiennes Governor.

A lie, Only such moneys at were to be employed upon the Garrison and
Fortifications of Bristol.

Fourthly, The Trained-Bands and Volunteers of the said Divisions not to be
drawn forth upon service, either into the City of Bristol or Country, but by
the like warrant.

See now what power was left to the said Committees or Deputy Lieutenants even
in their own Counties, and over their own men and moneys, upon which Colonel
Fiennes had not incroached in this his draught of an Ordinance; Again page 4.
he complains that Sir William Waller drew forth Colonel Essex Regiment, and
all the Troops of Horse: we conceive Sir William Waller drew forth only Col:
Essex his Troop of Red Coats, being not above 30 or 40 and his foot Regiment
being incompleate, the one half whereof never marched out of Town, and were
entertained by the Governor still: page 5.

3 Lies, 1 Captain Longes and Captain Coxes Troops were drawn out, and Major
Laugrishes also commanded out.

when Sir Ralph Hoptons Army drew toward Somersetshire: Colonel Alexander
Popham moved by letters from my Lord General, would have gone forth with his
whole Regiment, to join with Wilts and Dorset, and the Western forces of
Somersetshire, but was Countermanded by Colonel Fiennes, who then first
produced a letter from my Lord General, whereby Colonel Popham and his
Regiment were reduced under his command, which letter until then he had
concealed and would not suffer Col: Popham to march with above six Companies:
Sir William Waller told Col: Fiennes before Col: Popham, that he desired only 6
Companies.

It is true that Col: Popham was rented through the default of Major Langrish
and his horse; 2 Lies, Langrish was cleared by a Counsel of War at Bathe.

but the foot Arms were not above half lost; In answer to his 1200 men, lent
Sir William Waller, It is confessed, we all importuned him to enable Sir
William Waller by an addition of 1200 foot, to take the field for preservation
of the Country (which is no more then Col: Fiennes in his propositions to my
Lord General and Parliament undertook, namely, * to defend the Country for 20
miles adjoining) * Not against an Army, though he had received the benefit of
those propositions, which he never did, and that was one maine cause of the
loss of the Town.

And Col: Fiennes himself when he gave consent to this motion, did declare that
if the fortune of the Field went against Sir William Waller, yet with his
forces remaining in the Town; and the men which would be recollected and
rallied out of his defeated Companies, he made no doubt, but to make good the
said City: And Col: Fiennes after the defeat of Sir William Waller did declare
that he hoped to make good the Town with 2500 men, and that he hoped to make
up that number, by arming those men, that fled from the defeat into the Town,
and by taking Arms from the Townsmen, and putting them into other hands, page
6. 2 Lies, He never declared any such thing.

Sir Arthur Hazelrigg, Colonel Burghill, and diverse gentlemen after Sir
William Wallers defeat, thought fit to withdraw themselves: these Gentlemen
did not leave the Town upon apprehension it was not Tenable, It shall be
proved that some did it upon that ground.

but out of a desire to raise men else where to supply it, A lie, They went to
fetch supplies round about by the Lands end.

and out of a consideration it was not fit for them in time of war to stay
under his command, who in time of peace had plundered some of them for not
paying such taxes as he put upon the City of Bristoll, not withstanding they
paid in the Country, and resided in Town only to do public service, upon
their own purses: and for lodging in the Castle it is confidently affirmed,
that no lodgings there were ever offered to any of the Gentlemen, nor any
former respects showed to them, could encourage them to hope for any, and so
many mean fellows of the Town were suffered to shelter themselves and their
goods there, that there was no room left for the Gentlemen, insomuch that when
Colonel Stephens with his wife and family retreated into the Castle, they
could not endure their bad entertainment, and the Princes Trumpeter (then a
prisoner) had better lodging then he and his whole family, whereupon he
returned into the Town again. Page 6. Col: Steevens never acquainted Col:
Fiennes, and his brother affirms that he bid him take his choice of any room
in the Castle.

He tells us he had but 700 men left in the Town, and never a penny of money
to pay them: Col: Fiennes had left in the Town half his own foot Regiment,
half Col: Pophams Regiment, the new begun, though not yet complete Regiment of
his brother John Fiennes, being about 300 or 400 men, besides 300 or 400 foot
remaining of Sir William Wallers, and 1000 or 1200 foot he newly (by his own
confession) raised and Armed in the Town, so that he had near upon 2500 foot,
besides his Regiment of horse, and his Company of dragoons, which is the number
he undertook to keep the Town with as aforesaid, 3 Lies: There were only 3
Companies of Col: Fiennes his Regiment, not a man of Col: Pophams, and the 300
or 400 remaining of Sir William Wallers were part of the 1000. If M. Walker
that was a Sommersersetshire Gentleman, and constantly resided in the Town
before, had not most valiantly run out of the Town when the enemy came before
it.

and many more men he might have had, if he had not as aforesaid so much
lessened the Reputation of the Committees in the Country, that they, who by
their Warrant had called in near upon a thousand men in February last, when
Prince Rupert was before the Town, could not now call in a hundred, so much
was the Country distasted with taking free Quarter, Horses, disorderly
plundering even from the best affected, and all these abuses, A base lie all
along.

with many more, were imputed by the Country people unto the Committee and
Deputy Lieutenants resident in Bristoll, because being in place they did not
redress them, although it were not in their power so to do, being over-voted
at the Council of War, by Captains purposely chosen and new made by the
Governor, that he might have the sole power and countenance of that Council
to serve his ends, and being likewise overborne by the Governors access of
power gotten from time to time by Commissions and Letters under hand from the
Lord General, or the Parliament, which he kept sleeping by him, never showing
his additionall authority but upon special occasion, and then so cursorily and
privately, as did easily declare he meant not to have his authority so well
understood, as to draw it in danger to be examined and limited; A base lie, and
scandalous to the Parliament and my L. General.

Hereupon the Gentry forbore to intermeddle with affairs, and the whole Town
and Country Were filled with jealousies and indignations; and where he
affirms he had not one penny of money to pay his soldiers: This causes
admiration in all men, who have observed what strange and unheard of ways were
used, and what number of spunges and horseleeches were continually employed to
suck both from the Town and Country, some devices to raise moneys we will set
down, all is impossible.

1. A tax of 500 l. or 600. pound a week upon the Town, which was afterward
drawn down to a far less sum, we know not upon what consideration, since it
is apparent the Town was able to bear a far heavier burden.

But he would bear no part of it himself. He does not at all seem to deny it
in that Letter, and this tax was laved and disburced by the Deputy Lieutenants
themselves, not a penny of it came to Col: Fiennes his hands, not of that of
the twentieth part, he never received any within 20 miles, or within half a
mile.

2. A tax upon Somerset and Glocestershires toward the fortifying of so much
of Bristol as stood in these Counties, yet this Relator concealeth, and in his
Letter the 17 of June, seems to deny that he had any special levy for his
work, both from the Town and Country.

3. The weekly assessment, and the 20 parts within his verge of 20 miles,
which though they were not duly rased, amounted to a considerable sum, if an
account had bin kept thereof.

4. The plundering of S. Thomas Bridges, S. Maurice Berckley, and many other
men's estates in the Country, without any warrant from the Council of War,
or the Deputy Lieutenants, contrary to an express Order made by the said
Council, all which were carried into the Castle without account;

A Lie.

And when complaints were made for undue plundring, they were never heard by a
Council of War, but privately referred to Langrish or his equals, and the
complainants just request choked with delays, as in Mistress Millers case and
others. A Lie.

5. The letting and setting, or the stocking with plundered Cattle, the said
Delinquents and other men's estates, and sequestring their Rents with account,
and without the concurrence or privity of the Deputy Lieutenants.

6. The consiscated estates of the Conspirators in Bristol, and the secret
compositions made with many of them, are thought to be very considerable, a the
rather, because when it was move d, that all compositions might be made openly
at a full Council, and entered into the Council book, it would not be
hearkened unto:

a A Lie. All these shall be proved to be Lies at a Counsel of War.

Yet Colonel Fiennes in his Letter to his Father, dated June 17. 1643. (see
Relation, page 25.) says, he shall never make 3000. l. of the Conspirators
estates: It may be he meant upon compositions besides their plunder, which he
could set no probable value upon.

7. Diverse loanes upon the public faith to a great value, estimated b at 7000.
l.

b A Lie by 6500.

8. Diverse supplies from Parliament, which were always c concealed from the
Committee;

c What had the Committee of So^mersetshiere to do with it.

he had received 4000. l. before the 12. of May, 1643. by his own confession,
(Relation p. 23.) and we hear he has received at the least 3000. l. or 4000.
l. since, quaere whether he has received any money from Sir Gilbert Gerrard?

9. Licenses to trade with the Enemy ( d even contrary to his Excellencies
Ordinances of War) not granted for nothing.

d A base Lie.

10. e Custom money 1700. l.

e Another Lie. Col: Fiennes has received together with the 1700. l. of
custom money, in all 6688, and shall give a very good account of that, and all
other receipts that this Pa^phletter or any other can charge him withal.

11. If we may believe common fame, many Tradesmen (with whom we formerly told
you the Castle was cumbred) f were drawn to give 10. l. a man, to have
themselves and their goods secured there,

f Another Lie.

g and yet no sufficient caution is made in the Articles of Surrender, g The
9th Article of the agreement was framed purposely for it.

to restore the said goods to them again, many of them not being to be found,
and the poor men are put to compound with the enemy for getting them out, as
formerly they did with their friends to get them in; Besides, whereas his horse
were to have 2. s. 6. d. a day pay, Colonel Fiennes gave them free quarter in
the Country, and but 1. s. the day pay; g quaere what became of the rest.

g It was discounted to the State, as may appear by the Captains accou^ts
given in before this Pamphlet came forth.

This we set down to show how good an Oecononist our Governor was, and how
able to raise money, having so rich a shop as the Town of Bristoll to work in;
h certainly, it was very possible f^r such a thriving Governor to maintain
the Garrison out of so rich a Town, without the assistance of the adjacent
Counties, (contrary to his tenet, page 4.)

h How does this agree with what was said before of the many and unheard of
devices to get money? How many pounds or pence did his Governor Col: Essex to
whom he was assistant raise out of that rich City.

and this we demonstrate by the present practice of the Kings Forces, who make
that Town, not only maintain their whole Garrison, but man forth and
maintain a good sleete of Ships, find Gunpowder, and pay a great fine besides.
If Co. Fiennes had been a Comm ander of the Kings Forces, or that the
Parliament world let their officers do what they do, he could have raised as
much money as they, and yet sure this demonstrator is mistaken in the
hypothesis of his demonstration

And for the better understanding of this money business, know that Colonel
Pophams Regiment of Foot, and Colonel Coals Regiment of horse and Dragoones,
resident in Town, were not paid by the Governor, but by the Country; and the
Governors whole charge estimated by himself, (in a Letter to his Father dated
June 17. 1643. and printed with his Relation, page 23.) was between a 1000. l.
1200. l. and 1300. l. a week, reckoning as we conceive his weekly disbursment
for fortifying, which was none of his charge.) And for the 15. Regiments of
foot and 12. Regiments of horse, wherewith the Relator ( page 6.) says, the
enemy besieged the Town; It is confidently affirmed they were not half
Regiments, and that many of their Colors were no other then such as the enemy
had taken from Sir William Waller, and were now set up like scar-Crowes, or
penal statutes against Recusants in terrorem only: Let Soldiers judge of their
number that saw them.

But he relates ( page 7.) that there was one place where the works were not
perfect, the ditch not made on the outside, nor the foot-banck on the inside,
where was but a weak guard, * This seems strange to those that knew how much
money was raised to perfect the works, how long time was spent in perfecting,
and how suddenly so small a defect would have been remedied, unless it had
been purposely left as a posterne for the enemy; * A base supposition, as if
he that would have be trayed the Town, would first have killed so many of their
men and officers of quality, in testimony of his correspondency with them. All
these particulars shall be fully cleared at a Council of War.

and that there should be but a weak guard left in the weakest place, and Major
Langrish with his Troops of horse left there to second the Foot, sounds not
well; i Had the several complaints formerly made to the Governor against
Langrish for his cowardice at Wells, Muncton Forly, Landsdowne, and the
Devises, i For the business of Wells Langrish was not only cleared at a
Council of War, but also commended. At Muncton Forly he was not present,
being sent to Bristol by S. W. Waller, and in the other a places he ra^ away no
otherwise then Sir W. Waller, and all the rest did.

or the present advice of Col. Stephens, Lieutenant Col. Clifton, and many
others been heard, he had not been set there to betray the trust reposed in
him now: A Lie. Co. Stephe^^ and L. Col. Cliston gave no such advice.

wherefore we must set Langrishes faults upon Col. Fiennes score. But it stood
not with the Governors convenience to hear any complaints against so k
profitable an instrument, he knew much, and could discover much, Delicta fuere
nexus amicitiae, ( p. 8.) k A base and grou^dlesse slander.

the Relator continues his History of the enemies entering the Line of
communication which proved the loss of the Town. To avoid interruption we
will set down the counter-relation, according to the information received from
l diverse Gentlemen of quality, commanding in that service. l But namelesse.

When the enemies first viewed the Town, a great Officer of that Army declared
his opinion, that he thought it not fit to be attempted, alleging it was no
where assaultable, but in the hollow way, between Brandon hill Fort, and
Windmill hill Fort, (the only place where the enemy afterward found entrance
upon an assault given) the works being imperfect, and a weak guard kept there,
as abovesaid, by the Relators own confession, (page 7.) It was much the place
most obnoxious should be least regarded, yet so it happened, and upon the first
entrance m for an hour together, there were not above 100. of the enemies,
within the Line, m A Lie

the foe was so wary in seconding those that entered, that he gave them for
lost n And those that entered afterward as seconds were but such scattered
soldiers as had been beaten off elsewhere from the Works, between Wind mill
hill Fort and Pegor hill Fort: n How does this agree with the former clause
that the enemy should fall on with so few men in the maine place intended for
the assault.

How easily might any man but Langrish have done good service there? as
appears by the good service done by Captain Lieutenant Nevill (whom for
honors sake I name, see the Relation, page 8.) who had but 40. horse, and yet
if he had been seconded by some Musketeers, he had cut off all that were then
entered, and for about o 2. hours more, there were not above 300. of the
Enemies entered, (so unapt they were to believe so unexpected a good fortune) o
A Lie.

p But the Governor presently upon the first entrance of the assaylants, sent
his Lieutenant Col: to call his soldiers off from the Line, p A Lie as shall
be made to appear at a Council of War.

who affirmed that if our soldiers did not speedily retreat, they would be all
cut off: q Lieutenant Col. Davison with other Officers, earnestly advising that
a sally might be made out of the Town upon them, q A Lie Lieuten. Col: Davison
gave no such advise to the Governeur, was not called off his guard till the
enemy was possessed of all those places, was not out in the sally, as almost
all the rest of the held Officers were.

and that the r Soldiers yet remaining at the line, might keep it, and fall
upon the rear of them, which he could not obtain until 3. hours after the
assaylants had entered the line, when it was too late, and the Enemy had
possessed himself of Essex fort, the Redlodge Sir Fardinando Gorges house, and
the College Tower, places of advantage in the Suburbs, r Whence should the
Governor have had the soldiers to have sallied out with, if he had not called
the^ off the line, out of the supplies those Gentlemen should have sent him
that went about by the lands end

Major Jews (an old Soldier) was of the same mind with Davison, and being at
the Line, would not quit it in an hour and half, although he received many
commands to that purpose: At last his soldiers taking notice they were
commanded away, and Jews receiving a command in writing under the Governors
own hand to retire into the Town s under pain of hanging, he obeyed: s He
deserved to be hanged if he had not come off as at a Council of War shall be
made to appear.

After the sally unseasonably made, and beaten back again, spoken of, ( page
8.) the assailants possessed the Suburbs as far as Froome gate, t yet was there
no danger of the enemies wading over at the Key, the depth of the mud and
disadvantagious landing places, would have made them liable to great execution,
even by stones and clubs, wherein the Townsmen would not have been backwards.

t How did our own soldiers run over without sticking in the mud.

The Defendants both Townsmen and Soldiers were disheartened and displeased at
their retreat from the Line, into the Town, and to add more discouragement to
thom, the Governor instead of making his last retreat into the Castle,
according to his first resolution, neglected to make so much as a show of
further defense, but presently resolved upon a Treaty with the enemy; whether
he called his own creatures, his officers to join with him in this
resolution, is uncertain; But the Committee and Gentlemen of the Country (who
had most to lose there) viz. u Sir John Horner, Master Stephens, his son the
Colonel, and diverse other Officers do deny he ever put the question to them,
whether they would treat or no?

u A gross Lie, most, if not all the Gentlemen were there, the question was
put to them, and no man dissented.

But after he had sent a Drum to the enemy for a Treaty, and gave Langrish and
Captain Thomas Hippesly for Hostages, he then called the Gentlemen to
Counsel, to know what Articles he should propound in their behalf. This
Treaty slackned all men's courages, and made them lay by all thought of saving
themselves, by fight, but by Treaty only. x Now, and not till now, (whatsoever
the Relator says, page 8.) the Soldiers began to drop from their Colors and
Guards, and many of them ran to the Enemy, x Another gross Lie, of 1200, 12.
foot could not he get to their colors, before any Treaty was thought on or
spoken off.

and discovered the amazedness and disorders of the Defendants: Had the
Governor retreated to the Castle, and set a good face upon the matter, it
would have bettered his conditions, both for the good of his Soldiers and
Townsmen, who were so far from a design to fall upon the Garrison, that they
had showed great love in victualling the soldiers, and great courage in
fighting for them. Is that to set a good face upon the matter, to run and hide
his head in a Castle whilst hundreds of his Soldiers and friends were
butchering in the Town.

We will not argue how tenable the Town and Castle, or the Castle, after the
Town lost, was, but certainly the Governor and all his Council (until that
very moment) thought it tenable: otherwise to what purpose served, First, his
great cost in fortifying, continued to that day? Secondly, his victualling the
Castle? Thirdly, his desire to Sir William Waller to withdraw with his Horse,
for fear of cunsuming his provisions, prooved by the testimony of Col: Cook,
whom Col: Fiennes employed to carry a Message to that purpose, and by a writing
under Col: Fiennes hand herewith printed; A Lie. All those particulars shall be
answered at a Counsel of War, how all this may be reconciled.

And how could Sir Will: Waller make such have to Exeter or to Gloucester, as to
raise forces to rescue Col: Fiennes that was so hasty as to deliver up the
Town and Castle in three or four days to the enemy? Fourthly, his former
resolution at a council of War was, if they were beaten from the Line, to
fire the Suburbs and retreat into the Town and at last to fire the Town and
retreat into the Castle, to which purpose Orders were given out; At what
Council of War? Who gave out those orders?

and yet when we consider how he had pestered the Castle with unnecessary
people, and thereby disabled himself to draw in his Soldiers to keep it, we
cannot but conclude his resolution to loose that and save himself was of an
antienter date then his deeds and words formerly made show of, A lie, He gave a
Warrant to Captain Birck and others, to rid the Castle of all such. How to
save himself by keeping at the Line, and most usually in the places of
greatest danger, and going to the Koy and marsh to appoint the guards, when the
enemy played thick upon him from the Colledge-tower and the houses open S.
Austins back, having a good mark to know him by, by the horse that usually
accompanied him, sure he might have been safer in the Castle.

but we are sorry to hear this Relator (page 9.) make it so clear a point that
if the place had been Tenable, he could not have hoped for any relief in 6 or
8 weeks: what a discouragement will this be to that stout and faithful
Commander Col: Massy, and other Governors of Towns, who have not such a
powerful solicitor with the Parliament as Col: Fiennes Father. We have seen 3
of the Governors reasons why he could not keep the Castle.

The first was, he had too many men to keep the Castle, though too few to make
good the Town.

The second was, a doubt least the City should fall upon him in his retreat
thither.

Third was, the weakness of the Castle not fully fortified: And now newly
discovered by the enemies manner of storming, and the execution his pieces of
battery had lately done upon our Parapetts of earth; Together with the
provision he had made of close decked boats, and galleries; which provision is
gainsaid by all men:

If it was not before, sure now it is a very clear point, Col: Fiennes was not
much out in judging he could not have succor in less then six weeks, and it
was beyond expectation that Gloucester had it so soene.

Let us now weigh the rest of his arguments (page 9 and 10) upon that subject;
first he wanted powder and match, he confesses he found 45 barrells, when he
first undertook the charge of the Town, that he received 30 barrells from
London, and 126 barrells from France, in all 201 barrells; besides what powder
was made in the Town, being about 6 or 7 barrells weekly for 30 weeks
together, A lie. by half the barrells, and well near hal^e the weeks.

and what was and might have been gotten out of ships, shops and Merchants
sellars, a large quantity surely, had they been well searched; but to find
Gunpowder had been to loose a good excuse; Quaere, how many of these were
double barrells, and what became of the overplus (granting that Sir William
Waller had 60 barrells out of this said sum) Besides when Chaptain Birck heard
that the Castle would be rendered, he came to the chief Gunner, desiring the
Keys of him, for that he would defend the Castle himself; the Gunner
answered him, it was impossible, for that he had but 10 barrels of powder left,
and afterward in further talk, the said Gunner confessed he had about 60
barrels, but alleged that Colonel Fiennes bid him say, that he had but 10
barrels left; Sure neither was Captain Birck such a fool, nor the Master
gunner such a liar.

And for Match Colonel Fiennes might have made enough there. A brave Sould^er
to maintain a Castle against a Royal Army, with Match that was to be made
every day in the Castle.

Secondly, he says he should have lost all his Horse, being 300, and all the
foot which would not be contained in the Castle; wherefore it was concluded by
the Council of War to treat and accept of conditions which might preserve
300 horse and 1500 foot to the Parliament: what Council of War this was
appears not. The Committee and Gentlemen of the Country and most Officers
deny, they were called to any such Council of War, or any such conclusion
agreed on to their knowledge ( as I heve above said) As you have above lied.

And he might have sent his Horse away by night to Gloucester, and drawn all his
foot into the Castle, had he not so stuffed it with unserviceable people; Sir
you were not the first inventour of that expedient for the Horse, and if you
could have faggotted all the foot one upon another in the Castle, what should
have become of your friends in the Town between whom and you there was a joint
protestation and oath of mutual defense.

But it should seem by his actions subsequent to the conclusion of the Treaty,
he took little care to preserve the said body of men for service of the
Parliament: for presently upon the Articles agreed on; First, He suffered his
men to fall off from their Colors, Guards and Watches, A false lie. Col:
Fiennes both by his commands, and by all ways and means endeavored to keep
the Soldiers to their colors and Guards,

whereby the Common soldiers of the Enemy entering the Town, before the time
appointed came for the defendants to march out, and mingling with our
Soldiers, gave the Enemy advantage in the mixture, to plunder houses, strip
and rifle our Soldiers, dismount our horse, to allure, entice and enforce from
the Parl: service many of them; and so to break and dissolve almost all that
body foot and horse: who thereupon scattered and dispersed themselves about the
Country into harvest-work for their present relief; Nor could the Commanders
on the Enemies part remedy this evil which the Governors own folly had drawn
upon him; and this is a better justification of the two Armies, then that
wherewith the Governor by way of compliance tickleth them, (in his 11 page)
All these particulars shall be cleared at a Counsel of War, and for the point
of powder, mentioned in the precedent page, that had not Col: Fiennes got some
from beyond-seas, and otherwise by his endeavors, the West had been lost long
since, and the 10 barrells he helped Gloucester with saved it.

Nor did the Governor beat his Drum or call his foot Soldiers again to the
Colors when he went out of Town, whereby they might march away with him in one
entire body; and be kept together for the service of their Country; Secondly,
Presently upon the Articles agreed upon, the Governor set all the prisoners in
the Town and Castle, at liberty, 2 Gross lies. Those that advised this,
thought neither Town or Castle very safe and tenable.

these forthwith grew insolent and fell to plunder both Town and Castle, before
the enemy entered to take orderly possession of them; these prisoners were many
in number, and diverse of them men of good quality taken by Sir William Waller;
the Governor often complaining he was made Sir William Wallers Goale-keeper, A
base and grou^dlesse slander upon a Nobleman. He remembers no such answer, but
conceives it a justifiable answer if he had said it.

and repining at the charge of keeping them, he was often advised to remove
them to a place of more safety, where they might be kept as pledges for our
friends in captivity: London and the Lord Says Isle of Lundy were propounded.
But for the first, the voyage was too chargeable, and for the last (it is since
conceived) the Governor was unwilling to send any company to that place,
whereby the mysteries of that Island, might be discovered; and observation made
what was carried in and out there: A malicious lie. He knows that Col: Fiennes
did what he could to suppress such disorders which were occasioned by the
conniva^ce of other Commanders.

and when Sir William Waller moved Col: Fiennes to send away the said prisoners
by Sea before the enemy came before the Town, he answered he would not, for
that he would keep them to make his own conditions the better; For the
Prisoners, Col: Fiennes wished Captain Birck, to see if there could be means
found to send them away by sea, but he could not, and he desired also Sir
Arthur Hazelrigg to take some of them with him, but he would have none of them.

his own Counsels were always the best, I mean for his own ends; to make
good which, the Council of War was well furnished with suffragan Captains,
purposely made to vote for him. Much more might be said upon this Subject,
especially for abuses done in Churches, etc. whereby the love of the Town and
Country was much alienated. But enough has been said of a bad matter, let us
resort to God for mercy, and to man for justice to be done in a fitting way,
(that is openly and by man uninteressed,) lest for want of due rewards and due
punishments (the two Poles upon which the frame of Government turns) the
reforming part of the Commonwealth, become (...) corrupt as the part to be
reformed, which God of his mercy forbid. If liars and slanderers be not
punished and Pillored, no men of honor will be able to live and do service,
as Col: Fiennes does not doubt to make it appear at a Council of War, that
he made as good a defense of that place, as any has been made of any place
since this war, though not so long nor so successful, through other men's
faults and the weak condition of the place.

THere has lately come to my view a Letter written by Col: Nath: Fiennes to my
L. General, with no date to it, wherein (among^ other matters already confuted
in the answer to his relation) he te^ you he armed 3000 foot, and 300 horse,
and paid constantly 2000 foot and a Regiment of horse for 4 of 5 months
together; This we deny, Col. Pophams Regiment of foot being armed and paid by
the Country, and where he will find 2000 foot, those excepted, we know not,
unless they lay hid in Prince Ruperts imaginary close decked boats: he
further says, he was always ready to furnish Sir William Waller with arms,
money, etc. It is denied for both, especially for money, the money Sir Wi lliam
Waller had from Bristoll being taken up upon the private security of diverse
Genelemen, Deputy Lieutenants, and Committees of Parliament and others, Col:
Fiennes always repining thereat, and complaining they would draw dry the
spring and starve the Garrison in the Town by those courses; this letter seems
to be attested under the hands of diverse men, some whereof deny they ever
subscribed it.

Sure they will not deny their hands when they see them, and Col. Fiennes will
bring better proof of all that you deny, even of that which he said concerning
close decked boats, then you can prove Major Langrishes cowardice at Muncto^
Forly when he was 10 miles off.

The true Copies of a Certificate under Col. Fiennes own hand, dated July 17*
1643. As also of an Order of a Counsel of War held in Bristol the same day,
expressing the true causes why Sir W. Waller left the City of Bristol.
THE CERTIFICATE.
I do conceive that Sir W. Waller having only horse, they would be of little
us^ unto us for the defense of this City, and may be rather a burden unto us
in the consumption of our provisions, and therefore I do approve of Sir
Williams resolution to march out of the Town with them, and to dispose of them
as he shall think most advantageous to the Cause.

Bristol, July 17, 1643. Nath: Fiennes.

THE ORDER.
It was Ordered at a Council of War held in Bristol, July 17, 1643.

That (according to the importunity of the Governor and his Officers) Sir Will:
Wallers departure from Bristol, will be of far greater consequence for the
advancing of this present service, then his remaining there. And after debate,
it was concluded most convenient, That Sir Will: Waller speedily march toward
His Excellency the Earl of Essex, or to London.

Edward Hungersord. Alexander Popham. James Keir. Francis Dovvet. Arthur
Haselrig. William Carr. Edward Cook. Jonas Van-drusch.


I know not what he means by printing that certificate, and that Order of S
Will: Wallers Council. of War (whereof I deny the parenthesis to be true to my
best remembrance) and for the Certificate, I am still of the same judgment
under the favor of this great Soldier, especially if Sir Will: Wallers words
were true concerning his horse, that they were such rascals as he could never
rule them.

Finis.

