Hidden Manna: OR, The Mystery of Saving Grace.

Wherein The peculiarity of Gods especial Grace to the Elect is asserted and
proved, and diverse Objections of Pelagians and Arminians about the power of the
Will of man to supernatural good, are fully answered and confuted.

By that Reverend, Learned, and faithful Minister of Gods Word, William Fenner
B. D. late of Rochford in Essex.

Perfected many years since by the Author whilst he was Preacher at
VVillingsworth in Staffordshire.

Joh. 14. 22. Judas says unto him (not Iscariot) Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto the world? Imprimatur

Edm. Calamy.

Printed at London by R. I. for S. Bowtell, at the Bible in Pope's Head Alley.
1652.

TO THE Worshipful my very loving Friends, Mr. John Wollaston (now Sir John
Wollaston Knight. and Alderman of the City of London, and Master Thomas Parkes
Esquire. Grace and peace from our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe will of man is more wilful, then the understanding blind; The Prophet,
speaking of the Learned Scribes and Doctors, says, They have known the way of
the Lord, but they have altogether broken the yoke, Jerem. 5. 5. more wilful,
then blind; yea, the very Pagans, When they knew God, they glorified him, not
as God, Romans 1. 21. Yea, They were haters of God, ver. 30. who knowing the
Judgments of (...) Chrysostom.
God, that they which commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the
same, but have pleasure in them, and do them, ver. 32. The reason why I say a
wicked man sins more out of wilfulness, then blindness is, three fold; the
first is taken a causa, from the cause, because his wilfulness is the cause of
his blindness: For fools hate knowledge, Prove. 1. 22. or at least they regard
not to know it, Prove. 29. 7. Neither is this only true of those people that
have preaching, who actually refuse instruction, and will not learn amendment
of life, of whom the Psalmist speaks; They know not, neither will they
understand, Psalm. 82. 5. But it is true also of those blind souls, that live
under blind Guides, they do potentially, and innato habitu, reject the
Doctrine of newness of life, of whom Solomon speaks; Speak not in the ears
of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of thy words, Prove. 23. 9. The
second is taken ab effectis, from the effects, because the effect shows his
wilfulness, more then his blindness; He knows that drunkenness, and
company-keeping is a sin, yet he will live in it; he knows that
interloquutory swearing is a sin, and yet he will continue in it; That
worldliness, or Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor.
pleasure-hunting is a sin, yet he will go on in it; like Ovids Medea, that
knew the good, and yet would not do it; his sin is not so much ignorance of
the sin, as hatred of good: The wicked shall be cast away for his malice,
Prove. 14. 32. and therefore Moses calls the sin of the wicked, A root of
Gall and Worm wood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. they are sharp and piquant against purity,
and bitter against the power of godliness; they are said to walk after the
stubbornness of their heart, verse. 19. all showing, that they are more
wilful, then blind. What wilt (...).
thou say now, says S. Chrysostom? thou know not what things are to be
done? thou both know them, and willingly refusest to walk in them. The
third is taken, ab experientia, from experience, experience tells us, that the
wicked are more wilful, then blind! wherefore else could Elias, that was a
Prophet thirty years, and Elisha, that was a Prophet in his room sixty
years, wherefore could they do no more good upon the people? Wherefore does
St. Hierom. and Nicephorus.
John after his so many scores of years teaching, break off with this speech?
He that is filthy, let him be filthy still, Revel. 22. 11. The Drunkard hears
us preach against drunkenness, and he will not obey; the Blasphemer hears us
preach against blasphemy, and he will not be reformed; the Church-sleeper has
heard his Church-sleeping condemned, and yet he will not mend it. If Nero could
not endure Vespasian, because he slept at his Music, how can God endure such
as sleep at his Word? yet no restoration.

Whence we see, that the will is more corrupt by wilfulness, then the
understanding by blindness; The heart is deceitful above all things, Jerem.
17. 9. Above all things; That is, the heart is corrupt above all things,
namely, the will above all things else, and therefore above the understanding.
The heart of the wicked is like an Oven, as hot as fire, Hos. 7. 6. That is*
the will is like a red hot Oven, where all sins are baked with the heat of
Concupiscense. And therefore wicked men are very often said to walk after the
stubbornness of their heart, Jer. 9. 14. Jer. 11. 8. Jer. 13. 10. Jer. 18. 12.
Jer. 23. 17. Eccles. 11. 9. There be three reasons why the Will is more corrupt
of the twain:

1. Ratione Originis, because the Will was it that first rebelled against God,
for the Serpent could not have deceived the understanding of Eve, unless she
would; the understanding as long as it was in innocence could not be deluded by
the Devils guile, unless it would, for otherwise God had made the
understanding imperfect with a sinful ignorance; the understanding it self
like a natural Agent, understands, and works, ad ultimum virium, as well as it
can, and it suspends not its consideration it self; now it is the Will only
that is essentially free, and a free worker of its own works; and now freely
itching to sin by its privy influence into the understanding, suspends it,
not to consider, and liberate participata, by a participated freedom, not to
observe Satan's policy. Thus Adam and Eve, willingly guld, ate the forbidden
fruit, and first sinning willingly, they and we are most punished in the will,
most corrupted in will. And therefore all sin is devolved upon the heart, as
the first inward cause thereof. The Atheism of the Atheist is cast upon the
heart; The fool has said in his heart there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. The
mischief of the mischievous is turned upon the heart, But mischief is in
their hearts, Psalm. 28. 3. the iniquity of the vain man is truly fathered upon
the heart; His heart gathers iniquity to it self, Psalm. 41. 6. Our Savior
Christ sets all corruption upon the hearts score; Out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False Witnesses,
Blasphemies, Matthew. 15. 19. St. Chrysostom (...). etc
adds more; Reviling, touchy, teasty words, filthy talking, etc. And I may
add, Out of the heart proceeds drunkenness, and company keeping, etc. That
is, out of the will, for the heart is commonly put for it.

2. Ratione reatus, because the will is it that indeed is guilty of all the
evil in the soul, yea of all the said errors, and ignorance of the
understanding. And therefore says God of the wicked, They do always err in
their heart, Psalm. 95. 10. Error is not in the heart, but in the mind, and
understanding; but says the Text, They do err in their heart, because they
do err, and they would err. They walked in the counsels and imaginations of
their evil heart, Jerem. 7. 24. Counsels and imaginations are properly in the
understanding and mind, and not in the heart; but says the Text They walk in
the counsels and imaginations of their evil heart. For the understanding, as
it says the sin is delightful, and gainful to flesh and blood; so it would
say also, that it is forbidden by God, and punished with death; but the will
gives ear to that word, the pleasingness and the profit of sin, but will
hear no more, or else bridles the understandings that it consider, no further.
And therefore these broken counsels, the imaginations by halves, as interrupted
ones of the heart, are of the heart. Hereupon it comes to pass, that as the
will is free by native disposition, and the understanding free by
participation; so is the understanding blind, and ignorant, and deceived
subjectively by innate error, and the will by a circular communication. And
seeing the will is guilty of all the evil in the soul, all the blame God
lays upon the will, and plagues it with the sorest spiritual plagues, that it
is most wilful.

3. Ratione ipsius, in regard of it self, because the will was best while it
was Corruptid optimi pessima.
good, now it becomes worst when it is bad. As a good King is the best of men,
so a wicked Tyrant is the worst of men. A good heart is Gods; My son give me
thy heart, Pr. 23. 26. A wicked heart is the devils; Satan has filled thy
heart, Act. 5. 3. Every conceit of the understanding is not evil; But every
imagination and thought of the heart is only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. The
heart is the fountain, Jam. 3. And when God would curse all the rivers and
streams, he cursed the fountain, the heart. Now as in a corrupt fountain, the
nearer ye come to the fountain head, the more corrupt the water is, so the
nearer the heart, the more corrupt. And therefore the outward actions being
corrupt, the outward members are more corrupt; they being corrupt, the fancy is
worse corrupt; that corrupt, the understanding is worse corrupt; that being
corrupt, the affections are still worse and worse corrupt; and they being
corrupt, the heart is worst of all corrupt; for that (...). Chrysostom.
is the fountain. Out of the abundance of the heart the mind thinks, the
sense remembers, the fancy imagines, the mouth speaks, the hand works,
the foot walks, out of the abundance of the heart; so that that which is at
all in the other faculties and members of the man, is in abundance in the heart.

Whence again we see that the will does not always follow the understanding;
for the Wiseman presupposes that a man's understanding may be right, and yet
the will not follow it; and therefore he says, Be ye wise, and refuse it not,
Prove. 8. 33. Thus how many thousands, their own knowledge, yea and their own
conscience haling them from, yet will run upon sin: The envious,
revengeful, malicious man, his own knowledge testifies against this sin, and
yet he will revenge; his own conscience reproves him for this sin, and yet
he will bear malice. The lukewarmling, and the civilist, his own knowledge in
the Scripture tells him, he must live holier and ferventlier, his own
conscience checks him for not living better, and yet he will not live better;
Like the knowing Pharisees, Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of
your father ye Will do, Joh. 8. 44. Indeed its true, that the will must needs
follow one dictate or other in the understanding, for it cannot see its object
but by the understandings spectacles. Nevertheless the understanding having
nothing but a political or a suasive power over the will, it can but tender the
dis-junction, and leave the assumption to the wills choice, for any imperative
power that it has. As for example, worldliness; true, it is a gainful sin,
you may be better to live to the eye of the world, that you may get by it: but
then it is a dangerous -- says the understanding. Let me have it, let me have
it, says the will; I will cark, I will care for the world etc. This I will
do, I will pull down my barnes, and I will build greater, and there will I
bestow all my fruits, and my goods, Luke 12. 18. and then I will say to my
soul, etc. v. 19. I grant likewise, that an inordinate act of the will
presupposes an error in the understanding too; I say, an error in the
understanding, but not always an erring understanding; it presupposes errorem
materialem, non semper formalem, in case the will immediately before this
inordinate act were an incorrupt will, and the understanding an enlightened
understanding, as the Angels, and Adam before their fall. It is a goodly Apple,
fair to see to, sweetly likely to taste on, and the Serpent tells me I shall
not dye, says the understanding: Well, I will put it to the hazard, I will eat
it, says the Will. These were the seeds of an error, but not an error it
self, till by the wills intervening itch, the understanding began to be darkened
in a moment. Now that the will, will not follow the understanding always, may
appear by these reasons:

1. Because the blessed Angels, albeit extrinsecally they be confirmed in
grace, and by the virtue of extrinsecal actuating, are finally, and infallibly,
and intrinsecally settled in their wills upon grace, yet they have an inbred
radical mutability of will possibly to depart from the grace revealed.

2. Because, if the will must needs follow the understanding, then there could
be no sin in the will against knowledge, much less the distinct and
illuminate knowledge, which is to be seen in the sin against the Holy Ghost,
wherein the wilfulness of the will, lifts up the heel against the very face of
more special knowledge. And although there be ignorance, yea the mysticallest
and devillishest ignorance of all ignorances admixt with that knowledge, yet
that ignorance is not the cause, but a concomitant of the wilfulness,
especially quatenus, as it is a sin against the Holy Ghost.

3 Because the will is so far from following the Understanding, that the more
understanding, the understanding is in goodness, the stouter the Will is; as
is evident by the wicked, who the more they grow learned, and Doctorly, the
further they are from the mastery of their corrupt wills. Some of the deepest
heads, that could answer all the objections in their brains by their extracted
Science out of the Word of God, that any carnal man can bring to persuade them
to live in any one sin, and declare that they must live so and so, if they
themselves mean to be saved; yea and in this particular, at this particular
time, together with all the circumstances of press knowledge, yet
notwithstanding have unsanctified hearts; and therefore Solomon having charged
us to be wise in understanding, he charge us also to be wise in heart, Prove.
8. 5. yea, the good Saints of God, the more knowledge they have, the more their
wills grow resty from zeal, or from the strength of zeal that they had before,
notwithstanding that grace has abated the violence of their reluctant wills,
and given it a mortiferous blow. I know that Learning and knowledge puffs up,
and casts a mist before the eyes of the understanding, yet this does not hinder
the truth of the position, That the heart is more wilful, then the mind is
blind; be it that the mind is blinded, yet the wilfulness growing upon the
knowledges stature, shows plainly, that it is the more wilful of the two,
the knowledge of Saving Grace being not so adverse to the flesh as the practice
thereof, and therefore Solomon having bidden us get knowledge, he commands us
to love it with our heart; Get understanding, Prove. 4. 5. And love her, and she
shall preserve thee, verse. 6.

4. Because the argument of them which hold the will must needs follow the last
dictate of the understanding, may be retorted upon themselves; They say, it
must and does, because the Sinner never sins a sin, which his understanding
knows is a sin, and that a perilous sin to his own soul, and at this time
too; but the Will goes further, and tells him, That it is a delightful
profitable sin, and there is hope that God will not be so strict with him, as
to damn him for it; O, Christ dyed for our sins, and God is merciful, and at
what time soever a sinner does repent him, etc. and therefore I may do the
sin; I say, this may be recoyled back upon them, because this is but a begged
dictate, which the will would feign have, and therefore to gratify its Lusts,
the understanding like a partial Judge, and a fee'd Counselor, and a crafty
Lawyer, or else Jury, pleads, judges, and counsels, and gives Verdict according
as the importunate Will would have it.

For the Understanding and Will, are somewhiles like Simeon and Levi, brethren
in evil, sworn brethren in wickedness. The Will will yield to the
Understanding in some things, and the Understanding to the Will in other
things, for they are two wicked brats of a wicked parent soul. Other whiles
the Understanding and the will are like two disagreeing hounds in a collar,
that neither the Understanding will do as the Will would, for sometimes its
made to understand a thing against the will, or ere the Will be aware of it, nor
the Will do, as the Understanding prescribes it. Sometimes the Will deals with
the Understanding, as Nahash would with the Gileadites, pluck out its right
eye, or draw it some other way, or shut it self that it may not look upon
this or that lust, with Scripture looks, or Bible-glasses, but view it only
with the left eye, with respect to what gain it will bring in, what pleasure it
will afford, what credit it will yield, what conformity it has to self love.

Thus the sinner will mind the sin, will conceive the sin, will invent
reasons to maintain the sin, why? he would feign commit the sin: Thus the
Will gives the Understanding its quue, and prompts it, what it would have said,
and then follows the advice when it has done. Lewd things are in his heart,
he imagines evil at all times, Prove. 6. 14. He imagines, how so? because
lewd things were before in his heart. So that now we may see the desperate
estate of the corrupt will: It is not only stupens voluntas, a Will in a swoon,
but dead; show all the light to a dead man, what is he the wiser? neither is it
enough that the Will have a posse, a power of willing grace vouchsafed it, for
the Will is more wilful, then impotent. It is well observed by S. Austine, The
Apostle does not say, it is God that works in you the posse, but the Will: It
is not said, God works in you the power to will, But it is God that works in
you the will and the deed, Phil. 2. 3. It is not said, I will put my Spirit
into you, and cause you to be able to walk in my Statutes, but Ego faciam ut
faciatis, says the same Father, I will make you to do it, Ezekiel. 36. 27. The
will of it self, the more reason it has to be turned, the more it is wilful,
it hinches and winches, and snuffes against it: For sin taking occasion by
the [knowne] commandment works all manner of concupiscence, Romans 7. 8. Nitimur
in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata. Like the running torrent, that having
nothing to stay it, runs the slowlyer, at ab obice saevior, but being hindered,
runs the fiercelier.

Behold then here, what a secret the grace is, that converts this profligat
will, which I here present you with, and so much the rather you, Loving Sirs,
because I would have you have a depositum of our Countries thankfulness unto
you, and such as you are in that famous City, that have like so many Joseses,
brought your money and laid it down at the Apostles feet, to the plantation of
the Gospel in our ignorant coasts. The blessedest project that ever could come
into any Christian heart; for as the people might go to Gods house, when the
word of the Lord came from Jerusalem, Esa. 2. 3. so may our people hear it;
For the word of the Lord is come forth of your Jerusalem, and prospers: Blessed
be our Lumen Angliae, our Columna literarum, that stands in our Country as a
Becon to all, by whom, as a worthy instrument, Deus nobis haec otia fecit.
Accept of this poor mite, as a gratulatory Schedule, from my self in special
to the one of you, and from the Country in general to the other of you. And I
pray God to move the hearts of more such as may help forward the work of the
Lord,

Your loving friend, and poor labourer in Christ's Vineyard, W. F.
December. 29. 1626. from Willingsworth.
Hidden Manna: OR, The Mystery of Saving Grace.
Psalm. 25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Covenant.
SAving grace is a secret, that no man knows but the Elect, and the Elect
cannot know it neither without special illumination;

1. Special showing, Show me thy ways O Lord, says David. 2. Barely showing
will not serve the turn, but there must be a special teaching, And teach me
thy paths, ver. 4. 3. Bare teaching will not avail neither, but there must be
a special inculcative teaching; Teach me in the ways, to verse. 8. 4.
Inculcative teaching will not do the deed neither, but there must be a
special directive teaching, Guide in judgment and teach, ver. 9. Directive
teaching will not be sufficient neither, but there must be a special
Manu-ductive teaching, Lead me forth in thy truth, and teach me, verse. 5. 6.
Manu-ductive teaching will not be effectual, but there must be also a special
choice teaching, a determinating of the very will; an elective teaching, Him
will he teach the way that he shall choose, verse. 12. And what secret is this?
not common grace, for that is not the secret of the Elect, but special and
peculiar Grace; 1. The special grace of Prayer, Unto thee O Lord I lift up my
soul, verse. 1. 2. A special grace of faith, My God, I trust in thee, verse. 2.
3. A special grace of repentance, Remember not the sins of my youth, etc.
verse. 7. 4. A special grace of hope, My hope is in thee, verse. 21. 5. A
special grace of continual living in Gods sight, and dependence upon God,
Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, verse. 15. 6. Which is the root of all Gods
special and eternal favor and mercy; Remember O Lord thy tender mercy, and
thy loving kindnesses for they have been for ever, v. 6. even Gods special
mercy to him in particular, verse. 11. This is the secret, The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his covenant; That is,
the secret favor and grace of the Lord is with them that fear him, and not
only with them, but with none else, as Kimchi speaks; The (...)
Greek translates it, (...) The Lord is a strength to those that fear him;
but as a reverend Divine notes upon (...) out of the Hebrew, The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, for God has hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and has revealed them unto babes. Whence we gather this point of
doctrine; That saving grace that the Children of God have, is a secret that
none in the world know besides; so says the Wise man, Froward people are
abomination to the Lord, but his secret is with the righteous, Prove. 3. 32.
even the secret of heavenly grace, which he has hid from the wise and prudent,
says St. Hierome, yea the very badge of this secret Job calls a secret, The
secret of God was upon my tabernacle, Job 29. 4. this is the hidden Manna that
the godly eat, Revel. 2. hidden in a pot of Gold in the Arc, that is, Christ,
Heb. 9. This is the white stone, and a new name written in it, which no man
knows of, saving him that Mos erat antiquis niveis utrisque lapillis his
damnare rcos, illis absolvere culpa. l. 15. metam.
receives it, Revelations 2. 17. whereby the Children of God are absolved from
the wrath to come; a phrase taken from the Heathen, that used to condemn
Malefactors with black Stones, and for others with white Stones, as Ovid
speaks; this therefore is that same (...) that saving pardoning secret that no
man knows but he that receives it, and therefore the Children of God are
called, Gods secret ones, Psalm. 83. 3. This secret is called a secret three
ways:

1. Secret to the eye of sole nature, and thus it is not meant, for so the
grace of Christ is a secret only to Heathens, and such as are as blind as
they, for common Christians know it, the rine of it.

2. Secret to the eye of taught nature, nor thus is it meant, for so the grace
of Christ is a secret only to the ignorant sort of Christians, many carnal
Gospellers that sit under a good Ministry know it, and the bark of it.

3. Secret to the eye of enlightened nature, and thus it is meant; for so the
grace of Christ is a secret to all unsanctified professors, whether learned or
unlearned, namely, the pith of it: for though great Doctors, and profound
Clerks, and deep studied Divines unconverted, know the doctrine of grace, and
the truth of grace; though they can dispute of grace, and talk of the glory of
grace, yea and taste a little the good word of grace, yea and understand it
generally, it may be, as well as Saint Paul, and St. Peter, as Judas did, yet
the special and the spiritual knowledge thereof, for all their dogmaticall
illumination is a secret unto them, thus The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant, and that for three reasons.

The first reason is taken a natura rei intelligendae, from the nature of this
secret, and therefore it is called a mystery, a mystery kept secret, Romans 16.
25. The wisdom of God is a mystery, even the hidden mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 7. The
mystery of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. The mystery made known unto me, Ephesians. 3. 3. The
mystery of Christ, verse. 4. The mystery hid in God, ver. 9. The mystery hid,
Col. 1. 26. a rich glorious mystery, verse. 27. The mystery of faith in a pure
conscience, 1 Timothy 13. 9. Yea the Gospel, though fleshly men may learn and
preach it, yet the saving knowledge of it is a mystery that none but Gods
Saints knows the mystery of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 19. Yea though the Trinity
be known unto the wicked, yet none but Gods children know it pia cognitione,
piously, and therefore that is called a mystery, The mystery of God, and the
Father, and Christ, Colos. 2. 2. Yea Christian religion though the wicked
notionally understand it, assentingly believe it, yet indeed it is a secret
that none but the godly perceive, and therefore called a mystery, even the
mystery of Christ, Col. 4. 3. The Articles of faith, albeit the wicked can say
them by rote, and credit them universally, as for example; the Resurrection,
yet none but the holy ones truly believe it, and therefore it is called a
mystery, 1 Cor. 15. 51. The Judgments of God, though the wicked feel them;
and perceive them, yet none but the heirs of Heaven truly enjoy them, and
therefore they are called a mystery, The mystery of God shall be finished,
Revel. 10. 7. Popery, howsoever the wicked Protestants some of them know it,
and the policy of it, yet none but Gods marked ones see it, to avoid the
mystery of it; and therefore that is called a mystery, the mystery of iniquity,
2 These. 2. 7. the very Devil himself that would be worshipped as God, would
have his mysteries* too, (...) says Dionysius Halicarnasseus, unutterable
mysteries; Saint Chrysostom compares the mystery of Christ in regard of the
wicked to a written book, that the ignorant can neither read, nor spell, he
sees the cover, the leaves, and the letters, (...) he understands not the
meaning of what he sees; he compares the mystery of Grace to an indicted
Epistle, which an unskilful Idiot viewing, he cannot read it, (...) he knows
it is Paper, and Ink, but the sense he perceives not; so the wicked never so
learned, they perceive the bark of the mystery of Christ, but not the inward
sense of the Spirit, as Theodoret said of the Philosophers (...), etc. they are
like singing Parrots, that can imitate man's voice, but they skill not the
meaning; so the wicked can speak gracious things by rote, and understand not
what they speak; no, that is a secret; The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him; and he will show them his Covenant.

The second reason is taken a modo intelligendi, from the manner of perceiving
the secret of grace, which is Spiritual; the Natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know them, for they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and he that does know the mind of the Lord, that is,
the secret, he must have the mind of Christ ver. 16. Indeed the wicked that
have learning may perceive and know these things of the Spirit, but they know
them in a Carnal manner, not in a spiritual wise; and howbeit they may
reform their outward courses, and cut off many acts of sin, and like Grace
somewhat in their hearts; thus far, and further may the carnal man go, being
but changed, not renewed. Now they cannot spiritually discern Grace, for in
regard of spiritual discerning they are in the dark, even as eyes, says the
same Father (...) even as eyes if they would see without light, the eyesight,
and the goodness, and excellency of the ball will not avail to make them see;
so the wicked even the learned of them all, they cannot see grace because
they have the spirit of discerning light, their learning, and their wit, and
all their good parts cannot suffice them to descry this secret; they see it
indeed, But seeing see not, and hearing hear not, and perceiving understand
not, Matthew. 13. 13. Why the knowledge of this secret is not given to them, but
only to Christ's Disciples, ver. 11. and therefore it is called the Unction of
the Holy Ghost; ye have an Unction from the Holy one, and ye know all things,
1 John 2. 20. That is, you know all the secret, it is called eyesalve, Anoint
thine eyes with eye salve that thou may (...).
see, Revel. 3 18. This same eyesalve, the Physicians tell us, is an ointment
to purge away all filth and fluxes, and ophthalmies out of the eyes that they
may clearly see. Its called the opening of the eyes, Open thou mine eyes, that
I may see the wondrous things of thy Law, Psalm. 119. 18. Its called the
lighting of the eyes, Lighten mine eyes, Psalm. 13. 3. Its called seeing,
because all the wicked are blind to this secret, And the eyes of the blind
shall see out of darkness, Esa. 29. 18. Alas, the natural walks in the
blind shadow of death, and is not acquainted with this gracious light; no,
that is a secret, And the secret of the Lord, is with them that fear him, and
he will show them his Covenant.

The third reason is taken a statu intelligentis, from the condition of the
party that must perceive the secret of grace, he must have another secret thing
to be made capable of this secret, and that is the new creature, Gal. 6. 15.
which is called the hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3. 4. Its called a hidden
life, Your life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. and therefore the word of
God is closed up in the godly, that the wicked understand it not, Dan. 12. 9,
10. they are like scrauled blotted papers that cannot receive. The Law is
sealed up in the godlies heart, and the ungodly, whether learned or unlearned
cannot read it, Esa. 29. 11, 12. Seal my Law amongst my disciples, Esa. 8. 16.
A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, aspring shut up, a fountain sealed,
Cant. 4. 12. That is mysterium, the mystery says Ambrose, even the signed and
sealed mystery of faith and grace; for as a private letter to a friend
contains secret matter that no man else may read, because it is sealed; so is
grace sealed up, it is under the Privy-seale of heaven, that no man can break
open, but the faithful, to whom it is sent. The secret of the Lord is revealed
to them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

My first use shall be for Instruction. Is Gods secret with them that fear
him? then the godly are the friends of God, Ye are my friends, if you do
whatsoever I command you, Joh. 15. 14. Henceforth I call you not servants, for
the servant knows not what his Lord does, but I have called you friends, for
I have made all things known unto you, verse. 15. Mysteriis digni facti estis,
says Theophy lact, I have thought you worthy to be acquainted with my
secrets, and Abraham was called the friend of God, Jam. 2. 23. What shall I
hide from my friend? Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do, Genesis 18.
17? (...), says Chrysostom, Oh how greatly God condescends to the godly! he
speaks to them as a man would speak to his friend; there is no profitable
secret that he will not impart unto them, The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show to them his Covenant.

Secondly, Is Gods secret with them that fear him? then the godly are all one
with God: As Orestes and Pylades loved one another so well, that they were all
one with another: Orestes was called Pylades, and Pylades was called Orestes,
so are the godly all one with each other; St. Paul calls the godly Christ, yea
Christ says as much, That they all may be one as thou Father art in me; and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us, Joh. 17. 21. (...) says St.
Chrysostom, so far forth as its possible for man to be one with God; so here
the honor of the godly, they are admitted to Gods secrets to be one with him.
Tiberius Caesar thought no man fit to know his secrets, and yet the Lord
vouchsafes the godly his own secrets, as Elisha could tell the secrets that
were spoken in the Kings bedchamber, 2 King. 6. 12. so the godly know the
secrets of Gods chamber, even of the King of Kings Presence Chamber. O the
honor of the godly, says a sweet Father against the Persians, none but
Noblemen, Lords and Dukes might be made partakers of State-secrets, they
esteemed secrecy a Godhead, a divine thing, says Ammianus Marcellinus, the
godly are heavenly Lords, and Nobles, and the Privy-states-men of heavens
Court, Such honor have all his Saints, for the Kings secrets are the glory of
the subject that is in favor, says Cassiodore, and the Lords secrets are the
glory of the godly. The secrets of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show them his Covenant.

My second use shall be for Refutation. Away then with Pelagians and
Semi-pelagians, and Arminans, what shall I call them? Scabiosum tesserula* far
possidet. their grist is all musty that say, God gives no secret thing to any
one man more then another, that rifle up all Gods secrets, and would have all
men so many Tiresiases that swallow up St. Paul's (...) as it were a depthlesse
depth. St. Paul cries out, Oh how unsearchable, Romans 11. 33. Oh how secret are
these things! and these Numicians, Cosmongers, pick-lock Gods secret closet,
and expose his hidden treasures; St. Paul he admires, (...), Who has known?
verse. 34. who has known these secrets? Arminius vol Commagenus Aruspex
pectora divorum rimatur, and exta, as Juvenall the Satyrist speaks; let me
translate it: Arminius and his company ransack all Gods secrets, divulge and
communicate them to the seed of the woman, and of the Serpent all alike, they
make Gods eternal* love of Election, no secret, but a vulgar Idea, they make
the mystery of Christ, and him crucified, no secret, but like an Apothecaries
drug, Catholicall, they make the especial grace of God, no secret, but a
common quality; faith no secret, but a general virtue; repentance and the new
creature, no secret, but a universal gift, no secret favor to St. Peter, but
make God a party ante, not to love St. Peter more then Judas; no secret intent
to any one person more then another; but that Christ might have dyed for all
him, and never a man saved; no secret working of the Lord in any more then
other, but for any thing that either God the Father has done by creating* God
the Son by redeeming, or God the Holy Ghost by sanctifying, all the world were
left to their scrambling, take it, if you will, if you will not, choose; they
say God would have men to be saved, but that he will not work it for his own
part, rather for this man, or that man determinately that he be saved, as
Stilpo said that (...), man is no man, an universal is never a man, for its
neither this man, nor that man, for why not this man, as well as that man? so
say they, Christ dyed for man, that is indeed for no man, not this, nor that
man; for why rather this man, then that man, or that man, more then this man?
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Paul, and John, and all the Saints might* Man, in
regard of Gods grace, is like Pontilian, Saepe salutatus nunquam prior ipse
salutas; sic crit aeternum Pontiliane, vale. Martial. l. 5. Ep. 67. He was
often saluted first, but he never began first, so that he gave a continual
farewell. So God often prevents man, but man never prevents him first; and were
it not for God he would give an eternal farewell too all grace.
have been damned for all God, and Esau, and Ahab, and cursed* Herod, might
have been saved, and not they, for all him; no secret reference to God in this
man, rather then that man; but blessed Lazarus in heaven, is no more bound unto
God, then damned Dives in hell, Nun quis te discrevit? No secret putting a
difference betwixt Angel or Devil, but if David be better then Saul, he may
sacrifice to his own net: Thus these heretical Opinionists, schimatical
Quodlibetists; so I may call them, are worse then the Roman blabs that Paulus
the Lawyer speaks of, that disclosed secrets, for they cut off all Gods secrets
at one blow. But we, beloved we, let us hold this as a foundation, For the
foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows who are
his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation is faith, as St. Ambrose speaks, and as a
foundation is secret under God, so is faith secretly grounded in the hearts of
those that are Gods. This seal is Gods confirming grace, says Chrysostom,
and as a seal is set upon secrets, so is this grace secretly radicated, and
abiding in them; this Knowing, the Lord knows who are his* In the secret
election of God, says Haymo; as if the Apostle should say, though Hymeneus and
Philetus, and such like were (...) without seal, and erred concerning the
Faith, and fell off from what they seemed to have. Nevertheless Gods secret is
with his, the foundation of God is sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows
who are his; For the secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show them his Covenant.

My third use shall be for Consolation. Oh what incomparable comfort is this
to Gods people! Gods secret is with them, God has, and will reveal his secret
mysteries unto them, God has given them a prospective Chinke to look by into
his secret things; they are Gods friends, and as they turn my Text in meeter,
they know Gods secret intent, they are so honored with the Lord* that God
hides no good thing from them which is necessary for their salvation. All the
earth is Gods, but such as obey Gods voice are Gods peculiar treasure, Exodus
19. 5. Gods special jewels, Segullah it is in the original, that is Gods
proper ones, or Gods secret ones that he keeps in store for himself, and for
especial use, (...), as the Greek turns it, like a jewel which the King
delivers not into the hands of any of his officers, but keeps himself in
secret, says Rabbi Menahim, he has chosen them to be a special people to
himself above all people that are upon the face of the earth, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. that
is a secret people, A chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a
peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2. 9. that is a secret Nation, his peculiar pearl,
Psalm. 135. 4. that is (...) secret gem, all (...) ^omfort, that God gives them
some special peculiar secret grace that he gives to none else in the world but
to them. Christ has given himself for them That he might redeem them from all
iniquity, and purge to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit.
2. 14. that is a secret generation. God loves a (...), and a special claim to
them, as Synesius uses the word, for to them alone he makes known the mystery
of his will according to his good pleasure, Ephesians. 1. 9. even his secret will,
and hidden pleasure. They are Gods portion, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The lot of his
inritance, as a great inheritor reserves in some secret box, or some secret
closet his bonds and writings, he keeps them secretly under lock and key; so
are the godly. Oh what a blessed and happy estate is the estate of all that
fear God! Do thou serve God in thy family? Do thou serve him in thy
calling? Do thou stand to his truth openly, and indeare it above all riches
privately? Do thou make conscience of every of Gods Commandments? fear not,
the Lords secret is with thee, there is no evil shall ever hurt thy soul; For
in the time of trouble he shall hide thee in his pavilion, in the secret of
his tabernacle, shall he hide thee, and shall set thee upon a rock, Psalm. 27.
5. Do the proud insult over thee? Do the wicked tongues nickname thee? God
shall hide thee in the secret of his presence from the pride of man, God shall
keep thee secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues, Psalm. 31. 20. Gods
grace is a special grace to such as you are, and such as you are only. Christ
Jesus is your Savior, for he will save his people, Matthew. 1. 21. This ransom
is a special ransom, a ransom not for all, but for many, Matthew. 20. 28. His
bloudshedding was a special bloudshedding, not for all, but for you many,
Matthew. 26. 28. Sanctification is a special sanctification, not of all, but of
you, Joh. 17. 19. Justification is a special justification, not of all, but of
you only, his elect, Romans 8. 33. Intercession is a special intercession, not
for all, but for you alone, verse. 34. Christ is the head, a spiritual head,
not to all, but to you his Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. Christ his purchasing was a
special purchasing, not of all, but of you his Church, Act. 20. 28. Christ his
prayer is a special prayer, not for all, but for you, Joh. 19. 9. Christ's
redemption was a special redemption, not of all, but of you that are his
sons, Gal. 4. 4. Christ is the author of a special salvation, not to all in
general, but to all you that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. Specialiter, says St.
Ambrose, especially for you, whom he has made with himself, coheires of
salvation. It is a secret that God has given you, none of the wicked in all
the world know it, it is a secret favor that he has vouchsafed you, no
covetous, nor drunkard, scrape-pelfe, nor swearer, nor any ungodly man, or
woman in the earth partaketh of it with you.

Be comforted, then whosoever thou art, that have given over thy wicked ways,
and betaken thy self to newness of life, For the secret of the Lord is with
them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

But thou will say, Alas, thou can not pray, thou can not believe, thou
can not serve God!

I answer, Though these things do not openly manifest themselves, yet Gods seed
may abide in thee, 1 John 3. 9. Seed is secret in the ground, and seems to be
hid, yet it sprouts out in its time; and grows; so grace may be as hidden
seed in thy heart, secretly sown in thy soul.

But thou will object again, Alas, I cannot feel any such matter!

I answer, what if thou can not, it may be secret as from others, so from
thine own sense and feeling, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear
him, and he will show them his Covenant.

My fourth use shall be for Terror to the wicked. Here Is horror to all the
ungodly, they are strangers from God, they are not admitted unto Gods secrets.
The godly are signed with the Spirit, says St. Ambrose, a secret obsignatum,
Gods Spirit is their Sigil, says Theodoret, a secret seal, they are his
sons, and sealed with his Spirit, says S. Chrysostom, a secret Sonship.
But the wicked have neither secret sign, nor secret seal, nor secret
Sonship, nor any secret special or peculiar thing of God, they are aliens from
God; Reveal not thy secrets to a stranger, says Solomon, God reveals not his
secrets to such as are strangers to him. As Aristotle said of his Acroamatiks,
that they were (...) set out, but not (...) set forth; so may I say of the Law,
and the Gospel in regard of the wicked, it is expressed, but not expounded to
them; now when they rebelliously reject all obedience, he will close their
eyes, and hoodwinke both wicked Ministers and people, Esa. 29. 10. Yea the
Psalmist curses them that their eyes be darkened that they see not, Psalm. 69.
23. Pour out thy indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take hold
of them, verse. 24. As if he should say, ipsissimam perditionem, says
Marlorat, let them be damned, and all with damnation it self, for Gods ways
are kept secret from them, and not with them. Art thou a drunkard, and have not
Gods secret to keep thee from drunkenness? here thou feast thou art in the
state of damnation: Art thou a worldling, and have not Gods secret to keep thee
from worldliness? thou art in the state of damnation: Art thou malicious, and
a hater of thy brother; and have not Gods secret to keep thee from it? thou art
in the state of damnation? Art thou a sweater, a liar, or a luke-warmling etc.
and have not Gods secret to keep thee from thy sins? thou art in the Jaws
of Hell and vengeance, brut us stupor as Calvin. speaks, a brutish stupidity
possesses thee, the secret of the Devil is with thee, thou have thy secret
too, but it is the Devils secret; thou keep the Devils counsel. O my soul,
come not thou into their secret, Gen: 49. 6. Well may some be called the Devils
secret, for the Devil has power over the wicked secretly, and they perceive
it not; the secret counsel of the wicked, Psalm 64. 2. The secret of mockers,
so it is in the Original, Genesis 15. 17. as for the secret of the Lord, that is
with them that fear him, nemini nisi, says Musculus, with none else; The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his
Covenant.

Is the grace of Gods Children such a secret that none in the world knows
besides them? then let me commit this to the Arminians consideration, what
mischief he does to his own soul; God says this grace is a secret thing,
only revealed to his secret ones; God says, it is a mystery opened only to
those that are his; God says, it must be spiritually discerned, and without a
special eye salve can never be perceived; God says, it is a fountain sealed
up from the men of this world, a book clasped up, that nor learned, nor
unlearned can read, but only they to whom it is especially given from above;
God says, it is a depth, it is unsearchable, and a peculiar treasure, a
peculiar pearl, a special gift; but the Arminian looks for no other grace
but what is not secret, not peculiar, not special, but common grace; he looks
for no other grace save that which God vouchsafes to all, even reprobate and
all. Oh what and if this Metaphysicall grace they hazard their souls upon,
should prove uneffectuall, I beseech these men to chew upon this point; I do
not say they do debar themselves from Salvation, but if they would ruminate
this thing seriously, I think they would not dye as they do for ten thousand
worlds; let them hear a little, and I pray let their Consciences intently
ponder.

1. Must it be a secret grace of God that the world has not, if a man be the
child of God? Oh then (I quake to think of it) how do they look to be the
Children of God only with their universal Grace?

2. Must it be a special redemption that a man must have if he be redeemed?
how do they look to be redeemed with a general?

3. Must God give faith in a specially manner, or else a man cannot believe?
how do they look for faith by an universal gift?

4. Must a man have a peculiar grace, or else he cannot be of the redeemed of
the Lord, how do they look for it that do not so much as pray for it by
their tenent?

5. Must a man be beholding to They salute God with thanks by the halves like
as Apollonius saluted Decimus by the name of Quixtus, Mart. l. 4. Epig. 22.
God in a special manner, if he be chosen out of the world? Oh how do they
look to be vouchsafed, that profess themselves not so much as to conne God
any thanks for it?

6. Must a man be determinately converted to God in his will of God, or else he
cannot be converted? how do they look for it that profess they do not look
for it from God, but from their own freedom?

7. Must Christ pray in a special wise for those that are his, that their
wills may be quickened, As Martial called Cinna Dominus, when he meant no such
matter, 5 Ep. 58. so these men call God Lord, whereas they mean no such matter,
but themselves Lords over their own hearts.
how do they look to have the will and the deed, that professedly maintain,
that they will not be beholding to Christ for his prayers no further, but to
have the power of will; yea, and that Christ must pray them, if he mean to
have the will it self, that do even dispute the case, contend, and give out in
effect, that there is no special prayer, nor special quickening, they will not
acknowledge any secret matter in it, yea they write, and bitterly do they
reason it too, that if God do no more to them a priori then to the vildest
damned Castaway, give them merely the Catholic posse without any special
esse, yet they can be saved. They say that they can believe, that they can
repent, that they can be converted is from God; but that they believe, that
they do repent, that they are converted, is from the liberty of their own
wills; But what have thou that thou have not received? and if thou have
received it, why boastest thou as if thou had not received, 1 Cor. 4. 7.?
Well, I will tell thee, if thou boastest thus, sure I am thou have not received
it; but thou will say, as Cornelius a Lapide, That I do believe, that I do
repent, that I am converted is from mine own will, but I received the power of
God, and I do it by the virtue of that grace which I received of God. Nay, but
oh man, the very eliciting and drawing of this act from that which thou have
received, cannot be without a special act of God; for the wicked that have
received so far, yea having received further, even this secret too, do not
believe, do not repent, are not converted. Thou beleevest thou repentest, and
not Judas, and not Elimas, Do thou? well then, either St. Paul is a liar, or
thou must have received more then an universal grace, or else thou art a liar,
thou beleevest not, thou repentest not, thou art not converted; Of what
boastest thou says Theodoret, of thine eloquence? but God gave it thee: of thy
knowledge, but God conferred it on thee, he might go on of thy power of
believing, but it is the gift of God; of the deed it self, but it is the work
of God; of any one stock of good that God should join with thee upon it, but
that was the effect of God too. Saint Peter thou say has Free Will, and
Judas has the same: Saint Peter had power of God to believe, and Judas has
the same; Thus far God goes along (thou say) with Judas as well as with
Peter, St. Peter does believe, and has faith it self, and Judas has not; and
what now say I (and yet not I, but Saint Paul) has St. Peter, that he has not
received? and if he have received it, how can Saint Peter boast, that he has
not received, no more then Judas, that has not received at all? Saint Peter
and Judas have both Free Will of God, there they agree; Saint Peter and Judas
have both power of God to believe, there they agree too; thou say, Judas
does not believe, St. Peter does, there they differ; And who made thee Peter to
differ from Judas? Certainly when Saint Paul asked the question, Who has made
thee differ from another? 1 Cor. 4. 7. he never thought the question could, or
should be so answered, that thine own will made thee differ from another. Take
heed, O man, shall a Beggar stand at the door and tell thee, he does not stand
in need of this, or that alms, but can help himself well enough, without
receiving ought from thee; would thou help him? I trow not to such a boasting
Beggar. Alas poor Mendicant! and Like Fabulla, that having gotten another
hair, swore it was her own hair, Martial. l. 6 Ep. 12. like Fidentinus, that
repeated Martials books for his own, 1 Ep. 30.
how do thou look for the (...) credere, the (...) resipiscere for the
Alms of actual faith, and repentance at Gods mercy gate, and be at these
terms with God? This is to deal with God as concerning grace, as the
Egyptians for the watering of their Country, they said they were not bound to
the gods for it, but to Nilus. So thou say, by this Opinion thou art not
bound to God for it, but to the freedom of thy will; no, the Psalmist reads us
another Lecture, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. Tremble
then O dust and ashes, to disanull Gods secrets: should thou make some men's
secrets no secrets, but should commonly spread them, (...), says Diodorus
Siculus, Thou should have thy tongue cut out; O what a fearful sin do
thou run into, if thou do display the secrets of the Lord of Heaven on this
fashion? Do not thou read of Gods special grace every where in Scripture,
before thou can read of any good in any man or woman? As it was said of
Pherecydes, that he got his Pherecydes.
learning by the Phaenycean secrets, so thou may find in Holy Writ, that
all the Elect got all that they had from Gods special secret, even his
special and secret grace; Adam and Evah were faithful, but was it not first
said of God, The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head; Genesis 3. 15?
not -- him, so as Adam and Evah might, if they would break the Serpents head;
no, he shall break it, is a word de facto, He shall break the Serpents head;
Seth was faithful, but was it not first said, God had appointed him, Genesis 4.
25. and not Caine? Noah was faithful, but was it not first said, before he
heard one syllable of good in Noah, Noah found grace in Gods sight, Genesis 6. 8.
and not others? Abraham was faithful, but had not God first called him? Genesis
12. 1. and not the rest that were in Ur of the Chaldees? Isaac was faithful,
but was it not first said, In Isaac shall thy seed be called, and not in
Ishmael? Jacob was faithful, but was it not first said, I have loved Jacob,
and not Esau? Romans 9. David was faithful, but was it not first said, The
Spirit of the Lord came upon David? 1 Samuel 16. 13. Job was faithful, but does
not the very Devil acknowledge Gods special blessing to him first? Job 1. 10,
etc. Wherefore serves all this? but to teach thee how to beware, lest thou
sin against Gods special secret, O the Lord will not suffer this indignity
at thine hands, as to abuse his secrets; even the Devils in Hell, that are
called Gods Apes, among the Paynims, they would have their secrets inviolably
preserved.

Dionysius Haelicarnasseus tells us of the Pinarii Arcanorum custodes, that
looked to the secrets: and verily the sacred Lord of unsearchable glory is
tender of his secret. Consider how wretchedly thou wrongest thy Maker, in
saying, the reason why one is converted and not another, is from the free
arbitrament of the Will, for thou robbest God of his secret jewel, The secret
of the Lord says the Psalmist, the secret of the Will, so it should be, say
thou; that is, the secret cause why this man is converted rather then some
other. I beseech thee quake, and dare not so great audacity. Is not man's Will
said every where to be passive, and all to magnify this secret? Are not the
Children of God said to be elected, called, converted, redeemed, justified,
adopted, sanctified? Are not their Wills said to be turned, mollified? All
passive, all to show, all to be from this secret. Thou that art an Vniversaller
of Grace answer me, Why was Jonas sent to Niniveh Jonas 1.
and not to Tarsus? why was Elias sent to the widow of Zareptah, when there
were other widows in Israel as well as she? 1 King. 17. was it not of this
secret? Why was Paul commanded to go to Macedonia, and not Bythinia? Acts 16.
7. was it not from this secret? Why has such and such Countries means of
Salvation, and others again for many hundred, nay thousand of years not? was
it not from this secret? Why are some Aufes and Fools like beasts in knowledge
to their dying day, and others not, is it not from this secret? Again, answer
me; Wherefore were all almost that were converted in Scripture then converted,
when their own wills were about no such matter, but rather the clean contrary,
but only to set up this secret? Paul's will was to persecute Grace, then did he
light upon conversion of grace, Act. 9. was it not from this secret? Levi* when
he was sitting at the grating receipt of Custom, then he rose to the receipt
of grace, Mar. 2. 14. was it not from this secret? Were it from the liberty of
the Will, then conversion should be when the Will is most intent upon it;
wherefore was the man, possessed with a Legion of Devils, turned in the
instant, could that be from the first choice of his own Will? Mar. 5. 2. nay,
he cried out against Christ, v. 7. but even then was he converted, ver. 13. was
it not from this secret? Wherefore are Publicans and Harlots oftener saved then
other orderlyer people, is it not from this secret? wherefore was Nero's harlot.
that same (...) as Chrysostom calls her, and not Seneca? was it not still
from this secret? Again answer me, Why is not every blessing of God
universal, if Saving Grace were to be universal? God does not give strength
to all, nor beauty to all, nor wit to all, nor riches to all, nor houses to
all, nor learning to all, nor any left hand favor to all, and will he give
Saving Grace to all? Shall we deny that to God which we account an injury to
offer a denial of to the meanest of Gods Creatures? May not a Mother love one
child more then another, yea while they are considered in themselves both
alike? May not a Master love one of his servants more then another, though
respected alike? May not a Prince raise up a Favorite out of the rest of the
people, though circumstantiated alike? Yea very Fowls love some young one more
then another, though qualified alike; yea the very Viper will affect one of her
brood more then the rest, though shaped alike; The Sun does not shine upon
all places alike, nor the Moon upon all corners alike; the Mother Earth does
not feed all her Plants alike, but some more, some less, some not at all. And
will thou say that God gives universal grace alike, and deny him to do with
his own whatsoever he pleases? The Psalmist here teaches ye better
Divinity, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show
them his Covenant. O remember, it is the part of a slanderer to discover
secrets, Prove. 11. 13. Prove. 20. 19. and verily thou slanderest Gods wise and
hidden Counsels, that thus broachest all his secrets; yea, thou take part
with mockers, that revile the Saints, who say to the godly; Oh, forsooth, what
secret have you? oh, belike you are of those special ones; even as Eliphas
abused Job, Have thou heard the secret of God? and do thou restrain wisdom
to thy self? Job 15. 8. What know thou that we knew not? What understandest
thou that is not in us? ver. 9. With us are both the gray headed, and the aged
men, much elder then thy father, verse. 10. Is there any secret thing in thee,
verse. 11? yes mocker, there is a secret with them, and God reveals it to his
babes, and leaves the wise and the aged many times in their folly, and it is
Gods glory to conceal this secret from them, Prove. 25. 1. not as if the godly
can, or may pry into Gods secret Arc, but this secret is the knowledge of
their own vildnesse, which Zophar calls the secret of wisdom, Job 11. 6. This
is a secret that God reveals to them alone. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

Seeing the grace of conversion is a secret, how comes it about then, that the
wicked, that have not this special secret afforded them, are bound to be
converted, and shall be judged for not being converted?

For answer hereunto, I must needs use a little extravagancy: The Prophet
Jeremiah says, Woe be unto thee, O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean?
This is a plain question, and therefore (...), the people should answer yea,
or no; suppose they answer downeright No, we will not be made clean; then
their wilfulness plainly appears, they will not be made clean: suppose they
answer Yea, we will be made clean, then their wilfulness appears to be
double, for they are not only wilful, but lyingly wilful; we will be made
clean, but when shall it once be, says God? they do but dally with him, so
that he is feign to denounce a woe, Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem; and question
again, as being not yet satisfied, When shall it once be? It is evident then
that they were wilful in their impenitency; They kept not the Covenant of God,
and refused to walk in his law, Psalm. 78. 10. that is, neither did they, nor
would they: The wicked refuse to do judgment, Prove. 21. 7. They would not
hear, Esa. 28. 12. Children that will not hear the law of the Lord, Esa. 30.
9. And they would not, verse. 15. They would not walk in Gods ways, neither
were they obedient to his word, Esa. 42. 24. They would not be ashamed, they
would not receive correction, Jer. 5. 3. They refuse to return, Jer. 8. 5.
They refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears
that they should not hear, Zach. 7. 11. So that here we see the wicked are
wilful against conversion: That they are wilful may be gathered,

1. From the corrupt nature of their will, their heart is desperately wicked,
Jer. 17. 9. (...) that is deadly wicked, says Buxtorfius, Bonorum expectatio
Buxtorf.
nusquam apparet, says Tremellius, There is no good to be expected in it; and
therefore as it wills sin, so it will will sin, and will will not be converted.
The carnal heart is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of
God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 7. that is, it does not barely not do
good, but it is an enemy of God, it does not only not obey, but (...) it
cannot obey, and why can it not? Quia non vult, as Haymo speaks, because it
will not; for [because it can not] is not put as a reason of its not obeying,
but as a parenthesis, as if he should say, It is not subject to the Law of God,
because it is an enemy, it will not; indeed it is true it cannot, but that is
not the reason, for it rebels against it, Romans 7. 23. it will not be made
clean. That they are wilful may be gathered,

Secondly, from the abominable spawne of hideous conditions in the heart, for a
wicked heart is (...) an alseminary of sins, an universal roe, or seedplot of
rebellions. Tell it of new obedience, it simply wills not, They would not
consider his ways, Job 34. 27. urge it, it perversely wills not, The ungodly
man scorns judgment, Prove. 19. 28. urge it further, it strongly wills not, A
fool rages, and is careless, Prove. 14. 16. press yet more, not only
outwardly by preaching, but also inwardly, by the strange motions of Gods
Spirit, it stubbornely and contumaciously wills not, They resisted the Holy
Ghost, Act. 7. 51. wind into it, and excite it, it maliciously, and
desperately wills not, He has done despite unto the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10.
29. their will is the very tunnel of hell it self, so that the sin against
the Holy Spirit is in the bottom of the heart, and the reason why all do not
break forth into it is, because God does not follow and press all the wicked
hearts alike with grace.

That they are wilful, may be gathered Thirdly, from the Father of their
corrupt heart the Devil, For the devil works and rules in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. It is the devil that poisoned the heart, and what
poison has he brought into the heart? even like a Serpent, the poison that he
has in himself, namely willingness to disobey, and wilfulness (either
actually or radically) in disobeying, and therefore a wicked heart is wilful
upon sin, It is dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. But what death is
that that the Apostle tells us? a lustful desiring selfe-minded wilful death,
verse. 3 (...), says St. Chrysostom, this death is an elective death, dead the
Will is, and dead would be, My people love to have it so, Jer. 5. 31. whence I
deduce this sure conclusion, That the reason why wicked men are not converted,
and do not repent, is not because they cannot, but because they will not. The
Lord does not say, Can thou not be made clean, But will thou not? Indeed a
wicked man cannot repent; For, no man can come unto me except my Father draw
him, Joh. 6. 44. No man can come unto me except it be given to him of my
Father, verse. 65. that is, believe in me says St. Austin; Hence it is, says
the same Father, that the preaching of the Cross is pereuntibus stultitia to
them that perish foolishness, but unto them that are saved, it is virtus Dei;
every wicked man is like Lazarus, dead in the grave, fast bound, and a stone
upon him, (...), it being an Chrysostom.
impossible thing to raise himself again: as a foundered horse cannot but
limp, so a wicked heart cannot but be impenitent; there is a necessity, though
not a violent, yet a cruel necessity, as Avitor calls it, not as fatal, yet a
willing misfree necessity, as Bernard calls it; So that Luther gives the free
will of a wicked man in regard of grace, a good title, Res de solo titulo, A
naked titular thing, no such matter. Yet notwithstanding, albeit the wickeds
will cannot but be impenitent, the cause why it is impenitent, is not because it
cannot be otherwise, but because it will not be otherwise penitent, it does not
repent, and it will not, Sic volo, stat pro ratione voluntas, so I will, this
will is the reason.



I answer three ways; 1. Have thou a will in thee to repent? many will boast
every one of his own goodness, Prove. 20. 6. It may be said to thee, as Seneca
said to his friend, of a wicked youngster, that said he would be good; I do
not say, says he, he lies, but put at se cupere, he thinks he wills, but he
wills not. Thou say thou have a will to repent, whom may I believe says St.
Bernard? truly, I dare not believe thee, if thou live in wicked courses, thou
have a will to live in them, Thou art a scorner, and wilt hear no rebuke,
Prove. 13. 1. Thou art so, and thou will be so, thou will not be made clean.

Secondly, I answer, thou say thou art offended with thine own iniquities,
I do not deny it, what damned Devil is not? Homines vitam suam, and amant and
oderunt, wicked men hate their own lives, and love them both at one time,
their own conscience gripes them, and so they must needs find fault with
themselves, but then their corrupt desires transport them: Thou do not will
to be wicked, and yet thou do will to be wicked, like old wife Akko, that
said she would not, and yet she would; Like a Whore that would be strange,
forsooth, Oh she will not, and yet it is because she may cogge the more the
love of her Paramours. Thou would repent, and thou will go on in sin,
thou have a settled will to sin, but a sorry would, or a months mind to
repent; The truth is, thou call for mercy, thou prayest, thou repentest, for
a fashion to humor thy conscience, and sin the freelier; For the soul of the
wicked wishes evil, Prove. 21. 10.

Thirdly, Thou say thou will repent: the glutton when he feels his head to
pain him, his panch to burden him, his belches to annoy him, he will not be
such a glutton again; what says the Stoicke? Stomachum illi fecit luxuria,
cito tamen redibit in gratiam, his gluttony has turned his stomach a little,
he will be friends with his sin next time again. The wicked Israelites they
sought God, and enquired early after the Lord for a while, Psalm. 78. 34. but
how long did it hold? Alas, Their heart was not right within them, they would
not abide his Covenant, verse. 37. Wicked Ahab now he is fasting and humbling
himself in sackcloth, 1 King. 21. 27. A man would have thought Ahab will now
become a new man, but presently the byas was turned, by and by he is as bad as
ever he was, he hates Gods Ministers, 1 King. 22. 8. So that still the truth
is infallible, that a wicked man, the reason why he does not give over his
sins, is not because he cannot, but because he will not:

1. Because he will never indeed try whether he can or no, but he is like
Salomons sluggard, vult and non vult, as the Vulgar translates it, he wills, and
he wills not, Prove. 13. The soul of the sluggard desires, and [hath] nothing,
verse. 4. There is never a wicked man shall be able to say to God at the day of
judgment, Lord, I would have repented, I did what ever I could to repent, but
alas, thou Lord thou know, I could not: No, the sluggard let*s his field be
overgrowne with thorns and nettles, and the wall battered down, Prove. 24. 31.
Happily his field is barren ground and cannot bear fruit; but is that the
reason that it has no fruit? Indeed if he did hedge it, and dung it, and plow
it, and harrow it, and weed it, and then it would not bring any increase, it
were another matter, Cupiunt consequi non and sequi, the wicked would arrive in
heaven, but he does not strive to his power for heaven.

Secondly, a wicked man does not not repent, because he cannot, but because he
will not, for if he truly and fully would, he could; for the will is the
mistress of all the powers and faculties of soul and body: He that would be
sober, might be sober, unless he would gagge his mouth, and pour in liquor
as into a barrel: He that would speak holyly, may speak holy words, unless
he were dumb, or one should sow his lips; Thou would leave thy company at
the Tavern, thou lie unto God, there is no man hales thee into it as a Calfe
to the Shambles with a rope, thou art not tied there by a chain, as a Bear by
the nose at the stake; No, thou will not, Non velle in causa est, non posse
praetenditur, I will not, is the cause, I cannot is pretended: No, the scorner
will not go to the wise, Prove. 15. 12.

Thirdly, a wicked man does not, not repent, because he cannot, but because he
will not, because he shows he has still in every action more Can-does, then
Wil-does; Esau could weep for repentance when he saw he had lost his fathers
blessing, Heb. 12. but he runs a hunting and ranging at other times, is not
this A will not? Simon Magus could pray Peter to pray for him one while, Act.
8. and at other times play the Sorcerer, and seduce the people, and not look
after his own, nor Peter's prayer; is not this A will not? Saul could sacrifice
to God, and confess his sins now, but anon he will not obey God, but malice
David: Is not this, A will not? Wicked swearers say they cannot leave their
oaths, and yet in such and such company they will forbear; Was not that A will
not? Wicked drunkards say that they cannot but be overcome sometimes, yet they
can abstain while they are about their worldly profits: Was not this A will
not?

Fourthly, A wicked man does not, not repent, because he cannot, but because
he will not; for his Can-not, is a willing Can-not; he says, he cannot but
sin, but might not he in the loins of his first parents have kept him out
of sin if he had would? but that is past alas! he Cannot now choose, (...),
There is no man willingly wicked; Aristotle, the very heathen can confess, he
falsifies with God, and the carnal Philosophy of man cannot help them. Well,
to let pass the original Will-not, there is a new actual Will-not, E. g. the
Spend-thrift, he says, he has not where withal to give to the poor, he
cannot give; but he has willingly spent his money upon potting, or apparel,
or pleasure, or vanity, and therefore a willing Cannot. Many cannot remember
the lessons of the word preached to repeat them in their households, but their
minds have willingly roved in that interim, a willing Cannot. He cannot
repent, but he willingly lies Quod est voluntarium a part ante illud est
voluntarium Axiom.
in sin, that debarres him from repentance, this also is a willing Cannot.

Fifthly, A wicked man does not not repent, because he cannot, but because he
will not; for when the means to remove or abate his Cannot are lent him, he
willingly refuses them. Holy conference Qui tollit media voluntary, voluntary
tollit finem.
is a means, and he willingly refuses it; powerful Preaching is a means, and
he willingly mislikes it; to be reproved of his sins is a means, and he
willingly repines at it. So that the reason why a wicked man does not repent,
is not because he cannot (though he cannot) but because he will not.

Now then for answer, do ye ask, Why is a man invited by the Ministry to
repent, and turn unto the Lord, when he has not Gods secret, but cannot?
because the reason why he does not repent is, because he will not, nor he
cannot.

Yea, but thou will say, Preachers cannot bid him, as for example; He cannot
command Judas, or Caine to believe that their sins may be forgiven them,
because Christ never dyed for the Reprobate, I answer, Mentiris Cain, thou
lie Cain, Augustine.
Christ dyed for thy sins, and that five ways:

1. By way of Proclamation, remission of sins is to be proclaimed to thee, if
thou will believe; so says Paul, Be it known unto you therefore, men and
brethren, that through Christ is preached unto you forgiveness of sins, Act.
13. 38. yea, among all Nations, Luke 24. 47. For to him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his Name whos^ever believes in him shall receive
forgiveness of sins, Act. 10. 43. so that Gods Ministers are bound to preach
that thy sins may be forgiven thee, if thou repent and believe the Gospel.

2. By way of obligation, thou art bound to believe, that thy sins may be
forgiven thee in Christ, remission of sins is one of the Articles of thy Creed,
that thou art commanded to believe, Repent and believe the Gospel, Mar. 1. 15.
and therefore its called, the Law of faith, Lex a ligando, the Law binds,
Romans 7. 2. All are bound to believe in Jesus Christ, to the remission of sins,
even reprobate and all, they are bound as well as the Apostles themselves; For
our Savior commands them, to command all treasures the very same things that
he commanded them; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you, Matthew. 28. 20. so that thou art bound to believe that thy sins
may be forgiven thee.

3. By way of obsignation; Remission of sins is so far forth offered unto
thee in Christ, that God has sealed this serious offer in thine own
Conscience, thine own Conscience tells thee, or has told thee, that it has in
it for to tell thee, that God does truly offer this grace of Christ unto thy
soul, and thine heart can witness with thee that it is thy fault, if thou do
not repent, and believe to the remission of sins. Thus says our Savior, He
that believes in him is not condemned, but he that believes not is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of
God, John 3. 18. (...) says Saint Chrysostom! The not believing it self
accuses thee, namely in thine own Conscience, so that thine own reins check
thee for not believing that thy sins can be forgiven thee.

4. By way of general intention, for God intended his Son generally for
Mankind, to lay down a sufficient price to the remission of sins for the
same, even for the reprobate men, and all comparatively, more then for the
reprobate angels generally, I say, in respect of the condition, that if any man
or woman did repent, they should not perish everlastingly, Jo. 3. 16. although
I do not say generally, in respect of absolute purpose. Thus says the
Apostle, Verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him
the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. And least one should think, why then he took
not on him all Mankind, therefore Moses says it larger, The seed of the
Woman, Genesis 3. 16. in whose loins were all the world. This is no small thing
says the sweet Father, (...) he did not vouchsafe this mercy to Angels. So
then, thou art taxt with a sin over and above the sin of the Devils in Hell,
if thou do not repent, and believe to the remission of sins.

5. By way of special intention too, for all that thou know, for all that
thou know God means to work Faith and Repentance in thee unto remission of
sins. Peter calls upon Simon Magus the Sorcerer Not to despair, but to repent
of this his wickedness and pray God, that if it be possible, the thought of
his heart might be forgiven him, Acts 8. 22. (...) says the same Father; Peter
did not say thus, as if he made any question (or would have him make any
questioning doubt) of the possibility of his forgiveness, if he repented, but
only to show the grievous condition that he was in, that he might provoke him
to faith and repentance, so that thou sinnest against Gods unsearchable secrets
and counsel, if thou do not believe that God may in a special manner
vouchsafe thee forgiveness of sins. Excellently then says Saint Hilary, Omnia
omnium, Christ has satisfied enough for all the sins of all men and women.
Whence we may learn, that now its worse with the wicked man, if he w^ll live
in sin without amendment of life, then before; if this new Covenant had not
been made, accidentally; for now his sins may be forgiven him; God has
offered to condescend with him from the rigor of the first, wherein he could
not be forgiven; and to proceed in the new with him, wherein he may, First,
absolutely be forgiven, in regard of Christ's sufficiency, which is enough for
all sin of Mankind Hom. 25* de paen*
in the world; yea, as Eccius says The Redemption of Christ his Diog. Laer.
Prosp. resp. ob. Vincent
blood is sufficient, so that if there were a 100. mundi, a hundred worlds, it
might serve for all; yea more, were there as many worlds as the Epicureans
held, (...) infinite worlds. Aquinas is bold to say, That the blood of Christ
is of a sufficient value to redeem them all a toto: Secondly, mollifiedly, a
tanto, be forgiven on their own part, assisted with Christ's efficiency. I
speak of Christ's persuading, exciting, and to some general duties enabling
grace, whereby though he do not give them Free Will, yet he truly proffers
them to diminish the extreme bondage thereof, and without doubt does in some.
And therefore if he be obstinate in his sins, he is accidentally I say in a
more woeful condition then ever before, for now, Cursed is he, because he
continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them; He devolves himself upon the old Covenant, and shall answer for the
breach thereof. Now, Cursed is he too, because he believes not in the Son of
God, he ship-wracks himself against the New, and shall answer for the contempt
thereof. God comes so graciously unto him in the power of the dispensation of
the Gospel of Christ, that it might be the better with him under the Law of
faith (although God do not go so far with him as with his Elect) but he
makes himself guilty of the blood of the New Testament, and turns this May be
forgiven, into a double Never shall be forgiven, yea and by the just Judgments
of God into a desperate Never can be forgiven.

But suppose Ministers may bid them believe, because God has commanded them so
to preach, yet how can God himself bind Cain or Dives, or any other reprobate
to believe, when Christ did not dye for them? or how can God judge them for not
believing in the Son of God, who never was incarnate for them? can they be
tied to believe that to be so, which is not so?

I answer, 1. Put that Christ did not dye for them, the Preacher, or God in the
Preacher does not command them to believe an untruth; for faith comes by the
word preached, and look whatsoever the word says, they are bound to believe:
The word says, That he dyed for those that believe, For those that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, For those that repent: The word says, They are
bound to repent, etc. And if they do repent, if they do hunger and thirst after
him, then the word assures it, Christ dyed for them. So that, a man cannot be
bound to believe that which is not so, because that were a lie. This is not
true, when that which is not, by believing is made to be so. Ergo It is false
that a man is an Angel, it is false that a man is a Spirit, yet if a man be an
Angel, he is a Spirit, that is true. It is false that a fool is discreet; It is
false that a fool is wise, yet if a fool were discreet, he were wise, that is
true. So it is false that a reprobate hungers and thirsts after Christ. It is
false Christ dyed for him in particular, yet if he do hunger and thirst after
him, Christ did dye for him, is true. It is false that a reprobate does
believe, and false that Christ died for the reprobate in particular, yet it is
true, that if he do believe, Christ dyed for him.

Secondly, That which a man is bound to believe, is true: It is true, not only
that he is bound to believe, but also even that thing which he is bound to
believe, but no further then he is bound to believe it. But a wicked man, ut
sic, as yet a wicked man going on in sin, is no where in Scripture bound to
believe that Christ dyed for him; but he is bound to believe, that is, to be
in statu quo credat, in that state wherein he may believe, and so mediante hoc
statu, under supposall of that state he is bound to believe. He that is bound
to the antecedent, is bound to the consequent of that antecedent.

Thirdly, To believe that Jesus Christ dyed for him in particular, is not the
faith that every one is immediately bound to, but the sequel of true faith.
Credere in Christum est fides, to believe in Christ is the faith it self, that
is to go out of himself, and cast himself wholly upon Christ for his
salvation.

Fourthly, God in his special mercy gave Christ to his elect, to work their
salvation, and the application of the condition, for all is from him, our
redemption, and the having thereof: Because they could not effect the former
Covenant, he gives them an easier, and inables them to do it. Now God in his
general mercy, or in his conditional mercy (special too in regard of the
Devils, to whom he vouchsafes it not, and in regard of their former stricter
Covenant, which he ties them not to, so they do believe) having devised a
sufficient means for all the worlds salvation, sets the wicked reprobate a
rule to live by, namely, faith, repentance, new obedience, which he will not
enable them to do, nor is he bound so to do, for a power of belief was
included in their primaeve innocence, as minus in majori. Adam himself before
the Fall, was to go out of himself, and cast himself upon another. Now man
since the Fall, is bound to nothing but the same. Here is the difference,
before the Fall he was to go out of himself, to deny himself, ratione ullius
meriti, and to cast himself wholly upon the promise, Since the Fall, man must
go out of himself, and deny himself, ratione boni too, and to cast himself
upon a new promise; that promise was the promise of bounty, this the promise of
mercy; that promise was in his Son God, (...) and this promise in his Son,
both God and man, (...), so that this faith differs from the other, but only
in the sundry modifications of subject and object.

Lastly, the reprobate are justly condemned, because they do not believe in
Christum sufficientem servatorem; not to speak of efficacem, for though they
know that Christ is a sufficient Savior, this is but a credere Deo, but a
believing that God says true, who says that Christ is sufficient; they may
believe that Christ is a sufficient Savior, but sure it is, that they do not
believe in Christ a sufficient Savior.

The Lord stablish the peace of Sion, in heart and mind, through Jesus Christ
our Savior.
FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
WHich Title thou shall well deserve, if with thy Pen thou mendest, or coverest
with a candid censure those small faults, if any there be, which have escaped
uncorrected from the Press. I shall offer thee as a motive hereunto, That it
is an old Copy of a deceased Author, whose help we could not have, which is
usual in Printing.


