A REPLY to BENJAMIN BIRD's Ignorance, Folly, etc.
By him dedicated to his Ingenious and very Loving Friend, Mr. William Clap of
Abbots Wootton.
SOlomon gives an account of one that is wiser in his own Conceit than 7 Men,
that can render a Reason; and tells us, there is more Hopes of a Fool than of
him: And also aptly says, A whip for a horse, a bridle for an ass, and a rod
for the fool's back. But when by many fit Comparisons he has set him forth,
and shown how unfit he is to send a Message by, declares, the great God that
formed all things will both reward the Fool and Transgressors. And therefore I
doubt not but he will reward him whose Folly and Conceit, Pride and Enmity has
brought him to that Pitch, to account others ignorant and nonsensical, and
himself a great Discoverer; which indeed I must grant he is of his own Folly,
etc. And because I am not willing any should take this upon my Authority only,
I shall offer the following Considerations, and leave it to the truly wise and
judicious to determine.

I. Considering what Solomon says; It is an honor for a man to cease from
strife, but every fool will be meddling.

And again, He that meddleth with strife, belonging not to him, is like one
that takes a dog by the ears, and as a madman, who casts firebrarnds,
arrows and death, Prove. 26.18.

II. Now this Man's Coat considered, and whose Cause he espouseth, I leave to
the Judicious to determine, how aptly these Scriptures are applied to him, and
how it becomes him to be Advocate for the Presbyterians.

But if his Conceit (which is generally a Companion of Folly) was so great that
the Quakers Book could not be effectually answered till he had termed 2 of them
Nonsensical; I must confess his Conceit have exceeded his Proofs. Thus much to
his Folly. And now as to his Pride; let him consider what Solomon says, He
that is of a proud heart stirs up strife; and, if the scorner was cast out,
strife would cease. And as little Sense as he esteems the Quakers to have, they
can by his Pamphlet discern that his Pride and Contempt against the Light
within, shows his Enmity, and bespeaks him an Evil-Doer; for, as Christ said,
it is such as hate the Light: And he writes in defense of him that said, "The
Light within is the great Diana, by whom the Jacks of all Traders have their
Wealth. Hence it is that these Crafts-Men speak so honorably of the Idol;
great is the Quakers Light within.

Thus like Herod and Pilate, the Presbyterian Libeller and this Episcopalian
Priest (though I esteem not all of his Mind) can combine together to vent their
Scorn and Enmity against that he calls the Quakers Light within, which they
always affirmed to be no other but the Light of Jesus Christ, who is the true
light, which lights every man that comes into the world, and was before they
were, and will be, when all they that hare him shall be confounded; he shall
appear to our joy, and they that hate him shall be ashamed, Isa. 66.

Now, having premised this, I shall proceed to his Pamphlet, more for the sake
of the tender and well inclined People in Exon and elsewhere that may meet
therewith, than for this Officious Scribler's sake. And that People's
Understandings may be opened to see how such Teachers, that hate the Light, and
that are found in the Spirit and Practice of the false Prophets, can never
profit them at all; although by using the good Men's Words, that loved and walked
in the Light, they get gain the thing that too many of them more seek than
Godliness. And I hope those that peruse this, will, like the noble Bereans,
search the Scriptures, and see whether these things are so or not.

I. Page 2. he says, Sir, I have, according to your Desire, perused a Paper,
printed by John Field and J. Batt, called. A Reply to an Atheistical Libeller.
The Author whom they so call, they charge with concealing his Name; and then
asks this Question: How then do they know him to be an Atheistical Libeller?

Answer. By his writing atheistically, as may be seen in the 10th page of his;
and the 2d and 8th of my Scorner rebuked. But this Volenteer of the Church of
England, that comes to engage in the Presbyterian's Quarrel, is so eager to
fall on, and scornful as to term us Nonsensical, although he had not the Book
by him. But he, at the Close of that Paragraph has quoted a Scripture that may
well suit him; which I return: Though judgments are prepared for scorners, yet
stripes are for the back of fools; for would ever any but such an one have
taken the Pains, and exposed himself as he has, to answer a pitiful Pamphlet,
writ, as he says, by two of the Nonsensical Brotherhood? But what kin he is to
that Brotherhood, his Works bespeak him, and I may herein after show. For,

In his 2d page, He tells his Ingenious and worthy Friend Mr. William Clapp of
Abbots Wootton, because my Friend J. Batt wrote a few Lines by way of Posts,
That these Gentlemen hunt by Couples, as if they had learned of their Friends,
on the other side the Water.

Answer. I hope his ingenious Friend and others will have so much Ingenuity as
to see the Silliness as well as Malice of this Insinuation, for I doubt not but
to give as many and substantial Proofs, if need required, of being remote in
Spirit, Doctrine and Practice from those on the other side i. e. Rome, as
himself; and let his worthy Friend examine his Call to the Ministry he pretends
unto, and see if he flies not to the other Side of the Water for Proof.

He also says, Page 1. They charge Men with want of Allegiance to Christ, that
hold it impossile, while they are here, perfectly to keep his Commands, or to
live without transgressing God's Laws.

Answer. From hence I shall take occasion to repeat what he writ (that this
Parson writes in defense of) viz. the nameless Libeller I answered. In his
Preface he writ scurrilously and scornfully, and brought in a Quotation out of
Dr. Moor's Mystery of Godliness, as he said, which he grossly perverted, and
thereby abused both the Doctor and us, in adding the Word Quakerism, which is
not there, instead of Familism, as may be seen by those that will search the
Doctor's Book, p. 533. The Doctor does not say Quakerism, but Familism, is a
mere Flam of the Devil, a smooth Tale to seduce the simple from their
Allegiance to Christ. From whence I observed how they insinuated, That
Allegiance was due to Christ, and he consequently must be a King or Ruler: Yet,
said I, how many are alleging, that its impossible, while we are here to keep
Christ's Commands. This was to show their Inconsistency with their own
Pretensions and Doctrine, first that Allegiance, i. e. (Truth and Faithfulness)
ought to be the Practice, as it is the Duty of Christ's Disciples and God's
Children, and yet that its impossible for them to discharge that Duty or be
found in that Practice.

2. Man of himself, or by his own Strength and Ability is not able to do any
thing that is good or well-pleasing to God, which every true Christian must
acknowledge, because Christ has said to his Disciples, without me ye can do
nothing: Yet those that through Faith and Obedience become Christ's Disciples
and God's Children, are through that Grace and Truth that came by Jesus Christ,
and has appeared to all Men, taught and enabled to fear God, and keep his
Commandments, which is the whole Duty of Man, and is that Allegiance which I
esteem we all owe unto Jesus Christ, the great King of Heaven and Earth, and
the mighty Ruler of Princes.

And I desire B. Bird, his Friend, and all to whom this may come, seriously to
consider the evil Consequence of such Doctrine, viz. That it is impossible,
while Men are here, to keep God's Commands. From whence I observe,

I. It Is contrary to Christ's Saying, Matthew. 19.26. and Mark 9.23. If thou
can believe, all things are possible to him that believes.

II. It renders the End of Christ's giving himself, not sufficient or possible
to effect it, viz. That he might redeem us from ALL iniquity, see Tit. 2.14.

III. It contradicts Paul's Exhortation to Titus, v. 15. These things speak,
and exhort and rebuke with all authority. What Things? One of which was, That
Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from ALL iniquity.

IV. And its directly contrary to what the Spirit of God has declared, John
1.7. viz. If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship
one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from ALL
sin.

V. And it contradicts what B. B. quotes, and the Apostle declares, 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from ALL unrighteousness.

VI. It renders People unfit to enter God's Kingdom, or going where Christ is,
as appears by Christ's own Words and the holy Scripture-Testimony, John 8.21.
Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall
dye in your Sins; and whither I go ye cannot come. See also v. 24. And in 1
Cor. 6.9,10. it appears that the unrighteous cannot inherit the Kingdom of God,
and if its not possible to be righteous while we are here, its not possible to
enter God's Kingdom, for its said, 1 John 3.7,8. Little children, let no man
deceive you, he that does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous;
he that commits sin is of the Devil, etc. And 1 John 5.17. all
unrighteousness is sin, and so is the Breach of God's Law and holy Commandments.

VII. And lastly, this Doctrine of its being impossible to keep God's Commands,
or for Christians to live here without transgressing God's Laws, renders the
Devil more powerful to lead and keep People in sin, than Christ Jesus (to whom
all Power both in Heaven and Earth is given) is to lead and preserve People out
of sin, and bespeaks all those unreasonable Men, that will oblige Persons to
promise and vow in the Children's Name, when baptized (as they call it) those
things which they do not believe its possible should be performed, viz. That
the Child will renounce the Devil and ALL his Works, and constantly believe
God's holy Wo^d, and obediently keep his Commandments. See the Common Prayer,
concerning the Ministration of Baptism, when the Priest says to the Sureties,
unscripturally called Godfathers,

I demand therefore, Do thou in the Name of this Child renounce the Devil and
all his Works, the vain Pomps and Glory of the World, with all covetous Desires
of the same, and the Carnal Desires of the Flesh, so that thou will not follow
nor be led by them?

Answer. I renounce them all.

See also the 3d and 4th Answer, in the Catechism in the Common Prayer Book. I
desire B. Bird and his Ingenious Friend may seriously consider these things,
and these Covenants and Promises, and whether its reasonable and just that B.
Bird should take Money of People, and oblige them to PROMISE AND VOW on this
wise that which he declares it is IMPOSSIBLE to perform; and yet in the Common
Prayer and Collect, on Innocent's Day, prays; O Almighty God, mortify and kill
ALL Vices in us, and so strengthen us by thy Grace, that by the Innocence of
our Lives and Constancy of our Faith, even unto DEATH, we may glorify thy Holy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And in the Collect of the Circumcision of Christ its said, Almighty God grant
us the true Circumcision of the Spirit, that ALL our Hearts, and ALL OUR
MEMBERS being mortified from ALL worldly and carnal Lusts, we may in ALL THINGS
obey thy Blessed Will, through the same thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

Surely if Benj. Bird does not believe it possible, while People live here, to
keep God's Commands, or l^ve without transgressing God's Law, he does not pray
in Faith; or believe its possible to have ALL Vices killed in him, and ALL
Carnal and Worldly LVSTS mortified; or that in ALL THINGS its POSSIBLE for him
to obey God's blessed Will, through Jesus Christ. If he does let him blush and
be ashamed of venting and publishing such Doctrine in Print; for what greater
Perfection ever did any Quaker teach or pretend unto in this Life than what is
employed in what is afore-quoted?

And what a Man of Sense this Benj. Bird is, that terms Jasper Batt and me
nonsensical, and how concurring or contradictory he writes, and what excellent
sense, for a conclusion of this Head, take his own Words, p. 2.

Gods Commands are not grievous to good Men, THEY KEEP THEM WITH ALL THEIR
HEARTS; though by Reason of human Infirmities THEY FAIL IN THE KEEPING OF THEM.

Mark, they keep them with all their Hearts, though they fail in the keeping of
them: Is not this egregious Nonsense? And he farther says in the said Page,
And we may keep our Allegiance to Christ, although we cannot live without
transgressing Gods Law.

Answer. I deny that we can keep in Truth and Faithfulness to Christ, which I
account Allegiance, and yet live at the same time in transgressing against
God's Law: And how agreeable this is to what the Minister is to read in the
Commination, after he has pronounced the Unmerciful, Fornicators and
Adulterers, Covetous Persons, Idolaters, Slanderers, Drunkards and Extortioners
cursed, and the People have said Amen: I desire him and the Reader to examine
and consider, and also how agreeable it is to what is said in misere mei Deus?
viz. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. Thou
shall purge me with hysop, and I shall be clean, thou shall wash me and I shall
be whiter than snow.

In Page 3. he says, Secondly, John Field calls the Author of the Sauciness of
a Seducer rebuked, a Scribbling Libeller; and charges him with Blasphemy against
the Light within, which he says, is no other than the Light of Christ Jesus;
But this had need be well proved.

Answer. I hope those that read my Answer will find, in p. 5, 6, 7, 8. I have
proved by Scripture-Testimony, That the Life in the Word; by which all things
were made, is the true Light that lights every Man that comes into the
World; or as it may be read, the true Light, that enligtneth every Man that
comes into the World: And it was this Light within, or the Light of Christ
within, that Jos. Not, whom he quotes, exhorted his Reader to mind or believe
in: And I hope he is excusable for this, it being according to Christ's
Doctrine, and to what is said in the Common Prayer, for this Priest himself, at
the Celebration of the Communion is directed to say to the Communicants, That
we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us, we are one with Christ and Christ is one
with us. And if Christ be in us, then the Light is in us, for he is the Light
of the World: And this I showed in my former. But if B. Bird had not my Book by
him when he wrote it, and did it on Memory, he might forget. And in p. 2. he
confesses, I have not the Book by me at present, but to the best of my
remembrance, etc.

But Benj. Bird says, this had need be well proved; and adds, It Is not enough
for Men to say it is the Light of Christ. But let me ask this learned Doctor, If
he has obtained that Title, what need I have to prove it, when he has not
taken the Confidence here to deny it, but quotes Luke 16.15. If the Light that
is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness: And then says, This may be
your Case.

Answer. And it may not, for that which may be may not be; and I may return,
Prove. 18.7. and say, If a fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth
calls for Strokes, This may be thy Case.

3. p. 3. B. Bird says, I charge the Dissenters with coming to Church to save
their 20 l per Month.

Answer. The occasion I mentioned this was, because the Libeller said thus,
That since they, i. e. Quakers, felt the warmth of Toleration, they swarmed
among us; which savoured so much of Enmity and a Persecuting Spirit.

That I told him we also had felt the Lashes and Severity of his Brethren, the
Heat of their Anger, for it was fierce, the Warmth of their Wrath, for it was
cruel, who did both Whip, Brand, cut off Ears and Hanged in New England, when
Power was in their Hands -- And how their Meeting Houses were empty and shut
up, their Preachers absconded, their Flocks scattered in time of Persecution:
And then Paul's Basket was remembered; then their Christian Policy was used;
then to Church for fear of 20 l per Month; or lest they should be
excommunicated and suffer Imprisoment.

But this officious Advocate seems offended at this, and says, p. 3. The most
learned of the Dissenters hold it lawful to join with us in our public
Worship, though they count it their Duty to improve their Talents, and not hide
them in a Napkin, now they have the Countenance of Authority to preach the
Gospel in licensed Houses.

Answer. Observe first the account this Man gives of the Presbyterian
Preachers, and how he renders them like that unfaithful Servant the Lord
judged. See Matt. 25.25. and Luke 19.24. for hiding his Talent, for he grants
that when they had not the Countenance of Authority they hid their Talents in a
Napkin; but now they have it, preach the Gospel in licensed Houses.

Secondly, Observe, he grants they Preach the Gospel, and then what are those
and their Portion, that at any time Persecute such for that Cause? surely the
Men of this Man's Coat will not thank him for this, for if the Church of
England have imprisoned Persons for Preaching of the Gospel, what does this
less than render them Persecutors? So his Officiousness in this Case with these
Notes, I shall leave to the Determination of the unprejudiced.

Concerning what this Author says of the Light within, which we believe in and
profess, viz. Jesus Christ the true light, and only begotten Son of the Eternal
God, I shall next take notice of.

Page 4. he says, This Light the Eunuch had not, and therefore Philip did not
send him to it. 2. And when Christ was risen from the Dead, and traveled with
the two Disciples toward Emmaus, he did not send them to the Light in their
own Hearts and Consciences, to know him by. 3. Page 5. The Jews were directed
by the Light within to kill the Disciples of our Lord, and thought they did God
good Service in doing it. 4. Men may follow such a Light within into the Land
of Darkness. 5. there are many things needful for Men to know, which we cannot
attain unto by the Light within. 6. That Light which is in him (i. e. John
Field) was not before the Scriptures, for if it be worthy the Name of Light it
came from the Scriptures.

Answer. I deny all this, and if B. Bird intends all these Exceptions against
that Divine Light which the People called Quakers profess to believe in, and
which their Teachers are sent of God, to turn People's Minds unto, and which
they exhort People to mind and believe in, he is as blasphemous as the Libeller
he writes in Defense of; whom I in my former blamed for scoffing at the Light
of Jesus Christ. See page 4. And seeing in page 4. of B. Bird's, he says, I
should have so much Charity as to think, that the Author does not think it to
be the Light of Christ. I farther say, if that Author did not, nor this Author
does not intend the Light of Jesus Christ, which lights every Man that comes
into the World, and which God sent Paul to turn People to; See Acts 26.18. And
which Christ preached, John 12.46, and which he exhorted to believe in, see
John 12.36. For it is he that we Preach Believe in, and expect Salvation by,
and by no other Name nor Light; and if this Author means not this Light, the
means not the Light we believe in and profess; but if he means and intends this
Light, i. e. Jesus Christ, I absolutely deny every one of them, as aforesaid,
and hereby charge him to be a Blasphemer, and return on him what he says to me
about this Light, in p. 3. It Is not enough for Men to say, it is not the Light
of Christ, that we have within, or that shines in ours and all Men's Hearts,
and manifest to all reprovable things, and shows what is Good and what is Evil,
that does that for every Man, that the Scriptures of themselves nor no Man can
do for another. I say its not enough to say this is not the Light of Christ, or
Christ the true Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World; but
by plain Proof to make it appear if they can, which I know they are no more
able to do than to hinder the Sun from shining nor the Wind from Blowing. And
therefore the Teachers amongst the People called Quakers, exhort People to
mind, love and receive, to believe and walk in this divine Light, that will do
that for them which no other can, it will show them their Thoughts, discover
their Conditions, let them see they are Sinners, and that they cannot save
themselves. And as they believe in this Light, are truly sorry for their Sins,
and unfeignedly repent of them, and come to walk in this Light, they will have
the Benefit of the Death and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ, that dyed for
our Sins, and rose again for our Justification, and experience his Blood to
cleanse them from ALL Unrighteousness, and may come to find Peace be fitted for
God's Kingdom, and know Salvation to their immortal and never-dying Souls: But
those that rebel against it do evil and hate it, and will not receive nor
believe in it, nor bring their Deeds to it, if they were as wise as Achitophel,
as learned as Gamaliel, and could live to the Age of Methusalem, they can never
know true Peace, nor enter into God's Kingdom. But will be punished with
everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. and will be turned into outter Darkness; where the
Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth is, Mat. 8.12.

Therefore let all have a care they do not hate it, nor rebel against it, nor
continue in any thing that this Light manifests to them to be contrary to the
Will of God, but believe in it, that they may receive Power to do that which it
shows them they ought to do, and become the Sons of God: And if B. Bird will
but diligently and reverently read the Gospel in the Common Prayer, which is to
be read on Christmas Day, he may find this Doctrine thoroughly proved; and this
Exhorration in the Commination, viz. Let us, while we have the Light, believe
in the Light, and walk as the Children of the Light, that we be not cast into
utter Darkness, where is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth.

The next thing I observe is his quarrelling about the Scriptures; concerning
which he says, page 5. which was p. 9. of my former, viz. That Christ's Light
is to be preferred, because it was before the Scriptures.

Answer. Yes so it is and so does B. Bird confess, for he says, they were
given us by Christ, then Christ was before them, and is worthy to be preferred
above the Scriptures, which B. B. says were given us by Christ. See p. 6. and
will he prefer the Gift before the giver?

And in p. 6. he says, I charge those that take the Scriptures for their only
Rule of Faith and Obedience, as if they did set them above the Spirit, and
above Christ. But he quotes no page of my Book: However B. Bird says, This is
a false Charge, for they are given us by Christ.

Answer. Then Christ was before the Scriptures, as aforesaid, and B. Bird
grants it: Where then is the Falsness of the Charge? And why is he Angry if he
prefers the Spirit of God for the first great or supreme Rule of his Children?
I Will grant him that the Holy Scriptures, that were wrote by Holy Men, as they
were moved by the Holy Spirit, are the secondary and subordinate Rule. What
false Doctrine is there in this?

And in p. 6. B. B. says, Christ sends us to the Holy Scripture to search for
him, and not to the Light that is within; and therefore we have reason to
hearken to him, and not to those that would draw us from them to something
better in our own Hearts and Consciences, which we should keep close to.

Answer. The first part, relating to what Christ said, John 5.39,40. I grant
that Christ's Words, Search or ye search, etc. do not carry any Reproof in them
for their Searching the Scriptures, but for their not coming to him the true
Light, and thinking to have Eternal Life in the Scriptures: For, said he, They
are they that testify of me, and then blamed them that they would not come to
him, that they might have life, so that he did principally desire they might
come to him the true Light, that shines in their Hearts and Consciences, and
which is something better than the Scriptures, that testify of him, although B.
Bird is not willing to hearken to them that would draw him to something better
than the Scriptures. O strange! is this the Man that says we should keep to
John 5.39,40. and yet will not come to Christ, which is something better than
the Scriptures; for although they he spoke to, thought to have Eternal Life, they
were mistaken: And if B. B. thinks so, he is mistaken; for he cannot have
Eternal Life, till he comes to Christ the true Light, and believes and walks
therein, which is the some thing, better than the Scriptures, which B. B.
says, he has more Reason to hearken to. And I heartily wish B. B. did so and
that all People did practice and believe according to Holy Scriptures.

And in p. 7 he says, He, i. e. John Field, finds Fault with many, saying, we
cannot tell whether we have the Spirit of God in us, but by the Scripture; but
can he or any one else tell how we shall know the Spirit of Truth to be in us
but by the Scriptures of Truth.

Answer. Yes, by its own Evidence and Work in our Hearts, because that is not
wanting to do that in us, which Christ, who is the Truth promised it should,
see John 16.7-13. He did not say the Scriptures should convince of Sin, etc.
but the Spirit of Truth, which those that wrote Scriptures were moved by, and
by this Spirit, and the Light thereof, those that never see or hear the
Scriptures may know Good and Evil (see Rom.) yea God and the Things of God, as
well as those did that were before the Scriptures were, as Adam, Enoch, Abraham
and Moses, who my Antagonists grant to have had immediate Converse with God.
And sure that must be by the Spirit, and as God and his Spirit changes not, so
he can and does by his Spirit let us know we are of God, as Primitive
Christians did, and that the whole World lies in Wickedness.

In p. 6. he says, I asked what damnable Errors the Quakers hold? And B. B.
says, Let him read John Faldo's Book, called, Quakerism no Christianity, and
Thomas Danson's The Quaker's Folly, and his Synopsis of Quakerism.

Answer. Observe how he recommends me to our Adversaries Books for Proof, would
he have me refer him to those Books that Papists or Presbyterians have writ
against the Church of England, for proof that their Doctrines are Erroneous and
Damnable? This shows his Folly as well as Enmity, and that he is not wise but
otherwise, in that he would have Judgment against us, by false Accusations;
much like the High Priests and wicked Jews, that when they heard the False
Witnesses accuse our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, cried out, He is guilty of
Death. But I hope the Wise and Judicious will hear and read our Answers, and
consider our Defense before they conclude us guilty, although this Priest Bird and
some others agree to condemn us, and such that are willing to be so just to us
I refer to our Answers, viz. Quakerism a new Nickname for old Christianity, by
W. Penn: And Rusticus ad Academicos, by Sam. Fisher.

There is one thing more this Busy Advocate is offended with me for, which I
shall now take notice of, and answer, and then conclude. In page 7 he says,
John Field calls upon all to cease from Men and their Teachers, that are in
their Carnal State and Earthly Wisdom, and Dark Conceivings, and to turn their
Minds inward to the Saving Light of the Lord Jesus Christ. -- And then says,
What is this but a Cheat put upon Men, to call them to turn to a Light within
them that is not there?

Answer. I deny this; for if there be no Light there is no Sight, and if no
Sight no Knowledge; if no Knowledge People will Perish and Dye. But as I live,
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live, see Ezekiel. 33.11. And that he might not
perish, he has showed thee, O Man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and walk humbly with thy
God; by which it appears, there is Light in Men, and that gives Light and
Knowledge; for as the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5.13. All things that are reproved,
are made manifest by the Light; for whatsoever does make manifest is Light. And
this Light is that true Light that lights every Man that comes into the
World, which shows Man his DVTY, and manifests all things approved, discovers
the thoughts of the Heart, and shows the secret Intents, Corruptions and Lusts
that lodge in the evil Heart, out of which proceeds, as Christ says, Mat.
15.19. Evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies. The two latter of which have proceeded out of B. Bird's evil
heart, by saying, It Is a Cheat to call People to turn their Minds inward to the
saving Light of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And it was this I Exhorted all to turn their Minds inward unto, knowing that
this Light is saving, and believing what John says in the Revel. 21.24. That
the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in the Light of it. Therefore,
in great Love and good Will to all I did, and do exhort, as Christ our Lord
did, John 12.36. To believe in it, that they may become the Children of it, and
by believing in it, may receive the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ; For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. that we may come to have this Treasure
in our earthen Vessels, which by hearing and following Men in their carnal
State and earthly Wisdom, and dark conceivings, none can ever attain unto.

Oh, therefore, I cannot but in great Love and tender good Will to the Souls of
all, call unto them to cease from Men and their Teachings that are in that
carnal State and dark Conceivings, notwithstanding page 8 B. Bird says, Christ
has commissioned and promised to stand by the Teachings of Men, to the end of
the World; yet I affirm its not Men in their carnal State, earthly Wisdom and
dark Conceivings, although B. Bird, that pretends to be a Minister of the Gospel,
does so affirm, p. 8. viz. These Teachings of Men, which you cry down, are in
order to work Faith in them that believe, and for want of these Teachings of
Men (i. e. in their carnal State and dark Conceivings) millions of Souls perish
everlastingly; For where there is no Vision the people perish. And now seeing
the Teachings of Men are in order to the Salvation of their Hearers: Are not
you employed bp the Devil, to take Men off from those Teachings that are so
destructive to his Kingdom.

Answ. I deny, as before, the Teachings of Men in their carnal State are in
order to work Faith, although he affirms it is, and that in them that believe;
mind the inconsistency, to work Faith in them that have Faith; oh! what a
Minister is this. And I charge it on him for Untruth, i. e. that millions of
Souls perish everlastingly for want of these Teachings, or that such Teachings
of Men are in order to Salvation of their Hearers, and deny that we are
employed by the Devil, to take Men off from those Teachings that are
destructive to his Kingdom. This is another Falsehood. For our Christian
Endeavors, by the Grace of God are, to bring People to know the Teachings of
God and Jesus Christ by his Grace and Spirit in their own Hearts, and from
under the Teachings of such Men, that are not sent of God, and to his
Teachings, which will be destructive to the Devil's Kingdom, and be in order to
establish them in Righteousness, in which God's Kingdom stands, and will tend
to bring People off from any longer dealing with the Merchants of Babylon, or
buying their Merchandise any more, or following those that run, and God never
sent them; for they cannot profit the People at all, that are in the spirit and
practice of those that God by his Prophet cried against, That teach for hire,
and divine for money: See Mich. 3.11. And Jeremiah says, chapter 5.30,31. A
wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets prophecy
falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my People love to have it
so, and what will you do in the end thereof? Oh, therefore, it was and is from
such Men and their Teachings, that I did and do call all to cease from, and
invite them to come to Jesus Christ, and that grace and truth that is come by
him, and appears to all, and is revealed in the hearts and inward parts; its
this I would have them learn of, that they may be taught as the primitive
Christians were, to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, that so they may escape
the Wrath of God that is revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of
Men, may know peace and find favor with God, and through the belief of the
Truth may come to experience the Sanctification of the Spirit, and so be fitted
for an entrance into God's Kingdom, and while here, may be fed with that Bread
that comes down from Heaven, and not spend their Money for that which is not
Bread, nor their Labor for that which satisfies not, but hearken and hear the
Call of God's Grace and Voice of Christ in their Hearts, that their Souls may
come to live, and that for evermore, is the sincere desire of him that desires
the good, and the eternal well being of all,

JOHN FIELD.
London, 22d 6th Month, 1695.

