THE SINNER'S TEARS, IN MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS.

By THO: FETTIPLACE, Dom: Pet: Cantab.

Mat. 3.2. Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

The SINNERS TEARS By T.F.
Iu^^^

Suhitp t^^v^scr^^it

Paenitentia

16 LONDON 53

Printed for Humphrey Narley. at the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard

woodcut frontispiece

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE RICHARD Lord Keble, one of the Lords Commissioners of
the Great Seal of England, and the much Honored Mary his truly Virtuous and
Religious Lady, Grace and Peace.
My honored Lord,
I Know not where to find a fitter Patron for tears than your Lordship, the
constant Series of whose happy days, has been an exact pattern of true
Piety, and but one entire Oblation of fincere Devotion: Greatness and goodness
are the best supporters of decaying Holiness; by the one she is defended from
suffering ill, by the other encouraged in doing well. These high and happy
Ornaments, together with my nearness of blood unto your Honors nearest
relation; and mine infant education in that gracious Family (to which (as to
the happy instruments) I thankfully ascribe my first ingraftings into Christ)
are strong persuasions to invite me to presume upon your Honors Patronage of
this small tract, and humbly to present you with a taste of such wholesome
fruits, as (by divine increase) have had their growth from those precedent
blossoms. If ever kneeling were in season, now is the needful time, when there
is not only wrath gone out from the Lord against us, but even the blood,
Vialls of his fiercest wrath are daily powered down upon us. I willingly confess
my self to have been too deep a sharer in those grievous sins, which have
enforced these heavy judgments; what I cannot recall, I desire heartily to
bewail, and (as a true sign of mine unfeigned sorrow) according to the measure
of my weak abilities, have penned these following lines: accept of them I
beseech you, as humbly devoted to your honors service; and read them as the
disturbed notions of my distracted meditations. That holy Providence which has
directed their ends, will (I trust) supply their defects; even this the least
of grains (by that mercy) may become a fruitful tree, and branch it self into
matter of commemoration to the learned, of instruction to the ignorant, of help
to the weak, of comfort to the willing, of joy to the good, of terror to the
bad, of happiness (I trust) to all that are directed to it, and especially unto
their souls that stand in greatest need of comfort from it.

I shall not presume to enlarge my self with wast expressions, because I know
your Lordships more weighty affairs will not admit of such fruitless
endeavors; I shall now only crave your Honors leave, to end with Orisons; as
you have been both holy in your lives, so may you be happy in your deaths,
blessed in your memorialls; may those hopeful pledges of your loves be
faithful earnests of your joys, and future branches of the Churches Peace;
may they all (by your examples) go on cheerfully, and joyfully, in those paths
of Piety which lead to rest and quietness, that their seedtime being sorrow,
their harvest may be joy, that all tears may be wiped from their eyes, all
sorrows from their hearts; This is (my honored Lord) the most affectionate
desire, as a kinsman, the most zealous as a Christian, of

The most humble of all your Honors Servants, Tho: Fettiplace.

To the Christian Reader All Christian Consolation.
Reader,
THe miseries of this distressed age are such, and so many, that I know well, a
subject of joy would, in the worlds eye, appear more seasonable, and be far
more acceptable, after such a deluge of sorrow; but that heart which is as
truly sensible of the weight of Sin, as of the burden of Misery, will surely
find, that there is no true joy but in godly sorrow, that there is more
complaceney of soul in one repentant tear, than in an age of pleasure: with
grief of heart I confess, that much of my little time has been vainly spent, I
now (therefore) willingly resolve, to lament my lost hours, and shall account
it my chiefest happiness on earth, to spend my short remainer, to my best
advantage; I beseech thee therefore (for thine own sake) to consider with me,
that God hath-reserved us unto the last, the worst, the very dreggs of time;
that our transgressions are innumerable, our calamities unmatchable, our griefs
unutterable, that our days, our hours, our minutes, perhaps are few, and full
of evil, that it were even now most just with God to bring them to an end;
that Satan's cunning is unsearchable, his malice implacable, and (without divine
assistance) unresistable; that there is no one minute of our whole lives, in
which we are not exposed unto many great dangers, both of souls and bodies; and
we shall then find, that it behooves us to watch, and pray, that it mainly
concerns us to store our selves with such fit remedies, as may either enable
in the combat, or support us in the foil.

Such humble Confessions, and devout Prayers, as (by Gods mercy) I have found
agreeable to mine own condition, I have here published for the good of thine;
and such true comfort as I have enjoyed in them, I heartily desire may be
derived to thee from them: And my humble and most earnest petition unto
Almighty God is, that as we have been deep sharers in sinning and in
suffering, so we may also be devout sharers in sorrowing, that the Vialls of
our tears, may pacisie the Vialls of his wrath, that so his fierce anger may
be appeased, our crying sins pardoned, our bad consciences quieted, our
bleeding hearts comforted, our languishing desires relieved, our sad divisions
ended, our distressed Church restored, our dear Country preserved, and our
sinful souls and bodies eternally saved.

With this happy resolution of timely contrition, I joyfully embrace thee, and
earnestly entreat to be embraced by thee, that by this blessed Union of our
souls upon Earth, we may at last enjoy each other, in those sweet embraces of
Eternity, which is the cordial desire, and shall be the daily and devout
prayer of

Thy servant in all good affections and hearty well-wishes in Christ Jesus,
Tho. Fettiplace.

The Sinners Complaint.
AH Lord so long! what sudden fears?
What cares and doubts, what sighs and tears,
Since last thou did afford thy loving look
Have me oprest,
And robbed of rest,
Because thou Lord thy servant have forsook?
If not a look, yet hear me speak,
And pity me; O do not break
Thy bruised reed; why should thou strive with man,
Whose days are done,
When but begun,
Since thou great God have measured out his span?
Amaze me not with fearful things;
Give me thy grace, O give me wings
Of swift desire, and holy zeal, to raise
My soul to skies,
With powerful cries.;
That I may sweetly warble forth thy praise,
Thou art my Center, fix me there,
Or move me in thy blessed Sphere;
Suffer me not (dear Lord) to moove from thee,
There is no rest,
But in thy Breast,
And in thine absence present misery.
O that I were at rest with thee,
Or else that thou were come to me,
Since in thine absence I am so distressed;
Thy wrathful frown,
Has thrown me down,
And raised a storm in my unquiet breast.
Come Lord, and close these wretched eyes,
So blear'd with sins and miseries;
Resolve this erring heart to tamer dust,
Which every day
Thus sleals away,
That it may rise more joyful and more just.
THE SINNERS JOY.
All my Soul! why so dismayed?
Why so sad, so sore afraid?
Can thou think those gracious eyes,
Drenched in tears for thee,
Can disdain such powerful cries,
Such humility?
Sinners souls must sorrow keep,
Man may mourn, when God can weep.
Soul, though thou have done amiss,
Yet rejoice, for thou art his.
See, his soul was sad to death,
In his agony,
Sad to case thy woeful breath,
In thy misery.
Be not faithless, but believe,
Man may sigh, when God can grieve.
Do not grudge to lend a tear,
Can thou doubt, or can thou fear?
Can thou see his bleeding heart
And not believe him?
Wounded soul that bears a part,
Can never grieve him?
Timely tears are precious seed,
Man may weep, when God can bleed.
Be not so cast down; Alas!
See his soul forsaken was,
Frighted with his Fathers frown,
Left in pains of hell:
Ah why art thou so cast down?
'Twas to make thee well;
Doubt not, but admire his cost,
Man may stray, when God was lost.
Soul, when thou art left alone,
Do not deem thy Savior gone,
When thou can not see his face,
It Is to let thee know
That those sins withdraw his grace,
Which brought him so low.
See where he in grave does lie,
Man may faint when God can die.
Weep no more, but wipe thine eyes,
See, O see, thy Savior rise,
Happy Soul, thy debts are paid,
He is ascended;
Death is not, be not afraid,
All woes are ended;
Grieve no more, believe and live,
Man may take, when God can give.
DEO SALVATORI.
WIth sighing Soul, and bended knee,
Thy Servant vows himself to thee:
My God, accept a broken heart
Bleeding for Sin; O thou which art
The Sovereign balm, vouchsafe to be
(My dearest Lord) that Balm to me.
Inlighten with thy saving grace,
Those eyes thou guidest to this place,
And grant (dear God) those fins of mine
May not obscure that Grace of thine.
Amen.

THE SINNER'S TEARS
The Entrance to the Work.
THere is no man but naturally desires Happiness, even those unhappy ones that
least endeavor for it, have oftentimes an earnest longing to it; there can be
no true Happiness without Peace, no true Peace without Holiness, without
offering violence to our corrupt affections, without ransaking our souls and
searching out the very secrets of our Sinful hearts: the wordling may be
outwardly merry, but none but the sons of sorrow can be inwardly contented;
that outward Joy may delight for a season, but this inward Peace remains for
ever.

Peace is the richest Jewel in a Christians Cabinet, the choicest Legacy that
Christ bequeathed to his chosen ones; in it there is a complication of all
Blessings, and without it an expectation of all Miseries; there is no attaining
to it, but by the search of him who is the giver of it, there is no following
this search, but by that path which leads to the ready way, and there is but
one guide that can direct us unto that path: Blessed God, there is no way unto
thee but by thee, thou art life, and thou art the way to that life, and thou
art the guide to that way, thou Lord art all in all unto me, and therefore,
shall be now and ever praised by me.

In all awful reverence to thy sacred Majesty, in fear and trembling at the
sight of thy severe Justice to impenitent sinners, in serious apprehension of
thy sweet mercy in forbearing me a miserable wretch, and with unfeigned forrow
and humility of heart for grieving thy good Spirit, I here dedicate the short
remainer of my sinful days to thy service; In thy name, and in thy fear, I
begin my discourse, who art the God of peace, by whose holy Spirit I am guided
to this happy search: Lord, lead me in it by the same Spirit, that I may
become an instrument of glory unto thee, of happiness to thine, of rest to mine
own soul.

CHAP. I. Upon the consideration of our sinful thoughts touching the Sacred
Deity, with holy cautions to order our Devotions aright.
Lord,
WHen I seriously consider what thou art (the least glimps of whose eternal
glory I can no way see but by conceiving what thou art not) when I look upon
the vast distance between thee the blessed Creator, and me thy sinful
Creature, I cannot but wonder at thy great patience, at thy rich goodness, at
thine endless mercy toward me.

My whole life from my nativitie has been a continued course of sinfulness
against thee, mine actions highly rebellious, my thoughts finfully wicked, even
the very best of them a dark, confused, indigested heap of misconceivings of
thy sacred Majesty.

Thou (Lord) art an Essence most glorious, most inconceivable, eternally
enjoying Blessedness in the fruition of thy self; thy Center is every where,
thy Circumference no where; thou admittest not of Augmentation, nor of
Diminution; no length of time is b^yond thee, no depth of wisdom beneath thee,
no height of glory above thee, no breadth of mercy beside thee: Thou a^t^o Lord
a most pure, simple, and eternal being; Pure without matter, without form;
Simple without mixture, without composition; Eternal, without beginning,
without end: no Created being can express thee, no imagination conceive thee,
no understanding utter thee: when I think of thee as thou art, the bright
beams of thy glory amaze me; when I conceive of thee what thou art not, the
terrors of mine own heart affright me; even but the Least thought of this kind
is impious, seeing that hereby I do not only rob thee of thy glory, but even
deprive thee of thy self: and yet Lord, as thy being is most high, so is the
search thereof most necessary, because from it (as from the blessed fountain) I
enjoy my present, I exspect my future happiness; and unto it with joy of heart,
and earnestness of soul, I desire should run the current of my praises in this
life, of my Allelujaes in that to come.

When I find (therefore) any Corporal parts appropriated to the Divine nature,
I there see thee graciously descending to the weakness of my frail and infirm
nature, and ever bless thy holy name that vouchsafest to declare thy self, not
as thou art, but as I am: Thine Eye (Lord) is thy Wisdom, thy Right hand thy
Power, thy sitting thine Immutability, thy Standing thy Fortitude, thine Anger
thy Justice in punishing, thy Repentance thy Mercy in pardoning, thy Hatred of
sin thy Holiness, thy grieving thy Loving kindness, thy Patience and long
suffering thy Goodness; all are thy self.

Neither is it enough for me to consider the Divine nature in Unity of
Essence, unless I go yet further and find a Trinity of Persons; to be curious
in this search is dangerous, to be careless damnable; nothing may be here
safely seen, but what is graciously revealed: Lord no man can see thee as thou
art in thy self, suffer me therefore to see thee as thou art unto us, that I
may know thee, and love thee, and delight in thee, and be for ever known and
loved of thee.

If there were not an eternity of being, then it may be truly said that not
being was before being, and so that being had its rise from-not being, by
causing it self to be when it was not; So should Privation which was eternally
evil, produce that glorious being which is eternally good: Seeing this cannot
be, it will hence follow, that being was from all eternity, and that this being
was eternally Good; for that which was good in the effect, must needs be far
more eminently good in the cause. That this eternal good being must be also
infinite, because eternity it self is infinite; That this infinite eternal
good being, must be of infinite power, to continue infinitely; That this
infinite power must also be of infinite understanding, to support and preserve
this eternal infintie good being; and this infinite understanding is God.

Where there is an infinite understanding, there must also be an infinite
object to be understood, else could it not be insinitely active, and so should
both eternity and infinity suffer diminution and become defective, which were
for them both to be and not to be, which is impossible; and seeing there can be
no object infinite out of God; therefore this eternal infinite and
ever-blessed object, must of necessity be God.

Where there is an infinite understanding, and an infinite object to be
understood, there cannot choose but be an infinite and eternal love; for from
this infinite Understanding of this infinitely amiable and for ever blessed
object, there must needs proceed an infinite delight, whereby it infinitely
injoyeth its own excellency, and eternally reflecteth on the beauty of its own
perfection; else this infinite eternal understanding should want power to enjoy
this infinitely aimiable object, and so should be neither good, infinite, nor
eternal; and this infinite and eternal love is God.

Now because this Understanding, Object, and Love are all infinite, and that
whatsoever is infinite must of necessity be God; it will from thence truly and
undoubtedly follow, that this understanding is God, this Object God, and this
Love God. And because it is as equally impossible that there can be any more
than one infinite, therefore it will as assuredly follow that these three are
one, three in Existence, one in Essence, three in Order, one in Eternity; three
persons, one eternal, infinite, glorious, incomprehensible, wise God; to whom
be glory for ever. Amen.

This is that blessed Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, that ineffable, most
mysterious Trinity in Unity, eternally enjoying blessedness in its own Essence;
This is that blessed inter-union of that ever blessed Spirit, that most
unspeakable, immutable, incomprehensible fruition of eternal joy, at which the
blessed Angels stand amazed, in which the blessed Saints shall sweetly rest
themselves for ever.

All this, and infinitely more than this, thou art Lord in thy self, thy
Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, Truth, Power, Holiness, and whatsoever other Attributes
thou art pleased to take unto thy Divine Essence, are unto thee one, although
unto us diverse; and thou art therefore pleased diversely to manifest thy self
unto us, because we cannot otherwise conceive thy being, than according to
thine outward working; thy distinct operations are unto us the diverse
Indications of thine eternal, undivided, and for ever blessed essence.

And now Lord, who can see thee thus and live? I have hitherto seen nothing but
destruction to my body, amazement to my soul: In thine Essence there is light
inaccessible, unto which no mortal eye can approach; in thine attributes
terror unutterable, from which no mortal man can escape: Thy wisdom trying my
corrupt heart, and scoarching my sinful reins; Thy Justice most severe,
fearful in the pronunciation, dreadful in the execution; Thy truth admits
of no alteration; no Judgment pronounced but precisely fullfilled; Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, but not one tittle of thy sacred word; Thy Holiness is
such, that even the blessed Angels are impute in thy sight; what then shall
become of me a miserable wretch, the thoughts of whose heart are only evil,
and that continually? were it not for thy rich mercy, I were lost for ever; by
this alone I am for ever reconcil^d unto thee, and shall eternally be blessed
with thee.

I can here with joy unspeakable and glorious, behold thee my loving Father
affectionately embracing me in Christ from all eternity, by the sweet working
of thy holy Spirit; this is that truly-blessed vision of the sacred and
mysterious Trinity in this life of Grace, that will for ever make me truly
happy in that of Glory. Lord, if I find thee not Three in One to my soul's
comfort in this life, I shall never be found of thee to be blessed in thee in
that to come.

Without thy Power it had not been decreed, without thy Wisdom it had never
been acted, without thy Love it had never been sinished: Here in a severe Judge
I joyfully behold a merciful Redeemer; In a glorious Divinity a true Humanity,
united to the Deity, not mixed with it; Before I had three Persons in one
Essence, here I have two Natures in one Person, God and Man, one Christ, in
whom, and by whom, I have a joyful interest and undoubted union in the
Godhead. Here is the Father promising, the Son performing, the Holy Spirit
confirming. This is alone that blessed sight of God, that brings rest and
quietness to my weary soul: To know him to be my God, to have suffered for my
sin, and risen again for my Justification. To find him supporting, sustaining
me in my infirmaties, relieving my wants, chastising my errors, revenging my
wrongs, repairing my breaches, directing my ways, protecting my person;
wounding, rending, breaking my obdurate heart; creating in me a clean heart,
and renewing a right Spirit within me; bemoaning, bewailing mine iniquities;
inviting, nay compelling me to mercy and forgiveness.

Seeing now, O my Soul, that Gods being in himself is incomprehensible; and his
Love in Christ unutterable; with what Filial fear should thou think of him,
with what awfulness name him, with what reverence and preparedness pray unto
him, with what heat of affection love him, with what carefulness and conscience
fear to offend him, with what cheerfulness and holy diligence devote thy
service to him?

Blessed Lord,

Seeing that I am utterly unable of my self to comprehend thee, O let me be
graciously comprehended of thee, that corruption may be swallowed up of
immortality, and humane frailty of eternal glory.

As thou have given me an understanding in part to know thee, so give me also
affections entirely to love thee, and fixed resolutions to adhere unto thee;
that as thou art truly and eternally one in thine Essence, and yet distinctly
three in thy Persons; so I may be truly and entirely one in my obedience,
although distinctly three in my faculties; that all may be but one, and that a
pleasing sacrifice of praises unto thee, of profit unto others, of comfort to
my self.

Forgive my misconceivings of thy sacred Essence, my rash approaches to thy
heavenly presence, my cold, careless, irreligious thoughts, distracted words,
undesent actions. Lord, I am sailing on the stormy sea of ignorance and misery,
O be thou my sure Pilot to direct me, my sweet calm to refresh me, my safe
harbor to receive me; for of thee, and through thee, and to thee, are all
things, to thee be glory for ever. Amen.

CHAP. 2. Upon the consideration of Gods Love, and man's Unthankfulness.
A Meditation suited to the Morning.
Blessed God,

WHen I consider of the richness, of the largeness, of the constancy of thy
love to man, of man's vileness and untowardness unto thee his God, I stand
amazed at thy goodness, and mine own unthankfulness. How great, and invaluable
a blessinge do I enjoy in being made partaker of the glorious light of this
present day? how vile and unworthy am I that receive it? how great and glorious
art thou that give it? Thou, O Lord, art light inaccessible, unto which no
mortal eye can approach; before whose glorious Majesty the blessed Angels
stand amazed; and I am dust and ashes, yea worse, Lord, (for dust was thy
creation, and therefore in its entity was good) before I was dust I was not at
all: This not being, by thee became a being, this being beautiful, this beauty
immortal; and without thee this happy being is again become far worse than not
to be.

What can be more vain, more empty than nothing? ah woe is me, I am now become
far worse than nothing; thou madst me all goodness, and that goodness might
have made me all blessedness; but I have made my self all sin, and this sin
has made me all misery; there was darkness in not being, but that darkness was
incapable, there is greater darkness in being ill; for this darkness is most
capable of the privation of all light of comfort in this life, of the fruition
of the blackness of darkness in hell for ever.

This, Lord, was my condition in nature, and without thy gracious help must
have been so for ever. Let me now see what my condition is by Grace, by which I
enjoy not only the light of nature (without which my life would prove
uncomfortable) but also a sweet and safe assurance, that thou will by this
happy light conduct me safely to the blessed light of Glory.

Blessed Lord, I can now look no way but to happiness, I now find a true
sweetness and composedness of soul, a constant and courageous setledness of
heart, even in the very height of all the disturbances of Nature, of all the
inundations of Sin, of all the fluctuations of Sorrow, of all the Machinations
of Satan: from the sweet fountain of thy mercy, arise those precious streams
of Consolation, which abundantly relieve me in this barren wilderness.

I find indeed a law in my members, continually rebelling against the law of my
mind, but I find also thy grace to be sufficient for me, by which I am
victorious here, and shallbe triumphant hereafter: Satan may strive to winnow
me like wheat, but this shall make me the purer for thy Granary. I now find a
total and a blessed change of the whole man; mine affections which formerly
were captivated unto sin, entirely devoted to thy service; my love with holy
David wonderful to thy law, my hatred perfect against sin, my desire eager for
thy presence, my fear astonishing in thine absence, my delight in thy promises
ravishing, my joy in thy performances triumphing.

By these rich indowments of thine I am wrapped up above the reach of humane
misery; all vain and empty desires of the besotting pleasures of this life
appear truly as they are, but thorns and briars, to disturb the growth of my
felicity; how sweet is their loss for thy gain? how easily, how willingly, how
joyfully, how thankfully, are all these foggy mists of ignorance and error
happily dispersed, by the bright rays of my ensuing glory.

Beside these fawning enemies of Peace which flatter to unquietness, I am now
able to encounter with those other which affright the soul even in their first
appearance, and are able to deject the carnal man even to astonishment, and
utterly to expose him to the tyranny of sin, and torture of punishment: such
Lord is the vast difference between the blessed ones of thy fold, and those
unhappy ones which stray from thee into the strange pastures of impiety.

No sorrow can surprise me but for sin, and even this too thou make to
increase my joy: what affliction can be evil which is thy physic who art the
fountain of all good? if it be grievous in the taste, it is joyous in the
effects; If I mark the happy close, I must with joy confess, that these bitter
storms will end in blessed calms, will bring to my remembrance those grievous
sins that brought my Savior to those bitter groans, will force me from the
sorrows of this life, to my Celestial harbor, will bring me on my knees to
see mine own vildness, will enrich me with the graces of humility, and
patience, and together with them the sweet enjoyments of thy blessed Spirit;
and if so, how can I complain of want, when in stead of earth I enjoy heaven?

Lord, what can he fear that is assured of thy favor? afflictions,
tribulations, crosses, sins, Satan, Death, hell it self shall work to mine
advantage: as my cross is more grievous, my crown shall be more glorious; where
sin and Satan have been most prevailing, there Grace and Goodness shallbe more
triumphing. How truly sweet Lord is the inviolable peace of thy saints? who
powerfully compellest even the very rage of earth and hell to work to their
advantage. Lord sanctify the trialls of this life unto my sinful soul, that
by my patient sufferings with my Savior here, I may have peace with him and by
him hereafter.

I have hitherto looked on mine inward happiness; if I now cast mine eyes upon
mine outward, I shall there see that all these outward blessings also are most
peculiarly belonging to the Saints; the wicked ones of the world are robbers,
and shall one day give an account of their theft; children, friends, strangers,
even our very enemies, are protected, preserved, enriched, blessed for our
sakes; so was Joseph and his brethren for Jacob, Zoar for Lot, Potipher for
Joseph, the Centurion and soldiers for St Paul: And if thou (Lord) wilt look
so lovingly upon the children of this world for thine elect sake, how
graciously will thou one day look upon those sons that shall be made
partakers of thine own inheritance?

Who would not now be holy? seeing that in this blessed condition, there is
not only safety inviolable, but peace untterable, safety in life, and sweetness
in death.

And now Lord, when I enquire for what cause thou give me all this, I find
nothing but thy mere love unto me; when I ask what thou requirest for all this,
I hear thee demand no thing but the return of love: what is more easy, what
more sweet than love? and what object more aimable than that glorious being
that is the perfection of al love, and that love the beauty of al perfection?
Thou can not give Lord what thou have not, the glory of thy creation is but a
glimps of that grater glory of thine essence; Lord who can deny thee Love? how
sweet is this yoke, how light this burden! when I love thee I enjoy thee, and
my self in thee, I possess thee, I rest in thee for ever. O my God, all that
thou give me, all that thou requirest of me, is to make me happy, to thee
be glory for ever. Amen.

Blessed Lord,

All this I joyfully confess thou have done for me, and yet the whole course
of my corrupt life has been nothing elce but a continued Rebellion against
thee: mine Eyes full of Adultery, my tongue of Corrupt communication, my hands
of oppression, mine ears open to iniquity, my heart full of hypocricy, my feet
Lame in thy paths, and swift to walk in the ways of sinners, my whole man
nothing elce but the very body of death and destruction.

I have sinned against precepts, against promises, against mercies, against
judgments, against the checks of mine own conscience, and the blessed motions
of thy holy Spirit; I have even tempted my temptations, by making daily and
hourly provisions for sin; and have been so far from sorrowing for all this,
that I have resolved to continue yet still. And yet so great is thy compassion
toward me, that still thou storest up new mercies for me.

Lord, I bewail my weakness, I lament my willfulness, I abhor my filthiness; I
heartily desire, and earnestly endeavor to unrip my soul, to ransack my heart,
to unlock the very secrets of my thoughts, that I may have all my sins
continually before me, even in their worst appearances; and I may loath them
and leave them, and obtain thy gracious pardon for them.

I confess, Lord, that I am utterly unworthy to enjoy this blessed light,
which I have so much abused to thy great dishonor; much more the light of
Grace, by which thou leadest me to that of Glory; and that it were more just
with thee, for ever to deprive me of these happy lights, and to expose me to
the terrors of eternal darkness:

Lord, I have finned, and cannot choose but sin; I am a great and grievous
sinner, and yet I am thy child; have pity upon me, have pity upon me, for I am
in misery: into the bosom of thy tender love I thrust my sinful soul for
safety and protection.

O let not thy justice triumph in my ruin, but thy mercy in my deliverance, so
shall thou have the glory, and I the sweetness of mine eternal happiness.

Hear me, O Lord, and help me, for thy name sake, for thy promise sake, for thy
Sons sake. Amen.

CHAP. 3. Upon the consideration of Divine Providence.
A Meditation for Noon.
Blessed God,

WIthout thy holy providence no creature can subsist, by thine Allmighty power
they were created out of nothing, and if thou should not sustain them, they
must needs return to nothing: how wisely, how wonderfully do thou guide and
govern these inferior creatures? All things are at once disposed of by thee,
and move successively to their appointed ends: but above all, how graciously
have thou provided for the good of man? what varieties of food, how secretly,
how sweetly disposed it to sustentation? No creature can be nourishing without
thee, and with thee I enjoy not only nutriment, but delectation: how sweet is
this thy goodness to my body? how much more sweet thy mercy to my soul? and if
thy temporal refreshments are so good, how ravishing is that celestial food,
with which thy Saints and Angels are delighted?

Lord, how undeserving am I of these thy many favors? Thou give rain to the
earth, and it becomes fruitful; thou loadest me daily with thy blessings, and
lo I am unthank^^^ even those creatures that are insensible, are daily
nourisht into augmentation, and man alone, whom thou have made to live for
ever, contents himself with daily diminution.

This woefully appears by my deadness and dullness in my Christian calling, by my
back wardness to Holy Duties, by my carelessness and coldness in prayer,
weariness in reading, irkomenesse in meditation, by my faint Hope, sick Faith,
lukewarm Love, frozen Charity, lame Patience, languishing Zeal, and all those
other visible decays of Goodness, which are none other than the very symptoms
of a dying soul.

Ah now, Lord, how miserably deformed must I needs appear in thy fight, that am
thus ugly in mine own! Thou that had compassion on me when I was in my blood,
and then said unto me, Live; that have washed me clean from sin and
pollution, and espoused me into thine own bolom, will thou also love me in
death? Will thou court me in the grave? How justly might thou for ever leave
me to mine own ruin, that can so easily, so willingly forsake thee, for the
pleasures of sin; and yet how sweetly, how affectionately do thou order all
things for me? Even my very sins invite me to a more happy, to a nearer Union
with thee.

To thee therefore, O my God, the life of my life, the very being, and assured
comfort of my sinful soul, and wretched body, do I address my self for mercy
and forgiveness.

I confess my self unworthy of thy gracious providence in sustaining this frail
and infirm body, much more unworthy (O Lord) of thine unspeakable love, in
reviving, relieving, embracing my deformed soul.

Blessed Lord, who am I of whom thou art thus tenderly compassionate? When I
was in the womb I was defiled with sin, when I came out of it I was covered
with shame; the World bewitched me, the Flesh besotted me, the Devil beguiled
me.

Lord, when no eye pitied me, then thou badst mercy on me; and now at last
when I am run from thee, when I have adulterated my first Love, when I am
become poor and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked, thou freely
forgivest me, thou call me thy fair one, and give me thy love.

O my God, I admire thy Goodness, I deplore and abhor mine own wretchedness; O
let the sweetness of thy love in Christ, inflame the dying sparks of my
benumbed soul to praise thee without ceasing.

Expatiatc my narrow thoughts, with day'y contemplation of my heavenly home,
with joyful expectation of the sweet fruition of Eternity; O give me such a
blessed raptasie of soul, that I may live above the reach of humane misery, and
reign with thee hereafter in immortal glory.

CHAP. 4. Upon the consideration of the sinfulness, shortness, and uncertaintie
of life.
A Meditation suited to the Evening.
Lord,

WHen I call to mind how many days have past me without bending of a knee, how
many nights I have gone prayerless to bed, I may well wonder that I am this
hour alive to speak unto thee: I have been too unmindfull of thy holy
providence, and am therefore utterly unworthy of thy merciful protection: Few,
and full of evil have my days been in the house of my pilgrimage, I know not
how soon I may go hence, and yet I still live as if I knew not why I came
hither.

I am many ways invited to my heavenly home; how sweetly do thou wean from
the miseries of life, by the blessedness of death! By this Evenings rest of my
body I am put in mind of that eternal rest of my soul: This days ending tells
me that the end of all things is at hand, that the fashion of this world
passes, and that all things shall become new: As this hour is the Evening to
this day, so this day (for ought I know) may be the Evening to my whole life; I
cannot challenge to my self one minute more; how vain am I to promise days and
years? Lord, in the whole current of thy Sacred Story I find but only one,
that durst presume upon so large a reckoning, and him thou brandest with the
name of Fool: Let his folly (Lord) be my instruction, so shall I account each
day my last, and neither care to live, nor fear to dye.

How many have been snacht out of this life, how suddenly, and to man's eye how
fearfully? How unspeakable is thy mercy unto me to spare me for repentonce? how
often and how earnestly have thou invited me to mercy how coldly and how
carelessly have I refused these thy gracious offers? still I sin, and still thou
forgivest, and (which is the height of my impiety) I therefore am more and more
evil against thee, because thou art more and more gracious unto me; and it
were now most just with thee, even this very moment, to put a period to my
sinful life.

Lord, Let this teach me to improve the short remnant of my days to thy
service, and that I may endeavor so to do, I will prescribe my self these
following rules.

Each evening shall take a strict account of that days traffic for my soul,
and where I find my self a loser, I will labor for supply. When I awake, my
first thoughts shall begin with thee, from whom I have my first being: Nothing
will more truly represent me to my self, than the first view of mine
affections; if my first thoughts be seasoned with grace, my following actions
will savor of goodness. My care shall be more to dress my soul, than to trim
my body; I will think no pains too great, no ornaments too rich to make her
beautiful. One devout sigh from a contrite heart, is of more worth (in thy
sight) than an hours task of Lip-devotion. My affections are the soul of my
words, without which, I speak only, but pray not: when my prayers are cold, my
hopes may well be comfortless. My set hours for Devotion shall be constant; no
pretense of nature shall debar me of this happiness: The Lovers eyes are often
glancing on the pleasing object that delights him; if my affections be sincere,
my looks will be amorous, I shall often steal a sweet Ejaculation to satisfy
the longing of my Lovesick soul. When I can thus bring the day to an end, my
life will be comfortable, my death happy, and I may then say with holy David,
that I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord only
that make me dwell in safety.

Blessed Lord, in the morning of my Creation thou gave me unto my self, in
the evening of my Redemption thou gave thy self unto me: My Creation was
wonderful, my Redemption astonishing. As this days light is obscured for the
rest of my body, so were thou the blefied and eternal Light for the rest of my
soul. Thou, O blessed Savior, art my light to direct me, my heat to comfort
me, my sweet and safe repose eternally to refresh me.

Gracious God,

With humble and dejected heart I ask forgiveness of the many failings of my
sinfud life past, recall my sinful thoughts to my remembrance: Lord, as the
burden of them is intolerable, so let my grief for them be unutterable.

Lord, open mine eyes that I may see the foulnes, and the filthiness of sin,
and apprebend the greatness of thy wrath against it.

Forgive those actual sins which this days light has witnessed; Lord, give
me a godly sorrow for them, a perfect batred against them, a fixed and a
constant resolution to forsake them.

Lord, cleanse me from my secret and unknown sins, and keep me, for thy mercy
sake, that daring and presumptuous sins may never have dominion over me.

Make me a careful Steward of that precious time which thou haft given me,
withdraw my affections from the vain pleasures of this sinful life, and grant
that all the days of my appointed time I may wait readily and cheerfully
until my change shall come.

CHAP. 5. Upon our approaching unto Gods House.
Lord,

THere is no mortal man worthy to stand at thy door, much less to appear in
thy presence; and yet how often have I presumed to approach unto thee without
that preparedness of heart, without that dejection of soul, without that true
and holy reverence that becomes thy child.

I am now going out of Egypt into Canaan, out of Bondage into Freedom: The
sinful troubles of this life are my souls Taskmasters, to load it with a
burden insupportable, and this is that place of sacrifise, that Mount of God,
to ease and solace it.

Consider therefore, O my soul, in what relation thou now stand to thy God:
If thou art a true Israelite, thou will look back upon thy drudgery, and
despise it, and offer up thy self a living sacrifice with cheerfulness, with
thankfulness of heart. If thou art Gods child, thou will love to be in Gods
house; Long for Gods presence, thirst for his favor, delight in his Word, and
rejoice to be often at his Table: Thou will make it thy chiesest joy to be
often in that place, from whence thou may expect thy chiefest good.

Lord (by thy grace assisting) I will now uncloath my self of all earthly
affections, I will call to mind unto whose presence I approach, and wherefore;
that I am going from this Church Militant, to that Triumphant; that thou, Lord,
art as truly present here in Grace, as there in Glory (unless therefore I am in
love with misery) I will leave behind me all earthlymindedness, and carry with
me a pure heart, and heavenly thoughts, a lowly mind, and reverend gesture.
Lord, if I go not cheerfully to thy Throne of Grace, I may well fear I shall
never go joyfully to that of Glory.

The lowest room in thy House shall content me, Divine Worship admits not of
disparity of persons; we are all sinners, and (as we are in nature) most impure
in thy sight, the worst room in thy House is too good even for the best of us,
yet decency of place may be taken with modesty, if not sought with emulation.

During the time of this holy dispensation, I will call my thoughts unto a
strict attendance; and make it part of my precedent prayer, that I may. Satan
is ever most busy, when our intentions are most holy; which when he cannot
divert, he labors to corrupt, and by this means when I desire to grow better,
I become worse. How careful ought I to be to avoid his cunning, who can cousen
me in my best actions?

My soul shall more delight it self with the matter, than my ears with the
melody of thy sacred Notes: Church-musick will be then truly sweet unto me,
when mine outward joy is subservient to mine inward.

Man's sinful weakness shall not make me slight thy holy Ordinance: If my
Pastor have failings, I will pity, and pray for him, but not despise him. If I
look into mine own soul, I shall there find work enough to repair mine own
ruins. This, Lord, shall rather move me to extol thy mercy, in upholding mine
own steps, to lament the sadness of my Brothers misery. Lord, let me never
think my self better than another, because I know not how soon I may become
worse.

I shall willingly continue in that Fold where thou have placed me, and hope to
remain there with comfort, till thou shall lead me out with safety. While I am
at thy feeding, I am happy; one of thy morsels well digested with humility and
thankfulness, will yield me better nourishment than that other food of mine own
finding. The very meanest of thy Ministers may afford me Patience, and that
heavenly Grace, with thy blessing to boot, is a great advantage. If I receive
thy Sacred Word with cheerfulness, with earnestness of heart, my obedience
shall be accepted, my zeal rewarded.

While I am within thy walls, I shall account that gesture most decent that is
most humble, and those ceremonies most necessary that are most suitable to
obedience; all matters of Doctrine (which are necessary to salvation) ought to
be guided by thy sacred Word, which is the only rule of faith; all matters of
Discipline, (which are necessary only to obedience) are therefore left to thy
Churches care: that as thou art one, so thy Church may be one, in that blessed
union of love; which is the bond of peace.

And now, O Lord, if thou shall call me to a strict account for all my
misdemeanors in thy sacred Worship, with what confusion of face must ^needs
appear before thee?

How many evil suggestions, how many idle imaginations, how many sinful
objects have I often entertained, to divert my thoughts from thy service?

I have too often sinned in absenting thy House, but more often and more
grievously in frequenting it, by coming carelessly and out of custom, by
unbeseeming gestures, cold prayers, heartlesse hearing, profane scoffing,
curious censuring, and even in the best of my performances, by serving thee my
God by halves; all this I heartily bewail, and earnestly desire thy pardon and
forgiveness for it.

Lord, let this days rest of my body, bring to my remembrance that eternal
rest of my soul; let me not now think mine own thoughts, speak mine own words,
do mine own actions, but come before thee with a sanctified and humble soul,
with a wounded and contrite spirit.

Repel all evil suggestions, remove all idle imaginations, divert all sinful
objects; enlighten mine understanding, rectify my will, strengthen my memory,
subdue mine affections, that I may rejoice in thy love, delight in thy law,
long for thy presence, rely on thy promises, thirst for thy grace, and be for
ever blessed in thy glory. Amen.

CHAP. 6. Upon our returning from Gods House, and the neglect of private duties.
Lord,

HE that knows thee, will undoubtedly delight to serve thee; if I call thy
Sabbath a delight, my thoughts in this day will be pure, my words gracious,
mine actions holy: That soul which cannot joyfully familiarize it self with
thee in this life, may well be fearful to be seen of thee in that to come.

When I seriously consider what a rich favor I enjoy, how great a distance I
am at from thee my God, how sweet a mercy thou affordest me to speak unto thee,
I cannot but confess mine own unworthiness, if I regard not what I hear, if I
rejoice not to recall thy blessed words to my remembrance.

How dreadful was that voice that spoke in thunder! and how severe the words
that then were spoken! how blessed is this still music of the Gospel! and how
delightful to my wounded spirit! Lord, let this raise my soul above the reach
of earthly vanities, let this encourage me to heavenly chearfullnesse in
heavenly duties, to be joyful in reading, fervent in prayer, frequent in
meditation, constant in all: That knowledge will make woefully wise, which
teaches me to know, and not to do thy will: Meditation is the life of Hearing,
Practice the life of Meditation, and a sincere heart the life of Practice.

When I look into my life past, I find it to be all sin; when I consider of my
life present, I cannot but confess it to be all shame; I am still so far from
growing better, that I am become much worse; this is that blessed day which
concerns my peace, if I embrace not this happy opportunity, I may justly fear
these gracious offers will be hid for ever from mine eyes: each word that I
heard thy day is of weight; if I become not more holy by my heavenly
improvements by it, I shall certainly become sinful by my careless neglecting
of it. Thy work, O Lord, will have its end, and this end (either to my
happiness or ruin) shall assuredly promote thy glory; there is no vacuity in
nature, with thee, the God of nature, there can be none.

Think therefore, O my soul, that this days instruction may be thy last (as
thou hopest) for heaven, let it not pass thee without some profit: Consider
seriously how many millions of worlds one lost soul would give to be restored
to thy condition; that to morrow thou may be as one of them, and then judge
how great will be thy folly, how woeful thy misery; if thou triflest with those
sacred counsels which concern thy rest.

O thou God of infinite compassions, look not upon those infinite failings of
my sinful nature, but behold me in the beauty and perfection of thy blessed
Son.

Teach me, O Lord, to see the rebellion of mine own wicked heart, by his
perfect obedience, my sinfulness by his righteousness, my misery by his
mercy.

Forgive my many and sinful compliances of nature, which have made me a
stranger to thy graces, and mine own happiness.

The great neglect of mine obedience unto thy commands, has justly called for
the great and heavy load of mine afflictions; the careless withdrawing of mine
affections from thee my God, has occasioned the sad departings of thy holy
Spirit from me.

O that my loss of tears might now prevail with thee, to repair the loss of
thy presence in my sinful soul: Lord let the greatness of my folly in
sinning, extol the richness of thy mercy in forgiving.

Restore me to the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit,
so shall I have the comfort, and thou the praise of my deliverance.

If thou, Lord, wilt give me understanding to delight in thy Law, I shall also
have a sweet assurance, that thou will delight in me to do me good.

Accept of my desires, strengthen my endeavors, perfect my performances,
pardon my weakness, assist my willingness, forgive my sinfulness, nourish
the good motions of thy holy Spirit in me, and for thy mercies sake remove all
dangers and temptations from me; that when the short and wretched race of my
imperfect holiness is ended here, I may solemnize that eternal Sabbath with
thy blessed Saints and Angels in thy Kingdom, and rest with thee in the
perfection of true happiness for ever. Amen.

CHAP. 7. Upon the want of due Preparation for receiving of the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Lord,

WHen I look upon the inestimable value of that gift which I am this day to
receive, when I consider of the Majesty of thee the Giver, of the misery of me
the Receiver, of the vast difference between corruption and eternity, of thy
strict commands for preparation to the Passcover under thy Law, of thy blessed
precepts for due receiving of thy Sacrament under the Gospel, of thine own
example in washing thy Disciples feet, and thereby symbolizing the eternal
washing of their souls; of thy Saints practice in their solemn preparations
unto holiness, by pulling off their shoes when they approached thy presence;
of thy severe judgments against Vzza, for heedlesse touching of thine Ark;
against the Bethshemites, for curiousness in looking in; against those rash
Corinthians, whereof (for want of holy preparation) some were weak, some sick,
some fallen asleep; and lastly, of that dreadful sentence against unworthy
comers to thy Wedding Feast, pronounced by thine own mouth, I tremble at my
bold approaches to thy blessed Table, I wonder at thy goodness that I am yet
alive to say there is yet mercy with thee, that thou may be scared.

How many blessed opportunities of coming to thy Table have I sinfully
neglected! How many abused, by my sinful resort thither, by my wandering and
idle thoughts there, by my wicked and profane actions after I returned thence!

Lord, will thou still suffer me to abuse thy goodness? How long Lord, how
long shall I wander in these woeful ways of wickedness? I am weary of the
sins and miseries of this life, and willing to embrace this heavenly comfort
for my soul. I confess my self a great and grievous sinner, and yet I know
Lord, thou came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: I am
hungry, and poor, and blind, and naked, and miserable, destitute of all hope,
of all help, but from thee alone; Lord I am unworthy of thy crumbs, yet thou
admittest me to thy Table; the sinfulness of my corrupt nature has made a
woeful separation between us, but the richness of thy sufferings has for ever
made a sweet conjunction of us; all my sins are thine, all thy righteousness
is mine, thou art now my well-beloved, and I am thy chosen one, and in this
blessed Union is my sweet and safe repose for ever.

Who can enough deplore that more than woeful separation? Who can enough admire
this more than wonderful conjunction? this more than happy reconciliation?
Here is Justice undeniable, Mercy incomprehensible, Wisdom unutterable, Love
unimitable.

O let my soul now lose it self in the unknown paths of heavenly contemplation;
let me this day apprehend thee (O my Savior) fasting, praying, weeping,
groaning, sweating, bleeding, fainting, dying, for my sake, and now pleading to
my God for mercy for me: Let me now taste the sweetness of that mercy by a
lively faith, the fullness of this sweetuesse by a blessed hope, the fruition
of this fullness by eternal love.

Lord how unworthy am I of these embraces, if I bewail not, if I abhor not, if
I forsake not all the wretched failings of my sinful life past; if I rejoice
not with joy unspeakable, and glorious, to be admitted to so great a mercy; if
this inflame not mine affections with unspotted love to thee my God, with
earnest longings for thy presence of Grace in this life, of Glory in that to
come?

And now, Lord, since thou in thy rich love have freely forgiven me my pounds,
I will also most willingly and heartily forgive my brother his pence; I will
have nothing to do with malice, that had so much need of mercy: I will
unfeignedly, and freely, and fully forgive all injuries on earth; I will love
all those that hate me, and pray for all those that despightfully use me; and
all this for thy sake who have freely loved me, and laid down thy life for me,
to whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

Blessed Lord God,

Look down in mercy and compassion on me thy poor distressed suppliant, whom
thou now vouchsafest to admit unto thy heavenly Banquet; Illuminate my
blindness by the blessed light of thy most sacred Word, satisfy my hunger with
the sweet refreshings of thy gracious presence, enrich my poverty, with the
gifts and graces of thy holy Spirit; cover my nakedness with the precious robes
of thine own righteousness; swallow up the depth of my misery by the height of
thy mercy, that I may this day appear before thee with a sincere heart, and
happy soul.

Lord, strengthen and support my feeble faith, make me joyfully to trust in
thee, constantly to rely upon thee, thankfully to sacrifise my soul in praises
to thee.

Vouchsafe, dear Lord, that I may worthily approach thy blessed Table, that I
may this day be so united to thee, that all my joy and comfort may hereafter
be for ever with thee. Amen.

CHAP. 8. Containing pious Ejaculations at the time of Receiving.
Lord,

THis art that blessed Bread by which my soul is nourisht to eternal life;
thou art that fruitful Vine from which does flow those gladding comforts to my
fainting spirit.

Thou were broken for my sins, thou were bruised for my transgressions, and the
chastisement of my peace was upon thee: Lord, by thy stripes let my sinful
soul be healed.

Thou tookest into thy hand the cup of trembling, thou drankest out the very
dregs thereof, and thy precious blood was poured out like water for my sake.

Sweet Jesus sustain me by this Bread, refresh me with this Wine, recover me
with this Potion, cleanse me by this Effusion; that I may this day receive
joyfully, return thankfully, live righteously, and dye happily.

CHAP. 9. Containing a brief Meditation, and pious Thanksgiving after our
Receiving.
I Am this day joyfully delivered from the bondage of Sin and Satan, and
happily restored unto the glorious liberty of the sons of God; I have rellished
the sweetness of his heavenly promises, and received the seal of his gracious
performances; I now enjoy that blessed Peace of God which passes all our
understanding. My deliverance is wonderful, my freedom absolute, my peace
unalterable, my joy unutterable: My conscience is now quieted, my spirit
ravished, mine enemies vanquished, and my God welpleased.

To thee therefore, O thou blessed Fountain of eternal sweetness, do I address
my joyful soul, to love and honor thee to my lives end. Lord Jesus accept of
me, and so powerfully and graciously assist me, that I may savingly behold thee
in thy blessed promises, that I may happily enjoy thee in thy holy Ordinances;
that I may clearly see, and joyfully confess what great things thou have done
for my poor soul; that I may be daily ravished with apprehension of thine
exceeding love, and hourly husied with recounting thy endless praise.

Lord make me to forsake the sins and miseries of this life; make me more
watchful over my corrupt heart, more zealous of thy glory and thy childrens
good; that I may never willingly offend thee, but wholly sacrifise the short
remainder of my days unto thee; that so my heart and my flesh may triumphantly
rejoice in thee the living God.

Mortify my corruptions, support my weakness, accept my willingness: Let this
my humiliation before thee be a pleasing sacrifice unto thee, for his alone
sake whose precious life thy rich mercy has sacrifised to thy Justice for me.
Lord hear me, and have mercy on me for his alone sake whom thou have freely
given unto me, that I may truly love thee, devoutly serve thee, earnestly
embrace thee, eternally enjoy thee. Amen.

CHAP. 10. Upon a Journey undertaken, and the many dangers incident thereunto.
I Am now going from mine own home, and know not whether I shall ever return;
God I know has set a p^riod to my days, beyond which I cannot pass, but when,
or where, or how my life shall end, I am uncertain. Many are the dangers that
attend this sinful life, and many more my sins that have deserved them, I can
neither number the one, nor foresee the other; this is the wretched, and the
sad condition of my body, and (without unfeigned sorrow for my sins) the much
more woeful case of my distressed soul.

Lord, there is nothing so sweet as thy love, nothing so safe as thy
protection, and yet I have carelessy neglected the one, and thou may now
justly deny me the other; thou have woed me to mercy, and I have refused to
come; thou have graciously invited me by thy continual preservations, by thy
fatherly sustentations, by thy gentle corrections, by thy faithful promises,
and thy rich performances.

Blessed Lord, how wonderful are thy compassions toward me, when I am
unthankful for thy many favors, when I am unmindfull of mine own miseries,
even then thou graciously providest for me, and yet for all this I have not
hitherto resolved seriously to come unto thee.

Such, and so many are my sins, so great is my unthankfulness, that I now
tremble to appear before thee; and yet so tender is thy mercy to me, that thou
again allurest me to comfort and contentment. Lord, into the blessed bosom of
thy love I cast my self for safety and protection; and in the midst of danger,
even in death it self will joyfuliy rely upon thee.

For thou, O Lord, art my strong rock and fortress, unto which I will always
resort: Lord keep me as the apple of thine eye, hide me under the shadow of
thy wings.

Strengthen my weak faith against the strong assaults of Satan; support and
comfort me in all the fears and terrors of mine own accusing conscience;
protect and keep me in this present journey; let thy holy Angels be my blessed
Guardians, to protect me in life, to preserve me in death, to assist me after
death.

O let me never grieve those blessed Spirits (which though invisibly, yet most
assuredly are my attendants) Lord, as thou have given them readyness and
cheerfulness of mind to watch my preservation, and further my salvation, so
give me carefulness and constancy of soul to joy them in my life and
conversation.

And seeing, Lord, I cannot know my hour of dissolution, O teach me so to
number my days, that I may apply my heart unto heavenly wisdom; that I may
obtain a sweet assurance of thy love in Christ; unfeigned sorrow for my sins, a
sincere and constant heart to thy service, and a cheerful readiness at thy
call. Amen.

CHAP. 11. Containing pious Meditations, and zealous Ejaculations after a
Journey.
I Am now by Gods gracious providence returned safe unto mine earthly home, but
am still traveling to my heavenly: There is nothing in this life but labor
and sorrow, nothing in that but rest and happiness, and yet I dote upon the
one, and neglect the other. Lord, if my treasure were with thee, my heart would
be there also: When thou give me more knowledge of thee, I shall have more
desire to come unto thee; When my sins have made me more sensible of mine own
misery, thy Grace (I trust) will make me more capable of thy sweet mercy.

Lord, if this vain unquietness be so refreshing to my mortal body, how truly
blessed will thy heavenly rest be to mine immortal soul? When thou, Lord, wilt
wipe away all tears from mine eyes, all akings from my heart; when there shall
be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain; when soul and
body shall triumphantly and joyfully repose themselves in thee for ever: when
they shall drink freely of the rivers of thy pleasures, and be for ever
satisfied with the fatness of thy house.

I confess my self unworthy to enjoy this outward rest in this mine earthy
home, much more unworthy to enjoy that inward rest, that sweet assurance of a
lively hope, to be partaker of eternal rest. How wretched is my body without
this outward quietness? How much more wre ched is my soul without thee? Thou, O
Lord, art my shield to defend me, my staff to uphold me, my food to sustain me,
my wine to glad me, my beloved to embrace me, my pleasure to delight me, my joy
to ravish me, my sweet and sat repose for ever to refresh me.

Let this teach me (Lord) to fix my thoughts on heaven and heavenly things; to
use this world soberly in thee and to thee; to view it (truly as it is) a
barren wilderness, a transitory, vain, and empty thing; far inconsistent with
my real happiness; to desire nothing, to enjoy nothing in the creature, but
only in, and unto thee the great Creator; so shall no vain pleasure bewitch
me, no unjust profit beguil me; no sudden sorrow dismay me, no terrors of
conscience affright me.

To thee, O thou sovereign of my soul, do I devote the remnant of my sinful
days, to love thee, to praise thee, to honor thee, to rest in thee for ever.

Lord wean me from the sins and miseries of this life, and raise my thoughts to
immortality: Let the sweetness of thy heavenly joys relieve the harshness of
my worldly sorrows, that misery may be swallowed up of mercy and frailty of
eternity.

Unite me in a blessed union with thee, that I may constantly adhere unto thee,
and be for ever graciously accepted of thee: O give me a sweet complacency of
soul in thy service, and a willing and a dutiful obedience unto thy commands.

Lord give me a thankful heart for all thy mercies to me, for thy continual
preservation, for thy blessed supportation, for the enjoyment of thy needful
comforts in this life, and for the glorious hopes of those in that to come.

Blessed God, so sublimate my sinful soul, that I may see the richness of thy
love in Christ, that I may soberly enjoy thy blessings here, and faithfully
exspect thy joys hereafter.

Lord, all that I have without thee is mere emptiness, and nothing, mere
vanity, and worse than nothing; my glory, shame; mine honor, ignominy; my
health, ruin; my riches, poverty; my gain, loss; my pleasure, pain; my
laughter, madness.

Thou, O Lord, art all in all unto me, O grant that nothing may withdraw my
service from thee; that no enticing pleasure may allure me, that no distracting
care, or sinful sorrow may disturb me, but that my soul may now and ever
safely and contentedly rely upon thee.

Lord, thou see all my desires, and my continual groanings are not hid from
thee: Thou alone know how weary I am of the sinful travailes of this life,
how earnestly I long to be at rest with thee; Lord pardon all my sins, and put
an end to all my miseries: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, wipe away all tears
from mine eyes, and bring me to that rest of thine which never shall have end.
Amen.

CHAP. 12. Upon the great danger of Security.
DEceive not thy self, O my Soul, it is not so easy a matter to inherit Heaven,
as thou imaginest; there will be much fighting, sweating, bleeding, much
compunction of soul, subjection of body, hard pressing toward the mark, for
the price of the high calling in Christ Jesus, before this happy conquest can
be gained.

Cons^der therefore in what condition thou now stand, what ground thou have
gained of thy corrupt nature, how much better thou art this day than the day
past, than the year past, than thy whole life past; nay rather how much worse,
by adding sin unto sin, by drinking in iniquity like water, by treasuring up
wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of thy righteous judgment.

Philosophy will tell thee, that in all natural motions, the nearer they are
to ending, the more violent their motion is; Divinity will tell thee, that in
old age thou will be fat, and well liking: what increase of love have thou to
Gods Law? what growth of hatred against sin? what bosome-sin have thou parted
with? what gracious improvement have thou made in Knowledge, Faith, Repentance,
Love, and all those other gifts and graces which concur to thy perfection?

Holy Saint Anselm was often heard to say, If I could from hence behold the
pains of hell, from thence the horror of sin, I would rather embrace those
pains, than this horror: O what growth of grace was here! how far am I from
this degree of holiness! how easily persuaded to delude my self with shows and
shadows of perfection. There is no attaining unto happiness without holy
violence, without beating down my body, without cherishing my soul; if I
conquer not here, I cannot triumph hereafter.

Lord, when I look into the strictness of the lives of thy Saints, I much
lament the folly of mine own; I see holy David in sackcloth and ashes,
consuming whole days and nights in mourning for s^n, washing his bed with his
tears, afflicted in body, tormented in soul, grieving, crying, roaring, for
unquietness of heart. Blessed Paul subduing his body, by fasting, watching,
praying, toyling in the Ministry. and thou, my blessed Savior, in continual
labor and sorrow for my sake: how vain is my trust, how false my hope, how
great my error, to believe I run, when I stand still? to expect a triumph
without a victory, a victory without a combat. Lord, if many that strive to
enter in at the strait gate, yet shall not be able: what shall become of me?
who am so far from coming to thee, that I every day am running from thee; who
am not only opposite unto thee, but even enmity it self against thee.

Sometimes I feel the stings and gripings of a wounded conscience, I know my
self to be a grievous sinner, but I quiet my disturbances by thee my Savior, I
willingly accept of mercy from thee, but grudgingly repine at service to thee;
thou biddest me indeed to drink freely of the waters of life, but thou
command me also to make my calling and election sure, to work out my
salvation with fear and trembling; thou ordainest not the end without the
means; if I rebelliously neglect the one, thou may^st most righteously deny me
the other: Lord, what can it profit me to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, when I deprive my soul of happiness for ever?

O let this teach me to deplore my dangerous condition, to go on cheerfully in
the ways of godliness, to think no cost too much, no pains too great, no
grief too good, to purchase Heaven; to consider seriously, that time once past
can never be recalled, that this hour may be my last, and bring me to eternity
of torments; where the stream is stillest, there the channel is deepest; where
there is least distrust, there is usually most danger: Satan therefore disturbs
me not, because I sleep in death: But when thou, Lord, shall open mine eyes to
see the subtilty of this Deceiver, I shall then find, that the waters (of sin)
are gone over my soul, that I am woefully drowned in the great depth of
security, and can expect nothing (without mercy) but Satan's cruelty, and mine
own endless misery.

To that sweet mercy therefore I appeal, with earnestness of soul, and
humbleness of heart, bemoaning my sins, bewailing my transgressions.

O Lord my God, when I consider of thy gracious goodness, and mine own
vileness, I am utterly ashamed to appear in thy presence.

Thou have often called me to repentance, but I have not hearkened unto thee;
thou have lovingly invited me to mercy, but I have wilfully refused; thou have
clothed me with thine own garment, and I have shamefully defiled it; thou have
enriched me with thy grace, and I have robbed thee of thine honor: All this,
and infinitely more than this, thou have freely done for me, the worst of
sinners, and yet for all this I have rebelliously forsaken thee, and most
ungratiously been most unmindfull of thee.

And now, Lord, seeing that I am dead and putrified in sins, and rotten in
corruptions, what else can I expect from thee, but to be buried out of thy
sight? and yet thou still say unto me, live.

O thou blessed Fountain of eternal good, convey those happy streams of
comfort to my sinful soul, that may revive me from the grave of misery: open
mine eyes, that I may see thee in thy long patience, in thy great goodness, in
thy rich mercies, in thy fatherly affections toward me.

I am woefully sunk into the deep mire of sin, where no stay is; Lord uphold me
by thy grace, that I perish not eternally; O deliver me for thy mercy sake, for
I am helpless and poor, and my heart is wounded within me.

Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee, and thy judgments shall help me.

As thou have raised me by thy power, so rule me by thy providence, that thy
grace may be far sweeter with my sufferings, than my pleasure with my sins.

Restrain my loose desires, renew my good purposes, assist my weak endeavors,
correct mine errors, sustain my infirmities; give me a godly sorrow for my
sins, a thankful heart for thy favors, a filial fear of thy judgments, a
sincere love to thy laws, an holy constancy, and happy perseverance, to my
lives end. Amen.

CHAP. 13. Upon the great danger of Presumption.
Alas, my Soul, how vain art thou, how wretched, to presume upon the mercy of
thy God? how can thou be so foolish to believe, that God will favor thee in
that, which he so severely punished in his own Son? think thou that precious
blood was spilt to cherish sin? Be not mistaken, for as Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners, so he came also to call sinners to repentance.
Do thou argue well to say, because God is merciful, long-suffering, and of
great goodness, therefore I will abuse his mercy in sinning, his patience by
my long continuing in sin, his great goodness by my great unthankfulness? is
not this to mock his mercy, to bid defiance to his justice, to arm him with
fury, to invite him to revenge? Assure thy self, the longer he is in drawing
his Bow, the more forcible will he send his Arrow.

Deceive not thy self therefore, God will not be so merciful to thee, as to be
unjust to himself; All the ways of God are Mercy and Truth; Mercy to support
thy weakness, Truth to correct thy wilfulness: There is therefore Mercy with
him, that he may be feared, not that he may be slighted, not that he may be
shamefully dishonored. How full of falsehood is thy bold presumption? thou
criest Peace, Peace, when sudden War is ready to destroy thee; There is no
peace to the wicked, says my God; Heaven and Earth are up in Arms against
thee, and there is none left, not so much as thine own Conscience to deliver
thee.

Thou have graciously received the knowledge of the truth, thou have grievously
sinned against the light of that knowledge, thou have woefully continu^d in thy
sins, without remorse of conscience, without desire of repentance, and there
now remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a searfull looking for of
judgment, and violent fire, that shall devour the Adversaries.

O remember, that the Angels, for one sin, were thrown down from Heaven, and
that Adam, for one sin, was cast out of Paradise: Thy sins (O my Soul) are
innumerable, thou have had line upon line, and precept upon precept, and yet
thou addest sin upon sin, and transgression upon transgression: Thou have
sinned against many precious promises, against many gracious performances,
against many fearful judgments; thou have grieved that good Spirit, by which
the Saints are sealed up unto the day of redemption: All these are heavy
aggravations upon thee, to fill up the measure of thy sins, and hasten the
swiftness of thy punishments.

Ah how sad is thy condition! thou have not only wearied out thy self in
wickedness, but thy God also: hear what he faith unto thee, how he
complains of thee, by his holy Prophet, Behold, I am pressed under you, as a
cart is laden with sheaves, Amos 2.13. and yet thou still addest more load: but
as thou addest sin upon sin, so thou call for wrath upon wrath; as thou have
made a mock at sin, so God will make a mock at misery; as thou have thy measure
in sinning, so God will have his measure in punishing: Consider what he says
unto thee by his Prophet, Judgment will I lay to the rule, and Righteousness
to the balance, Esaias 28.17, 18. As he has a bottle for thy tears, so he has
a bag for thy transgressions, Job 14.17. their growth is recorded, their number
accounted, their nature examined, all sealed up against the great and fearful
day of the revelation of the righteous judgment.

O consider this thou that forgettest God, lest he tear thee in pieces, and
there be none to deliver thee: Think how suddenly thou may be snatched away by
those infernal Fiends, to endless torments, and then what tears will be
enough to weep thine obsequies, to quench those everlasting burnings? But then,
alas, instead of tears of compassion, thou shall have mocks of derision, the
cursed Devils will laugh thee to scorn, the blessed Saints and Angels will
rejoice at thy confusion, and God himself, who only can relieve thee, will for
ever hide his tender mercy from thee.

Awake therefore out of thy sleep of death, look well into thy lost estate,
thou art now near unto making up the measure of thy sins, beyond which thou
can not pass: Thy God has said to thee, as to the Sea, hitherto malt thou
go, and here shall thou stay thy proud waves: Think how suddenly thou may
be called to thy last account, even this very hour, (for ought thou know)
those cursed Spirits may convey thee to thy fiery Prison: O think how
powerfully the wrath of God will then seize upon thee; how woefully thou will
excrutiate thy self, with apprehension of thy former folly; and last of all,
how wretchedly thou art forever banished from eternal joys, to suffer with the
damned in eternal torments: Let this move thee to amend thy wicked ways, to
cry mightily to God for mercy, to judge thy self, to condemn thy self, that
thou may not be judged of the Lord; to Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and so
thou perish from the right way: If his wrath be kindled, yea but a little,
blessed are all they that put their trust in him. Turn (therefore) unto the
Lord thy God (O my soul) for he is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and
of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.

Blessed Lord,

As an unfeigned sign of my repentance, in anguish of heart, and bitterness of
soul, I earnestly desire to search into the secreets of my sinful thoughts, to
unbosom all my sins, and lay them open to the view of all thy Saints, that thou
may have the glory, they the good, and I the shame of my confession; that so
this penitent sense of mine iniquities (which I thankfully acknowledge comes
alone from thee) may be an evidence unto me, that thou will also give me pardon
for them.

Lord, I willingly confess my self to be a great and grievous sinner, mine
original defiled, my birth polluted, mine infancy stained, my youth ensnared,
my manhood corrupted, mine age besotted.

Mine imaginations vain, my thoughts sinful, my words wicked, mine actions
abominable, my whole life a very sink of sin and all uncleanness.

When thy hand has been heavy upon me, I have then promised thee amendment;
when thy rode has been taken off from me, I have again returned to mine evil
courses; this plainly shows, that I have hitherto sought but any self in
thee, and may therefore justly fear to be forsaken of thee.

I have been undutiful to thee my God, envious and uncharitable to my
neighbor, hypocritical to the world, deceitful to mine own soul.

My thoughts have been wanton, my desires lascivious, my actions unclean.

I have been blind to thy precepts, deaf to thy promises, dumb in thy praises,
lame in thy services, sick at thine ordinances, dead to thy embraces.

I have broken all my promises, I have slighted all thy threatenings, I have
abused all thy mercies, I have rejected all thy favors, I have delayed my
repentance, I have resisted the checks of mine own conscience, I have quenched
the motions of thy blessed Spirit, and turned thy grace into wantonness; and
yet as if all this had been too little to condemn me, I have most daringly
presumed on thy mercy, and most ungracionsly resolved to go on in my
impieties.

Lord, thou have peomised to forgive those that repent, to ease those that are
heavy laden, to raise up those that are fallen, to satisfy those that are
hungry, and to bind up those that are brokenhearted.

O Lord my God, I earnestly desire to repent, I am laden with a burden
insupportable, I am feeble and sore smitten with the terrors of thy Law, my
flesh trembles, and my heart faints; I am fallen into the very mouth of
hell, I am sorely wounded with the remorse of mine own accusing conscience, and
hungry for the sweet refreshings of thy saving grace.

Thou, O Lord, have made me sensible of this my great misery, and thou alone
can make me capable of thy rich mercy; unto that mercy therefore I appeal,
with sighs in my soul, and sorrow in my heart.

O thou which art the blessed fountain of all goodness, which desire not the
death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent and live, have mercy upon
me.

O thou which art the Savior of the world, which came to seek, and to save
those which were lost, have mercy upon me.

O holy, and for ever blessed Spirit, thou which feedest and refreshest the
distressed souls of thine Elect, have mercy on me.

Let thy power (O blessed Father) support my weakness; thy wisdom (O blessed
Son) supply my folly; thy love (O blessed Spirit) restrain my wilfulness; that
as thou art eternally one, so I may for ever be at unity with thee, although
most woefully divided in my self.

Lord, as thou have given me a heart to pray unto thee, so give me also a soul
to praise thee, and a serius resolution to perform those promises I make unto
thee.

Lord sweeten all my sorrows by thy blessed sufferings, enlarge my heart with
thankfulness for thy many favors, strengthen my weak faith, restrain my
rebellious nature, increase daily in me the gifts and graces of thy blessed
Spirit; indue me with a perfect hatred against all sin; and grant, dear God,
that daring and presumptuous sins may never have dominion over me. Amen.

CHAP. 14. Upon Quenching the motions of Gods holy Spirit.
COnsider, O my soul, from whence these happy thoughts arise, and wherefore, if
they were from nature, they must needs savor of corruption, but now they are
from Grace, they summon thee to goodness, they beckon thee to immortality: Thy
God now calls thee to repentance; he offers thee his gracious pardon for thy
sin; his love, his protection, his peace, his grace, his glory: He now woeth
thee to favor, and thou (a woeful wretch) convicted by thine own accusing
conscience, condemned by divine Justice, rebelliously rejectest all these
gracious offers: Ah, what woeful folly is this! nay rather what wilful
madness! As there is a time of calling, so there will be a time of rejecting;
the blessed wind of Gods holy Spirit blows but where it lists; when it is
once gone, thou know not whether it shall ever return: God will have mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. Ah woe be
unto that soul whose time of calling is once past, a thousand worlds cannot
redeem its loss. If thou will not now embrace these comfortable breathings of
his tender love, thou shall then endure the bitter storms of his incensed wrath.

If thou will not embrace his Mercy, thou shall exalt his Justice: I called
unto you (says God) and ye refused to come, I held out my hand and ye would
not look toward me; therefore will I forsake you in your extremity, when your
fear comes as desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind, when distress
and anguish comes upon you; then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. Prove. 1.24, 27,
28.

Gods clemency and patience in this life will assuredly exasperate his fury,
and revenge, in that to come; as his Mercy is unutterable, so his Justice is
intolerable, both are his divine being, and therefore both must needs be
infinite; both are to manifest his glory, and therefore both must be eternal.

From hence is that expression of Saint Vaul, It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10. From hence it is that wicked men are
left unto their own swing in this life, that they may be paid home with Gods
wrath in that to come.

Let this teach thee, O my soul, to welcome these endeared motions of the
gladding Spirit, to thirst for them, to rejoice in them, to think no thought
too dear to be disloged for them.

Blessed Lord, I hear thee calling thy holy Apostle Saint Peter, and I see him
readily forsaking all to follow thee; how often have thou called me, a sinful
wretch, by the sweet motions of thy blessed Spirit; and I have hitherto refused
to forsake the very least of all my sins, for thy sake, who willingly
forsookest all the pleasures of this life for mine? Long have thou waited my
repentance, but I have yet hated to be reformed. Mercy has been offered, and I
have not esteemed it, Judgment has been threatened, and I have not regarded
it; thou have not only whispered unto me by thy gracious visits of thy blessed
Spirit, but thou have even called me aloud, by thy divine hand of wholesome
chastisement; By loss of friends, by loss of means, by loss of health, by loss
of liberty, and (without thy rich mercy) by the great danger of that greater
loss of thy Gospel, and thereby of thy gracious presence in this life, and
thine eternal joys in that to come. All this my sins have justly brought upon
me, and yet for all this, my wretched heart desires to be a stranger to thee.

Lord, who am I that thou so graciously invitest unto mercy? Lord, what am I
that now presume to speak unto thee? I am so deformed, and contemptible, that
mine own knowledge comes far short of mine own misery. O how justly might
thou for ever leave me to my self, to eat the fruit of mine own ways, and to
be filled with the falsehood of mine own devices, to possess sorrow, and inherit
shame? But thou, O Lord, who art infinite in goodness, have manifested to my
sinful soul, that when I wretchedly forsake thee, thou readily forsakest all
to follow me; when I run from thee, thou bewailest me; when misery compels me
to return, thou joyfully receivest me, thou lovingly relievest me, thou then
graciously acceptest of me; And now, O Lord, when I have even wearied out thy
mercy and compassion toward me, thou still invitest me to come unto thee.

To thee therefore, O thou blessed Shepherd of my soul, do I devote these
penitent expressions: O let those tributary tears which are due to thy
sufferings, be now plentifully poured forth for mine own sins. Lord pardon my
contempt of grace, and graciously enable me to entertain these happy visits of
thy holy Spirit, and patiently to bear these sweet chastisements of thy
heavenly hand, that I may have fellowship with Christ, and peace with God.

If thou Lord for the sins of my prosperity, shall think it fit to bring upon
me the miseries of adversity, for the great neglect of thy gracious visits, to
deny me the sweet comforts of thy blessed answers, yet give me patience, and
sure confidence to trust still in thy mercy, that so while I am most justly
debarred of my longing desires, I may not be utterly deprived of thy loving
favors.

Lord cast me not away from thy presence, O leave me not unto my self, lest I
perish everlastingly; make me to see the richness of thy love and favor
toward me: Quicken the motions of thy blessed Spirit in me, renew my good
thoughts, and six them wholly upon heaven and heavenly things; Lord Jesus make
me joyful in them, and for ever truly thankful for them.

Make me willing to enjoy thee, and ready to abandon all things for thee: Lord
I now seek thee but I cannot find thee, I call upon thee but thou answerest me
not: O kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, for thy love is better than wine.

Lord let thy left hand support me, and thy right hand embrace me, let me be
outwardly, and inwardly, sustained by thee; my weaknss by thy power, my
rebellion by thine obedience, my folly by thy wisdom, my pollution by thy
sanctification, my faith by thy fruition; that I may be grieved for thine
absence, delighted in thy presence, inamored with thy beanty, enriched with thy
bounty, inflamed with thy love, adorned with thy graces, comforted with thy
consolation, incompast with thy glory. Amen.

CHAP. 15. Upon the consideration of Gods peculiar Providence to his Children.
Lord,

NOthing can befall me in this life, without thy wife, and overruling
providence; not so much as one hair of me can fail without thy allowance; for
even my very hairs are numbered; as a Sparrow cannot fall to the ground, so
neither a hair from mine head without thy sacred leave: And if thy blessed
Providence protecteth these inferior creatures, if it extend it self even unto
excrements, how much more safely do thou guard the bodies, how much more
tenderly the souls of thine Elect? Yet such is my stupidity by nature, that I
seldom look beyond the seond causes; I usually content my self with casuals and
contingencies, and often judge that merely accidental, which sweetly moves by
thy commands, to thine appointment and thy childrens good.

Thy Providence is eternal, thy provision in time; thou, O Lord, art
infinitely wise, and caust therefore provide infinitely well, the end thou
ordainest to thy self, the means to thy creature; good and bad are under thy
protection; the good for themselves, the bad for others; both for thy glory;
the one thou willest to be happy, the other thou permittest to be miserable;
neither of them can avoid their necessity of fate, and yet thou neither
inclinest the one, nor inforcest the other, because unto both in their
original thou gave perfect freedom of will, to choose the good, to leave the
bad; to inherit life, or purchase death.

Blessed God, we are all debtors in our first Parents, thou may therefore
most justly require that of us, which was lent us in them: They were able to
pay, but not willing; we, their woeful posterity (as we are in nature) are
neither able, nor willing; But by thy grace, Lord, we are only willing, and
not able; and thou have therefore sent thine only Son, who was both freely
willing, and fully able, to appease thy Justice, to reconcile thy Mercy, to
comfort us here, to crown us hereafter.

And now, Lord, having given us thy Son, how shall thou not, together with him
also, give us all things? and yet I often see thee giving of good things to
the bad, and bad to the good: there is nothing more fiequent in this life than
the afflictions of thy children, nothing more common than the prosperity of the
wicked, they receive their good things in this life, I shall enjoy mine in that
to come, when I shall be comforted, and they tormented. Thou, O Lord, art
righteous in all they ways, and holy in all thy works; thou loadest them with
thine outward blessings, for their outward obedience; thou deniest me these
outward favors, for mine inward advantage; by the one they are left
inexcusable; by the other I am made more conformable; my patience exercised, my
faith tried, my love examined, my humility proved; all these are special
tokens of thy mercy toward me; for as grace increases here, so shall glory
hereafter.

Lord, what can he fear that is assured of thy favor? that knows assuredly,
that all these outward things shall work together for the best, to his
advantage? If Joseph be thrown into the Pit, it is to send him into Egypt; if
into Prison, to preser him to Pharaoh, that so Corn may be sent into Canaan; if
Satan be sent to tempt Job with afflictions, it is because Job shall overcome
Satan by patience; if holy David become a sad spectacle of humane frailty by
sinning, it is to make him a pattern of true piety in repenting; if the bodies
of the Saints be grievously martyred in this life, it is to array them with
glorious robes in that to come.

Lord, let this teach me joyfully to entertain the saddest of events, which
either thy wisdom, man's unrighteousness, or Satan's cruelty, can bring upon me;
to be patient under them, and thankful for them; to ransake my soul, and
search diligently there, for what sin thou sendest this sorrow, to bewail it,
abhor it, forsake it, and earnestly implore thy pardon for it: When I am thus
happily resolved, I shall then have that undaunted boldness, to say with holy
Job, Allthough thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee; with holy David,
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear none
evil, for thou Lord art with me; and with thy blessed Apostle, that I know
assuredly, that the sufferings of this life shall work for me a far greater and
more exceeding weight of glory, in that to come.

To thee therefore, O thou blessed Guardian of my sinful soul, and wretched
body, do I address my self for safety and protection.

I confess, O Lord, there is no one minute of my whole life can be safe
without thy gracious providence, and yet so wretched have I been, that few or
none of them have been devoted to thy service.

Lord, I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of all thy truth
thou have afforded me; even the very best of all my actions has justly merited
the very worst of all thy punishments, and yet thou daily loadest me with thy
blessings, allthough I hourly sin against thee, by my great transgressions.

Forgive me my unmindfulnesse of these thy mercies, my great unthankfulness
for all thy favors, and fix my sinful soul more willingly, more joyfully,
more fervently, more constantly, on thy service.

Teach me to keep a catalogue of thy mercies, to let none pass without a
thankful and devout acknowledgement; to set some days apart from the year,
some hours from each day, to praise thee for them.

Forgive the pride of my prosperity, my carelessness of thee, my coldness unto
thine, my crossenesse unto others, my cruelty to my self.

Lord pardon my repinings in adversity, my distaste of thy power, my distrust of
thy providence, my denial of thy wisdom, my refusal of thy love, my contempt
of thy favor, my neglect of thy grace, my despair of thy goodness.

O give me such a blessed frame of heart, that I may cheerfully and joyfully
content my self, to walk in whatsoever paths thy blessed providence shall lead
me to: O hold thou up my goings in those paths, that my feet slip not; teach me
to make a gracious and a sweet improvement of these outward crosses, a blessed
and a wise advantage of thine inward graces: Lord lead me by thy counsel here,
and afterward receive me to thy glory. Amen.

CHAP. 16. Upon sinful Anger, and the great disturbance thereof.
Lord,

WHen I consider of thy patience, and long-suffering toward me, a miserable
sinner, of the lowliness of thy Saints, and of the great humility and
meekness of my Savior in his sufferings, I much deplore the woeful weakness
of mine own infirmities, and more admire the richness of thy goodness, in
admitting me to speak unto thee.

What pleasure, Lord, can thou take in that service which is all sin? how
can thou delight in that which thou abhorrest? thou art a God of pure eyes,
and can not behold iniquity; if all my righteousness be in thy sight as
filthy rags, and menstiuous clothes, how full of ugliness and deformity will
my sins then appear before thee?

Ah Lord, thou have often se^n how easily, how suddenly, how wretchedly, I have
been swallowed up of sinful passion; how I have violated that invaluable peace
which thou have given me, by revengefull thoughts, by despightfull words, by
disturbing actions: I know nothing in my corrupt nature, but to know my self
miserable; I see nothing in this misery, but terror and confusion, affliction
to my body, destruction to my soul; all occurrences of this life should have
rather added to my growth of grace, than disturbance of nature: I have hitherto
been grossly mistaken, in calling that a defect of my body, which is in truth
an error in my soul: Nature was at first created pure, no disobedience was then
in the passions, Man has marred it by his Fall: all the Streams that are now
troubled flow from this Fountain; this barren excuse therefore is so far from
lessening sin, that it makes it bigger. I am now so much the more stained by
committing actual sin, as I should have been more holy, and am not, since
original.

Lord, let this teach me to deal truly with my soul, to uncloath my self of all
sinful excuses, that so sin may appear truly what it is, and may become out of
measure sinful; that mine Anger may be holy, my application of it happy, that
nothing may disturb me but sin; that I may be a Lion in thy cause, a Lamb in
mine own; that when I hate the sin, I may love the person; when I rebuke the
offense, I may pray heartily for the offender; so shall I zealously enjoy thee
my God, religiously embrace my neighbor, patiently possess mine own soul.

And now, Lord, as thou have given me an heart to confess my sins of impatience
before thee, so give me a sweet assurance in my Savior, that by him I have
assured pardon for them.

If thou Lord for my sinful Anger shall inflict upon me thy severe wrath; and
for my long continuing in my sins, the long duration of thy punishments; yet
let not thy severitie exceed the measure of my Christian charity; though thou
continuest my miseries, yet withdraw not thy mercies. O make me more and more
humble unto thee my God, and more and more meek amongst thy children; conform
me to that blessed pattern of true piety and patience; that as a sheep in thy
hands (my blessed Shearer) so I may be dumb, and not open my mouth against
thee.

Lord banish from me all desires of revenge; let Patience have its perfect
work, to quiet me here, and crown me hereafter,

I confess my self to be a great and grievous sinner, and yet I am thy
creature; my body is thine, and my soul is thine, both were joined in thy
creation, and both are joined in my devotion; both have sinned against thee, O
let them both be humbled before thee, not to satisfy thy Justice, but to
implore thy Mercy; not to merit thy Grace, but to magnify thy Goodness.

Lord make me truly sensible of the greatness of thy misery, that I may the
more devoutly, the more sincerely, sue to thee for mercy: Forgive the many
violent erupcions of my sinful passions, give me a meek and humble spirit,
that I may happily enjoy thy presence, and mine own content. Lord grant that I
may patiently and joyfully embrace the wrongs and injuries of this life, for
thy sake, who have been patient even to death for mine.

Let that be made easy unto me by thy grace; which by nature is impossible,
that nothing may delight me but thy love, nothing grieve me but thy
displeasure, nothing offend me but thy dishonor. Amen.

CHAP. 17. Upon man's inordinate love to the Creature.
WOE is me that I am constrained to live in Meshech, and to dwell in the tents
of Cedar; woe is me that I was conceived in sin, that I was born in sin, and
that I have so long been captive to the power of sin: How vain am I, how
wretched, to beguil my self of rest and quietness? O how unworthy to defile my
Marriage vows, to prostitute my love to these unclean, and false embraces of a
s^nfull world, to dig unto my self these broken Cisterns of impure and empty
joys, and to forsake those living waters of eternal life: O woeful cateif, if
I well consider what I am; but sar more woeful, if I seriously consider what I
should be.

Lord, when I was in my blood, thou said unto me, Live; when I was cast out,
and none eye pitied me, then thou had mercy on me; when I was naked thou
clothedst me, when I was wounded thou healedst me; nay more, Lord, thou did
uncloath thy self for me, and by thy wounds I am healed; when I was loathsome in
mine own eyes, I was beautiful in thine; and when all this is not yet enough
to manifest thy wonderful compassions toward me, thou feedest me at thine own
Table, thou lodgest me in thine own bosom, thou make me partaker of thine own
inheritance.

Blessed God, what could thou have done more for me that thou have not done?
And yet for all this I forsake thee, I neglect thee, I abuse thee, I adulterate
those many vows and promises I made unto thee: And now, Lord, when I am even
ashamed to present my self before thee, when my false heart has been so great
a stranger to thy blessed bosom, that I am even afraid to kneel to thee for
mercy; thou graciously forgivest me, thou bemoanest my sin, thou hidest my
shaure, thou make love unto me, and (to the wonder of my soul) delightest
still to set thy love upon me.

Thou, O my blessed Savior, have told me, that if I were of this World, it
would love me, but now I am not of this World, that the World hates me: Lord,
what madness is this in me to love mine utter enemy? to delight in her bosom,
which hunteth for my precious life? to forlake thee, the pleasant Lilly of the
Valleys, the sweet Refreshments of Eternity, to weary out, and wound my soul
amongst the Briars of this barren Wilderness? Thou Lord, have said unto me,
Arise my Love, my Fair one, and come away; thou invitest me from the showers
and tempests of a stormy Winter, from the cares and troubles of a discontented
life, to the sweet dews of thy graces, the gentle breathings of thy Spirit, the
tender buds of thy love, the lovely blossems of thy goodness, the pleasant
fruit of thy promises, the joyful crop of thy performances: And
notwithstanding all this I still cry, yet a little more sleep, yet a little
more number, yet a little more folding of the hands together; yet a little more
sin, yet a little more shame, yet a little more sorrow.

Ah, Lord, what is there in the creature, that thus strangely bewitcheth me? or
rather, what is there not in it, that is not every minute ready to betray me,
and dispoyl me of those precious ornaments of soul which thou have given me;
the cares and crosses of this life asflict me, the pleasures besot me, the
profits disturb me, pride puffs me up, and even mine own heart deceives me;
by calling good evil, and evil good; by making that sweet in the expectation,
which is bitter in the fruition: Lord, while I have sought the creature, I have
lost my self, my body in distempers, my soul in distractions.

That precious Faith which is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence
of things not seen, whose end is the salvation of my soul, which is thy gift
who art the God of truth, is now drowned in a sea of error, and justly given up
to believe dreams and delusions, and doctrines of Devils; to trust wholly in
vanity, and to follow after lying.

That saving knowledge, by which I was formerly enlightened in thy sacred
Truths, is now blinded with the soggy mists of sin and ignorance: This, Lord,
is my great aggravation, and just condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and I have loved darkness better than light.

That glorious hope which makes not ashamed, but exspecteth an inheritance
eternal in the heavens, which fades not away, is now become a vain and empty
hope, delighted with sin, rewarded with shame.

Those blessed affections by which my happy soul was wont to walk in thy ways,
and to delight it self in thy commands, are now wearied out in ways of
wickedness; and that heart which has so often promised obedience unto thee any
thy Laws, has now forsaken thee the living God, and made a covenant with death
and hell.

Thus am I robbed and spoiled of all, and am become poor, and wretched, and
blind, and naked, and miserable; my whole head is sick, and my whole heart is
faint; I have sown in iniquity, and must reap in asfliction; I am intoxicated
with the wine of Error, that stings me like a Scrpent, and bites me like a
Cockatrice, and yet when I awake (such is the sadness of my present condition)
I say, I will seek it yet still.

Lord, he that is once out of thy path, knows not the length of his journey,
and may well fear to lose himself for ever.

And now, Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee; thou see my
weakness, and acceptest my willingness: thou that know it impossible that
the world should be overcome by me, biddest me be of good comfort, because thou
(Lord) have overcome the world for me; if I fight not against thee, though I am
often foiled, yet I am more than conqueror in thee.

O let this teach me joyfully to rely upon thee, to make thee the height of my
joy, the end of my desires, the only happy and eternal object of my sinful
soul: Lord, I heartily defire thee, I thankfully embrace thee, and do for ever
vow my soul and body to thee.

Suffer me not to wander from thy blessed presence, let me not longer dally nor
dissemble with my soul; O let me not think that I then love thee, when I love
but my self in thee; make me now at last to know those blessed things that
belong to my peace, lest they be for ever hid from mine eyes.

Lord, by thy rich mercy I can now plainly see the vanity and emptiness of all
these earthly objects, the folly and misery of those that rest in them, the
rest and quietness of those that least rely upon them; in this tranfitory
beauty of the Creature, I can now behold the ravishing perfections of the great
Creato^r.

Lord, I now exceedingly desire to know thee, that I may for ever love thee,
that I may be sick of love till I enjoy thee, that I may joyfully rest in thee,
and be eternally united to thee.

For thou, Lord, art infinitely sweeter than the sweetness of thy Creatwes;
they are all but emptiness and vanity, but in thy presence is the fullness of
joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

O thou blessed Fountain of eternal goodness, forgive me mine offenses, cover
my sins, and fix my soul upon the sweetness of thy heavenly joys; give me
constancy and steadiness of heart, to cleave unto thee, and for thy mercy sake
remove all vain desires that may betray me from thee.

O thou blessed Savior of my sinful soul, by whose persect obedience all my
disobedience is forgiven me; who have given thy self for me, and to me; give me
also unfeigned repentance, that I may heartily bewail the sinfulness of my
life past, that I may make a gracious improvement of my life present, and
faithfully perform the vows and promises which I make unto thee, for the short
remainder of my life to come.

O blessed and eternal Comforter of all those sinful souls that put their
trust in thee, give me a sweet and full assurance of thy love in Christ;
withdraw my wretched heart from vanity, inflame it with an earnest and
affectionate desire to thee; open mine eyes, that I may see some glimps of thy
celestial joys prepared for me; make me often to think of them, earnestly to
long for them, and readily and cheerfully to part with all these earthly
pleasures to enjoy them.

Lord make me able to encounter and withstand the strong assaults of Satan, and
this evil world; give me thy saving grace, and take from me what thou will;
without thy blessed presence, all these outward joys are weariness, and
emptiness; without thee, even life it self is bitterness unto me; without thy
love I ask it not of thee, yea I rather beg thee (Lord) to take it from me,
that so I may be joyfully released from the bondage of a sinful body, that I
may love thee with a pure and spotless soul, that all mine imperfections may
be done away, that so I may securely dwell with thee, in perfect holiness, and
endless happiness. Amen.

CHAP. 18. Upon the sin of Uncleanness, with encouragements to avoid it.
COnsider, O my Soul, in what a blessed relation thou now stand to thy God;
thou have lately grieved for thy sins, and God has also graciously accepted
of thy sorrow, and thou art now at peace and union with him; his holy Spirit is
thy Comforter, his holy Providence thy Guide, his holy Angels thy Guardians,
his holy Saints thine Assistants; the Creatures without thee are at league and
union with thee, and thy Conscience within thee is a continual feas^ unto
thee: while thus thou continuest thy safety is inviolable, thy joy unutterable,
thy peace unalterable.

Who can express the blessedness of this condition? how ravishing is this
reviving presence of the gladding Spirit, by which thou art sustained sweetly
here, by which thou shall be joyfully refresht hereafter!

Will thou now lose all this (O my Soul) for this false, this foul, this
momentany pleasure? will thou lodge this beastly sin, where thou now lodgest
thy Redeemer? Consider how vain it is, how bitter it will be; think how many
sad thoughts, how many aching hearts, how many wounding sighs, this fall of
thine will cost thee; what distempers of body, what disturbance of soul, what
unquietness of sleep, what checks of conscience, what inward sadness in thy
greatest merriment, and (which is worst of all) what a fearful apprehension of
Gods wrath in this life, and woeful expectation of judgment, and suffering of
extremity of pains in Hell for ever.

Let not the vain hope of Gods mercy flatter thee; for while he is merciful,
he will be just, yea his mercy shall provoke his justice; if his patience and
long-suffering do not lead thee into timely repentance, his wrath and fury
shall surely lead thee out to greater condemnation.

If custom persuade thee, let custom also reclame thee; if thy flesh murmur,
thy spirit will rejoice: O how happy will thou find this opposition! how
glorious this victory! even but one blessed thought of amendment, is of more
value than an age of sin.

Holy Saint Augustine, who was wont to nourish his lascivious flesh, and
thought it then impossible to live without the lustful kisses of his Roman
Dames, when once he had but relished the ravishing embraces of eternity, brake
forth into this sweet and most divine expression, How truly sweet is the loss
of this earthly sweetness! those transitory joys which I was formerly afraid
to lose, I now rejoice to banish; it was thou, O Lord, who did thrust them
out; it is thou, O Lord, who art entered in, who art sweeter than all
sweetness, etc.

Lord let this example move me to a blessed imitation of this blessed Saint, to
take heed of holding conference with Satan, to labor to repel the very first
motions to sin; if I delight in his discourse, I shall soon consent to his
counsel; if he feel me resist, I shall find him give ground. Lord let me
remember what I fight for, and follow my advantage with courage and success,
that when my days of warfare shall determine, I may say with joy and comfort,
with thy blessed Apostle, I have fought a good fight, I have kept the faith, I
have finished my course, from henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day,
and not unto me only, but unto all those that love and expect the day of his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

Lord,

Thou have often seen the weakness of thy sinful servant, how willingly, how
wretchedly I have been yielding to the false allurements of my sinful flesh;
how basely I have given ground, even upon the very first assault, without
desire of resistance, without care of repentance.

I have hitherto been so far from sorrowing for this sin, that I have much
delighted in it, and often grieved thee, my God, in framing of excuses for it.

Blessed God, how rich is that peace which I enjoy by thee, how glorious that
hope which I possess in thee, how wonderful that mercy I obtain from thee?
and yet how carelessly, how coldly, have I parted from thee? Lord forgive what
is past, restrain what is present, prevent what is to come: O let me enjoy no
sweetness but in thee, who art nearer to me than I can be to my self, who art
sweeter to me than the sweetness of these earthly pleasures.

O give me such a blessed frame of heart, such Angel-like integrity of soul,
that my thoughts may be chaste, my desires holy, my words gracious, my actions
good.

Give me a double portion of thy blessed Spirit, that I may double my obedience
to thy sweet commands, that I may taste the comforts of thy heavenly joys, and
utterly abhor the false allurements of this sinful world.

Let the sweet showers of thy distilling graces allay these motions of
concupiscence, extinguish these devouring flames of lust, that I may constantly
and happily oppose this darling sin to my last hour, and joyfully triumph with
thee for ever. Amen.

CHAP. I. Upon immoderate Mirth, and the sinful inconveniences thereof.
Lord,

IF I were this day to dye; If thou should now say unto me, Give an account
of thy Stewardship, for thou shall be no longer St ward; if mine Audit were at
this instant to be given up, and all mine actions this present hour to be
account^d for, how sadly should I look upon that lost time which has been
spent in sin? how many vain Items must needs appear to my deserved shame, and
ondless forrow? So many minutes wasted in unclean and wanton cogitations; so
many days and nights in frivolous and idle discourse; so many weeks, and
months, and years, in vain and finfull actions: How full of horror and
confusion would this Account appear, even to mine own eyes With what face
should I dare present itunto thine? What would I not now give to purchase but
some small respite to redeem this woeful waste, this vain expense of time? What
serious vows, and faithful promises should I now make of amendment? What
constant hours would be now dedicated to thy service? my whole life would now
seem too little to bewail my solly, to redeem my loss.

O what madness is it then, while I have days of mercy, to despise them, to
abuse them, to be utterly neglective of them? What is it, Lord, that I so
eagerly pursue? Even the very height of all mine outward happiness, is but a
short crackling of thorns, a sudden blaze, which may seem to warm me, but can
never thoroughly heat me; Woe be to that soul for ever, that can find no
refreshment but in this momentany fire; If thy Grace, Lord, cannot warm me, thy
Glory will not comfort me.

There can be no true joy but in godly sorrow; The heart of the wise is in the
house of mourning, the heart of fools in the house of mirth, Eccl. 7.6. The
luxurious Wanton may be carnally joyful, but the penitent Christian is
cordially merry.

There is no better trial of this truth (Lord) than from thine own mouth, who
were a man of sorrows; thou, O Lord, have told me, That I shall weep, but the
world shall rejoice; that I shall sorrow, but my sorrow shall be turned into
joy, and my joy shall no man take from me, John 16.20.

Deceive not thy self therefore (O my soul) for if thou walk too far in this
enticing path, thou art out of thy way to Heaven; and thou may go so far in
it as to lose thy self, and by a customary freedom of thy Christian liberty,
soon find so great an indisposition unto God, and goodness, that unless the
blessed Shepherd of thy soul vouchsafe to find thee, by his saving grace, it
is improbable, nay it is impossible that thou should ever return.

Can thou be so senseless to believe that thou art Christ's Disciple, when thou will not bear his Cross? Did ever any of his followers enjoy heaven without
violence? without beating down their bodies? without cherishing their souls?
without much weeping, fasting, praying, sighing, groaning for their sins?
without being crucified unto the world, and the world unto them? without
checking, and controlling their unruly lusts? without utterly forsaking all
this earthly trash? and joyfully accounting it as loss and dung to possess
Christ?

Look upon the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Virgins, Fathers of the Church, and
all the blessed company of Saints, in all times, places, Ages of the world, and
thou shall find them all to use this world as if they used it not; quietly,
sparingly, soberly; Isaac at his evening devotion in the solitary fields, Eliah
at his private Carmel, the Baptist in the desert, St. Paul in his desires out
of the body, and with Christ, holy Simeon in his Pillar, Saint Jerome in his
Cave, all of them and innumerable more of Gods Saints, were true Benonies,
sons of sorrow and affliction.

Lord, with how much fervor, and alacrity of soul, did these thy blessed ones
pursue thy heavenly joys? what sharp combats had they to overcome themselves?
And if such chosen and select vessels as these, have had such great strivings,
such powerful conflicts with their finfull bodies? what will become of me?
that have obeyed sin in the lusts thereof, that can find no pleasure but in
folly, no laughter but in madness.

Consider therefore, O my soul, whilst thou have yet time, that there is no
truer character of a graeeless heart, than profane mirth; thou art too ready
to believe, that God is merciful, that all thy sins may be forgiven thee in a
moment; that the good Thief was saved at the last hour, and that therefore thou
may still go on in wickedness. God indeed is always ready to show mercy,
but it is only unto those that are ready to repent: And how knowed thou
whether God will accept thee in that hour? Whether he may not, whether he will
not, then withdraw his saving grace from that sinful soul, which has so long
withdrawn it self from his service: This is that which thy blessed Savior
tells thee, Not every one which cries Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven,
Matthew. 7 21.

And lest perpaps that one example of the dying Penitent may flatter thee,
consid^r of the time, the place, the manner of his strange conversion: This was
assuredly (says St Augustine) to manifest the power and Godhead of a dying
Saciour, and that upon the rare consession of an Infidel, and that at such a
time when all the world forsook him, and even his own Disciples either doubted,
or denied his Godhead.

Alas, how little comfort can thou now reap from this example: how should it
rather affright thee, to see bu^ one soul amongst so many millions to obtain
mercy at the last hour, and that upon such weighty circumstances? on what a
weak foundation do thou build thy hopes of happiness? how easily will that
devouring storm of thine accusing conscience ruin it? and then how great the
fall will be, the fearful horror of thy lost estate will woefully express.

Lord, let this teach me to redeem those precious hours which I have lost: O
let each wanton thought, each idle word; be monitors to tell me how my Audit
stands with heaven. I can speak nothing, I can do nothing, which I can recall;
each circumstance of sin is charged in mine account, and must be reckoned for:
how careful should this make me of the-expense of that time that is recorded
for eternity? Thou, O Lord, art holiness it self, thy Saints and Angels are
holy, and thy children must be holy; nothing but holiness can inherit heaven,
no unclean pleasure, no impure joy shall enter there: How can I ever hope to be
an inhabitant of that holy City, whose heavenly language I cannot speak?

And now, Lord, seeing these things are thus, by thine assisting grace, I
seriously resolve to allow my self no pleasure in this life, but what is
sanctified with moderation; because I clearly see, these outward pleasures to
be only so far useful unto me, as by them I am made more serviceable unto
thee: Moderate and honest repast, sets an edge upon my soul, and makes it more
earnest, more-active in devotion; when I take up pleasure as a trade, I become
a Traitor to my body, a Tyrant to my soul.

Lord, I am now heartily in love with heaven, and grudge at that hours liberty
in outward merriment, that makes not the next more eager of mine inward
comfort; There is no sweetness but in goodness, and there is no goodness in
that mirth which is not subordinate to this sweetness: Christian liberty may be
easily mistaken, and become licentious wickedness; there is oftentimes most
danger in those things which seem most necessary, if not used with moderation.

And now Lord, having seriously considered what time is, and wherefore, I
admire the folly, and lament the misery of all those whose only aim is to
mis-spend it: My days are few, and full of evil, O let my greatest care be to
husband my time well; I have much business, and great, to dispatch, and I know
not whether this days l^ght may be my last; Mine eternity of joy or sorrow,
has its dependence on this short moment: If I think upon it seriously, I shall
grudge to spend one minute vainly: Lord, there is no distinction of time with
thee, one day with thee is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day; O let me seriously consider, that with me there is, that I must work while
it is called to day, that mine hours are swift and short, that the night of
death comes when I cannot work; that the end of all things comes, when time
shall be no more: By thy grace therefore I will piously devote the remnant of
my life to holy duties, so shall mine age of sin be nothing in thy sight; and
one day well spent (in thy remembrance) as a thousand years.

Blessed Lord,

Will thou accept of such a sinful creature as I am to appear before thee, to
approach unto thee, to sue to thee for mercy? How bold am I to look up unto
thee with these adulterous eyes, that have so long been gazing on these earthly
joys? how much presuming on thy mercy, to implore thee with that tongue, that
has so much provoked thy displeasure? how impudent to offer that disloyal
heart unto thee, that has so fast been wedded to this sinful world?

Lord, when mine own wretchedness had brought thy gracious visitation on me,
when thy hand pressed me sore, when thine arrows stuck fast in me, and the
venom of them drank up my spirits; when my heart was in hcaviness, and my soul
in bitterness, when my life was drawing near unto the grave, when mine own
conscience pleaded powerfully against me, and the terrors of a second death
were ready to devour me; I then earnestly implored thee for mercy, and thou
freely forgavest me; I then begged my life of thee, that I might thankfully
devote the remnant of my life unto thee.

Ah Lord, how wretchedly has mine own heart deceived me? what serious vows,
and faithful promises did I then make unto thee? and yet how carelessly, how
foolishly am I departed from thee? how vainly have I trifled out that precious
time which thou have given me? how justly may thou now deprive me of this
wretched life, by which I have so much dishonored thee?

And now, Lord, when I have even wearied out my self in wickedness, when my
soul is overcharged with sin, and my heart with sorrow; when the vanity of this
life is ready to forsake me, and there is nothing left but misery and shame to
seize upon me; I have not yet resolved seriously to come unto thee.

Lord, leave me not unto the weakness of mine own infirmities, expose me not
unto the raging hillowes of these strong temptations, suffer me not to sink
into this depth of sin, to be destroyed by this dreadful storm of Satan, and
mine own accusing conscience; rebuke these winds and waves, and cause a
blessed calm within me; reach out thy hand of mercy, and support me; strengthen
my drooping soul, that I may joyfully, and faithfully lay hold upon thee: give
me a fixed heart, that I may seriously return unto thee, and may this hour be
graciously accepted of thee.

Lord wean me from the false embraces of this evil world, turn all these
sinful joys to bitterness unto me, make me to see their foulness and
deformity, their emptiness and vanity, their shortness and uncertainty, their
falsehood and flattery, their weariness and misery.

O let my heart be filled, let my soul be ravished with those transcendent
joys of thine which are for ever; give me a joyful soul to rest securely in
them, a ready heart devoutly thankful for them.

Lord moderate my desires to outward enjoyments; let me relish no sweetness
but in thy love, no goodness but in thy grace, no comfort but in the full
assurance of thy glory.

Forgive those wretched hours which have been stolen from thy service: O Lord,
my God, I heartily bewail them, and willingly resolve to spend my days in
sorrow for them.

Make me more watchful over my corrupt heart, more careful of my precious
time, more serious in the weighty work of my salvation; more sorrowful for
sin, more mindful of the hour of death and day of judgejudgement: That so I
may affect the pleasures of this life soberly, enjoy them sparingly, and leave
them cheerfully. Amen.

CHAP. 20. Upon the great danger of deferring the hour of repentance.
COnsider, O my Soul, of the great danger of delaying thy repentance; of
judging that so easy, which will prove so difficult; of thinking that almost
finished, which is scarce yet begun: Believe thou it will suffice thee to have
some transitory thoughts of thine amendment, to have perhaps some pinching
sighs, some stings of conscience, some shows of sorrow for thy sins; to hang
down thy head like a bulrush for a day, and yet afterward to return with the
dog to thy filthy vomit, and with the sow to the wallowing in the nasty mire of
sin: While thou continuest in this course, thy hopes of amendment are extreme
doubtful, of reconciliation dangerous, of repentance desperate.

If ever thou hopest to inherit heaven, let not Satan thus delude thee; look
well into thine evil and corrupt heart, and thou shall there find, that this
is not the cure, but the discase of sin; that thou grievest not for thine
offense, but for thy punishment; that thou may yet go much farther in this
supposed path of thy repentance, and still be far short of that sincerity of
heart which God requires of thee, and yet have no part nor fellowship in
Christ: Thou may with Saul express thy sorrow with thy tears; with those
Believers in the Gospel, receive the word with joy; with Demas, show thine
inward grace by thine outward obedience; and in some sort be made partaker of
the Holy Ghost, and have a taste of the good things of the world to come; and
yet for all this, come far short of this unfeigned work of true repentance.
Alas, what can it profit thee to bewail that sin which thou will not forgo?
what reward can thou expect for that obedience which so soon faints? what
comfort in that joy which is but temporary?

Remember how great a work thou have in hand, how many millions of lost souls
complain eternally in hell of this neglect; O look into the foulness of thy
sin, and then into the trueness of thy sorrow: If thou art Gods child, thou will be grieved for offending of so good a Father; thou will abhor that sin
that has so much provoked his displeasure, thou will most solemnly protest
against it, and seriously resolve for ever to avoid it; thy sin will be ever
before thee, to humble thee here, to exalt thee hereafter.

Thy degrees of sin will have thy degrees of sorrow; thy measure of pollution
will require thy measure of sanctification: As thou have given up thy members
to be servants of sin, so thou must now yield them up to be weapons of
righteousness; as thou have been drowned in pleasure, so thou must be drencht
in tears; yea those tears will be thy daily food, to nourish thee in grace, to
enrich thee in glory.

O how truly-blessed is that soul, which has unfeignedly resolved on this
good, this great, this necessary work? that can cheerfully and joyfully express
it self with holy David, and say, Lord I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning
all the day long, I have roared out for very anguish and unquietness of heart.
If thou have David's sorrow (O my soul) thou shall assuredly have David's joy,
thou shall say with him also, Lord I am thy child, and the son of thine
handmaid, thou have broken my bonds in sunder, Psalm. 116.16. Satan may now
tempt thee, and through thy frailty and infirmity prevail against thee; but to
become a customer to evil, the powers of hell cannot entice thee; a thousand
worlds are not now of that value with thee, as the joyful remembrance of thy
passed dangers, thy present comfort, thy future safety.

Thou have now seen (O my soul) how absolutely necessary this great work is;
think now how happy will be the performance, how full of danger the delay: the
longer thou continuest in sin, the more remote thou art from grace; What
extreme folly is this in thee, to deprive thy self of that friend, of whom thou
have most need? If thou find thy self so backward to this holy duty now, how
averse will thou be hereafter, when sin is more deeply rooted in thee, the
devil in more firm possession of thee, and God himself removed further off
from thee?

From whence now are these false hopes, these vain promises of future
happiness? how dare thou refuse these gracious offers of eternity? how full
of doubtfulness and extreme hazard is this false assurance of that holy Spirit,
which thou have so often grieved? Be not deceived, God is not mocked, look what
a man sows, even that shall he reap; he that sows in the flesh, shall reap
corruption; he that sows in the Spirit, life everlasting: If thou will not
hear Gods call in this life, he will not hear thine in that to come; if thou will not mourn for thy sins here, thou shall howl for them for ever. And who
shall then have pity upon thee? or who shall be sorry for thee? or who shall
pray for thy peace? thou have abandoned me (says God) thou have gone from me,
and now will I stretch out my hand against thee to destroy thee. Jerem. 15.5, 6

Lord, let this teach me to deal truly with my self, to search narrowly for
sin, timely for sorrow, and speedily for pardon. Seek the Lord, O my soul,
while he may be found, for in the great water-floods (of his eternal wrath)
thou shall not come nigh him.

Lord,

I have sinned, and I desire to repent; I have layen long festering in the
grave of sin, and cannot be now raised without a miracle.

I have sinned in delight, in consent, in action, in custom, in long
continuance of custom; without remorse of conscience, without thought of
repentance: I am grown old and impudent in sin, and am no more worthy to be
called thy child.

Lord, I am become loathsome to my self, how much more odious unto thee, who art
a God of pure eyes, and can behold none iniquity.

I have sinned against thee, I cannot repent but by thee; my transgression is
active, my obedience passive, I can no more arise from sin than death, even
this desire of sorrow is from thee; the repair of my corruption is the work of
thy creation; when thou have raised me by thy grace, thou supportest me by thy
goodness, thou leadest me by thy providence, thou drawest me by thy patience,
thou compellest me by thy power.

Such is my weakness, such is my feebleness by nature, that I cannot rise
without thee, that I cannot stand without thee when I am raised by thee; such
is my strength, such is my ability by grace, that I am able to go with thee,
that I am joyful to run after thee.

Lord quicken and revive me from the death of sin, and grave of misery; sustain
my wounded conscience with the sweetness of thy saving promises; let thy
patience and long-suffering lead me in to repentance, thy holy Spirit unto
perfect holiness, and endless happiness.

Lord Jesus draw me, and I shall joyfully run after thee; my body in obedience
to my soul, my soul and body in obedience to thy blessed will, more zealously,
more willingly, more constantly to my lives end. Amen.

CHAP. 21. Upon Servile fear, and the danger thereof.
NO child can fear his father as lie ought, that is not jealous of his fathers
honor, that is not feelingly affected with his injuries, and zealously devoted
to perpetuate his praise; and it is as equally impossible that this father can
affect that son, whose obedience is rather enforced by power, than invited by
affection.

If this be so in Nature, it is much more so in Grace; for thou, O Lord, art
now a double father to me, thou art my father by creation, and my father by
redemption: Lord, as thou have doubled thy goodness toward me, I should have
doubled my return of thankfulness toward thee: Thy love to me is absolute, no
breach can dissolve it, no time determine it; thy love to me was from the
beginning, and whom thou love thou love to the end: My love to thee is
fickle, false, and full of imperfections; and if my filial fear, even in my
rest performances, be full of spots and blemishes in thy sight, how most
deformed shall I appear, when I serve thee with an irreligious, and ungodly
fear? when I do thy will repiningly, and coldly, not for love of thy mercy,
but for fear of thy justice? when I am knowingly and willingly consenting to
thy great dishonor; when I am so zealous in the worlds cause, yea, too too
often, in the devils cause, and so benumbed in thine; when sorrows dismay me,
and sins delight me.

Ah Lord! how far am I from what I ought to be? If I go on in this path, I
perish everlastingly; while I continue in this course of disobedience, I hang
over hell fire by the slender twig of an uncertain life, and if that once
break, my loss is irrecoverable: Thou Lord have said it (and thy word is truth)
He which denies me before men, him will I deny before my Father which is in
heaven: Lord let this teach me to delight in thy service, to be jealous of
thine honor, to thirst for thy favor, to tremble at thy frown, to submit to
thy rod, to think nothing too dear to part withal, to purchase thy grace, to
promote thy glory. Thou, O Lord, love not a cowardly Christian; if I prefer
any thing to thy love, I am most unworthy of it; that friendship is too dearly
bought, which cannot be enjoyed without the loss of thy favor.

If my brother offend me, I will labor to restore him with the spirit of
meekness, lest whilst I study to rebuke another, I become guilty my self: No
sin shall pass me without some show of distaste, without some feeling of my
Makers injury, and my brothers misery; If I be not moved with compassion for
another sin, I shall never be moved with contrition for mine own; such comfort
as I can willingly afford another, I may well hope shall be graciously
conferred on my self.

In my reproof of sin I will observe these holy cautions, lest while I
endeavor to become serviceable unto thee, I prove injurious to my neighbor:
Private sins shall not have public reprehensions; neither shall public sins
be undecently reproved by me a private person; Piety must not confound Charity,
nor Religion Policy. Lord, I may easily transgress, even in my best intentions;
how grievously have I then failed in my rebellious actions? when I have not
feared thee with that sincerity of heart which becomes thy child; when I have
not loved thee for that beauty, for that richness, for that goodness which thou
art, but for those outward blessings which I enjoy from thee; when I serve thee
for base and by respects, such, and so unbeseeming my profession, so far below
that soul which thou have given me, that thou may justly now withhold thy
blessings from me; when I have hitherto sought but my self in thee, when my
thoughts have been carnal, my words hypocritical, my service deceitful.

To thy glory (Lord) and mine own deserved shame, I willingly confess, that I
have not only sinned through the frailty of my nature, but I have sinned also
with an high hand; sin has not only surprised me at unawares, but I have
obeyed it in the lusts thereof, with willingness, with greediness, with
joyfulness; I have not only corrupted mine own ways before thee, by mine own
sins, but I have also foolishly contracted others faults, by hearing and
seeing thee my God dishonored in vain and sinful discourse, in more vain and
sinful excess, without show of dislike, without thought of reproof; yea, Lord,
I have added unto others sins by mine example, while I have feared to reprove
that which I have known to be distasteful unto thee, while I have seemed to
love that which has been hateful to mine own soul: With those time-pleasing
Rulers in the Gospel, I have believed in thee, but because of the Pharisees
(because of outward respects) I have feared to confess thee; and have loved the
praise of men more than the praise of God.

But thou, Lord (who art infinitely good, and ever ready to forgive, whose wise
and over ruling Providence is only able to produce the greatest good out of the
greatest evil) Pardon and pass by my many and my weak compliances of sinfu^l
nature; supply my defects, accept my desires, encourage my endeavors: Let thy
power be magnified in my weakness, thy love in my willfulness, thy grace in my
sinfulness.

Suffer me not (O Lord) to run from thee, by a base and servile fear of thy
Justice, O let me rather run into the bosom of thy love by a filial fear, in
sweet and safe assurance of thy mercy.

Lord make me to see the fearfulness and ugliness of sin, by the bright rays
of thy celestial beauty: O let me patiently, and joyfully, and thankfully,
endure thy sweet chastisements for it, and speedily, and constantly withdraw my
longings from it.

Give me an yearning and relenting soul for grieving thy good Spirit; give me
(O Lord) that chaste and blessed fear belonging only to thy children, that I
may not fear thee to tremble at thee, but to love thee, to honor thee, to
delight in thee, to enjoy thee.

Lord, make me jealous of every deed, of every word, of every thought that may
displease thee, and truly penitent for all those sins by which I have so much
dishonored thee: Indue me with a loyal heart to love thee truly as I ought;
strengthen this love with holy confidence, and happy perseverance, that may for
ever hanish this unholy fear; that so my joyful soul may live above the reach
of humane misery; that I may be capable of no fear but of offending thee; and
that I may not only fear thee my self, but be jealous also of thy fear in
others.

Lord, let nothing in this life withdraw me from a zealous and a constant love
to thy service, from a faithful and devout endeavor to promote thy glory;
that so I may be ever found truly obedient unto thee, my God, religiously
acquainted with the affairs of this life, piously affected to the good of mine
own soul. Amen.

CHAP. 22. Upon the great neglect of reckoning daily with our consciences, and
the benefits lost thereby.
COnsider, O my soul, how venomous the nature of sin is; if thou can afford
to sleep in small sins, thou will not stick to welcome greater. Sin is of an
incroaching nature; if thou suffer it to sleep in thy bosom, it will expect to
dwell there: Little sins are harbingers to bigger ones; if thou lodgest these,
those will challenge entertainment: Let each evening therefore take a strict
account of that days action, and where thou find thy self failing, pray
heartily for pardon.

In thine entrance upon this holy course, thou will surely find three potent
oppositions: Satan will tell thee, that God requires no such strictness at thy
hands; the World will tell thee, thou have this, or that employment to consider
of; thine own Corruption will persuade thee, that nature will abhor this
discontented course, that thy spirits will be too much dulled, and thy life
will prove uncomfortable.

Alas my soul, these are delusions to betray thee to a greater mischief. As
there are degrees of Sanctification, so there are of Pollution; no man becomes
evil in an instant: from hence it is, that sometimes the soul can start even
at the very thought of that sin, which by degrees it can digest without
disturbance. If holy David had accounted with his conscience, after his
lustful looks on Bathsheba, doubtless those fearful sins of his had never
been committed. O let not any vain pretenses deter thee from this task, but the
blessed benefits allure thee; if the entrance be harsh, the progress will be
safe, the continuance sweet, the end happy.

By this enquiry thou shall see thy sins (those great disturbers of thy p^ace)
arraigned, convicted, condemned, and by the mercy of thy Savior daily dying in
thee; Satan repulsed, the gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit strengthened,
thy mournings comforted, thine infirmities sustained, thy conscience quitted,
thy rejoycings exalted, the holy Angels delighted, and thy heavenly Father well
pleased. O how truly blessed are these enjoyments! what soul can be now sad in
this enquiry?

Lord, I now solemnly resolve upon this safe, this sweet, this blessed task; I
willingly abandon all excuses that may hinder me, and joyfully embrace those
happy duties which invite me nearer to thy heavenly presence; thy yoke is
easy, and thy burden light; when thy grace has redeemed me from the bondage
of sin, and restored me into the glorious liberty of thy child en, I shall then
find (to my souls comfort) that thy service is perfect fre^dom^, from sin, from
shame, from death, from hell; from all miseries here, from all torments
hereafter.

Be wary therefore, O my soul, and careful to remove all lets that may
disable thee, but those especially that turn me from a Christian to a beast.
Satan has many ways to cousen me; when he cannot beguile my judg^ment, he
will betray mine affections, and lead me by a seeming good, in friendly
society, to a^^ call evil in excess, and so when he cannot corrupt my
intentions, he will undoubtedly divert mine actions, as well knowing it is
impossible for him to be devout, who is not temperate.

Lord, by how much Satan is more powerful and malicious, by so much make me
more wise and circumspect, that my intentions may be good, my words gracious,
my actions virtuous, my life holy, my death happy.

Blessed God,

How large a portion of my little time have I bestowed on sin? how eager have I
been of it? how negligent in asking pardon for it?

Lord pardon my unmindfulness of holy duties, make me more watchful for the
time to come, that I may constantly resolve upon amendment of my evil ways,
and willingly endure thy fatherly afflictions for them.

Forgive those sinful hours that have unfitted me for thy service; suffer me
not, O Lord, to wander in the ways of wickedness, and when at any time the
frailty of my wretched flesh shall tempt me to exceed those blessed bounds
which thou have set me, O let thy saving grace restrain me; let not this
sinful freedom captivate my precious soul, to thy dishonor, and mine own
deserved shame; but let thy gladding Spirit be my joyful comfort, to refresh
me in life, and protect me in death.

Make me more zealous, more intent upon the ways of godliness; Lord suffer not
my pious resolutions to abate with any outward obstacles; let me not lean upon
these broken reeds, but rest on thee the rock of my defense and safety.

Make me content to leave these earthly vanities for thy sake, who were willing
to forgo Thy heavenly Throne for mine; though the frailty of my nature has
too often led me into the bondage of sin, yet let the freedom of thy grace now
guide me into the footsteps of sorrow, that this blessed sorrow may be turned
into joy, and that this joy the world may not take from me.

Lord open mine eyes, that I may see the blessedness of goodness, the perfect
freedom of thy service, the glorious liberty of thy children; so shall I
willingly submit to thy commands, and joyfully partake of thy rewards.

Blessed God, with humbleness of soul I offer up my self unto thee; Lord Jesus
accept of me, and so assist me with thy grace, that I may wholly dedicate my
self to thy glory. Amen.

CHAP. 23. Upon Unchristianlike dullness in affliction.
Lord,

I cannot live without crosses, unless I can live without sin; when they come
therefore, I will bid them welcome for thy sake, from whom they are sent; not
one of them can afflict me without thy leave, who have directed their course,
limited their power; let me not repine at that which I have justly d^served;
let me rather rejoice, that thou vouchsafest me this favor; if I were not thy
child, I should not be under thy rod; if thou Lord did not love me, thou
would not scourge me; no outward thing can so well assure me of thy favor,
as the fellowship of thy sufferings; for if I suffer with thee, I shall
assuredly be glorified together with thee.

Holy David was in trouble, and it was good for him: O let not that which was
good for him, be evil for me. Lord, if thy physic be bitter, yet it is
wholesome; if it make me heartsick now, it will make me healthful hereafter; if
I disturb it not by mine impatience, it will work in me the quiet and the happy
fruits of true repentance, and amendment of mine evil ways; it will remember
me that I am a Stranger, and a Pilgrim here, that there is nothing in this life
but wearine e and sorrow; it will drive me from the penury of sin, and tyranny
of Satan, to the riches of grace, and liberty of goodness; it will encourage
me to walk worthy of the richness of my calling in Christ Jesus; it will make
me willing to go home to thee my heavenly Father, where I shall feel no more
pain, find no more sorrow, suffer no more affliction, where thou Lord wilt wipe
away all tears from mine eyes, all grief from my heart.

Thou (O Lord) alone know my disease, and can best temper my potion; each
degree must be answered, so much sinful pleasure as I enjoy, so much sorrow
must I drink (and woe be unto me for ever if I drink it not) if I taste not of
this cup here, I shall drink of the very dregs in hell: Thou, O Lord, who have
freely forgiven me my sins, have not fully remitted my punishments; thou who
did undergo the misery of life, and the bitterness of death for me, have
neither bought off the one, nor taken off the other, from me; by thy sufferings
I am fully and for ever freed from the guilt and torments of sin; by mine own
corruptions I am liable unto the act of sin, and so even unto death also, as a
temporal punishment for sin: Thou came not, O Lord, wholly to abolish sin in
me, but to become righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption unto me;
not to abate my sorrows, but to uphold my sufferings; that I being thereby made
conformable unto thee in grace, may hereafter be partaker with thee of thy
heavenly glory.

How fearful ought this to make me to commit sin? how careful to avoid
occasions of allurements to it? how thankful, how joyful, to receive Gods
Fatherly chastisements for it? I may here see, and joyfully admire, the
wisdom, justice; goodness, mercy, of my heavenly Father; his justice, in
punishing sin; his wisdom, in the proportion and end of this punishment; his
goodness, by susteining me under it, by redeeming me from it; his mercy, by
making it to work for me a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory.

Lord he that can droop under thy Cross, shall never follow thee to thy Crown;
when I once find the lightness of this load, by the strength of thy supporting
grace, I shall then feel, to my souls exceeding comfort, that one sin is of
more weight than an age of sorrow.

And now Lord, I am joyfully prepared for the worst of afflictions, which
either sin or Satan, life or death, can bring upon me; scourge me, lance me,
bruise me, break me, do what thou will with me here, so thou spare me for
ever; Lord, allthough thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee, for I know
assuredly, that all these outward things shall work together for the best for
me; and that my present sufferings thou have sent in mercy to me, to humble me
for sin, to preserve me from shame; I kiss them, I embrace them, and am
sincerely thankful for them. Lord let me clearly see for what sin thou have
inflicted this punishment, that I may bewail it, abhor it, forsake it, implore
thy pardon for it; when I am thus armed, I shall be able to encounter thy
fiercest affliction; if I am found naked, the weakest will foyl me.

To thee, O Lord, whose wise and overruling hand disposes all occurrences of
life, and sweetly guides them to the good of thy children, do I address my
sinful soul, for mercy and protection.

Lord open mine eyes, that I may see and believe the constancy of thy love, in
the mutability. of mine outward condition.

Give me a patient and a willing heart to welcome all the changes of this
present life, to be humble under them, to rejoice in them, and be thankful for
them.

Forgive the pride of heart, and prodigality of hand, attending on my
prosperous estate; my great repinings, and ungodly passions, incident to my
declining happiness, and increasing misery.

As thou have weaned me from the pleasures of this life, by the rod of thine
afflictions, so wean me also from the sins of this life, by the staff of thy
consolations, that so my heart may be wholly taken off from all earthly
enjoyments; that I may become even as a weaned child, to forgo willingly what
thou deniest me, to receive quietly what thou providest for me.

What I want of these outward blessings, supply unto me by thine inward
comforts, which are in^finitely better for me, and shall be therefore ^ver
dearer to me. Lord furnish me with graces suitable to all events, and able to
encourage me in all afflictions.

Lord sanctify this present sorrow to my sinful soul; so sweeten it by thy
grace, that it may bring forth in me the quiet, and the happy fruits of
righteousness: Make it a sure pledge of thy fatherly affections toward me;
let it daily and hourly draw me nearer to thy presence; let it wean me from
the miseries of sin, and at last bring me to the sweet fruition of eternity.
Amen.

CHAP. 24. Upon Unchearfulness in Christianity, with encouragements to avoid it.
AH Lord, from whence is my uncheerfulness, my dullness in my Christian calling?
how much below that glorious hope which thou have given me? When I consider of
the richness of thy love in Christ, I find thee to be all in all unto me, and
may well wonder at mine own unthankfulness, and ignorance, that is stll doting
on this worlds nothing and uncertainty. Thou (O Lord) art truly and eternally
good, and therefore able to derive eternity of happiness. Before I was created
I was thine, and when I was not mine own thou becamest mine; thou (O my
Savior) who have given me thy self, can deny me nothing: What is too good,
too great, too glorious for that so^^ which thou have redeemed at so dear a
rate, ^s the price of thine own blood, and espoused to thine own bosom? Thy
creatures are at peace with me, thy holy Angels attend me, guard me, fight for
me, rejoice at my conversion; thy Saints triumphant pray for me, the Devils fly
from me, and thou, O Lord, by thine all-mighty power, and gracious providence,
art ever with me; thou carest for me from the cradle to the tomb; Thou art
about my bed, and about my paths, and spyest out all my ways; Yea, Thy mercy
embraces me on every side; when I sleep I am safe, when I awake joyful; in
prosperity I have thy rod to afflict me, in adversity thy staff to comfort me:
Lord while I am in thy favor, I can look no way but to happiness; if I walk
not answerable to it, I may well fear to be deprived of it.

And doubtless (O my soul) those eyes which look so graciously upon thee in
this life, will behold thee with a more earnest, with a more endeared love in
that to come, these transitory glances are but the faithful pledges of those
future embraces. Those arms of mercy which now support thee in thine often
failings, shall then encompass thee with glory; those blessed hands which now
chastise thee for thy rebellions, will then wipe away all tears from thine
eyes; and that relenting heart, which sometimes is most unwillingly withdrawn
from thee for thy Apostasy, will then unite it self to thine for ever.

Lord, who can be a Christian and be sad? who can believe all this, and not
triumph in joyful exaltation? and not insult over the sorrows of this life?
and not contemn the joys of this bewitching world? and not resist these
cloudy, discontented thoughts, these close assaults of Satan's never-resting
malice? Millions of Worlds, Miriads of Angels, cannot restore that cursed
spirit to this happiness which thou now enjoyest, and yet so slightly regardest.

O let this teach thee to abhor his foul temptations, to consider of thy worth
in Christ, and to raise thy self above the reach of earthly misery; to love thy
God faithfully, to serve him cheerfully, to persevere joyfully; to be patient
in tribulation, to rejoice in hope, to pray continually; to thirst after the
sweetness of his grace, and earnestly to long for the consummation of his glory.

Blessed God,

How unworthy am I to be called thy servant, who have so long been subject to
the worlds commands? how undeserving of the glorious liberty of thy Sons, who
have so willingly been fettered by mine own corruptions? how incapable of thy
heavenly comforts, that can rejoice in nothing but these earthly vanities.

Lord open mine eyes, that I may see the richness of the price of my high
calling in Christ Jesus, and endeavor to walk worthy of it; that I may
earnestly desire thee, joyfully embrace thee, and constantly and cheerfully
devote my service to thee.

Forgive my drowsiness, my dullness, my backwardness to holy duties; awake my
sinful soul from sensuallity, and raise it to the blessed thoughts of sweet
eternity.

Compassionate my weakness, accept my willingness, forgive my sinfulness,
quicken my dullness, correct my untowardness: Lord bring me to such a blessed
frame of heart, that I may willingly forgo the sins and miseries of this life,
and frequently delight my self with contemplation of thy joys in that to come.

CHAP. 25. Upon Man's sinful frailty in the hour of Temptation, with motives
to make resistance.
I Am now in the lists with Satan, and this hour to fight the Lords battle:
God sees me, and his holy Angels see me, I have long professed my self to be
Christ's soldier, and he has now brought me to the field to prove me, now is
the trial of my courage, of my Christianity; if I overcome, I shall rejoice on
earth, triumph in heaven.

If that evil one were as powerful as malicious, I had just cause to fear
him; but now my comfort and assurance is, that he cannot hurt me, but by me: He
now strongly labors to incline my will (and woe were me if he might compel it)
his subtle suggestions, his unclean solicitations, his fulminated motions, may
be the father begetting, but mine own corrupt heart is the mother conceiving;
there can be no danger from abroad, if there be no treason at home.

Look well into thy self therefore O my soul, ascend the Watch tower of thine
understanding, and see that there lurk therein no seeming shows, no specious
pretenses, no gross lies, no false proposals to betray thee; if thy head be
surprised, thy heart cannot long hold out.

Examine thine affections, try them by the blessed rule of divine precepts, if
they be not sharply corrected, they will soon be corrupted; endeavor to resist
the very first motions to sin; for if Satan can beguile thine affections, he
will undoubtedly command thine actions.

Quicken thy memory by the momentany pleasure of sin, by the heavy judgments
threatened against it, by the sad consequences of it, by the eternity of
torments after it: Think how often thou have been already foiled; how many
serious vows and faithful promises thou have already made to God of thine
amendment; how carelessly thou have dispensed with them all, and how
presumptuously persisted in thy follies: O think how gracious thy God has been
unto thee in forbearing, how wonderful his mercy is in pardoning, how justly
he might now destroy thee, even in the very act of sinning.

Lord, if none of all this will yet scare me from sinning against thee, nor
allure me to repenting, that I may draw nearer home unto thee: O let me yet
confider who it is that leads me to fight, and wherefore I have engaged.
Thou, O my blessed Savior, art my Captain, and Heaven is my Country; Shall I
now lose those rivers of eternal pleasures, for this short, this false, this
momentany joy? shall I run from thee who art the Prince of Peace, and who have
spilt thy precious blood for me, unto that cruel enemy of Mankind, who has
drawn so much blood from me? Shall I forsake thee who have laid down thy life
for me, and inslave my self to him who every minute seeks to devour me? Shall
I dishonor thee my God, grieve thine holy Angels, shame my profession, wound
mine own conscience, terrify mine own soul, seek mine own ruin? If I consent
to this temptation, that God whom I dishonor will abhor me, those blessed
Angels whom I grieve will forsake me, those cursed spirits whom I obey will
deride me, that conscience which I now wound will accuse me, that glorious
Gospel which I shame will condemn me, and that ruin which I now seek will for
ever seize upon me.

Let this move thee (O my soul) as thou exspectest happiness, to take up a
blessed resolution of resistance: If the assault dismay thee, let the conquest
encourage thee; if the beginning be sharp, the close will be sweet; if nature
be dejected, grace will be strengthened; and as grace increases here, so shall
glory hereafter.

Consider last of all what Saint James says, and fix it in thy thoughts as
chief of all, Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried
he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him, Jam. 1.12. Thrice happy is that soul which is faithful in Gods
service, although it may often faint, it shall never fail; it may sometimes be
foiled, but shall never be overcome; it shall never fall totally, it can never
fall finally; for thou, Lord, upholdest it, and in thy love it is sure of
safety here, of triumph hereafter.

Blessed God,

With grief of heart I willingly confess, that I have shamefully dishonored thy
great and glorious name, by mine often failings, by my many faintings, and more
wretched yeeldings; to the shame of my profession, the grief of thy good
Spirit, and the terror of my frail condition.

Lord how wretched is my soul without thee and yet how easily, how willingly am
I enticed from thee even at this instant I am ready to forsake thee, and may
most justly fear to be forsaken of thee.

The world allureth me, the flesh besotteth me, the devil beguileth me, and
mine own false heart deceives me, and is now ready to rebel against me: O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? Lord Jesus assist me, and let thy
saving grace be now and evermore sufficient for me.

Lord rebuke these evil thoughts, relieve my misery, support my weakness,
strengthen my willingness, give me an undaunted courage in thy service, an
unfeigned sorrow for my former failings, and constancy of heart against present
suggestions, and future temptations, that I may find no sweetness but in thy
love, no pleasure but in thy service, no profit but in thy rewards. Amen.

CHAP. 26. Upon the Infirmities of the Saints.
Lord,

WIth grief of heart I confess, that I find a Law in my members, rebelling
against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive to the Law of fin, so that
those things which I would do I cannot, and I daily and hourly do those things
which I would not; yet my comfort is, that I make not provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof: By the weakness of mine own corruptions, I often
fall into sin, but by the blessed assistance of thy grace I abhor to lie there;
sin oftentimes surpriseth me, but by thy rich mercy has never yet reigned over
me; It has often deceived me, but I trust shall never destroy me. It has
pleased thee, O my blessed Savior, to conclude all things under sin, that thy
grace may abound; while I strive against it, and am afflicted for it, my
sinful desires will (I trust) be graciously accepted, and (in thy perfect
obedience) gloriously rewarded.

Be not dismayed therefore, O my soul, that thou sometimes art ravished with
apprehension of thy heavenly joys, and suddenly relapsed to the follies of a
wretched heart; the one thou happily enjoyest, by the sweet assistance of the
heavenly Spirit; the other thou violently suffer, by the strong torrent of
my sinful nature. Lord, such is thy great wisdom, and inconceivable goodness
toward me, that oftentimes thou leavest me unto my self, and therefore
suffer me to fall (and that most grievously sometimes) that I may see mine
own infirmities, and be truly humbled for them; that I may impute nothing to
mine own merits, but give all the glory to thy sufferings; that I may go out
of my self, and mine own misery, into the sweet enjoyment of thy rich, and
endless mercy.

Consider therefore, O my soul, that so long as thou continuest in this valley
of tears, thou can not live without this burden of sin; so long as thou
carriest this frail body about thee, continuing weaknesses will be attending on
thee. O let this teach thee to bewail the misery of this frail life, which is
only prone to evil, and that continually; let it humble thee for thy many
failings, and invite thee to a more hearty and sincere affection to thy
Savior, by whose absolute and perfect obedience, all thine imperfections shall
be done away; and lastly, to a more earnest longing for thy bodies dissolution.

Comfort thy self in this, that all the miseries of this life shall work
together for the best to thine advantage, nothing can befall thee without his
holy providence that so dearly loves thee, even thy very sins shall further
thee to Heaven; if thou have now fallen, through the infirmity of thy corrupt
nature, God will raise thee, by this fall of thine, to more perfection in
goodness, to more vigilance, to more holiness, to more courage, to more
constancy, in thy Christian calling: for, The Lord orders a good man's goings,
and makes his way acceptable unto him, though he fall he shall not be cast
away, for the Lord upholdeth him, Psalm. 37.23, 24. and if that evil one be
powerfully malicious, the greater shall thy joy and triumph be, when thou art
happily victorious.

Lord, how truly blessed is the condition of thy Saints? who compellest even
the rage of earth and hell to work for their advantage: Why art thou then so
sad, O my Soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? still trust in God,
for he is the help of thy countenance, and thy God, Psalm. 42.15.

Lord, how sad is my condition without thee? thou (who alone know the
secrets of all hearts) know that I love thee, that I long for thee, that I
desire nothing in compare of thee my God, and yet thou find nothing but
pollution in me: sometimes I beg to be at union with thee, and sometimes live
as if I cared not for mercy from thee; still I sin, and still thou forgivest:
yea I am therefore the more ready to rebel against thee, because thou Lord art
most ready to be merciful unto me; and yet for all this (such are thy bowels
of compassion toward me) thou bemoanest mine iniquity, thou invitest, thou
compellest me to mercy.

Lord, will thou still suffer me to abuse thy goodness? I have oft^n run from
thee, by relapsing into grievous sins, and thou, O Lord, as often have received
me to favor, and afforded me the sweet refreshings of thy holy Spirit; I
confess my self unworthy to enjoy that blessed Spirit which I have so often
grieved: O let this teach me to be truly and sincerely thankful unto thee, to
love thee more heartily, praise thee more joyfully, serve thee more faithfully,
to my lives end.

For thou, O blessed Lord, art all in all unto me, thou art strength in my
weakness, love in my wilfulness, life in my sinfulness; thou alone know
under what great evils of sin, under what sad pressures of sorrow I daily
groan, and thou have promised to ease those weary souls, that cry to thee for
succor and relief.

Lord save me, or I perish; Lord ease me of this heavy burden, that I sink not
to eternal misery; give me thy saving grace, to guide me from these woeful
ways of wickedness; O let this hour put an end to this sin: Lord lead me unto
thy paths, and uphold me there, that my feet slip not; suffer me not to feed
upon these empty husks; O satisfy me with thy mercy, and that soon, before I
go hence, and be no more seen.

My spirit is willing (O Lord) but my flesh is weak, have pity upon me, have
pity upon me, for I am in misery.

Lord cover my sins, Lord pardon mine infirmities, Lord Jesus accept of me, and
interpose thy blessed merits for me.

Lord raise me from this wretched fall; support my weakness, renew my
repentance, increase my faith, quicken my zeal, that so by thy gracious
assistance, I may be raised to more purity, to more perfection, in my Christian
calling; that where sin has abounded, there grace may abound much more, to thy
great glory, and mine own endless comfort.

O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord consider and do it, defer not for thine
own sake, O my God. Amen.

CHAP. 27. Upon Desertion.
WHile I am in this pilgrimage of sin, I cannot be without this portion of
sorrow, why complain I of that which I have so justly deserved? how often has
my God afforded me the gracious visits of his blessed Spirit? and yet how
easily have I regarded them? Lord, I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies, much less of this invaluable favor, to enjoy the kisses of thy
sacred mouth; as I am now grieved for the loss of thy presence, so I have too
often grieved thee by mine own rebellious absence; this is the sad condition
even of the best of thy Saints in this life; as they have had their aberrations
from grace, so they have had their fluctuations in woe; these sad departings of
thy blessed Spirit have ever been the just memorials of their present griefs,
and former miseries.

I see thy holy servant David, sadly bemoaning this great loss, and almost
despairing of the enjoyment of thy gracious presence, I hear him crying out in
bitterness of soul, Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he show no
more favor? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for
evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious? has he shut up his tender mercy
in displeasure? Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9.

How grievous was this complaint? how gracious thine answer? even in the very
minute of distress, even by the very lips of the distressed; for it follows in
a breath, And I said, this is my death, but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most High.

Jonah's extremity was thy blessed opportunity; even when Jonah thought himself
in most danger of perishing, he then found thy mercy most ready in relieving;
when he thought himself cast out of thy sight, even then he found himself
looking to thy presence, and ready to be received into thy favor, Jonah 2.4.

Lord, if thou give me but the least measure of true faith, I shall be able
to remove the greatest mountains of sin, and know assuredly, to my souls
exceeding comfort, that thou hidest thy face from me but for a moment in this
life, that thou may gather me to everlasting kindness in that to come.

Comfort thy self in this therefore (O my Soul) that God will never leave thee,
that he will never forsake thee, that he will never leave thee totally, nor
forsake thee finally; that he has not now withdrawn his gracious presence from
thee, but the present comfort of his grace from working in thee: as there are
sad desertions, so there will undoubtedly be gracious visits; thou may be
forsaken in sin, in the suffering of punishment for sin, in the severity of
that punishment, in the fearful apprehension of Gods wrath in this severity;
but assure thy self (O my soul) thou shall never be forsaken in the final
execution of this wrath, in the eternal duration of this final execution.

Lord, if my hopes of heaven were grounded on the weak foundation of mine own
abilityes, If mine Election were but temporary, I might justly fear this
desertion would prove eternal; but now my comfort is, that Christ is my strong
rock, on whom I am safely built; that nothing can separate me from his love;
that his Decree of mine Election is particular, sweet, sure, and eternal; that
the happy means appointed to this blessed end, is faith, holiness,
righteousness, and sanctification; holiness to obey thy precepts, says to
embrace thy promises, righteousness to enjoy thy Saints, and sanctification to
possess my self: Thy blessed Decree (O Lord) is so far from giving me liberty
to commit sin, that it most undoubtedly restrains me from it; If I cannot make
my calling and election sure, by thy decreed means of sanctification, I shall
never make my comfort sure by my vain hopes of glorification.

If I look upon Noah, Lot, David, Jonah, Christ himself, I shall there see the
several and the sorrowful degrees of this Desertion: Noah and Lot fearfully
sinning, David a long time resting in sin, and woefully deprived of Gods
gracious presence for sin; Jonah, even doubting of Gods favor, in the
suddenness, and the sharpness of his punishment; and thou, O my blessed
Savior, affrighted with the fierceness of thy Fathers wrath for sin, and for a
time (as thou were man) despairing of his gracious prefence.

Be not afraid therefore, O my soul; for as thou art deferted for thy sins
sake, so thou art beloved for thy Saviors sake; though he hide himself behind
the wall (of thy corruption) yet he will graciously look through the lattice
(of thine humiliation) Cant. 2.9: Even this thy present sadness will afford
thee some refreshings, some gracious glimpses of his holy Spirit; and though
thy heart be now disquieted within thee, thou shall again assuredly receive the
voice of joy and gladness. Lord let this teach me to abhor those sins that have
deprived me of thy presence; to seek earnestly to enjoy thee; to rise early to
find thee whom my soul loves; to settle mine affections upon thy beauty, mine
actions upon thy service; that I may be guided by thy grace in this life, and
encompast with thy glory in that to come.

For thou, O my blessed Savior, art infinitely dearer to me than the choicest
of these earthly vanities; their love is false and uncertain, but thine true
and eternal; abundantly sufficient to rejoice me here, to enrich me hereafter.

O Lord my God, my soul longs for thee, I am weary of the sins and miseries
of this life, and nothing can relieve me but thy blessed presence: O make thy
face to shine upon me, and save me for thy mercy sake.

My God, my God, look upon me, why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from
the words of my complaint? O satisfy my longings, for thou know Lord that I
love thee.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and hide not thy face from my supplications, O hide
not thy self from me, nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

Thou have been my succor, therefore leave me not, nor forsake me, O God of my
salvation: Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and save me for thy mercy
sake.

O lead me from the bondage of sin, into the blessed liberty of thy children,
that I may be comforted in the sweetness of thy promises, and thou may be
delighted in the zeal of my performances.

Give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free Spirit; O
hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble, make have and hear me.

Lord, I am defiled with sin, and disquieted with sorrow; I am daily vexed with
temptations, and hourly overcome with vanity; I am wretchedly infolded in the
miseries of mine own corruptions, and woefully beguiled by the devils
subtilties; O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me?

Lord I bewail my misery, and implore thy mercy; O that I were this hour at
union with thee, that I might hereafter joyfully adhere unto thee, be
graciously accepted of thee, and for ever gloriously exalted by thee. Amen.

CHAP. 28. Upon the apprehension of sudden danger.
BLessed God, I know that nothing can befall me without thy holy providence,
even this present danger is by thine appointment, and what thou have designed
it unto I know not, I enquire not; Lord give me a sweet and safe assurance that
I am thine, and then do with me what thou will: O let me live, and I shall
praise thee, and thy judgments shall help me; but if thou haft appointed me
this hour to dye, O let me then go home unto thee, and be united in a safer,
in a sweeter union with thee. Lord hear me, and have mercy on me, for my dear
Saviors sake, who has given his precious life a ransom for me.

Preserve me, O God for in thee have I put my trust; forsake me not, O Lord my
God, be not thou far from me.

Lord strengthen and support my wavering faith, forgive me all my sins, and
suffer not my soul to be surprised in my last extremity.

Have thee to help me, O Lord God of my salvation, for thy names sake, for thy
promise sake, for thy precious blood sake.

Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou
God of truth.

CHAP. 29. Upon the weakness of Faith, and sinfulness of Thoughts tending to
Despair.
HOW much art thou mistaken (O my Soul) to think thy self then farthest off
from God, when thou art nearest unto him; to suppose thy self then most
wretched, when thou art nearest to the paths of happiness? He that never
doubted, never truly believed; and he that has least assurance in himself,
will have most certainty in Christ.

Thou have sinned, and thou art sorrowful; thou have committed great and
grievous sins, and thou abhorrest them, thou forsakest them, thou heartily
desire pardon for them; if thou had not a godly sorrow, thou could not
have this godly desire; if thy sorrow were for punishment, it would cause thy
death, but now it is for sin, it will lead thee to repentance; if thou grievest
not so much for the severe sentence of an incensed Judge, as for the
displeasure of a good and gracious Father, as thou sowest in tears, thou shall
reap in joy, nay thou shall have great joy even in these tears, thou shall have
much sweetness even in this sorrow; and if thy seedtime be sweet, how blessed
will thy harvest be? hear what thy Savior says, Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted; in sorrows here, in eternity of joys hereafter:
who can curse, where God has blessed? what Devil can deject, where God will
exalt?

Thou art grieved for offending thy gracious God, and thou implorest him for
mercy; comfort thy self in this, that God is near unto all those which call
upon him, yea that call upon him faithfully, Psalm. 105.18. Be not afraid
therefore; for if thy faith be weak, yet it is living; if it be languishing, it
will assuredly recover more strength; if there be blossoms now, there will be
fruit hereafter; these happy beginnings will have gracious proceedings, blessed
c^dings.

Consider what thy God has promised by his holy Prophet, I will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, Isay 42.3. Let not the smarting
(therefore) of thy conscience trouble thee, remember who it is that searches
it, I have wounded thee (says God) and I will heal thee, I have broken thee,
and I will bind thee up. Thou art therefore wounded, that thou may be healed;
thou art therefore broken, that thou may be bound up: That sore which is
insensible, is ever most dangerous; and that wound which smarteth most, is most
capable of remedy.

Blessed Lord, I now feel, to mine unspeakable comfort, that thou have wounded
me with the terrors of thy Law, that thou may heal me with the comforts of
thy Gospel; that I am therefore bruised with the burden of my sins, that I may
be ever eased by the merits of my Saviors sufferings; all my imperfections are
his, all his righteousness is mine, I may boldly challenge it, thou will not
deny it, I may safely plead it, thou can not refuse it.

Consider yet further, O my Soul, what thy blessed Savior says unto thee, I
am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were dead,
yet shall be live; and whosever lives and believes in me, shall never dye,
Ioh. 11.25, 26.

How can thou doubt now (O my Soul) when thy Savior bids thee believe,
and live? what can thou fear, when thou have his promise for thy safety?
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one tittle of his Word shall fail.

Let not the number of thy sins affright thee, for it is his blood which
cleanses us from all iniquity, 1 Ioh. 1.7, 9.

Let not the nature of thy sins amaze thee, for though they were red as
scarlet, yet he will make them white as snow.

Let not the long continuance of them stagger thee, for At what time soever a
sinner does repent him of his sins, from the bottom of his heart, I will blot
them out of my remembrance, says the Lord, Ezech. 18.

Thy Co^^cience shall not trouble thee, for Being justified by faith, we have
peace with God, Romans 5.1.

The Devil cannot hurt thee, for Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who
also makes intercession for us, Romans 8.32, 33.

Nay (which is the sum of all) God himself in Justice cannot condemn thee, for
There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. his lustice is satisfied, his Mercy
magnified, his Name be for ever glorified.

Lord let this teach me to rely with comfort on thy blessed promises, and to
walk worchy of them, in my religious performances; to manifest my increase of
grace, by my increase of goodness; to fix my heart wholly upon thee, to love
thee, to fear thee, to honor thee, and assuredly to rest in thee; when thy
grace shall enable me to delight in thy fear, my sins can never persuade me to
despair of thy favor: my peace will be then inviolable, my joy unutterable, my
happiness unalterable.

Blessed Lord God,

When I consider of the wretchedness of mine own corruptions in nature, I am
even ready to despair of thy love; But when I look upon the blessedness of my
condition in Christ, I am then encouraged to sue to thee for mercy and
forgiveness: Allthough thy justice be severe against ane, as I am a grievous
sinner, yet thy mercy is most sweet unto me in my Savior.

I now tremble at thy judgments, yet I rejoice in thy promises; allthough thy
Law speak never so terribly, thy curses be never so many, thy plagues be never
so grievous, thy wrath never so tempestuous, yet in the sweet mercy of my
Savior I am able to abide them all.

O Lord my God, I abhor my self, I accuse my self, I condemn my self, I am now
ready with thy wrath to seize upon my sinful soul, and cast it down to
everlasting misery.

Lord, unto thee only I appeal for mercy and forgiveness: sweet Jesus accept
of me, and interpose thy blessed merits for me; enrich my soul with thy
sufferings, be ever present with me, and eternal comfort to me.

O holy and for ever blesssed Spirit, thou that sanclifiest the souls of thine
Elect, assist and strengthen me; quicken and revive my drooping says, increase
my hope, cherish my love, foment those dying sparks, by the sweet breathings of
thy blessed Spirit, that they may zealously break forth into a pure and fervent
flame of holy affections, to thy great glory, and mine own eternal happiness.
Amen.

CHAP. 30. Upon the great Neglect of the duty of Prayer.
Lord,

WHen I serionsly consider how manifold and great my failings are, when I think
of the shortness and uncertainty of life, of the solemnity of death, of the
eternity of happiness or misery after death, and by all these of the necessity,
usefulness, and excellency of Prayer, I may well wonder that I am ever from my
knees.

My life is all sin, and had therefore need to be all sorrow; the greatness and
continuance of my sins have added to the greatness and continuance of my
misery, and there is none but thou (O Lord) that can relieve me; there is no
coming to thee but by Prayer, and no Prayer powerful with thee, but that which
is fervent.

This is that eye of my affection that wounds the heart of thy compassion;
this is that holy violence that takes Heaven by force, that surpriseth thy
Mercy, that manicles thy Justice, that wrestles with thy Love, and will not let
thee go without a blessing: This is my strong armor to defend me, my daily
food to sustein me, my safe repose to refresh me, my sweet content for ever to
delight me.

Blessed Lord, how wonderful is thy desire to man? how graciously do thou
provide for him? how daily art thou mindful of him? Thy words instruct me, thy
promises allure me, thy graces sustein me, thy sacraments strengthen me, thy
visits comfort me, thy embraces ravish me; And, as if all this were not yet
enough to manifest thy favor toward me, so unspeakable is thy love, so
earnest thy desires unto me, that thou have even given me thy self, to be
overcome by me. Lord, thou art all love, when I strive with thee for mercy, I
overcome thee by thy self; how great is thy goodness? how tender are thy
mercies unto man, for whose sake thou contendest even with thine own Essence?
Thou have given thy Son to die for me, and in him thy self to be overcome by me.

Lord, let this teach me to renew my acquaintance often with thee, to labor to
be powerful in my prayers; to study to be humble, zealous, earnest, even
importunate in my devotions; to let no sinful thought pass me without a sigh,
no sinful action without holy contrition, no divine favors, without devout
and thankful acknowledgement: That soul which is truly sensible of the burden
of sin, will hasten unto that heavenly help that can give it ease, and that
heart which is once truly inflamed with thy love, will readily instruct ^he
tongue to be zealous in thy praise. Lord let me first seek mine own heart,
before I presume to come before thy Mercy seat, lest if I recall it not from
the vanities of this life, my very prayers become sin, and so while I expect a
blessing, I deserve a curse.

Let no vain excuse, no barren pretense of this life, persuade me to intermit
this holy duty, lest carelessness, and coldness in devotion, beget in me a
loathing of that course, which by constant practice will become my constant
comfort: I ord make me to consider of the sweetness, of the excellency of this
gift, that I may daily labor to improve it to my souls eternal happiness,
That when I often fall (as I needs must through the weakness of the flesh)
thou, O Lord, in mercy may restore me through my blessed importunity of
spirit.

With grief of heart (Lord) I confess, that my great neglect of this holy duty,
has most justly occasioned the great abatement of thy holy Spirit in me, and
long withholdings of thine outward blessings from me.

Lord give me yet an heart to serve thee, and then take from me what thou will:
I desire nothing with out thee; for I know assuredily, that with thee I cannot
but enjoy all things needful for me.

O make me to bewail mine own unworthiness, my drownsiness, my dullness, my
carelessness, my much untowardness in thy service: Create in me a clean heart (O
Lord) and renew a right spirit within me, that I may praise thee with alacrity,
and fervency of soul; that I may be daily ravished with contemplation of
eternity, and hourly satisfy my thoughts with apprehension of the sweetness of
my present safety, of my future glory.

Lord make me every day more earnest in this holy duty; O give me such
affectionate desires, such holy longings, such insatiate appetites, such
earnest importunities of heart for heavenly graces, that I may not only beg of
thee, but even wrestle with thee for this blessing, although the sinful
desires of my corrupt flesh go halting to the grave.

Be merciful unto me (O Lord) for my soul trusts in thee, and in the shadow
of thy wings will I make my refuge until these calamities (of sins and
miseries) be overpast.

Lord hear the voice of my humble petitions when I cry unto thee, when I hold
up my hands toward thy Mercy seat, show thy servant the light of thy
countenance, and save me for thy mercy sake. Ps. 28.2. Ps 31.18.

CHAP. 31. Upon the great neglect of Reading the sacred Scriptures.
Alas my soul, how unbeseeming thy profession is this thy backwardness to holy
duties? how long will thou grovell on this element of earth? how long be
cheated with these counterfeit commodities, these childish toys of outward
enjoyments? what sweetness can thou find in those things which favor of
corruption? what comfort in those joys which are but vain, vexatious, toylsom,
transitory? whose seeming beauties are suddenly passing, never returning: O let
this move thee to delight in that which cannot pass, to remember whence thou
art, and whether thou art going, that thou may thereby raise thy thoughts to
immortality.

Look upon the beauty of those sacred leaves, and thou will loath the falsehood
of this worlds embraces: Thou may there find the sum of all that was, or is,
or is to come, conducing to thy real happiness; There is nature unbowelled,
hell opened, and heaven unveiled; Thou may there see the creature to be
vanity, thy self misery, thy Savior felicity; Thou have there his counsel to
guide thee, his wisdom to instruct thee, his power to sustein thee, his gifts
to encourage thee, his threatenings to admonish thee, his mercies to allure
thee, his judgments to deter thee, his holy Spirit to comfort thee: There is
antiquity, strangeness, truth, in history; wonder in miracles, amazement in
prophecy, foundness in precepts, sweetness in promises; each syllable
contained in this Book is matter of eternal moment. Take heed therefore, that
thou passest by no portion of th^s sacred volume lightly, nor pryest into any
presumptuously; holy diligence is often blessed with heavenly knowledge, and
humble ignorance, with heavenly grace.

Lord, seeing that thy word is in it self so excellently rich, and in its use
so absolutely good, with what earnestn^ss of soul ought I to embrace it? with
what holy diligence peruse it? with what devout cheerfulness, and constancy of
heart, apply my self unto it? These high perfecti^^s shall religiously oblige
me to repair my former neglects, by my present promises of my future
performances.

No day shall henceforth pass me, without some time allotted for this holy
exercise, custo^ will make it easy, profit sweet; if the troublesome affairs of
this lise do sometimes (to my soul grief) distu^b me in it (by thy grace
assisting) they shall never divert me from it; what is borrowed from this
blessed task, by enforced necessity, shall be repayed with advantage by the
next happy opportunity. Lord, all is but vanity and mere nothing, in compare of
thee, and thy service: If I cannot be willingly holy, I shall never be joyfully
happy.

Blessed Lord,

So sanctify my sinful soul, that I may joyfully perform those promises I
make unto thee; that I may daily dedicate some part and portion of my sinful
hours, to read some portion of thy sacred Scriptures: O let them ever be the
joy of my joy, the life of my life, the light of mine eyes, and comfort of my
heart.

Lord turn away mine eyes (from these outward enjoyments) lest they behold
vanity, and quicken me in thy way.

Give me an humble soul, that I may read thy blessed lines with holy fear and
awful reverence; that I may be piously delighted with them, and happily
instructed by them.

Give me a discerning soul, that I may see the wonderful things of thy law,
that I may truly love it, and delight in it, that my heart may be inflamed by
it, and my tongue be ever talking of it.

O let thy Statutes be my song in the house of my pilgrimage, that I may walk
in thy ways with constancy, that I may run in thy race with fervency. Amen.

CHAP. 32. Upon the neglect of Divine Meditation.
WHat do thou here on earth, O my soul? why art thou so perplexed with the
cares and sorrows of this sinful life? so careless of the joys in that to
come? Who can judge him likely to inherit Heaven, that loves not to think of
it? Thou may measure thy degrees of Grace, by thy desires of Glory: If thy
thoughts be not often, and earnestly taken up with this subject, thou have just
cause to suspect thy loving, to fear thy enjoying it; for, Where thy treasure
is, there will thy heart be also.

If thou live the life of Pleasure, thou art so much worse than a beast, by
how much thou ought by reason to be better; if of Action, thou art so much
nearer to happiness, as reason is beyond sense, and yet so much farther off, as
Grace is beyond Nature; if the happy life of heavenly Meditation, thou art so
far above vanity, as heaven is above earth, as immotality above nature, as
glory above corruption.

O how sweet are those thoughts which lead me to Eternity, which raise my soul
above the reach of humane misery, that can support me under all the heavy
pressures of sin, under all the grievous burdens of sorrow, under all the sharp
assaults of Satan; that (...) make me merry in life, and triumphant in death.

Nothing can more truly represent me to my self, and inform me that I am all
earthly, than the dullness and backwardness of my thoughts to be heavenly: Who
can ever hope to be an inhabitant of that City, whose language he cannot
speak? Lord, when my thoughts are more zealously affected with thy heavenly
joys, I shall then hope to be more frequently acquainted with thy heavenly
visits; by my careless neglect of the one, I am now justly deprived of the
sweet enjoyments of the other; while I am wedded to this wretched world, my
thoughts must needs favor of corruption: But if thou, Lord, wilt once open
mine eyes to see the glorious beauty of my heavenly home, I shall then know,
and joyfully confess, that one hour thus spent, will add more comfort to my
fool, more true content to my desires, than all these outward blessings, and I
shall then account, and joyfully confess with thy Apostle, that all things are
but loss, and dung, in compare of the richness of thy love in Christ Jesus.

For thou, O blessed Savior, art the blessed Fountain of eternal happiness;
the joy of my heart, the triumph of my joy, the comfort of my life, the safety
of my body, the rest of my soul; without thee I am far worse than nothing, and
with thee I enjoy all things; for thou art in the Father, and I in thee, and
thou in me; and in this happy union is contained that fruition, is enjoyed that
for ever-blessed vision, in which the souls and bodies of thy Saints eternally
delight themselves.

O thou sovereign of my souls eternal comfort, how unworthy am I to enjoy
thee, that have been hitherto so much un^indfull of thee? how undeserving to
behold thee in thy glory, that am so daily guilty of thy great dishonor?

Lord raise my thoughts to immortality, and fix my soul upon the love of sweet
eternity; let my chiefest joy be, ever to contemplate thee, who art my chiefest
good.

Pardon those wretched hours that have been lost in search of outward
happiness; O make me to redeem them, by abandoning the creature, and placing
mine affections wholly on the beauty of the great Creator; expatiate my
sinful soul with daily meditations of my future joys, that I may love thee
more fervently, fear thee more dutifully, desire thee more earnestly, long for
thee more heartily, embrace thee more faithfully, and think of thee more
joyfully, to my lives end. Amen.

CHAP. 33. Upon unchristianlike Dejectedness in Poverty.
WHY do I excruciate my soul with apprehension of a seeming evil? how
unworthy am I of this life, which I hold from that God, whom I dare not trust?
will God feed me with the delicates of heaven, and not give me bread? will he
give me full draughts of the rivers of his eternal pleasures, and not afford
me temporal refreshments? shall my death be precious in his eyes, and my life
uncomfortable in mine own? can there be any evil, and the Lord has not done
it? shall he do it, and shall I complain? if poverty be evil in it self, yet
it is good for me; the evil of sin has drawn upon me this evil of
punishment; so this evil is from nature, and the good from grace: By this
affliction I am weaned from the world, and made desirous of my heavenly home; I
am now put in mind, that my treasure being there, my heart should be there
also; I am now fully assured (by my patience and humility under this
affliction, and by the quiet fruits of righteousness it daily brings forth in
me) that I am Gods child; that as I am now made partaker of my Saviors
sufferings, so I shall be hereafter of his glory; that I part with earthly
contentments, to enjoy heavenly comforts. Lord, when thou lendest me thy staff
of consolation, I shall be well able to endure thy rod of affliction; all
though my body be worse, I shall then find my soul to be much better, my
present condition happy, my future blessed.

In what estate soever I am, I will think that best, because thou (Lord) have
put me there: if my calling be low, my account will be the less; if I discharge
this faithfully, I shall not lose my reward. Thou, O Lord, look not upon my
greatness, but my goodness, my faithfulness in thy service: A pin in thy
material Temple was as useful as a stone; if I be any thing in thy
spiritual, it is enough; yet let me not content my self with easiness and
indifferency in heavenly blessings, but labor to supply mine outward wants by
inward graces; so shall this earthly bitterness be turned into spiritual
sweetness, and eternal blessedness.

Thou (O Lord) have allotted me my portion in this life, most agreeable to thy
Divine Wisdom, most suitable to my frail condition; and why take I then
thought for to morrow? sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof: Thou
allowest me lawful means for increasing of it, thou forbiddest me repining
thoughts to distrust thee in it; Lord let me first seek thy Kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof, and then I know assuredly, that all things needful for
me shall be added to me.

O thou blessed Savior of the world, who for my sake were willing to endure
the scornful poverty of this life, to purchase my redemption, teach me by
thine example, and for thy sake, to undervalue all the glorious pomps of these
enticing vanities, that though my body be despised by the world, my sinful
soul may be accepted with thee, and both soul and body may eternally be happy
where thou art.

Lord, by how much (by thy great sufferings) thou were made the vilder for me,
by so much (by thy rich mercy) let thy love be ever dearer to me.

O give me graces suitable to all events; let not prosperity puff me up, nor
adversity too much deject me; but for thy mercy sake, let happiness in Christ
be all in all unto me; make me humble in the one, patient in the other,
thankful in either, bappy in both.

Grant (Lord) that no ungodly care, or sinful sorrow, may disturb me, but that
I may with willingness, and thankfulness, and joyfulness of heart, contentedly
rely upon thee.

Enrich my heart with heavenly thoughts, give me that better part which cannot
be taken from me; Lord, what thou deniest me of these outward comforts, make
good unto me by thine inward mercies, that all these earthly things may work
together to the best to mine advantage, so shall my present poverty be an
undoubted earnest of my future glory. Amen.

CHAP. 34. Upon Sickness, and ungodly repining thereat.
AS every good and perfect gift is from above, so is also every punishment for
sin, by every proportion of sorrow; For misery comes not out of the dust,
neither does affliction spring out of the earth, Job 1.5, 6. That Divine
Goodness, which wisely and affectionately disposes all things to the good of
his chosen, by his holy providence has suited their degrees, limited their
powers, and appointed their ends; every pain in sickness, every pang in death,
have their just number, weight, and measure.

I't is the Lord, let him do what he will; nothing can befall me, but by his
Divine allowance; nothing shall dismay me, that my God inflicteth on me: if my
visitation be grievous, I am sure it is safe, For He chastises me for my
profit, that I may be partaker of his holiness.

Blessed be that sorrow which allureth me from sin, blessed be that misery that
inviteth me to mercy, (...) kiss it, I embrace it, and with humbleness of heart
I joyfully and patiently submit unto it: The Lord gives, and the Lord takes,
blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1.21.

I humbly confess (Lord) that my great and grievous sins have most justly
deserved this great and grievous affliction, that thou might long since have
deprived me of my life, for depriving thee of thine honor; that I am most
unworthy of this thy gentle visitation, for I am full of rottenness and
corruption, and therefore can expect no other, but to be filled with sorrow and
affliction; thou have given me a body for thy service, but I have defiled it
with sin and wickedness; thou gave me a soul enriched with thy heavenly
graces, but I have defaced it with unthankfulness and disobedience; no faculty
of my soul, no member of my body, but are most impure, and sinful in thy
sight. Thou (O Lord) know all my foolishness, and my faults are not hid from
thee; thou see how vainly I have misspent my precious time, how carelessly
abused that continued health which thou have given me; how seriously been
busied on the Creature, how wretchedly neglected thee the great Creator.

Thou have often weaned me from sin, by thy blessed motions, by thy gracious
admonitions, by thy gentle visitations, by a wasted body, and a wounded soul;
and yet I still sin, without ceasing, without sorrowing, without repenting;
such are my faults, so grievovs mine offenses, that I now blush to name those
sins before thee, by which I have so often and so foolishly rebelled against
thee: and now after all this, allthough thou have with lasting patience waited
my return, and art enforced to withdraw thy present mercy, yet thou art moved
to behold my present misery, ev^n in thy very wrath thou have compassion on me,
Habac. 3.2. while thou seem (by this present sickness) to withhold thy
favor from me, thou graciously intendest, by this blessed means, to show thy
self more lovingly unto me; for, I know Lord, that thy judgments are just, and
that thou of very faithfulnesshast caused me to be troubled, Psalm. 119.75.
Theresore, Though thou killest me, yet will I trust in thee, Job 13.15. Though
I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no evil,
Psalm. 23.4. Behold Lord, I am willingly, and joyfully, and thankfully in thy
hands, do with me what thou will; if I live, I shall praise thee; if I dye (I
trust) I shall go home unto thee, and be for ever blessed with thee.

O thou Father of mercies, and God of all consolations, behold me thy sick
servant, with thine eye of pity and compassion; O remember not my former sins,
but have mercy upon me (O Lord) and that soon, for I am come unto great
extremity.

O Lord my God, I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the
day long; thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the
iniquities of my youth; O let the sweetness of thy mercy qualify the sharpness
of thy Fatherly correction; consider me, O Lord, that I am but dust, full of
frailties and infirmities, forgive me for thy mercy sake.

Remember not the sinful failings of my youth, but according to the richness
of thy goodness, be thou mindful of me.

O righteous Father, look not on the multitude and hainousness of mine
offenses, but look upon the bitter passion of thy blessed Son, he was wounded
for my transgressions, he was broken for mine iniquities, O by his (blessed)
stripes let my sinful soul be healed.

Enable me to suffer this thy gentle visitation, with that meekness, and
contentedness of soul, that becomes thy child; and so bless it unto me, that
it may bring forth in me the quiet and the happy fruits of righteousness, that
it may drive my thoughts to immortality, and fix my soul upon eternity.

Blessed Lord, my hope is in thee, my soul trusts in thee, and under the
shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, until this misery be overpast. O Lord
consider my complaint, for I am brought very low.

Let my present anguish more prevail with thee, to move thee to compassion,
than my former foolishness, to stir thy wrath and indignation: O enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for no flesh is righteous in thy sight.

Lord, I confess my wickedness, and am sorry for my sin; for thy Names sake, O
Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great; my confusion is daily before
me, and the shame of my face has covered me, my heart is disquieted within me,
and the fear of death is fallen upon me: Lord, I am thine, O save me for thy
mercy sake; into thy hands I commend my self, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord
thou God of Truth.

Forsake me not, O Lord my God, be not thou far from me, have thee to help me,
O Lord God of my salvation. O spare me, for thy mercy sake, that I may recover
my strength, before I go hence, and be no more seen. Amen.

CHAP. 35. Upon the misery of Life, and blessedness of Death.
I am a Pilgrim, and a Stranger here, as all my Fathers were, I am wearied out
with travel, and long to be at rest; I am lodged here, but with great cost,
and greater danger; this seeming sweetness has cost me much true sorrow, many
bitter sighs, and aching hearts, disturbance of body, distraction of soul; I
have sought for help here below, but can find none, no creature on earth to
relieve me, none to support me; I have seen pleasure to be folly, and laughter
madness, men of low degree to be vanity, of high degree a lie, their
understanding vain, their labors vain, their help much more vain; for who can
ransom the soul of his brother? surely man must let that alone for ever. My
substance is a mere shadow, and my rest unquietness; I labor for holiness, but
I cannot attain it; I search for happiness, but I cannot find it; the Devil
beguiles me of it, the World allures me from it; yea (so sad is my condition)
that mine own soul is against mine own contentment: Mine understanding cosens
me, mine affections betray me, my memory forsakes me; those things which I
would do, I cannot, and I daily do those things which I would not; all that I
am, all that I can be in this life, is nothing else but extreme vanity.

What shall I think of all this? and wherewith shall I comfort me? by thy
mercy, Lord, I have found out one that can relieve me; Thou (O my blessed
Savior) art unto me life, and by thee death is unto me advantage; while my
body sleeps it shall rest, and that rest shall be truly blessed; I shall rest
from labor, from sorrow, from sin; my sleep shall be safe, my vision happy;
while my body sleeps my soul shall awake; when my soul is uncloathed of
flesh, and my flesh of beauty, my spirit shall be made ready with the robes of
glory; while my dust is insensible, my spirit is intelligible; mine eyes shall
be then opened, and I shall see even as I am seen, with purity, and perfection
of soul; no veil of nature shall obscure me, no defect of organes hinder me, no
clouds of sin molest me; mine understanding shall be clear, mine affections
pure, my memory perfect; I shall there be satisfied in beholding, ravished in
enjoying, blessed in reteining: nothing can be there wanting where I enjoy all
that was, that is, that is to come; where the happy humanity is eternally
united to the blessed deity, where I am Christ's, and Christ is Gods. O happy
condition of my sinful body, O blessed change of my immortal soul, the one is
sown in corruption that it may rise to immortality; the other lays down
corruption, to inher it glory; though I now leave it, I still long to enjoy it,
and joy exceedingly in longing for it, because I know I shall for ever be
united to it.

But woe is me, even in this happiness I am still miserable, I have found out my
quiet, but I care not to enjoy it; death offers me a crown, and I refuse to
accept it; am I so senseless to affect mine own unhappiness? to rejoice in
labor, and complain of rest? what do I here any longer? the world loves me
not, nor I it; why do I thus dote upon mine enemy? when it frowns it afflicts
me, when it smiles it betrays me; there is nothing in it but weariness and
misery.

Go out therefore, O my soul, go out cheerfully, from thy prison to thy palace,
God is thy father, and heaven thy country; thou art here distressedly poor, and
wretchedly naked, bereaved of graces, dispoyled of goodness, thou have there
much treasure, and of great price, a fair mansion, and a goodly heritage;
Christ has purchased it, and is gone before to prepare it: Thou longest much
in this life to behold that which thou never saw; here are great and
glorious things prepared for thee, such as eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man to conceive; how earnestly
should thou long to see them? how much more earnestly to enjoy them? how
willingly should this make thee to express thy self with holy David, and say,
My soul is athirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall I come and
appear before the presence of my God?

Alas my soul, thou art here but groping in the dark, daily erring and
mistaking, hourly stumbling and salling into sin, into shame, into sorrow; in
great danger of the miseries of life, in greater of the torments of eternal
death.

All that thou know here is to know thy self ignorant: Thou only know
things here by their events, thou shall there know them in their first causes;
thou art here wearied out in gaining this imperfect, lame, and empty knowledge,
thou shall there delight thy self in knowing all that is desirable, by knowing
him in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; these drops of
transitory joys are full of bitterness, those rivers of eternal pleasures,
are derived from the fountain of eternal sweetness; thou have here vain pomp
to delight thee, thou have there a far greater and more exceeding weight of
glory to encompass thee; thou art here enthralled by the misery of life, thou
art there enlarged by the blesedness of death.

Blessed Lord, all this by grace I know, and saithfully believe; and yet by
nature I am still blind, and ignorant, unable to discern, unwilling to desire
those blessed things which are belonging to mine everlasting peace; but when
thou (in thy rich mercy) shall once open mine eyes, to see the beauty of my
heavenly home, I shall then entirely love it, and unfeignedly long for it; I
shall then most willingly forsake these tottering walls of my frail flesh, to
dwell with thee in p^rfect holiness and endless happiness, that frailty may be
swallowed up of immortality, and immortality may be embraced by eternity.

O thou which were; and art to come, who have sweetened death by thy perfect
obedience, and perfumed the grave by thy blessed sufferings, suffer me not in
my last hour, for any pains of death, or terrors of hell, to fall from the fast
hold of a true and lively faith in thy promises, to lose the precious hopes of
immortality, and sweet enjoyments of eternity.

Lord let me then say with thy blessed Apostle, That I know whom I have
trusted, that he will keep what I have delivered to him, and restore it safely
unto me at that day.

Let me seriously consider of the misery of life, and blessedness of death;
acquaint, me every day with the remembrance of it, and bless me every hour with
a desire unto it; that I may willingly uncloath my self of sin and misery, and
joyfully be clothed upon with immortality.

O Lord prepare me for that blessed hour, and in my greatest weakness and
extremity, even then when all the comforts of this wretched life shall fail me,
Lord Jesus forsake me not, be not thou far from me.

O give me then that inward joy, that blessed comfort of thy holy Spirit, that
may support and comfort me in all the terrors and amazements of this dark and
unknown passage, in all the dreadful accusations of the devil, and mine own
accusing conscience.

Lord let thy blessed Spirit then witness to my soul, that I am thy child, that
thou will purge away all my dross, and take away all my sins; that I am
powerfully protected by thy grace, and shall assuredly be made partaker of thy
glory. Amen.

CHAP. 36. Upon the great Neglect of Opportunities in doing good unto the
Saints.
Lord,

WHen I call to mind the richness, and the largeness of thy bounty toward me,
I am much grieved at the coldness, and the carelessness of my affections toward
thine; each object of charity is an opportunity of mercy; If I neglect it, I am
unkind to thee my Savior, cruel to my neigbour, injurious to mine own soul.

I am not, lord, but Steward of thine outward blessings, and it were now just
with thee, to call me to a strict account: If any of thy Saints suffer, which
thou sendest unto me for relief, their sufferings thou will surely require at
my hands: as each cup of cold water which I have given in thy name, shall not
lose its reward, so each farthing which I ow unto thee in thy members, will
assuredly require its everlasting punishment.

I have been too carefully solicitous for the things of this life, too caresly
negligent of the treasures in that to come: I have had many ways to deprive my
self of my present comfort, of my future happiness; when my talent has been
large, I have had no leisure, when little, no ability to works of mercy. The
present necessities of thy Saints have been daily neglested, upon the false
pretense of future opportunities; and those future opportunities again put off
by the dilatory plea of mine own present necessities: Thus have I long kept my
self in a circulation of self-couzenage, and have so lived here as if I were
never to go hence, and were utterly ignorant for what cause I came hither.

From whence is this my great neglect of charity toward my brethren, but from
my greater want of love to thee my God, and from whence my disobedience to thy
precepts, but from mine unbelief of thy promises? Thou biddest me Give, and
have promised it shall be given unto me, good measure, shaken together, pressed
down, and running over, Luke 6.38. Thou command me not to be weary in well
doing, and have promised, that in due time I shall reap, if I faint no^ Ephesians.
6.9. If I did believe the one, I should gladly perform the other; and whose
word shall I take (Lord) if I dare to question thine? All thy blessed promises
are Yea and Amen, the beginning sweet, the end certain; as thou have a bottle
for my tears, and a bag for my transgressions, so thou have also a book for
mine Alms-deeds, Acts, 10.4. Not one of them shall be forgotten, but even the
very least of them shall be ^raciously accepted, gloriously rewarded; not for
my work sake, but for thy promise sake, no: for mine own sake, but for my
Saviors sake: Lord I can merit nothing at thy hands but by thine own mercy.

And now Lord, let me examine, What I have gained, by my want of charity. I
have exchanged Heaven to enjoy earth, I have parted with thee my Savior, in
whom are all the treasures that are true and crernall, for the very basest part
of earth, which is vain and uncertain; I have lost those blessed opportunities
of doing good which can never be recalled, and together with them, those
rewards of thine, which shall never be enjoyed. I have offended thee my God,
grieved thy Saints, burdened mine own conscience, and been an utter enemy to
mine own salvation.

As my affections have been frozen toward others, so have I justly found the
gifts and graces of thy holy Spirit, decaying daily in mine own soul; my love
cold to thy law, mine ears deaf to thy precepts, my mouth dumb to thy praises;
my faith dead to thy promises, my hope fainting, my zeal languishing, my joy
perishing. These are the sad and sure effects of want of charity, the beginning
sinful, the progress dangerous, the end desperate.

Lord, if those heavenly spirits, whose very names import their ardency of love
to thy glory, are yet found cold enough in thy sight, with what horror and
confusion of face, will those wretched souls appear before thee, who have not
been so much as lukewarm in thy service?

By thy grace (Lord) I will therefore henceforth make a godly improvement of
all future opportunities of doing good; wharsoever thine allowance is unto me,
of these outward blessings, I will dedicate some due proportion of it unto
works of mercy; and cheerfully, and thankfully, trust thee my God with the
sustentation of my body, upon whose blessed protection, I safely rely for the
eternal preservation of my soul.

my heart, my hand, my tongue, mine actions, shall be allwaies ready to relieve
the necessities, to promote the good of thy children; and as this happy
resolution has had its beginning from thy grace, so shall its aim be wholly at
thy glory.

Blessed Lord,

Such is thy gracious goodness unto thine, that thou even preventest them with
thy blessings; while they call upon thee thou art ready to answer, and before
they speak unto thee thou art willing to hear.

Lord, I am thy child, and am therefore bold to crave a blessing of thee, and
what is now more suitable to my necessities, than the sweet infusion of thy
holy Spirit? for I now find (to my grief of heart) that the foreign heat of the
pleasures and profits of this life, have extracted from me the inward heat of
my desires and longings for thy blessed presence; the adventitious heat of the
love of this world, has quite consumed in me the natural heat of my zeal to
thy kingdom.

Lord, kindle in me those decaying sparks of thy grace, that they may now grow
up into a bright flame of fervent affections to thy glory, and thy childrens
good.

Teach me to know that godliness is great gain, and that the truest treasures
are those which are laid up with thee in thy Kingdom.

Lord, pardon my neglects of holy duties; forgive my deadness, and my dullness
unto works of mercy; repair my sinful breaches by thy present graces: O let
the fervor of my future charity become a pleasing sacrifise to expiate my
former misery; to reconcile my soul (in Christ) to endless mercy. Amen.

CHAP. 37. Upon the deceitfulness of the heart in the performance of holy
duties.
NOthing is more common amongst Christians than to be deluded by the show of
holy actions; the heart of man is deceitful above all things, who can know it?
holy performances are usually accompanied with hellish temptations; when the
Ship of our souls is under sail, and has the freshest way for heaven, we have
then most need to look to our steerage, to have an eye to the compass and
landmarks.

Which of our holy duties (which are the ships we sail in to the port of
happiness) have not their rocks to split upon, or Remoraes to hinder them, or
cross winds to divert them, or leaks to sink them, or seas to overwhelm them?
when we arrive at any small measure of goodness, we many times rest in it, and
grow secure upon it: if grace carry us on farther, we are too apt to believe
that we are far better than our neighbors, that we are highly in Gods favor,
and cannot but deserve his fatherly protection, his liberal remuneration; and
so by this secret insinuation of pride in our hearts, we have folly in our
hands, sin in our minds, and shame in our actions.

That prayer is very rare, that is not fick of some distemper; that charity
very pure, that can admit of no mistakes, and that performance very perfect,
that is not soyled with some filth of wickedness: How willing are our thoughts
to wander in our prayers? how cold and careless are we in them? and how remils
in the performance of them? where is that constancy, that fervency, that holy
importunity of spirit that is required of us in this holy exercise? which of us
can truly say, that (throughout the whole course of his whole life hitherto) he
ever put up one prayer unto Almighty God, that was not cumbred with distracted
thoughts, that needed not a present pardon? I tremble at mine own, and grieve
at others failings (O let my severest censures of my brothers sins, be assured
signs of my best love) How far are we (even the very best of us) from that
purity, and perfection of soul which becomes this holy duty? and yet how ready
are we, even the very worst of us, to believe our selves sufficiently holy,
assuredly happy?

We content our selves usually with the very shells, and husks, and outsides of
Religion; with shows and shadows of devotion; with customary, cold prayers;
intermitted, undigested readings; careless, inconsiderate meditations;
hypocritall, pharisaical fastings; popular Almsdeeds, having only the show of
godliness, but denying the power thereof: All these, and whatsoever else are
like to these, are odious to God, abominable to good men, and most destructive
to their souls that are deluded by them.

When, by the sweet assistance of the heavenly goodness, and gentle breathings
of his blessed Spirit, we are drawing nearer to our haven; when the aguish
distempers of the soul are abated, and her native and radical heat is grown
strong and vigorous; when the fervencie of our zeal is a rich evidence of the
liveliness of our faith, of the certainty of our hope, of the perfection of our
charity; when our affections are inflamed with Gods love, and our actions aim
only at his glory; when we are grown up to that happy state of grace, that our
consciences are pure, our resolutions godly, our conversations unblamable;
allthough we dare not then propose these base and by respects, these outward
aims, unto out selves, yet how cunningly and closely will corruptions Real in
upon us, even in these very blessed acts of grace? This is too truly proved,
too sadly experienced, even by the very best of Christians: Lord (in thy rich
mercy) give us eyes to discern it, hearts to avoid it.

How often may we find pride in our humility, lust in our desires of chastity,
our own private ends in our proposals of Gods public interest? when we bear a
part amongst the mourners of Syon, when we are cast down for some humane
frailty, we presently conceive highly of our own holiness, and very meanly of
others in their relations unto happiness; while we have sought to become
better, by the proposal of some strict rules, to preserve chastity, have we
not many times become worse, by poisoning those very defires by unclean
thoughts, and uncleaner actions? How many while they have sincerely aimed at
Gods glory, by the holy proposal, and happy performance of some real good,
for the benefit of his children, have been secretly surprised with the by-end
of their own deserved praise? Lord, how readily have I now met with mine own
sins, to thy great glory, and mine own deserved slame? I willingly confess,
that I am guilty of all this, and infinitely more than this; even these very
lines are witnesses against me, of my secret corruptions; O let this my
sorrowful confession purchase for me thy free and full remission, that thou
may have the glory, I the comfort, of these weak endeavors.

And now Lord, seeing I am thus impure, and sinful in mine own eyes, even in
the very best of my performances, how loathsome must I needs appear in thy
sight, who art Purity it self, and can not behold iniquity! Blessed Lord, as
thou have given me the light of thy Word to discover me unto my self, so give
me also the sword of thy Spirit, to deliver me from my self.

Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man, from mine ownsecret corruptions, and
unknown abominations.

Allthough I am unto mine own soul both ruin and destruction yet let my
blessed Savior be unto me safety and salvation.

Search my heart (O Lord) and try my reins; O let no base and by-respects
inhabit there, to rob thee of thine honor; no false and vain respects, to
cheat me of my present holiness, and future bappiness.

Pardon and pass by the secret and unknown errors of my sinful life, suppress
the great disturbances turbances of my corrupt affections, allthough they many
times prevail against me, yet let thy saving grace (Lord) be sufficient for me.

Lord make me purely and entirely holy; let me love holiness, neither for fear
of thy punishments, nor for hope of thy rewards, but for thy sake only (O my
God) who art holiness it self. Let me never think my self holy enough, but
forget all those holy actions which are past, and press hard forward toward
the mark, for the rich price of the high calling in Christ Jesus.

Lord crown my holy desires with happy performances, and blessed perseverance,
that at the end of my race I may receive the end of my hopes, the salvation of
my precious soul, and that for his sake, and perfect holiness, by whom I trust
these weak and sinful endeavors of mine, shall be graciously accepted, and
faithfully rewarded. Amen.

CHAP. 38. Upon the unruliness of the Tongue, with necessary cautions to
restrain it.
Lord,

THY servant David is said to be a man after thine own heart, and yet I find
him setting a watch before his lips, that he might not offend with his congue:
if such a chosen vessel as he had so much need of circumspection, what holy
cautions had I need to use, what strict rules to observe, who am so far from
David's purity, that I am nothing else but wilful impiety? I am so far (Lord)
from being at union with thee, that I am even enmity it self against thee.

In vain had holy David set a watch before his lips, unless he had first set a
guard upon his heart; where the fountain is impure, the streams can never be
wholesome; if the heart be full of sinful corruption, the tongue will soon
overflow with corrupt and sinful communication.

Lord, I need none other proof of this point, than mine own sinful failings;
how often have I provoked thee to anger, and displeasure against me, by that
usual, but most fearful sin of swearing? of which, with shame and sorrow I
confess, my younger years were sadly guilty; since when, time and experience
having added more light to my mind, but thou (O Lord) especially more grace to
my heart, when I would have left it, to my great grief I could not; and had not
that thy saving and preventing grace restrained my depraved nature, this sin
had doubtless been a sad memorial to my grave: such is the power of sin once
grown habitual. O let my sorrowful confession be the readers useful
instruction, that thou may have the glory, I the shame of my mis-doing.

Lord, I have often sinned against thee, by my wretched violation of the truth,
in envious detractions from the good of my neighbor, vainglorious aggravations
of mine own abilities, censorious taxations of my brethrens infirmities,
indulgent diminutions of mine own iniquities.

I have often grieved thy good Spirit, by which thou have sealed me up unto the
day of redemption, by my vain and idle communications, by my rash and sinful
exprobations, by my weak and froward objurgations, to the great dishonor of
thee my God, to the cominuall grief of thy Saints, to the sad disturbance of my
self.

All this (to my hearts grief) have I often done, and by all this I may now
plainly see, how much I have hitherto been the servant of sin, and Satan, how
great an enemy to thy glory, and to the good of mine own soul: But now, Lord,
by thine assistance, my special care shall henceforth be, to allow my self no
liberty of speech, but what is aiming at Eternity; if my heart be heavenly, my
words will be gracious, my actions holy, mine end happy; and that all this may
be so indeed (by thy grace Lord) I will observe with carefulness, and
constancy, these following cautions.

1. Before I speak, I will consider, that I am in thy blessed presence, that
what is once ^p^k^n can never be recalled, but is recorded for eterternity.

2. That each idle word must be accounted for, and that my whole life hitherto
has been little else but vain and empty discourse, tending much to thy
dishonor, the hurt of my neighbor, and (without mercy in Christ) the
destruction of my own soul.

3. That there is no truer testimony of a graceless heart, than a licentious
tongue; that if I be not holy in my discourse, I can never be happy in mine
actions.

4. That it is impossible for those prayers to be pleasing to God, which are
offered up with that sinful member, that is so shamefully defiled with evil
and corrupt communications amongst men.

5. That if I make a mock at Christianity, by having only a form of godliness
in mine outward actions, but denying the power thereof in my usual
conversation, God will one day pay me home, by showing me the richness of his
sufferings, but denying me the benefits thereof, and the sweet enjoyments
thereby.

6. That without helinesse no man shall see the Lord; and that such as is my
common, and most accustomed discourse in my life, I may well fear will be my
last, and most uncomfortable expressions at my death.

7. Unto all this I will add the shortness, misery, and uncertainty of a
sinful life; the horror and amazement of a wretched death; the extremity and
eternity of torments after death. Lord, when my heart is thus guarded by thy
grace, my lips I trust will be ever open to thy praise.

Blessed God,

If thy holy Angel durst not give railing accusations against the devil; if
thy Sainss in patience possess their own souls, and their speeches he
seasoned with salt, administering grace to the hearts of the hearers; if thou
the blessed Savior of the world, when thou were reviled, reviledst not again,
but as a lamb before the shearers so openedst thou not thy mouth, with what
comfort can I now appear before thee, with what confidence expect a blessing
from thee?

With grief and sorrow I confess, that my heart has ever been full of
corruption, and naughtiness, my mouth full of cursing and bitterness, my
daily discourse full of folly and uncleanness, the whole course of my life
full of misery and wickedness.

O that my head were water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night (that I might mourn continually) for mine own and others
sins.

Lord purify my heart, and rectify my tongue, that both may be accepted of
thee, and now and ever graciously directed by thee.

Lord, I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me; O let the
sorrowful remembrance of my sins invite thee to a sweet remembrance of thy
mercies, that thou may have the praise, and I the comfort of thy gracious
pardon.

Lord let my heart be inflamed with thy love, and my mouth filled with thy
praise, that I may sacrifile my oul unto thee, that I may sanctify my soul
before thee, by devout thoughts, by gracious words, and godly actions, that so
I may with joyfulnesse and thankfulness appear in thy fight, not only all the
day long, but even all my life long, that thou (my God) may be glorified, thy
Saints delighted, and my sinfnll foul eternally comforted. Amen.

CHAP. 39. Upon holy revenge for sin, with motives and encouragements thereunto.
Lord,

I Have ever been too apt to revenge the smallest injuries offered unto me by
others, in relation to mine outward condition, and too remiss in that holy
revenge of those great and insufferable wrongs, which I daily and hourly
obtrude upon mine own soul; this plainly shows me to have been too much
savouring of flesh and blood, too little mindful of thy kingdom, and the
righteousness thereof: That soul which is truly sensible of its own injury,
will (by thy grace) be daily minding of its own redresle; and that sinner which
is incapable of slight offenses, will in time become insensible of greater.

My greatest enemies are those of mine own household: The world may allure me,
the devil persuade me, but it is mine own false heart alone that betrays me,
and mine own corrupt nature that enslaves me: my greatest care shall therefore
be, to bend my strongest force against mine own corruptions; to labor much to
subdue mine affections, and to take an holy revenge upon my sinful actions;
not to satisfy thy justice, but to implore thy mercy, that I may thereby
truly manifest my perfect hatred against sin, and the sincerity of my soul to
thy service.

There need none other motives to invite me to this holy duty, than the woeful
breaches sin has daily made in my soul, such as (without mercy) will never be
repaired; this is too sadly proved by the sensible decay of goodness, and the
too powerful growth of ungodliness in my corrupt heart; as it is easy for
that Castle to stand a close siege, that is well fortified, manned and
victualled, so is it impossible for that Fort to hold out long which makes no
resistance.

Lord, as mine own spiritual ruins have hitherto been caused by mine own
neglects, so (by thy gracious assistance) mine own repairs shall be begun and
finished, by my present desires, and future endeavors. That time which I have
lost by former carelessness, and coldness in Religion, I will endeavor to
redeem by holy vigilance, and Christian fortitude; and that I may sincerely be
what I intend, with willingness of heart, I offer up this solemn Vow unto thee:
Lord, as this holy motion came from thy heavenly Spirit, so enable me to the
performance of it, by thy grace, to thy glory, and my souls eternal comfort.

I vow my self a serious and professed enemy to all ungodliness; no sinful
thought shall surprise me without a sorrowful sigh; no ungracious word pass me
without a sudden retractation, and devout confession; no wicked action defile
me without a sincere and godly humiliation; unto each measure of sin I will
allow a due measure of sorrow; those sins that have been reigning over me,
shall at set hours be constantly revenged by me; and as my body has been a
deep sharer in my sins, so it shall also be a daily sharer in my sufferings:
I will at set seasons deny my self somewhat of these outward enjoyments (which
thou Lord in mercy have allowed me) as a true sign of my true sorrow for that
sinful excess which I have too often taken without thine allowance. Those
sinful hours which have been vainly lost in idleness and emptiness, shall
be willingly redeemed in a constant observation of religious duties; no day
shall pass me without a solemn and devout task of devotion, no hour without
some sweet ejaculation: And when at any time the troubles and disturbances of
this frail life shall deny me happy opportunities for these heavenly
performances, what is wanting in act shall be made up in desire; which thou,
Lord, I trust wilt graciously accept, and look upon as done, because faithfully
intended.

O thou infinitely wise, and for ever blessed being, that art truly and
eternally happy, without the sinful service of thy creature; and yet
command us to serve thee for our own sakes, that we also may be happy in
thee; thou that love not a false and fickle heart, nor delightest in the
sacrifise of fools, give me a wise and understanding heart, that I may
seriously consider of this sacred Vow; give me a constant and religious heart,
that I may cheerfully perform what I have faithfully promised; give me a broken
and a contrite heart, that I may bitterly bewail what I have foolishly
neglected; that thy great name may be glorified, my sinful life amended, my
conscience quieted, my spirit comforted, thy Saints delighted, thine Angels
rejoiced, and my soul and body eternally saved in the great and dreadful day
of the Lord Jesus, to whom with thee, O blessed Father, and thine holy Spirit,
be all possible praise, and honor, and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

CHAP. 40. Upon the blessed condition of Gods Saints, with motives and
encouragements unto Godliness.
Lord,

(To close up these imperfect lines) as I began with that beauty of holiness,
which thou thy self art, and is essentially contained in thee, so my souls
desire is to end with that blessedness, which we thy Saints enjoy, even in
this vale of misery, and is eternally derived from thee; that so I may begin,
and end with thee, who art the beginning and end of thy creature, that I may
lead thy servants from the pure fountain of true holiness, to the sweet
streams of inward happiness, wherein we may securely bath our weary souls in
rest and quietness, until thy gracious goodness shall conduct us home, unto
the full fruition of those joyful rivers, of thine endlesle pleasure.

I am no sooner entered upon this blessed search, but I find my soul ravished
with admiration at the greatness, with apprehension of the goodness, with
contemplation of the freeness of thy love and favor toward me. I see thee
the great and glorious God of heaven and earth, from all eternity, out of thine
own gracious goodness, without all possibility in me (when I was not) either
of desiring, or deserving this inestimable love of thine, electing me in Christ
(of whom thou had no need, from whom thou could receive no benefit) unto
holiness and happiness in this life, and unto blefsednesse in that to come;
and as I find this love of thine to be purely, simply, admirably and eternally
great, so is it also truly, necessarily, sufficiently and permanently good.

If it were not truly good, it could never make me truly happy; if not
necessarily good, I might then enjoy happiness without it; if not sufficiently
good, my happiness enjoyed by it could not afford me satisfaction in it; if
not permanently good, what I enjoy in satisfaction, I may want in perfection,
by being suddenly removed from it. But thou, O Lord, have graciously afforded
me all these degrees of happiness, that I might be truly and eternally happy,
that I might be happy in thee, because there is no attainining happiness but
by thee, that I may be happy in soul, and happy in body, happy in life, and
happy in death, happy here, and happy hereafter.

Thou, O my blessed Savior, art sweeter unto me than all sweetness; thou art
that blessed All Sufficiency, by which I am both fully, and for ever satisfied?
thou art my safe repose, my inviolable peace, my rich rest, my safety in life,
my comfort in death, my glory after death. By thy patient sufferings, I am more
than conqueror of sin, of sorrow, of death, of hell; by thy glorious
resurrection I have assured hope of immortality; by thy blessed ascension, of
eternal glory; by the one thou have powerfully defended me against the rage
and malice of devils, by the other thou have graciously exalted me in thy
blessed union with me above the nature of Angels; thy peace thou have left with
me, thy peace thou have given unto me, even that blessed peace of conscience
which the world cannot take from me, and that eternity of peace with thee in
thy Kingdom, which thou Lord in thy rich mercy have prepared for me. O that I
might now lose my self with contemplation of thine endless love, that I might
be ravished into ecstasy, with apprehension of my present safety, of my future
glory; that all my faculties of soul might be but one entire and pleasing
sacrifise of thankfulness unto thee; that as thou (O my Savior) and the
Father are one, so I may be one with thee, to magnify thy gracious presence
here, and to be for ever where thou art hereafter, to see thy great glory, and
enjoy mine own end less felicity.

From this for ever blessed fountain of eternal happiness do plentifully flow
those pleasant streams of comfort, to the souls and bodies of the Saints, even
in this life, by which they are securely quieted, and joyfully contented, even
in the very worst of times, which either man's malice, or the Devils cruelty,
can study to inflict upon them; if they receive injuries, they return prayers,
they entertain them with a Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do, Luke 23.34. and Lord lay not this sin to their charge, Act. 7.60. And so
while they lose outwardly, they gain inwardly (and godliness is great gain) for
by patience they possess their own souls.

Their courage is undaunted, for The righteous is hold as a Lion, able to
encounter the fiercest affliction, ready to withstand the strongest temptation;
if the World frown upon them, they can cheerfully say, and faithfully believe,
that A small thing which the righteous has, is better than great riches of the
ungodly, Psalm. 37.16. if it smile, that They then account all things but loss
and dung in compare of Christ Jesus; if outward blessings be present, they are
humble under them, and thankful for them; if absent, They can patiently tarry
for the Lord, for they know he is their help, Psalm. 33.14. and that No good
thing will he withhold from them that love him, Psalm. 34.10. if sickness seize
upon them, The Lord is about their bed, and about their path, and spieth out
all their ways (their ways of sin, and their ways of sorrow) yea, He makes
their beds in their sickness, (by ease to their bodies, comfort to their
souls;) if famine threaten them, they have God's promise to maintain them, For
the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon all those that put
their trust in his mercy, To deliver their souls from dearth, and to feed them
in the time of security, Psalm. 33.17, 18. if sudden danger approach them, they
have heavenly succor to defend them, for The Angel of the Lord tarrieth about
all them that fear him, to deliver them; yea even Death it self is an advantage
to them, and therefore no ways able to affright them, for Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints; and therefore, Though the Lord
kill them, yet will they trust in him, Job 13.15. Lord, if thy mercy be thus
great unto me, while I am yet in my sinful flesh, how unspeakable shall I find
thy love, when my body is become spiritual, my joy eternal?

From these outward enjoyments may well be derived their inward contentments,
but by their inward refreshments is enjoyed that incomparable, inconceivable,
unutterable sweetness, that blessed peace of God, and joy in the holy Ghost,
which passes all our understanding, God's holy Spirit witnessing with their
spirits, that they are his children, and most precious in his sight, and they
are now fully persuaded, with his blessed Apostle, that Neither Death, nor
Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be ever
able to separate them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord,
Romans 8. 37, 38.

How full of solid comfort is this blessed assurance? how are our souls
ravished with apprehension of the sweetness of our present comforts, of the
fullness of our future joys? these blessed earnests of that ever blessed
Spirit, are the faithful pledges of his future embraces, far above the reach
of Malice to disturb, or Devil to destroy: Hence it is that our faith is
precious, our hope lively, our joy glorious, our lives safe, our deaths
blessed, and from hence arise those many and those rich endowments of the
Saints, their zeal burning, their love wonderful, their desires earnest, their
longings insatiate, their petitions for enjoyings importunate: Lord, what can I
desire more of thee, than what I enjoy from thee? I have thy mercy without me,
and thy mercy within me, thy mercy in life, and thy mercy in death, thy mercy
from the beginning, thy mercy to the end, and thy mercy without end, I am even
crowned and encompassed with mercy; O let me now say with holy David, I will
allwaies give thanks unto the Lord, and his praise shall be ever in my mouth,
Psalm. 34.1. Let me not only praise thee my self, but (with him also) invite
others to praise thee, O praise the Lord with me (all ye his Saints) and let us
magnify his name together, Psalm. 34.3. O taste and see how gracious the Lord
is, blessed is that man which puts his trust in him. Be glad, O ye
righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are true of
heart, Psalm. 32.12.

And now, Lord, having had a taste of the sweetness of thy Saints happiness on
earth, I willingly forsake all to follow them; I have too long been straying in
the strange pastures of impiety, and am now joyfully desirous to be led home to
thy fold, that I may feed in the green and fresh pastures of thy sacred
precepts, and drink freely of those waters of comfort in thy blessed promises,
that I may so drinle that I may never thirst, but be fully satisfied with thy
grace in this life, with thy glory in that to come; O let this evil world
neither allure me to its vanities, nor betray me from thy mercies, but as thou
have overcome the world for me, so (by thy grace assisting) it may be also
overcome by me: Thou have indeed told me, that I shall mourn in it, but my
mourning shall be turned into joy, and that my joy shall no man take from me;
Lord I believe, help my unbelief; I embrace thy cross, I despise the shame,
for that glory which is set before me, of which I have a safe assurance by the
blessed earnest of thy holy Spirit in me: To thee O Father, Son, and holy
Spirit, one eternal, infinite, incomprehensible, and ever blessed Goodness, be
all possible praise, honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

O thou great God, who have tender bowels of compassions, and multitudes of
mercies for us miserable sinners, who art not easy to be provoked, but ever
ready to forgive, who suffer not thy whole displeasure to arise against us,
but even in thy very judgments remembrest mercy, and art then moved with the
sight of our misery, have mercy upon me a great and grievous finner.

Lord I have sinned, I have transgressed, I have done foolishly, in departing
from thy judgments: But righteousness belongs unto thee (O Lord) and unto me
shame and confusion of face; O let thy bowels of compassions remove out thy
sight my multitudes of transgressions, that I may now appear before thee with a
joyful heart, and happy soul.

Let thy words be sweeter to me than the honey and the honey comb (than the vain
pleasures, and false profits of this life) O let my chiefest joy be in thy
service, my greatest delight to walk in thy ways, and all false ways (of
pollution and uncleanness) let me utterly abhor.

Give me that inward peace, that quietness of conscience, which the world
cannot take from me, that when I am afflicted by it, I may not be condemned
with it.

Lord let me faithfully believe, and graciously improve the constancy of thy
love, in the worlds great unconstancy, the richness of thy mercy in this
wretched ages misery.

O that my eye might drop without ceasing, that my heart might break forth into
complaints, and my soul be melted into sorrows, for mine own and others sins,
that have occasioned these heavy judgments, these sad complainings of thy
people.

Lord, as I have been a great and grievous sinner amongst them, so let me be a
constant and a true mourner for them; as thou have beheld us sinning, so now
also behold us sorrowing, that as our sins have provoked thee to anger, so our
tears may move thee to compassion, that thy mercy may be magnified, our
miseries relieved, our sorrows comforted.

O let not these bitter aggravations of thy judgments extort from us the least
measure of impatience, nor beget in us the least degree of distrust; let us
neither complain of thy justice, nor despair of thy mercy, but quietly and
thankfully rely upon thee, and in thy blessed hour enjoy a sweet enlargement by
thee.

Lord pity the forlorn condition of thy sons and daughters in affliction,
repair their outward losses by thine inward graces, that what is wanting to
them of these earthly comforts, may be abundantly supplied in thy heavenly
joys.

Forgive the great disturbers of the peace of this thy Sion, Lord open their
eyes, that they may see how much they have erred from thy ways; Lord sanctify
their hearts, that they may speedily return unto thee, and be for ever
graciously accepted of thee; O that thou would give us one heart, and one
voice, that we might serve thee without ceasing, that we may be all truly
humbled before thee, and truly joyful in thee.

Restore me (for thy rich mercy sake) unto that blessed union of Love, which is
the bond of Peace; that as thou our God art one, so thy distressed Church may
be one, thy divided people one, their wishes and desires, their prayers and
tears, their actions and endeavors one, for thy glory, the Churches safety,
and the Nations happiness, That we may have peace with thee our God, peace with
our enemies, peace with our own souls, and everlasting peace with thee in thy
Kingdom. Amen.

A comfortable PRAYER to be used at the point of death by the Visitors of the
Sick.
O Eternal, Almighty, most merciful, and for ever blessed Lord God of Heaven
and Earth, we thy poor, and most unworthy creatures, miserable and distressed
sinners, in all humility of heart, and dejectedness of spirit, are here
prostrate before thee: Lord, we confess that we are utterly unworthy to
approach thy glorious presence; Blessed God, we are confounded and ashamed to
lift up our sinful eyes unto thee, whose gracious goodness we have so much
neglected, whose patience and long-suffering so long abused, whose anger and
indignation so justly provoked, whose wrath and fury so wretchedly deserved.

Lord, we are heavy laden with the burden of our sins, and thou alone art
able to relieve us, to thee therefore we address our sinful souls for mercy
and forgiveness: O thou that art the blessed Shepherd of our erring souls,
that came into the World to seek, and to save those that are lost, have mercy
upon us: O thou that have espoused us unto thy self, and have given us thy
love, have mercy upon us; O thou that call us to come unto thee, and
embracest us when we are come, receive our prayers. Lord give us prepared
hearts to meet thee in this holy duty; Quicken our benumbed souls with holy
fervencie, that our devotions may ascend unto thy gracious presence: Lord thou
have promised to be near unto all those which call upon thee, with sincerity,
and faithfulness of heart; for thy blessed promise sake, we most humbly
beseech thee, let our humiliations be comfortable, our prayers acceptable.

In full assurance of the sweetness of thy mercy toward us, we are now bold
to become Petitioners unto thee for this thy sick servant, whose life is
drawing near unto the grave: Blessed Lord God, it is thou that killest, and
make alive, that bring down to hell, and raisest up again, we most meekly
beseech thee therefore, for thy rich and tender love sake to thine Elect, to
mitigate that bitter curse which thou have laid upon us all in Adam: Lord look
upon his affliction and his travail, and forgive him all his sins; give him
sure patience to endure with meekness whatsoever thou art pleased to inflict
upon him; Lord lay no more upon his feeble body, than thou shall make him, able
for to bear; impose no more upon his wounded spirit, than thou in mercy shall
support him under: Forsake him not, O Lord our God, be not thou far from him;
let him remember that this chastisement of thine, is common to thy dearest
children; that thou hidest thy face from him but for a small moment, but with
everlasting kindness thou will have mercy on him.

Lord, settle and compose his thoughts for thy Kingdom; let no disturbance of
this life distract those blessed meditations, which invite the weary soul to
rest and quietness; let him now see, and joyfully believe, that thou will
order all these outward things to thine own glory, and the good of those that
have relation to him; let him freely forgive all injuries on earth, and
heartily desire to meet his greatest enemies in heaven: O let his soul be now
transported with the sweetness of thy love, and favor toward him. Lord
qualify this bitter potion, which thy holy providence has allotted to him; let
him now remember, that the sufferings of this present life, are not worthy of
that glory which shall be (suddenly) revealed in him; and when the outward man
is drawing nearest to its dissolution, Lord Jesus strengthen, and rejoice the
inward man, with comfort and assured confidence of thy salvation.

To this end (O Lord) we most humbly beseech thee, to illuminate his
understanding, that he may see the sadness of his own condition in himself,
that ^he may deny and utterly abhor himself, that he may disclame all sinful
confidence in his own actions, and endeavors, and wholly cast himself upon the
righteousness of him, in whom alone thy wrath is fully satisfied. Lord give
him a serious and a true remorse of conscience for his many, and his great
offenses; Lord Jesus grant that they may not now appear unto the terror and
amazement of his sinful soul: O let him now remember that it is thy precious
blood which purges him from all iniquity, that thou (O blessed Savior) art
become unto him righteousness, and holiness, and sanctification, and
redemption. Lord comfort and assist him in this last, and greatest trial of
his faith: And because the sensible decay of his infirm body, and the violent
disturbance of his sickness, will not suffer him to call upon thee with
digestednesse of mind, and quietness of spirit, we therefore humbly pray thee,
to sustein and comfort him, even in his greatest weakness and extremity.
Blessed God, let the sorrowful sighing of thy sick prisoner now come before
thee: O let thy blessed Spirit, which is in him, put up humble supplications to
the Father for him; O satisfy him with thy mercy, and that soon: Let those
happy sighs and groans, which cannot be expressed, become a pleasing sacrifise
of thankfulness to thee, and a sweet savor of eternal rest to his departing
soul.

O thou that art the God of power, protect him from the fury of that roaring
Lion, who is now seeking to devour him: O thou that art the blessed Savior of
the sinful world, compassionate his frailties, commiserate his infirmities,
forgive his iniquities: Lord purge him by thy precious blood, cloth him with
thine own righteousness, enrich him with thy blessed merits, and plead them to
thy Father for him. O thou holy and for ever blessed Spirit, who art the pure
fountain of eternal love, be present with him, relieve, and comfort him in all
these bitter pangs of his last hour, indue him with a willingness and
cheerfulness to leave this transitory life, and crown him with eternity of
joys in that to come.

And now, O Lord, we come unto thee for our selves, who are here at this time
upon our sinful knees before thee, Lord open our eyes, that we may seriously
consider of that last, and solemn hour of our departure: Lord sanctify our
hearts, that while we are encompassed with sinful flesh, we may lament our
often failings, and infirmities, and every day be more and more desirous to go
home to thee, who art the God of spirits. Lord give us grace, that we may walk
soberly, and righteously, and holily, as becomes thy children; that at the
resurrection of the just, our souls and bodies may enjoy the blessed
consummation of their endless happiness. Lord hear our prayers, and let our
cries come unto thee, for thy name sake, for thy promise sake, for thy blessed
Sons sake. Amen.

The Conclusion.
BLessed Lord God, by whose only mercy I have finished this imperfect Work, as
I began it by thy goodness, so I desire to end it with thy praise; Lord accept
of it, and graciously afford thy blessing to it: Let not the weakness and the
sinfulness of me the Instrument, be the Readers discouragement, but give glory
and honor to thee the Agent; for of thee, and through thee, and to thee are
all things, to thee be praise for ever. Amen.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
For the comfort and assistance of those that are ready to depart this life, I
have hereunto added the dying Confession of Mr. Anth^ny Sadler, Minister of
Gods Word, at West-Thorock in Essex, of which I was an Earwitness.
Obiit vicesimo die Maii, Anno 1643.
THE Lord has laid a gracious, and a gentle visitation on me; I do
acknowledge (with a thankful heart) that this weakness: of body, this
languishing of nature, these painful days and nights, are from him: For
misery comes not out of the dust, neither does affliction spring out of the
earth, Job 5.6. Ah (my friends) little do men think how much the great
disturbances of sickness, how much he pains and infirm ties of a dec ying body,
distract those blessed thoughts, those sweet and happy meditations, which the
troubled soul desires; The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak; Lord Jesus
strengthen the inward man, and lay no more upon this sinful b^dy, than thou
(in mercy) shall enable it to bear.

I am now verily persuaded, that God has purposed to determine my days, his
blessed will be done, even so Lord Jesus come quickly.

He that looks into his life past, that ransaketh his soul, and calls to
mind the sinful failings of his youth, will find it very hard, and
difficult, to make his calling and election sure: I have earnestly desired to
leave no corner of my soul unsearcht, and I find my self to be a very great
and wretched sinner; I have committed grievous sins, very grievous sins,
such sins as are not fit to be named before God's Saints; I have examined my
soul by each particular Commandment, and I find my self guilty of the breach
of all, and that in an high manner, especially considering that weighty
Function God's providence has called me unto: I have not only sinned against
mine own soul, but against the souls of others too, whom I have corrupted by
my ill example, and that very often. And now, when I look upon the glass of
the Law, and there see mine own vildnesse, I find Gods justice, and mine own
deserts, even ready to surprise, and cast me down into the nethermost hell, and
that most righteously.

But O see the goodness of a gracious God! I now come to lay hold upon the
promises, but how? not without repentance, not presumingly; I apply them not in
a general, but particular way; I do not only believe that Christ Jesus came
i^ to the World to save sinners, but I believe also that he died for my
sins, and rose again for my justification: -- God has promised (and all his
promises are Yea and Amen) that he will not forsake those which trust in him,
nay he has bound himself unto it by an oath, by two immutable things which
cannot fail, his Truth, and his Holiness, Heb. 6.18. and God has said, That
he which confesses and forsakes his sins, shall find mercy, 1 John 1.9. I
acknowledge them -- I confess them -- I am grieved for them -- I forsake them
-- I abhor themwhat should I do more -- God requires not more of me, These
pauses were supplied with tears.
and yet for all this I cannot find my self assured of his favor; methinkes
this sorrow is not so hearty as it ought to be, and yet I know, and steadfastly
believe, that if God did not work with me, this sorrow could not be, and where
he works, there can be nothing wanting; I know that the most righteous man
alive cannot perform this work so perfectly as he ought, and therefore I
believe, that he which is ascended up on high, has done it for me in that full
and ample manner, which is able to appease his Father's wrath; and I now trust,
that by his perfect obedience this imperfect work of mine shall find a
gracious acceptance. This is my hope, and this my belief.

Nay I can go yet a little further, to strengthen my assurance, that my peace
is made with God; I every day, and every hour, do pray unto my Savior to
intercede his Father for me; and if I implore him, he will intercede his
Father; and if he intercede his Father, he cannot be denied.

O my God, impute my sins to him, transfer his righteousness to me, and
then I know I shall appear a glorious soul before thee. Amen.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1. UPon the sinfulness of our thoughts touching the sacred Deity, with
holy cautions to order our devotions aright. page 2. CHAP. 2. Upon the
consideration of God's love, and man's unthankfulness; A Meditation suited to
the morning. page 9 CHAP. 3. Upon the consideration of Divine Providence; A
Meditation for noon. page 14 CHAP. 4. Upon the consideration of the
sinfulness, shortness, and uncertain^y of life; A Meditation suited to the
evening. page 17 CHAP. 5. Upon our approaching unto God's House, with necessary
cautions for our behavior there. page 20 CHAP. 6. Upon our returning from
God's House, and the neglect of private duties. page 24 CHAP. 7. Upon the want
of due preparation for Receiving of the Lord's Supper. page 27 CHAP. 8.
Containing pious Ejaculations at the time of Receiving. page 30 CHAP. 9.
Containing a brief Meditation, and pious Thanksgiving after our Receiving. page
31 CHAP. 10. Upon a Journey undertaken, and the many dangers incident
thereunto. page 32 CHAP. 11. Containing pious Meditations, and zealous
Ejaculations after a Journey. page 34 CHAP. 12. Upon the great danger of
Security. page 37 CHAP. 13. Upon the great danger of Prosumption. page 41 CHAP.
14. Upon quenching of the motions of God's holy Spirit. page 47 CHAP. 15. Upon
the consideration of God's peculiar Providence to his Children. page 51 CHAP.
16. Upon sinful Anger, and the great disturbance thereof. page 55 CHAP. 17.
Upon Man's inordinate love to the Creature. page 58 CHAP. 18. Upon the sin of
Uncleaness, with Encouragements to avoid it. page 63 CHAP. 19. Upon immoderate
Mirth, and the great Inconveniences thereof. page 67 CHAP. 20. Upon the great
danger of deferring the hour of Repentance. page 75 CHAP. 21. Upon Servile
Fear, and the danger thereof. page 79 CHAP. 22. Upon the great neglect of
reckoning daily with our Thoughts, and the benefits lost thereby. page 84 CHAP.
23. Upon Unchristian-like Dullness in Affliction page 87 CHAP. 24. Upon
uncheerfulnesse in Christianity, with Encouragements to avoid it. page 91
CHAP. 25. Upon man's sinful frailty in the hour of Temptation, with Motives to
make resistance. page 94 CHAP. 26. Upon the Infirmity of the Saints. page 97
CHAP. 27. Upon Desertion. page 101 CHAP. 28. Upon sudden danger. page 106 CHAP.
29. Upon the weakness of Faith, and sinfulness of Thoughts tending to
Despair. page 107 CHAP. 30. Upon the great Neglect of the duty of Prayer. page
111 CHAP. 31. Upon the great neglect of Reading the sacred Scriptures. page 114
CHAP. 32. Upon the neglect of Divine Meditation. page 117 CHAP. 33. Upon
Unchristian-like Dejectedness in Poverty. page 119 CHAP. 34. Upon Sickness, and
ungodly repining thereat. page 122 CHAP. 35. Upon the misery of Life, and
blessedness of Death. page 126 CHAP. 36. Upon the great neglect of
opportunities in doing good to the Saints. page 131 CHAP. 37. Upon the
deceitfulness of the heart in the performance of holy duties. page 135 CHAP.
38. Upon the unrulinesse of the Tongue, with necessary cautions to restrain it.
page 140 CHAP. 39. Upon holy revenge for sin, with motives and encouragements
thereunto. page 144 CHAP. 40. Upon the blessed condition of the Saints, with
motives and encouragements unto Godliness. page 147 A comfortable Prayer to be
used at the point of Death by the Visitors of the Sick. page 157
FINIS.

