A PLAIN FAVLT IN Plain-English. AND The same in Doctor FEARNE: Who (upon
different grounds) build one Error; but this is the best of it, that their
difference destroys the same Error, which they would build upon the Ruin of
PARLIAMENTS.

LONDON, Printed for T. Underhill. 1643.

A PLAIN FAVLT IN Plain - English.
AS two Ships setting Sail out of one Harbor, the one going to the West, and
the other to the East, yet (if they continue in that course) must needs meet
together in the wrong side of the world: So Plain-English going one way in an
intention for the Public, and Doctor Fearne, (going another way against the
Public) meet in one and the same wrong opinion and error, destructive to
Parliaments.

Plaine-English will destroy Parliaments, by the peoples resuming their power,
because the Parliament goes not high enough, in Terms, Conditions, and Actions.

The Doctor, and his fellow-Malignants, will have the Parliament dissolved,
because it goes too high, and will not lay down the Commonwealth at the feet
of the Cavaliers, pretending the name of the King.

So both speak to have it done, but upon contrary Reasons, confuting each
other: For, if the Reason of Plain-English be good, the Doctors Reason is
naught; and if the Doctors Reason be good, Plaine-English's Reason is naught.
But the Doctor says Plain-English's Reason is naught, and Plain-English says
the Doctors Reason is naught, and I believe both, and so the business is ended.

Yet to talk and walk a little farther with them, (but setting one on the one
hand, and the other on the other, and my self in the middle to keep them from
fighting) I would ask them some Questions of Justice, Honesty, and Reason.

First, Is it just that the debts of the Kingdom should be paid? and if so, I
entreat my fellow-walkers to tell me who shall pay them, if the Parliament
shall be dissolved? If they say, Another Parliament, how be they sure that
another Parliament may not be more displeasing to them then this, and deserve
to be dissolved as well as this?

Secondly, Did not men lend upon the Act of continuing this Parliament? So that
the Act of Continuance is the very Sinew of their security, and that which drew
them into the Contract of lending. And of whom shall our Brethren the Scots
require the performance of Public Faith, if the Parliament (that gave this
Faith) be annihilated and dissolved? And is it honest to borrow money upon
Security, and then to take away the Security, upon which it was borrowed?
Surely, he that borrowes money upon Bonds, and then takes away the Bonds,
deserves another name besides that of an honest man, and must look to borow no
more of any that know it. And thus the Act of Continuance is turned into an Act
of Cousinage, while it is made a Lure to draw in Trust, but disabled to
perform it.

Thirdly, In Reason, or in many Reasons, (if any Reason can be alleged, for
which indeed none can be sufficient) it is for the Public good, Quia
periclitatur salus populi, The Public is in danger. This Public danger must
be so evidently and apparently caused by the Parliament, that the whole People,
or (at least) the greater part of it must plainly see it, judge it, and agree
in it: But while there are two parts, one that says the danger is caused by
the Parliaments ^ising too high, a second by the Parliaments going too low, a
third believing neither, (for neither of these believes one another) but
thinking the Parliament goes aright, or (at least) a tolerable way: How shall
we think so many dissenting parts will agree upon one evident cause of danger?
And of so many parts and sides differ, who shall be the Judge of the
Controversy between the Contestants? Surely, if the Parliament may continue
but till these three parts agree, either upon the Reason for which the
Parliament shall be dissolved, as ^^using a public danger, or upon a Judge to
determine and judge their agreement, the Parliament may continue long enough,
and by the Parliaments not ending, this Question may be at an end. And
certainly this Question was raised in a most unseasonable, and therefore most
unreasonable time: For, (when the people are divided into diverse opinions, as
well as Armies) is that a fit time to speak of agreeing together, in
re-assuming their power, when they disagree in the Reasons of it unto death?

But again, if the Votes of the people must be gathered by ^ Judge, where
shall this Judge sit when he gathers these Votes? Must the people meet all
together in one place, or be taken by poll in their several parishes? If they
meet in one place, that will end the Question, by putting out of question, that
Salus Populi periclitabitur, public danger will certainly follow, by this way
of avoiding public danger: For you must bring two sorts of people together,
that have main Armies on each side, and if so, whether will not the people be in
more danger by this meeting, then by the Parliament? but this the Swords and
Guns will soon tell you. And if he must go or send into parishes, surely I
think Plain-English will be loath to compute the Votes of the parishes in
Oxford, or New Castle, nor the Doctor to take the Votes in Windsor or London.
And if the Parliament may continue until this polling be done, I think it will
be as good as an Act of Continuance.

But yet further, if most Votes must carry it, it will be a Legal Quare,
Whether those that have less then 40. s. per Ann. shall have Votes, which is
denied in the choice of the Knights of the Shire?

Again, Whether those that are maintained by the Parishes shall give Votes,
who have no Votes in choosing of Burgesses, and especially whether such men
shall be fit to judge of public danger, for the dissolving of a Parliament?

But thus Error is infinite in bypath, and wanderings, and thus it falls out,
when men (leaving the old lawful, and fundamental way) will tread out paths
of their own making, and being only of private condition, will take upon them
the Government or rather the Dissolution of the frame of the Public. But this
is the common fault of mutable and everrepining Mankind: If Ziklag be burnt,
and wives and children carried away, then they talk of stoning David. But if
the foundations be thus destroyed, what has the righteous done? Surely it had
been a point of discretion, (I will not say of civility and good manners) to
have spent some thoughts first in a fair and admonitory way to have obtained
this end, before they fall to destroying and rooting out Foundations, and
plucking up Parliaments, and consequently Kingdoms by the roots: For certainly,
if such a thing should be done, (which indeed is as unseasonable as it is
destructive) there could be no freedom, certainty, nor continuance in
Parliaments, and then, as good to have none at all. They must vote like men in
chains, not their own votes and consciences, but the votes and opinions of
others: and they must not promise nor contract any thing for the Public,
except they send home to know their opinion that must rule them in their Votes.
And certainly if this way be thoroughly followed, it may lead men, as well to
reassume Laws, as power of Law-making, and then into what a Chaos of confusion
do they resolve (or rather dissolve) this ancient, and wel-grounded Government?

But (as I said) if they would have had such a thing done a handsome way, these
re-assumers should have brought the people together, to have found out, and
agreed upon some invincible and manifest Reasons (for such they had need to be)
to prove that the Parliament should cease for the public good, and so propose
them to the Parliament: For, they know the Parl. has power to dissolve it
self, and it is very preposterous to thrust them out of doors, before you
ask them whether they will go out voluntarily of themselves, especially being
settled by an Act of Parl. And I assure you, by that knowledge I have of many
(if not most) of the House of Commons, if you can show a way how Religion,
Liberty and safety, and consequently ^he Common good, can be better settled by
their absence then presence, (that so they may leave their banishment, and
return to their homes) I think you may have easily not their places only, but
their thanks: For, little pleasure, and certainly less profit it is for them
to leave their own businesses and Families, (I say not Recreations) to work and
toil in public businesses, yea to be often put to make brick without straw,
even to work impossibilities, and to please two contrarieties, or else to be
beaten (on all sides) with such terrible Taskmasters as these Re-assumers.

But perchance too much has been said against those cruel, unreasonable, and
unjust speeches of re-assuming, especially where the people, Peers and King
have given their Votes and Faith (by an Act of Continuance) that there shall be
no reassuming. And if nothing else, yet let Gods own wonderful hand stretched
out in working for the Parliament, and by it, stop the mouths that are opened
against it. It was wont to be the common language of the Petitions of most
Counties, to acknowledge the great blessings God had sent to them, by the
unwearied labor and service of the Parliament, as the taking away the
High Commission, Star Chamber, and Ship Money, etc. but now advantages and
exceptions must be sought out against it. And admit there are some failings,
and some weaknesses; was there not a great Apostle that gloryed in infirmities,
because when he was weak, he was made strong? and no wonder, for God himself
had told him, that in weakness his strength does appear. And appeared it
has, since God (by them) has overthrown such strongholds, as former
Parliaments have not been able to remove, but have rather strengthened against
themselves. Do not weaken those whom God does strengthen for himself, but
rather join with God in strengthening their weakness by supplies, prayers, and
(if you will) faithful, and petitionary advice: and do not fight against a
Miracle of Gods making: a miracle, I say, (for such our Forefathers would have
esteemed a Parliament settled by an Act of Continuance) destroy not then what he
has so wonderfully built, neither despise his building, though it appear, not
very glorious in fleshly eyes: Rather say with the Prophet, Hag. 2. 3.
Who is among you that saw this house in her first glory? and how do you see it
now? is it not in your eyes (in comparison of it) as nothing? Yet now be strong
O Zerubbabel, and be strong O Joshua the son of Iosedech (the High Priest) and
be strong ye people of the land, and work; for I am with you (says the Lord
of Hosts) The Glory of this latter House shall be greater then of the frrmer
(says the Lord of Hosts) and in this place I will give peace (says the Lord
of Hosts) And let all the people say. Amen.

FINIS.

