CONSCIENCE SATISFIED.

That there is no warrant for the Arms now taken up by SUBjECTS.

BY WAY OF REPLY unto several Answers made to a Treatise formerly published
for the Resolving of Conscience upon the CASE.

ESPECIALLY Unto that which is entitled A fuller Answer.

By H. FERN, D. D. etc.

Speak unto the Elders of Judah, saying, what? are ye the last to bring the
King back to His House? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the King. 2 Samuel 19.11. Let your Moderation be known unto all men; the Lord is at hand,
Phil. 4.5 OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University, 1643.

To the Conscientious Readers among the People.
TO you especially this is intended, who professing to make a Conscience of
your ways have hitherto been led on in the dangerous and perverse way of
Resistance and disloyalty; to give you some check, and call you at least to a
thought of the violent Course you were in pursuit of, there was a Treatise
formerly directed to you, for your better help in the examination of your Way,
and the Resolving of your Consciences, for it was marvailous to behold, how men
pretending Religion and Conscience, should be so securely carried on without
all warrant, so hood winckt with an implicit faith, against the clear light
of the Law of God and this Land meeting them in the face, which faith as by
reason of its blindness, it is most contrary to a Conscience desirous to be
informed, so the blinder it is, the stronger it is, and leaves a man miserably
deceived with the conceit of a Conscience well fatisfied.

To hold you on in this blind devotion, Four Answerers have appeared for you
against the aforesaid Treatise, that you may at least say, you have four for
one; but if you take them all and bray them in a Mortar together you shall not
beat out of them any true and real Causes of these your Arms, but Pretenses
only, nor any warrant from the Law of God, or of this Land to justify your
taking Arms upon such Causes, were they never so true and real. That you may
more easily discern what is in them, and thereby the truth, I have taken them
in pieces for you, and by this Reply shown you what is adulterate. It is
chiefly directed against M. Bridge his book, and the Fuller Answer; against
that, because it appears under the License and Authority of Them he pleads
for, and is framed more to the capacity of the Vulgar; against This, because it
is cried up among the more Intelligent of the Party, and carries an appearing
depth of Reason, though indeed no otherwise, then stained waters do, which
seem deep through the darkness of their Color. What is material in M.
Burrowes you shall find repeated in Theirs, or his own words, and receiving
answer. With that other Answer, which appears without name, but with a Margin
full of Greek and Latin, I dare trust you, so that you will beware of one
thing, that dangerous discourse he has for the suppressing and taking away of
Tyrants, and will promise me another thing, that you will not proceed in this
unjustifiable way without direct and positive warrant for Conscience to rest
on; Yet shall you have something in particular to this Answerer in the 12.
Section.

Before that Fuller Answer came to my hands, I was told by one, that had reason
to know, I should receive answer from a grave Divine; but having perused it, I
found little of the Divine, less of his Gravity: but a phansy both ridiculous
and dangerous. He has set before his book a Premonition (wherein he has painted
out the Resolver under the several shapes of birds and beasts, as his flitting
phansy led him) a very piece of Pictured Tapestry, fitter to hang before the
entrance of a Stage, then of a Treatise concerning Conscience: but which is
worst of all, concern's not me only but every good Subject, in his book he has
phansied such a frame of Government here in this Land, that he has marred it in
the Making, for by an unheard of Coordination he has contrived it into a plain
Popular State.

I held my self many ways (though this Age has had books enough to teach it
duty) engaged to answer, for my own, for yours, for Truths sake; I found my
self much abused by mistakes, and odious imputations, especially of the Full
Answerer, but you worse by deceiving pretenses, and Truth worst of all by false
Principles, and Doctrines given out under its name.

I desire you would understand, what was spoken by me in the former Treatise,
by way of Assertion, Conclusion, or general Rule concerning the two Houses,
was but a sacrificing to Truth from a Conscience not simply devoted to man;
what was related as matter of Fact, did either not concern them, or not touch
them with any such foul aspersion, as the Fuller Answerer would make you
believe; My Conscience is clear, and my paper was not stained with such blots.

For disaffection to Parliaments (wherewith I am charged) I will not say how
far my heart went along with This in the way of approbation, but thus much I
will say, I always had, and still have to Parliaments affection enough (though
not to make me a Rebel to the light of Reason, and Rules of Conscience, or
disloyal to His Majesty, yet enough) to ground any due obedience upon. My
heart would fail me (as hers did upon the departure of glory from Israel, 1 Samuel 4.) to think, how the Name of Religion and Authority of Parliament would
suffer in after Times, could they justly be entitled to the enquiry of these.

But I take it to be the desire of all good men and Loyal Subjects, yea of the
King himself, That Parliaments should flourish in their due power and freedom,
knowing that neither he nor they can suffer by such; and I presume that many of
the Thousands which follow his Majesty, have engaged themselves in the Cause,
not only out of mere duty of Allegiance, but also out of a sense of that very
desire, they are Confident is in Him, to the continuance of Parliaments; being
such for the most part, as have no other hope of advantage by the service, then
peaceably to enjoy what by the Law of the Land they may call their own; such
whose hearts God has touched as he did theirs, that went with Saul, when some
children of Belial despised him, saying, how shall this man save us? 1 Samuel 10.

Should I bring in the Kingdom (as Ioab did the suborned Widow of Tekoah)
like a woman in mourning apparel to speak the truth, you would hear her
Complaining, Her Sonns have striven together in the field, and smitten and
slain one another, but for the iniquity, let the King and his Throne be
guiltless, 2 Samuel 14. and farther adding, Let the name of Religion be sacred,
and the Authority of Parliament blameless; but there are certain Men upon whom
the iniquity will lie heavy as the gravestone, and upon whose tombs, if this
Land give them burial, posterity will write, Better these Men had never been
born.

If therefore the Ambition, Envy or Avarice of any particular men have engaged
you under the specious pretenses of Religion and Liberty, look upon your selves
at length, and how you are used but as their sword and buckler to make way for
their ends, and to defend them from the stroke of justice; And should they by
your aid attain those ends (which God for bid) will they for your conspiring
with them, give every one of you fields and vineyards, and make you Captains
of thousands, and Captains of hundreds? has not His Majesty offered enough
for the restoring of your peace and happiness, if they would let you
understand it? can you see to the end of these troubles, but by returning to
your forsaken Loyalty? shall you not be divided again, and called to Faction
and siding upon the disposing of the offices and revenues of the Kingdom
amongst your Leaders? Or if that business could be settled, and the world
provided for, shall you not be divided again when you come to think of a form
of Religion? or shall you every man be recompensed with a freedom of his own
way, for lending his help to unsettle that One Religion, which the Laws have
established?

However your vain hopes do at length succeed, or your Conscience in the mean
time be satisfied, I am sure God cannot be well pleased, and will not (though
he has hitherto suffered it for the just punishment of this sinful Land) be
long mocked after this fashion; for do but hearken to the Cry of Blood, to the
Cry of the Fatherless and Widows, of this Land, of Ireland, to the
complaints of the poor every where for want of that relief which they had
from thousands of families, now dissolved by the causlesse imprisonment of the
Masters; if your Ears be not open to them, His are, or if you think you are
not chargeable with this heavy account, look to the ways your Leaders drive
you through, how they lie through blood and oppression, through the breach of
your Faith, your Allegiance, your Protestation, of which it is strange to
consider what advantage has bin made, to the seeming performance of one clause
in it, (the Privilege of Parliaments,) by the breach of all the rest, which
concern the Kings Rights, the Religion established, the Subjects Liberty and
Property; and in all this consider, how your way is forced through the breach
of many of Gods Commandments; I need not tell you them, your very children (if
ever you instructed them in their Catechism) can say your practice agrees not
with what you taught them; but this I must tell you, if this be Conscience, it
is a Conscience that is condemned of it self, and grown desperate; if this be
Religion, it is a Religion that says there is no God. If therefore there be
yet any sense left of Conscience and Religion, any fear of God, ret^^^ from
these perverse ways, or else hear what he threatens to such wilfulness, Lev.
26.23. If you will walk contrary to me, then will I also walk contrary to you.
and Esa. 30.12. Because you despise this word, and trust in oppression and
perverseness, and stay thereon, therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a
breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking comes
suddenly at an instant. A great forbearance of God has it been, that Houses
have not broken down, where the Consultations have been so often held for the
direction of these ways, or that Churches have not fallen, where so many
blasphemous Prayers and Preachings have been made, in order to the advancement
of them. I suppose you are not prime Leaders in this way, yet the longer your
Directors spin out the time, and you hold on to countenance the Action, ye do
but increase the Cries of the distressed throughout this Kingdom against you,
and cause that judgment on high to break down the sooner; Do not dally any
longer with Him that can do it suddenly in an instant, but look what hangs
over our heads, and read what is written, and the Lord give you understanding.

CONSCIENCE SATISFIED.
That there is no warrant for the Arms now taken up by the Subjects.
By way of Reply to several Answers made to a former Treatise, especially to
that which is called the FVLLER ANSWER.
SECT. 1. The case, and the Question upon it stated.
IT is necessary I begin with the Author of that Fuller Answer, for he begins
with a discourse of his own, and the better to set it off, will needs do me
the favor to rectify the Case, and state the Question for me. Blowing aside,
says he, the Pindust of the style, which guilds but intercepts the letter of
his Treatise, I find the Substance of it to be a groundless supposition of
the Parliaments taking Arms, upon a bare supposition of the Kings mere
intention to subvert Laws and Liberties; for who ever maintained they might
take Arms upon such a bare supposition? Page 1. also I am enforced to answer
what he would have said, for he resolves upon a Question, that never came in
question, page 2.

First I must deprecate what here and every where this Answerer imputes unto
me, as if I charged the Parliament (i.e.) the two Houses with this War; it
was no where said, they did take up these Arms, but often insinuated and
proved, that, if that were the Case, they might not do it, the more forceably
to convince them that have now done it, under the name and pretense of
Parliament.

Then I must tell him, it is an easy but commonly deceitful way of Answering
to say the Question is mistaken, and make the Reader believe all that was
written is nothing to the purpose, when as the mistake is in him that
complains of it. For if this Answerer in blowing aside the Pindust of the
Letter, as he speaks, had not received much of it into his eyes, he might have
seen (the Conscientious Reader will) that the Question for the Rational part
of it, was put to the g^e^^est advantage of them that plead for Resistance not
as he renders it whether they may take Arms upon a bare supposition of a mere
intention in the King to subvert Laws and Liberties? as if he knew not what
the word (subpose) meant in putting of a Case, but to this sense, suppose or
grant the King will not discharge the trust, but is bent or seduced to subvert
Laws and Liberties, whether then may Subjects take Arms? this implies in the
case as much or more, then he himself pretends here to be the cause of your
Arms, viz.

The actual invasion of Liberties, the invitation and detention of Delinquents
from trial by Law, to be a party in Arms against the Parliament, to dissolve
or remove it, the importation of foreign. Arms, and Soldiers, illegal
Commissions to employ them, etc. so he, page 1. To take no notice for the
present of the falsehood of these imputations wherewith His Majesty is here
charged, we must look upon them, as the supposed causes of their Arms.

And first I cannot but wonder, why among these particulars here is no mention
of Religion, when as the people are made to believe that is it they fight for;
happily he included it in the etc. as indeed in the consultations of these
unhappy days, the care of it (though timely moved by worthy Members of both
Houses) has been cast off to the fagge end of other more necessary occasions,
that I may not say Designs, a likely way to make all prosper.

When the people are dealt with by such men as these Answerers, then Religion
is the main Engine to draw them into Arms, and indeed were they not abused
with that plausible pretense, they could never have been so far engaged
against their Sovereign: but when these men enter the lists with an Adversary
about the cause of this war, Religion is not insisted on, not once touched in
this, expressly declined in the other Answers: but Nature is rather sought unto
by them, for a ground of self preservation; for upon strict examination these
men know, it will appear what actual invasions have been made upon Religion
against the known Laws of this land, and who are to answer for them; they know
also what offense it would give to several Sects (which are and will be
always serviceable to new designs) should Religion be either countenanced, as
it is by Law established, or any one way declared for.

But secondly I would fain know, whether they can in Conscience be persuaded,
that some actual invasions of Laws and Liberties can be a sufficient cause
for Subjects to Arm and Resist, when it evidently appears their Sovereign is
not bent to continue in that destructive way; will it not suffice, if he
restore those Liberties, and withdraw the encroachments made upon them? If he
promise security and pass several Acts of Grace for further assurance of
them? If he be content that, All Arms laid aside, the Law shall judge who are
Delinquents, and accordingly censure them?

They that have formerly written for Resistance in some Cases, have thought it
unreasonable that Subjects should pretend to Arms, till they find their Prince
in such a Condition, as was insinuated in the case proposed, viz. Bent or
seduced to subvert Laws, Liberties, Religion, or to make havoc of the
Commonwealth or Church, as D. Willet has it in Romans 13. q. 17 and as we see
by the limitations, testimonies, examples in Paraeus upon Romans 13. and in Phil.
Par. his answer to Mr Owen.

But our Pleaders for Resistance at this day, because they cannot find His
Majesty in such a condition; or hope to make men (that know any thing of His
Personal Vertucs, or His Acts of Grace passed this Parliament) believe, he is
so bent, do now pretend they have cause enough for taking Arms, what ever the
Kings mind be and although there be no such horrible things intended by him as
the Doctor speaks of, so Mr Bu^r. page 140.141. and to the same pu^pose this
Fuller Answer insists upon actual invasions of Liborvies, Laws, as the cause
of their Arms.

Yet that they may seem to have better pretense of Reason for what they do,
and more win upon the people, that least know the gracious disposition of their
Sovereign toward them, they do endeavor to charge His Majesty with the like
destructive intentions, as were to be supposed in the case.

To this purpose we find this Answerer every where rendering the reason of their
taking Arms to be, b^^^use the King refuses to perform His trust, and in the
first page; because His Majesty has drawn in Delinquents to be a party in Arms
thereby to dissolve or remove the arliament; where he puts the Cause upon His
Majesty's intention. And we well remember upon His Majesty's first Guard at
York, it was (I will not say voted above) given out among the people, He
intended to make War against His Parliament, and still we have it urged as a
Cause of these Arms, that His Majesty is seduced by wicked Council, and the
like.

Therefore the Case being so laid upon his supposed intentions to continue in a
subversive way of Laws, Liberties, the question upon it was put to the full,
for the rational part, whether, such a case being supposed or granted, it were
Lawful for Subjects to take Arms and resist? Then for the other part of the
question, which concerned matter of Fact, Whether that case were now? (i.e.)
whether it were true of His Majesty which they supposed and took for granted,
and endeavored to make the people believe of Him? it was of a second
consideration, and examined after by it self.

Every mean understanding might easily conceave this to be the sense of the
Question, the brief of the Cause, and of my Treatise.

But this Answerer it seems, had a discourse of the power of Parliam^n^s lying
by him, (for no man will think it occasioned by my book, but applied to it) and
therefore thought fit to quarrel at the Question as proposed by me, and in
stead of my three Resolves, to give the Reader three Propositions of his own,
he should have made them more, but for observing number. And then he boasts, How
many weeks soever the Doctor has been about the Treatise, it is well known to
many, the Answer cost not many hours the doing, page 3. he means the applying
of what was done before; but any one may perceive by his confused jumbling of
things, and his frequent mistakes when ever he repeats and answers what I had
written, that he was ambitious of doing the business hastily, rather then
surely.

We Will follow him as we may, first examining how he makes good his Propositions
or grounds he goes on, then how he applies them to what I had written, where we
shall tak in the other Answers, as occasion requires.

SECT. II. The frame of this Government as it is fancied in the Fuller Answer.
HIs whole resolution of the Cause is laid down in his first Proposition, which
is this.

The Parliament may with good Conscience in defense of the King, Laws, and
Government established, when imminently endangered, take up Arms without or
against the Kings Personal commands if He refuse. His other two Propositions
are subservient to this, tending to the proof of it; That the final result of
this States judgment, what those Laws, Dangers, and means of prevention are,
resides in the two Houses of Parliament, Prop. 2. That in this final
resolution the People are to rest, and in obedience thereto may with good
Conscience bear and use Arms, Prop. 3.

To make this good he first endeavors to show this Monarchy is mixed, by a
Coordination of the two Houses with the King in the very supremacy of power it
self, so he page 3. Whereupon if the King refuse to provide for the safety of
the Kingdom according to their advice, then His coordinates; the two Houses
must according to their trusts supply, so he tells us, p. 3.8.10. And that this
power was reserved by the people at the first constitution of this government,
page 24.25. and that this constitution was made by consent of King and People
in the first Coalition of Government, page 4. by the Consent of the People that
first made the King, page 13. Contrived by the people in the first constitution
^f Gov^ernment, page 8.

These Particulars we find in this his discourse confusedly spoken of, if we
give his conceptions their due order, they stand thus. First, he supposes all
the Power of government to be derived from the people, and that the
Constitution of this Government was their contrivment, when first they made a
King; then, that by this first Constitution, such a Coordination of the two
Houses with the King was contrived, by which they have power reserved, not only
to consent in making Laws, but to supply the refusalls of the King, as they
shall think good for the safety of the State; and for this, the final result
of the States judgment is in them to declare what is Law without him, and unto
their final resolution, and commands thereupon, though arbitrary (as this
answerer acknowledges Page 17) the people ought to obey.

Thus has he fansied the reason and constitution of this Government, but I
suppose the honorable houses of Parliament will not thank him for raising
them to that height of Supremacy, he has placed them in; I am sure we Subjects
have not cause to thank him for that arbitrary power he has placed in them.

If any man expect from this his discourse, satisfaction for conscience, he
shall find nothing but uncertainties, and improbabilities, not fit grounds for
it to restupon; and if conviction of Reason be looked for here, I suppose there
is no man that upon serious consideration of what this Answerer brings us to,
will not think it more reasonable to be under the arbitrary Government of one,
then of many, nay, under the Government of one that challenges not obedience as
due, bat according to Law, then of many, whose commands are Law unto us; as
this Answerer makes them.

And here we do not undertake to set down the extent of the power, and
Privileges of Parliament; no more then of the Kings Power, and prerogative.
They are both of them beyond our skill, and we may not take the boldness to
meddle with either of them, farther then the necessary information of
Conscience does enforce: to which purpose as we may by use of Reason certainly
conclude, the King has not this or that Power, as to make Laws by himself, to
rule arbitrarily; so of the two Houses without offense we may as certainly
conclude, That they have not such a power by the first Constitution of this
Government, as this Answerer every where beggs for them, but no where proves it.

It is granted that the two Houses of Parliament are in a sort Coordinate with
His MAJESTY, ad aliquid, to some act or exeacising of the supreme power, that
is to the making of Laws by yielding their consent; and that they have this by
a fundamental Constitution. But that they have such a fellow ship with His
MAJESTY in the Supremacy it self, as this man imagines, or such a Power of
resistance reserved at first to supply His MAJESTY'S refusa's; or such a final
and arbitrary Power and c^mmand, as he attributes to them, Conscience can never
be truly convinced off.

SECT. III. Of the Original of Governing power, and of the beginnings of
Government in this Land.
WE will begin with his groundwork, Which lies scattered through all his
discourse, That first Coalition or Consititution of Government in this Land,
which he supposes to be framed by the agreement or Contrivement of the people
when they made the first King; wherein they entrusted him with such Power as
was thought fit, and reserved to themselves what power they held necessary for
their own safety, upon extraordinary times and occasion of danger.

So then Conscience, if it will obey the power of Arms now usurped by
Subjects, must be clearly convinced (which is impossible) of these particulars,
That the Governning Power is from the people, that Monarchy was here raised
upon such a contrivement, wherein such a power of supply, and of resistance,
was reserved to the People, and that all Kings since, do consent to such
conditions, and are admitted under them.

All the proof that I can any where find this Answer has brought for all
this, is from the words of Fortescue, Hanc potestatem a populo effluxam, this
Power the King has derived from the People; and from the mutual Oath of King
and People, page 5. Let the Reader give me leave to speak a little of the
Governing power simply; then of the beginning of Government in this Land, that
Conscience may see what little satisfaction this or any man else can give it, to
persuade either that the governing power is derived from the people, or that
the Government of this Land began in such a Contrivement or constitution as
this man phansies.

It was said in my other Treatise, that the Governing power was from God, not
only as an ordinance of the precept that commands Government, but also as an
Efflux or issue of that providence, which sets up and pulls down, which
translates Kingdoms, and governs the whole world, Creatures Reasonable and
unreasonable; and this not obscurely in the Apostle, Romans 13. where the powers
are said to be not only (...) from God, but also (...) as orders ranked by him
and under him.

Well then, this Governing power was not a populo effluxa, as he above said,
but flowed from that providence at first through the veins of nature in a
paternal or Fatherly rule, and by that as by a pattern in a Kingly Rule or
Government, upon the increase of people and Nations; for when the Reins of
Paternall Government could not reach them for their extent, or hold them in for
their unrulines, and injustice, it in larged it self into a Kingly power,
which bore and used the sword; for that is given them to use straight after the
Flood. Genesis 9.6.

This is plain by the book of God, that the first Fathers of Mankind, were the
first Kings and Rulers; for we see the Earth divided among Noah's three Sons,
and upon the Increase of their Children many Colonies were sent into Countries
far distant, and thereupon many independent Governments raised; which must be
by the direction and order of Noah, that first sent them out and assigned them
those parts of the Earth; And still as they increased, they spread farther upon
the face of the Earth, new Colonies being excluded and thrust forth (like
swarms of Bees) under their Rulers, who were the chief Fathers of those new
Progenies, and had the Government, both Regal and Sacerdotall by
Primogeniture, unles the chief Patriarch, from whom they all issued, saw cause
to order it otherwise.

Therefore of all the Sons of Noah and the Nations sprung from them it is said,
Genesis 10. these are the Sons of Noah -- after their Families in their Countries
and Nations. verse. 5, 20, 31. and we find many of those first Princes and
rulers to leave their names to the people that came of them, and to the
Countries they were seated in; as may be seen, Genesis 10.

Hence it appears. First, that Monarchy was the first Government it being late
ere any Popular Rule, Aristocraticall or Democraticall appeared in the world.
Secondly, that the first Kings were not by choice of the People, but that
Monarchy (however we cannot say it is jure divino, by divine precept commanding
all Nations to be so governed, or jure naturae by natures law enforcing it) is
plainly ductu naturae, by nature leading men from Paternall to Regal
Government, and exemplo divino, as I may say, by divine example and
insinuation; the Government that God set up over his people, being Monarchical
still, in Moses, the Judges, the Kings; whereas Aristocracy, and Democracy,
(that I'may not call them Defections and Revolts from the Natural way of
government) are mere inventions of man; In several Monarchies indeed we see
diverse limitations and qualifications of power, and several offices and ways
of executing that power, these are mere inventions of man. And this I note for
explication of what was in the other Treatise said of Monarchy in relation to
Ius divinum, which by this Answerer is often interpreted, as if I granted
Monarchy, and Aristocracy, and Democracy to be equally of humane invention.

Thirdly, it appears that the power of Kings was as of Fathers, and that the
people had no power of coertion over them, more than children over Fathers.
Fourthly, that albeit within few ages after the flood, people began to choose
themselves Rulers, (as likely they did that departed from the building of Babel
in several companies, according to your several languages) yet was such
popular election to be accounted a kind of defection from, and a disturbance of
that natural way of the descent of governing kingly power, by a Paternall
right; and this irregular way began in the progeny of Cham. Lastly, that albeit
when a people are free, as upon the utter failing of the royal Line, they may
choose a Governor, (there being then no other way to set up one but by choice)
yet then do they no more give the power, than if they received a King by
natural descent, or by Gods designment, and still the King so chosen is a
Father, as in the fifth Commandment, and the people as children in the same
relation for obedience and coertion, as at first in the generations of Noah.

Accordingly kings at first among the Nations though chosen, ruled as Fathers,
arbitrarily, their discretion being law unto the people, as was observed out of
Justin, in the former Treatise, and as we may really see in the fiction of the
Golden Age.

Now for the beginning of Government in this Island, how shall conscience find
any certainty, that it was so set up and contrived as this Answerer supposes?
If he will begin simply at the very first coalition of Government (as he
phrases it) he must suppose a multitude of people meeting together to contrive
a Government, and these either to spring on a sudden out of the earth, as
Cadmus his race, but then in all likelihood they would not so well agree; or to
live dispersedly in caves and woods, and so to be brought together by some
Orpheus his pipe, but then we cannot imagine such rude men to be so politic
and cautious as to make such a contrivement, for he tells us the reason which
we see in this State, is that same reason that first contrived the Government
when they made the first King; Or lastly, he must suppose this land was peopled
by a colony from France or Germany, and then as likely they had the
constitution of the Government from the King which sent them, or that the
government which the first Kings used here was arbitrary, as it was every where
else at first.

But let us come down to times of more certainty, and, as the Declaration of
Parliament, 24. H. 8. c. 12. directs us, look in Histories and Chronicles,
which tell us, this Realm of England has been accepted for an Empire, governed
by one supreme head; unto whom a body politic, compact of all sorts and
degrees of people, of the spiritualty, and Temporalty, are bounden to bear,
next to God, a natural obedience, so in that Statute. Now this first
constitutionof government in this Land, (as this Answerer has phansied it) can
neither consist with the substance of this Parliamentary Declaration, as we
shall see anon, nor can it have any footing in Histories and chronicles to
which that Declaration refers us.

For those chronicles, and Caesar in his commentaries tells us, there were in
this land then diverse Princes independent, in which of them shall we look for
this constitution? or shall we seek it among the British kings, whom the
Saxons drove into Wales? if we could find it there, it would not concern us,
for we are not now upon the British but English government, which followed the
Saxons. If the Answerer will begin his constitution and first king at this
period or revolurion of the Monarchy, (for higher he cannot, and lower at the
conquest, I trust he will not) why did not he tell us so, that he might have
give^ conscience some direction to find out his first constitution and first
King? He knew well enough there was little help for him here.

For we find this English Saxishgovernment at the beginning, branching it self
into an Heptarchy, and rising in arms; it is likely those Captains took upon
them as kings by the consent and acclamation of the soldiers, as when in the
state of Rome the pretorian guard, or some army abroad saluted an Emperor, and
thrust him upon the people. But what then will become of his first constitution
by the contrivement of the people, when they made their first king? should any
of these seven Monarchs come in by such a popular contrivement; (which cannot be
imagined) must our government needs be the same? Or can we think that Egbert
who made himself sole Monarch was bound up by such a constitution and
reservation as he says was contrived at their making of the first King? from
that Egbert to King CHARLES, our Authentic Histories and Chronicles (to which
the Declaration of Parliament above mentioned refers us) do show a glorious
succession of Monarchs, not one made by election, but Harold, who yet has not
obtained the style of Rex Haroldus, and his title, if any, dyed with him.

We see upon what uncertainties and improbabilities, conscience is left for
this first election and precontrivement; this Answerer has not directed it any
ways how it should be assured of it, much less of that reservation of power,
which he imagines to be made by the people, at that first election of a King.
He gives us no record to witness it, turns us to no authentic History or
chronicle, shows us no constant practice or judgment of foregoing Ages; what
he has from the mutual oath of King and people, page 5. may be good upon
after agreement between them, as will appear; and his hanc potestatem a populo
effluxam, out of Fortescue, although it supposes derivation of power from the
people; (the usual mistaken principle of Government, which later times have
given cause to examine and find unsound) yet does it not imply, the people has
reserved any power, much less such a paramount power, as he imagines.

Conscience has this certain by the continual practice of this Government,
that there is such a constitution as gives power of consenting to the two
Houses in making and declaring Law, when ever the beginning of it was; it
cannot see that it began by a contrivement of the people at the supposed choice
of the first King, but rather that it was subsequent to Monarchy, and procured
by the people for their greater security, not precontrived by them.

If objected. The constitution is fundamental, therefore preceding the first
King; we answer it follows not, for it may be a fundamental, yet not of
Monarchy simply, but of government as now it stands, a fundamental not of the
Regal power, but the peoples security. For Government may receive a change and
qualification by consent of King and people, from more absolute to mixed; and
such a constitution is a fundamental, because all after-lawes are built upon
it, but not a fundamental to the Regal power, for it gives no power to him as
it does to the two Houses, but rather lessens his power by limiting it upon
agreement, that he will not impose any laws upon his people without their
consent.

But as for that reserved power of declaring law without the king, and of
commanding all, when they shall judge it expedient for the safety of the
kingdom, upon the Kings refusal, Conscience has no assurance from this
Answerer, that such a power was reserved (which is enough to leave it without
excuse, if it obey such a power) but on the contrary, has strong presumptions
and reasons against.

For first, it cannot see how such a reservation of power can consist with the
beginnings of government in this land, whether we consider the Norman or the
Saxons entrance. Secondly, it cannot see how it can consist with the known
established Government, for by such a power the Supremacy would be plainly
settled in the two Houses, they may when they judge it necessary, use this
reserved power, which transcends all ordinary power in the King.

Thirdly, should the Kings of this Land be admitted upon such agreement for
this reserved power, Conscience cannot but think it an unreasonable condition,
and neither for the Kings nor peoples security, but a very seminary of
jealousies and sedition; as if in Matrimony (for the King is also sponsus
Regni, and wedded to the kingdom by a Ring at his Coronation) the parties
should agree, upon such and such neglect of duties, to part a sunder; or
children (for the king is also a Father of the kingdom, and the body politic
owes to him natural obedience, 24. H. 8. c. 12.) should condition with their
Parents upon such or such usage to be acquitted of their duty and obedience;
what our Savior said of their light and unlawful occasions of Divorse, non
fuit sic ob initio, it was not so from the beginning, when God at first joined
man and woman, may be said of such a reserved power of resistance, it was not
so from the beginning, when at first Rulers and Kings were Fathers, and so are
still called in the fifth Commandment, not to be resisted or abdicated by their
children, their subjects.

Lastly, this contrivement seems plainly to contradict it self, for it places
this reserved power in the Comites and Barons, which cannot be before the first
King, for Bracton tells us (as he is cited by Sir Edw. Coke in mag: Cart.)
Reges associant sibi Comites and Barons ordinances eos in magno Honor, Earls
and Barons are made by the King, and assumed for Council, therefore invested
with a long Robe, and for defense, therefore girt with a sword; which shows the
power they have, is not by a contrivement or reservation at the supposed making
of the first King, but from the King by grant and of grace; much less is it
such a transcendent and paramount power as this Answerer imagines to be
reserved in them, and the House of Commons, at the first constitution of
government in this Land.

We have hitherto searched into the groundwork of this frame of Government,
as he had laid it in a supposed contrivement and reservation of the people when
they made their first King, and have found it to be groundless, so that
Conscience cannot rest upon it, to make resistance in obedience to such a
reserved power which this man tells Us is in the two Houses, but gives no
proof for it at all, nor indeed can. So that this which has been said against
it, were enough to overthrow the Co-ordination, supply, Final resolution, and
Arbitrary Commands, that he has built upon this fiction; but we will
particularly examine his discourse upon them, which is but an opening and
enlarging of his phancies upon the new Principles of these days, set off with
plausible show of reason to deceive the unwary.

SECT. IV. Of the Co-ordination of the three Estates, and of the Supremacy of
Power.
HIs Co-ordination he has thus expressed, This mixture or Coordination is in
the very Supremacy of power it self, and the Monarchy or highest power it
self is compounded of three Coordinate estates, page 3. There is but one
Highest, but that one is a mixed one, page 4. It was granted, there is a
Co-ordination to some purposes, but not such as he urges it for, in the matter
of Supremacy and Supply; which that we may the better discern, we must
according to our skill (and that shall be no farther, than the common use of
reason, and the Grammatical construction of what the known Law does plainly
declare, may lead every man's apprehension) unfold wherein Supremacy of power
does consist.

There is a power of Enacting and of Executing or administration; accordingly
the Supreme power shows it self in making new Laws, and abrogating old, in
calling assemblies to that and other purposes, in Treaties with foreign
Princes, sending Embassies, appointing Officers of State, Judges of Courts, and
other Ministers of justice through the Kingdom.

Now if the Co-ordination of the King and two Houses of Parliament, were such
as he does express and would seem to infer by the supply they are to make
upon the Kings refusal, they should be Coordinati ad omnia, simply coordinate
and equal in those powers and acts of Supremacy, whereas in plain speech he
cannot say they are coordinate with His Majesty, but only in consenting to the
making of Laws, page 4. in all the rest the King is solely supreme, and all
power of administration derived from Him. So then their consent is required to
one act or exercise of supreme power, but not to the denial of His Supremacy,
for He is still by Law acknowledged the only supreme Governor, and the
supreme Head; which being urged in my former Treatise, this Answerer should
have shown us how the King can be so, and yet this co-ordination of his, stand
good to all purposes as he would have it.

If he restrain that only supreme Governor, and supreme Head, to supremacy of
power in Execution or Administration, it would be plain that none can use power
in this government, but derivatively from His Majesty, which were enough for
the purpose, I urged Supremacy in the former Treatise, viz. to show His Majesty
cannot be resisted; for resistance is a taking of the sword or power without
him, and from him, and also a using of it against that power of administration
which is settled in him, and therefore against him, as he is the only supreme
Governor.

This would be enough to check any man's conscience that will dare to resist,
yet must not the supremacy be so restrained; for albeit, for the greater
security of the people, Kings have bound themselves from imposing Laws upon
them without their consent, yet may we also see the beams of His Supremacy
shining in the power of enacting exercised with their consent. For he has the
power of calling them to that purpose, and the constitution that has given them
power of consenting, has left in him power of dissolving them: Also, anciently
(as I have heard knowing men say) the Law enacted began thus, Rex statuit, the
King ordains, and before the Laws and Statutes in each Kings Reign, we find the
title or introduction thus usually expressed, The King by the advice and assent
of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and at the instance and request of the
Commonalty has ordained, etc. And still for the procuring of his assent, we see
them Petitioning under the style of Loyal Subjects, and while they sit in that
coordination there is still that other relation of Head and Body between them,
and accordingly He was declared in Parliament to be Supreme Head of the body
politic, He being instituted and furnished by the goodness and sufferance of
Almighty God with plenary, whole entire power, preheminency, authority,
praerogative, and Jurisdiction, to render and yield Justice and final
determination to all manner of Subjects within this Realm in all causes. Also
that sundry Laws and Ordinances had been made in former Parliaments, for sure
and entire conserving the Prerogative and preheminency of this Crown. 24. H. 8.
c. 12.

From all this so plainly declared in Law, and confessed, can we conclude with
this man, that the two Houses are Coordinate with his Majesty in the very
Supremacy? or that the highest and Supreme head is a mixed one? No! but that the
Legislative power is Supreamly in the King, only this power is excited by the
instance and request of the Commons, representing to him the grievances of his
people abroad, and cannot be exercised or come to the act of Ordaining, but
with consent of them and the House of Lords. This may easily be conceived, if
we consider, that Kings at first ruled arbitrarily, and then the Legislative
power was solely in them, afterward the people obtained such limitations and
qualifications of that power, as might make for their security; as for example,
That they should not have Laws imposed on them without their consent: this does
not make them coordinate with their King in the very Supremacy of power it
self, (as this man has conceived it) but still leaves the power of Ordaining
supreamly in him as in the fountain, though the efflux or exercise of that
power be not solely in his will, but expects the consent of the People.

Now let us gather up his scattered proofs as we can find them. Such a
co-ordination there must be, or else, says he, the Monarchy is not mixed, page
3. and 4. It does not follow, if there be a mixture in it, therefore such an
one of equal ingredients; or if it be mixed secundum quid in some respect,
therefore simply, or as he would have it; though we say not the Monarchy is
mixed, as he, yet we grant, the Government is mixed; not as he, by placing such
power in the coordinate parts; but mixed, that is, not absolute or arbitrary in
his Majesty, yet not without Subordination on their part, and predominancy on
his; And to say the Monarchy it self is compounded of three Estates as he
does, is absurd.

But the Treatiser himself calls it that excellent temper of the three Estates
in Parliament, confessing them to be the fundamentalls of this Government; and
if Fundamentalls, what subordination can there be in them, they admit not of
higher and lower; all foundations are alike, page 3. The Treatiser acknowledged
it a Fundamental of Government, that provided this temper of the three estates
in Parliament as the reasonable means of our safety; therefore says the
Answerer, the three estates are Fundamentalls, a good argument A genere
adgenus; from the constitution that places this power in the two Houses, to the
persons that bear the power; for when we speak of Fundamentalls, we speak of
Laws and constitutions, which may provide such a temper, and yet do it with
subordination, that it be not temperamentum ad pondus, but ad justitiam, not
with Arithmeticall, but Geometrical proportion, not with exact equality of
all, but with a predominancy of one; otherwise it would sometime fall out, that
this body of the Commonwealth could not act or move any way, like as the
natural body could not, if all the elements were equally tempered in it.

And to show he is for an Arithmeticall proportion in this temper of the three
Estates, he wonders we cannot see that the King is Universis minor, when as we
may easily reckon that of three, one is less than two. page 3. Very good, we
shall have enough of such arguments as these for the present we will make a
note of this in the Margin, and shall have occasion anon to call him to his
reckoning upon it.

Then he keeps a trifling to show how the two Houses are subjects divisim,
taken singly, and not subjects conjunctim, in the co-ordination page 4. In one
word, their consent is not subject to the Kings command, yet they are subjects
even collectively taken, for so they represent subjects that chose them; they
are subject to his command still, to remove or rise, when He Prorogues or
dissolves, and so they acknowledge themselves Subjects in all their addresses
to His Majesty, which they make as a body collective. He is the Head of them
not taken severally (for then He should be Head of many bodies) but as jointly
making one body.

And left he should seem to forget they are his Council, which would take off
from that fellowship in the supremacy, where he has placed them, he grants
they are his Council, but by the first constitution not to be elected by him,
but assigned to him, not assumed as Moses his under Officers were upon
Jethero's advice, page 4. How this of fes is pertinent (though often hinted in
this book) I see not, for Moses did not assume them as Counselors about making
of Laws, for neither he, nor they, nor both together could make any, but as
Officers to ease him in the execution, or judging of the people according to
those Laws they received from God.

As for the Commons in Parliament, they being a representative body, could not
be chosen but by them they represent, yet are they sent upon his command and
have a trust upon them, not only from those that elected them, but also from
the King that sends for them to represent unto him the grievances of his
people, and faithfully to consult about the remedies; accordingly it is in
relation to his Majesty that they take the oaths of sup remacy and allegiance
at their admittance into the House, and although they have there the power not
only of consulting, but of consenting also, and denying for the security of
the people whom they represent, yet who sees not by all this, in what relation
they stand to his Majesty.

For the Lords, they are assumed by the King, Bracton said above Reges
associant sibi Comites and Barons, and we see the King calls by his Writ whom
he pleases to that House; nor does it help that he says page 5. the Lords
are Consiliarii nati born Counselors to the State, for though Nobility in some
be Native, yet was it at first Dative as they speak, by the grace of the King.

We may add here what he says in the same place, The very style of Comites
and Peers implies a Coordinate society with his Majesty in the Government,
they are in Parliament his Comites his Peers. Yet Bracton tells us, Rex non
habet parem has no Peer, and gives us another reason of the style Comites (as
he is cited by sir Edw: Coke in Mag: Charta) quia sunt in Comitatu, without
relation to Parliament, because they are either in the Train of the King, or
because set in each county adregendum populum, and so assumed by the King to
the like end that Moses did his under Officers in ruling his people; So that
other place of Bracton cited by this Answerer, page 4. Rex habet Superiorem --
Curiam suam viz, Comites and Barons, is not meant of the Court of Parliament,
for there is no mention of the Commons, but it follows in that place debent Regi
fraenum imponere, it is likely he spoke this in favor of the Militia raised
against Hen. 3. (for then he wrote) and might call that assembly of Earls and
Barons then combined against the King, curiam, the higher Court or Council.
But when he speaks like a Lawyer, he says plainly, Rex in Regne parem habere
non debet, cum par in parem non habeat poteflatem, multo fortius non habeat
superiorem, which how it agrees with that above, let this man, or the skillful
in the Law judge.

Let us examine what reason will conclude by his argument from the style
Comites; it would follow thence, That the Commons must be his Comites, and
Peers too, for they are coordinate with his Majesty, as well as the other; and
so this Answerer must set up three thrones, one for the King, another for the
Lords, and a third for the House of Commons; I should not think any thing too
honorable for the Houses of Parliament, but only Majesty. Now it is a rule in
policy, Majestas cum suprema potestate conjuncta est, Majesty goes along with
the supreme power, as in the popular State of Rome, it was usually and properly
said, Maiestas populi Romani, and so might it be said here too, were this man's
contrivement good, but I know the honorable Houses of Parliament look not for
it.

But we return to the beginning of page 5. In reading the first line of it, I
was in hope he would have blessed us with some demonstration of this constitution
to be such as he has borne us in hand it is, how does it appear that the
constitution of this government is such? I answer, by the mutual oath that the
King and people take to maintain the laws that have so constituted it;
Altogether inconsequent; The King takes oath to maintain the Laws-therefore
they are such as this man fansieth them; it shows indeed an obligation on his
Majesty to perform, it does not show such a co-ordination, supply, reserved
power, etc. surely never any King swore to it in that sense, or had reason to
understand it so; for he finds he is expressly bound by that oath to preserve
the immuimmunities and liberties of etc. to protect etc. which he should not be
well able to do if his power might be taken from him at the pleasure of others.

So when he answers to that which I have said, the King is King before he take
the oath; True, but he is King but upon the same trust, which his Predecessors
swore to, and the Oath, which the Law provides for the King to take, virtually
binds him before he takes it. He Answers nothing, unless he could show that
the trust which this Oath implies to be in the King, was such a trust upon
which the people in their first contrivement (as he phansieth) conditionally
admitted the first King, and that the Law which provided this oath, was that
first constitution or contrivement, which would be absurd, for the oath speaks
the Language of later times, and would not fit the Mouth of the first King in
the first Coalition of Government, for it binds Him to preserve the immunities
of Holy Church, which if it should be of an after addition to the Oath, yet
surely Leges and Consuetudines Angliae were in it from the beginning; now those
are customs of Government, and customs must have some continuance of time
past to make them so, therefore the first King in the first Coalition of
Government swore not this Oath; what he shows indeed by this argument we admit,
that the King is bound to take the Oath, is bound to perform the duty of it,
but this is nothing to prove such a first Constitution as he dreams of.

He brings a proof out of Fortescue, Hanc potestatem a populo effluxam habet,
etc. Principatu namque nedum Regali, sed and politico suo populo dominatur, now
the word Politico implies the Principat of many, especially when opposed to
Regali, pa. 5. This place tells us what manner of power the King has, does not
tell us the two Houses of Parliament have such power as this man pretends; We
examined that Effluxam a populo above, whether the power of the King was
derived from the people by agreement in the first coalition of Government. Here
we grant the King has a limited power, but not so limited as this Answerer
would have it, which he might have read in the words cited: for he sees there
the King has His Regalis potestas, but Rules not only by that (i.e.) by a
power mere Regiased and politico principatu, by a political power also, in as
much as in the making of Laws the advice and consent of many is required, and
his power regulated by such Law.

But this Principate of many, as it is ill rendered out of the Latin, so is it
ill meant, to the excluding of His Regalis potestas, and so to make this
government Democraticall, or Aristocraticall, rather then Monarchical; Now
there cannot be such a blend or mixture of the Forms of government, but that
one must be predominant, and Supreme, because else the body Politic could not
move or act any thing, as it was said above, when we spoke of the Temper of the
three Estates.

This Answerer, to free this body Politic, (when the three Estates lock and
bind one the other by their Negative voice, as upon the Kings refusal) and to
make it active without him to all ends and purposes, places the Final
resolution in the two Houses, to which all must obey, and so indeed places the
Supremacy there, but why then should this be a Monarchy rather then a popular
government, were it not for Supremacy in the King? or why should that first
Constitution, which he says placed this final resolution in the two Houses,
leave such a power in the King, to dissolve them? which power, say we, looses
the Body Politic, when through the aforesaid binding it cannot move a new way
by a new Law, and gives it motion by the former Laws, which will appear anon to
be with less inconvenience, then if in such a case it should be moved by such
a final resolution.

Having thus far spoken of his Coordination, before he comes to the Supply, the
two Houses are thereupon to make, he spends two Pages, the 6th and 7th in
repeating his Notes he has taken at Court-Sermons, where he says, the
Divinity of Monarchy, and the absolutenes of this in the Kings sole person,
has been usually cried up, as if there were no medium between such an absolute
Monarchy, and such a coordinative one as he has phansied; Let them bear their
burden that speak not their conscience at Court, I would they would now do it
sincerely at S. Margarets Westminster, for I could tell him what stuff is
preached there too, what omnipotency is ascribed to some in the world, I would
also this man would have used a conscience in repeating and interpreting my
words, for he often makes me speak contradictions through his own inadvertency,
and in this place he absolves me in the beginning of his relation, and charges
me thus at the end;

This and much more was preached, and all upon this error, that the Dr.
resolves on, that the sole Supremacy of power was in the Kings Person, and
that His Judgment was the sole Supreme rule of Power. He should have done well
to have cited the place where I resolve so, for they are not my words, nor do
they render my sense any where expressed to that purpose. For when I say (as I
did, and proved in my other Treatise) that the King is Supreme, or the higher
power, I do not mean he is sole and absolute in making or imposing Laws (the
contrary was often expressly acknowledged by me) but that He is still,
notwithstanding the consent of the two Houses, required to that act or exercise
of supreme Power, the only supreme Governor, according to the oath of
supremacy, which was enough for the purpose I urged it; viz. not for his
absoluteness, but against our resisting of him. It is well known the consent of
the Senate and people of Roms was required to the Laws their Emperor would
have enacted, and yet He was Supreme, so acknowledged, 1 Pet. 2.13. And it is
well known, The King was in Parliament acknowledged the Supreme Head of the
Body Politic.

And now what can conscience conclude hence? First, that the two Houses of
Parliament are in some sort coordinate with the King, by reason of that consent
necessarily required in the making and declaring Law, and that is enough for our
security against an absolute or arbitrary government. Also that the King,
notwithstanding such their coordination and consent, is, and has been so
declared in Parliament, the Supreme Head of the Body, Ecclesiastical and
Civil, also the only Supreme Governor, and that is enough to deter conscience
from resistance.

SECT. V. Of the Supply which is phansied upon the former Coordination.
NOw lest it should appear unreasonable, as needs it must, that the two Houses
of Parliament should have power to make Laws and Ordinances without the King,
which He acknowledges He cannot do without them, and to seize the Militia or
power of Arms, with which His Majesty is entrusted, as this Answerer
confesses; the device to make this good, is by a rule misapplyed, Coordinata
invicem supplent, which Rule he gave us, Page 3. and now comes to misapply it,
Page 8. If the King fail in His trust, His coordinates in the mixture of this
Supreme power, must according to their trusts supply. But before we show how
weakly this coordination inferres the supply, let us first see wherein this
supply stands, and when the time is for them to make use of it; this Supply, he
tells us, is in applying the means of safety to its end, that is in settling the
Militia as may be most safe for the kingdom; and the time when it is necessary
to apply them, is in imminencie of Danger; to this purpose, Page 8, 9, 10.

The King acknowledges imminencie of Danger in His Writ of Summons,
Consideratis periculis imminentibus, Page 9. There may be imminent dangers
sufficient to move his Majesty to call a Parliament, and require their advice,
though not sufficient to cause them to use this Supply, by taking the Militia
into their hands. Where by the way (says he) we may take notice, that His
Majesty is by Law to call a Parliament, when there shall be any imminent
danger, ib: and by the way we may take notice, that the King is the sole Judge
of those imminent dangers, when he calls a Parliament, and also (which is not
the way to make him hasty in calling a Parliament) that according to this man's
contrivement, so often as his Majesty calls a Parliament, they may use this
supply, and seize the Militia, because of those imminent dangers in the Writ of
Summons.

This imminency of danger has a competent Judge, the two Houses, (wherein the
Law makes the Reason of the Kingdom to reside) who have by Vote concluded it.
Page 9. so it was by Vote concluded, that his Majesty, upon the raising of a
Guard at York, for the safety of his person, intended to make War upon the
Parliament, are they competent Judges of his intentions too? indeed those
horrible imminent dangers that were pretended, have been for the most part as
invisible as Intentions are.

But the King refused to pass the Bill for the Militia, according to the
advice of the two Houses, which is (says the Law) the same ever living Reason
of the State that first advised the Government, and must still advise the way
of applying it, page 9. His Majesty did not barely refuse, but gave his Reasons
for it, and if they had their dangers and fears moving them to gain the
Militia, so had he his to withhold it, as he had amply testified to the world.
But here is a Reason of State, to which his Majesty's Reason must give way; and
that surely is Law. Certainly the Militia is to be applied by the Reason of
State, but we must not make the King no part of the State as he does, and as he
says the Law does, but we would fain see that Law; we are sure it is declared
25 H. 8.21. Your Royal Majesty, and Your Lords and Commons represent the whole
Realm. This restraining of the whole Reason of State to the two Houses, is but
the same device with that which made the first constitution of this government,
to be the contrivement of the people when they made the first King, and was
above confuted; So this necessity that is here laid upon the King, always to
follow the advice of the two Houses, is but a strain of that device which
places a final and Arbitrary resolution in them, and shall be handled anon.

His Majesty will apply the Militia, but by the advice of them against whom it
is to be secured, whom the Parliament has Voted enemies to the State, against
whom especially it was called, page 10. This is shooting at Rovers; if he
should tell who those voted ones were, and who those enemies against whom this
Parliament was called, I do not think he would find any of them about his
Majesty, when he refused to pass the Bill for the Militia; but he tells us a
little after, page 10. The King gathers these voted enemies into an Army
against the Parliament, that had voted them such; and a little after, What
shall the two other States do, but use that power of Arms, which the government
in such case of the Kings refusal has entrusted them with, to its own
preservation (that is always supposed, never proved) especially when it is but
for the apprehending of such enemies to it, as (beside that voted delinquencie)
are sufficiently convinced by their own flight; Now we know who those voted
delinquents are, against whom the Militia was by bill to be secured; some five
or six that fled beyond sea. But these though beyond sea, are gathered together
into an Army here by the King: to pass by this, let us see what is more
material; The Kings Army is raised against the Parliament, Their army against
those delinquents to bring them to justice; But can any man in conscience be
persuaded, that was the Kings design? was that a time to provoke them that were
so powerful with the people? or was the King in a condition then fit to
enterprise against them that were so furnished with all the Arms of the
Kingdom, he not knowing where to have sufficient for a small guard? Nay, let
his offers, sent them from Nottingham many months after speak to Posterity, by
whose refusal it was, that we are not now in safety; when as it pleased God
within a few weeks after to raise him such an assistance, that he was able to
appear against those forces that pretended they were sent from the Parliament.

And now that it comes to blows, why should it be interpreted, that the King
intends to overthrow the Parliament, because he fights against those pretended
Parliamentary forces, more than that the Parliament intends to overthrow the
Kingly power, because their force fight against those that assist him?
certainly, as they desire the continuance of his Kingly power, so does he the
continuance of free Parliaments; knowing he cannot suffer by such.

And for the apprehension of those Delinquents which fled, being here pretended
as the cause of their seizing the Militia, and taking Arms, Can we think them
so considerable? or that they would have been withheld, when as those that
were greater and nearer to His Majesty, had been delivered up to the justice of
the Parliament? certainly this would not have made the Breach, if first a great
Delinquent on that side had not been denied to be delivered up to trial, if
the Militia had not been seized, and some further design thereby threatened
according to His Majesty's apprehension.

Having done with these pretenses, we come to his argument for this supply,
Co-ordinata invicem supplent, if the King refuse, His Coordinates the two
Houses must supply.

We answer, Co-ordinates do supply each others failings, not always and to
all purposes, but then and so far forth as is appointed by that constitution
that makes them so, there are two parts of this Answer.

First, they do then supply when it is expressed so in the constitution that
has co-ordinated them, and not else; he gave us as an instance of this
co-ordination, the example of a father and son, entrusted with lands to certain
uses, page 5. Now put case, the father refuses to expend any thing upon such
uses as his son presents to him, because he apprehends them not such as were
intended; may then his son supply and do it himself, unless it be so
expressed in the deed of Enfeoffment? which is improbable it should, for then
the whole power would be placed in the son. So if this power of supplying may
be challenged by the two coordinate parts, upon the refusal of the third, it
must be as express in the constitution of the Kingdom, as the co-ordination
and power of the three is: We see such reservations express in merely
conventionall Kingdoms, where the Prince is chosen and admitted on such
conditions.

He tells us indeed it is fundamental and of the first constitution, but
proves it not, we see it not expressed in the Enfeoffment, as I may say,
wherein we find three Estates entrusted.

If any would know what are those fundamental Laws, so much jeered at in this
and other Pamphlets; It is that original frame of this Coordinate Government
contrived by the people in its first constitution, and since in every several
Reign confirmed by mutual oaths between King and people; and in the Parliament
summons of Ed. 1. this Law is called Lex stabilitata and notissima, page 8. If
any man would know what jeering is, he may read the premonition before this
fuller Answer, and the first leaf of the answer; but if he would know what
these Fundamentals be indeed, he must not expect to know them truly by this
Answerer, that lays the foundations of this Government, in the airy
conceptions of his own phancie, such are, a contrivement of the people when
they made the first King, A reservation of power to upply upon the Kings
refusal, and the like; such fundamentals as these were reasoned against (which
is not jeering) from the analogy and proportion that must be between the
foundation and the building, the fundamental constitutions and the Written
Laws; in my former Treatise.

It is a known and written Law that declares the King Supreme head of the body
Politic, also that declares him the only supreme Governor in this Realm,
can the fundamentals, as this man lays them bear this superstructure, or
rather consist with this fundamental thus openly declared and laid in Law? So
it is a known Fundamental Constitution, that the making of Laws is in three
Estates, secured against each other by a power of denying, and that it is in
the Kings power to dissolve the Court; can this consist with the fundamentalls
of this man's laying? Also the contrivement of the people at the supposed
election of their first King, was proved above altogether uncertain,
improbable, and unreasonable.

What is sworn to by the Mutual oaths of King and People, we granted above
to bind them, but not to prove such a Constitution; What that Lex notissima
is, he should have done well to have expressed it, for we know he is apt to
deceive us with generals, and to conceive, where ever he meets with Fundamental
Law or constitution of Government, it is his Law and constitution as he has
framed it.

The Coordination of the three Estates, we grant is fundamental and Lex
notissima, but this power of Supply would not be so strange and new a Doctrine
now, if it had been then Lex Notissima. Nay the Rule of Coordination is against
it, which, when three are expressly entrusted, gives not power to two, unless
it be so expressly provided in the Orinall constitution; and this coordination
is such that it gives us an argument against it too, that the original
constitution of this Government, meant there should not be a supply by two
Estates, because it has settled the provision of the Kingdom in three, secured
against each other by a Negative voice, and has left the power of dissolving
in the King, which would make such a power of Supply vain.

Secondly, we Answer to the Rule, Coordinates supply only in that whereunto
they are coordinate. Now the two Houses are Coordinate with His Majesty only ad
Consentiendum for the making new provisions of safety by new Laws, we do not
find them Coordinate with him in command of the Militia, or appointing
officers for it, or designing Ministers of Justice through the Kingdom,
therefore the Supply cannot hold in these; for if one part of the body can
supply the defect of another, yet cannot they supply the office of the head.

But the Answerer may reply, though the King alone is ordinarily entrusted with
the Militia, the designing of officers, etc. yet may these fall under their
ordinance of Supply, as the substratamateria, the matter about which that
ordinance may be conversant, as about the means of preventing imminent
dangers. We Answer, that Ordinance cannot extend it self farther then Law will
give it leave, it may not overruled known Laws; if it be Law and the
Constitution of the Kingdom, that when the preventing of imminent dangers
require new provisions, those provisions or new Laws be made by three Estates
entrusted, and strengthened with power of denying, then it is plain, such supply
or provision cannot be made by an ordinance; and better run the hazard of
inconvenience by the refusal of one then to leave the whole power in the other
two. Otherwise an Ordinance shall prevail to divest the King of all the power
settled in Him by Law, what then will become of the property of the Subject? No
marvel this proceeds on to an arbitrary power, as we shall have this Answerer
confessing anon.

But he told us above, Page 3. that the three Estates are fundamentalls. If
therefore the King be one of the Fundamentals, according to his phrase, then
according to his argument, Page 8. the King is not to be stirred out of his
Place, so long as the government stands, for there he tells us foundations are
not to be stirred so long as the building stands; shall He then be like a loose
stone in the Foundation, to be taken out and laid aside, when they shall judge
He is not fit to bear his burden, the Trust the Law has put upon Him?
howsoever some stone in the side wall may be so used, the chief corner stone
cannot.

If he reply as he does, Page 9. This Vote or Ordinance of the two Houses takes
not away the Kings negative voice in making Laws, it is not an Act of
Parliament, it is but an occasional supply of this Coordination, least the whole
should ruin. Yet will you tell us presently, The Houses in case of the other
parts absence and refusal, are virtually the whole, and have the Parliamentary
power, if so, why then can they not make an act of Parliament as well as such
an Ordinance? but call it what you will, Act or Ordinance, whereby either King
or Subject are despoiled of what is theirs by Law, it matters not greatly,
seeing that Ordinance is of force so long as they please to judge necessary,
who, according to this Answerer, have the final and arbitrary resolution; what
will it satisfy the King to tell him this is but an occasional supply, if He
see it is in their powers to take or make the occasion? or to let Him know,
that ordinarily he has the power and is entrusted with it, but upon
extraordinary times and dangers it is theirs, He refusing their direction, if
He knows it is in their power to make that distinction when they please, and to
apply it? Or when will some think themselves safe enough to part with this
power again? seeing greater fears are now likely to prevail with them for the
holding it, then did at first for the seizing it.

But he supposes, Page 11. That the two Houses upon the absence and refusal of
the other part, are virtually the whole, and then asks, whether there be not a
Parliament actually in England? if so, why have they not then a Parliamentary
power? This term virtually does often stand him instead, for under that he can
enlarge the power of the Houses to the extent of his fancy; but let us know in
this great point, wherein Conscience expects clear ground to rest on, whether
the Law has actually invested the Houses with such power.

A Parliament we grant, and a Parliamentary power in it, and if any deny the
two Houses to be the Parliament, it is because in proper speech and in truth
the name and power of Parliament which belongs to three Estates, should not be
restrained to two. The two Houses have still the power belonging to them, and
what ever is now by them presented to the King, and by Him passed, it is done
with full power of Parliament, what is done without his consent is not: it is
no more now, then if the King were present in the House, and should deny to
pass a Bill; for presence or absence is nothing, His power of denying is all.

For put the case the King and the Lords should agree, and the Commons stand
out, there were a Parliament still, but where is the Parliamentary power? I
doubt he will not say the King and Lords have then the full power of
Parliament; but where then is this Supply? will he say in the House of Commons?
we must call him now to his reckoning, Page 3. where he tells us; Of three
Estates one is less then two, and also to his rule he gives us, Page 4.
Coordinates supply each others failings, and Page 11. The refusal of one part
exempts not the other from their duty; So that if this man hold to his own
conceit, he must grant the King and Lords may Supply, if the Commons refuse.
But if in that case he will not stand to his own reckoning and his own Rule,
then must he quit his vain conceit of Supply by the two Houses, in case the
King refuse.

After this he seeks a reason of this Supply in the necessity of providing for
the safety of the whole, which else would be frustrated of its safety. However
this Resolver slight the Observators Argument, drawn from the highest end of
Government, the peoples safety, he cannot deny, but the Rule holds always,
finis quo ultimatior eo in fluxu potentier; to that end all other subordinate
stand but in the office of means, and this is evinced by the text, the higher
power is a Minister for thy good, Page 11. The Observators argument deserved to
be slighted by the Resolver as inconsequent, but it was confuted at large, by
showing such means make not for that end (the safety of the State) but are
remedies worse then the disease; Nor has this full Answerer strengthened the
consequence one whit; We grant the safety of the Commonwealth is the highest
end, and unto that end all other are as means, and that the higher power ought
to minister unto that end. But does it follow, therefore such a Supply by
divesting the Kingof His power, by turning the highest Minister out of His
office, is the means to that end.

The joint agreement of the three Estates is the means for new provision for
that end; but in case they agree not about that provision, which may happen by
the refusal of the Lords, or the Commons, or the King; then that the two
agreeing parts, what ere they be, should supply the defect of the third, had
been far more reasonable, then that the supply should be made only by the two
Houses, (i.e.) by the body only without the Head; For this is not only to the
notorious prejudice of the Supreme Head with whom the Kingdom is immediately
and chiefly entrusted, but also it is alame provision, and argues the first
Contrivement (as this man fancies it) very inconsiderate, in not providing, in
case the King and Lords, or the King and Commons should join.

Now as the not providing in such Cases, and the power of dissolving (which
resides in the King) do plainly show that such a Supply is not the
Contrivement of the first Constitution, but a fancy of late popular
Statesmen, from whom this Answerer has borrowed it; so in very deed this way
of Supply would not be a means of safety, but of more inconveniency, as at
this day experience teaches us, and at large was showed in the former Treatise.

Therefore if the three Estates cannot jointly agree, which is the reasonable
means of making new provision for safety. There is in the King by the same
Constitution power to dissolve, and protect His Subjects in their Religion, and
properties, and Liberties, according to the former Laws established; And
although His Majesty has bound Himself from dissolving them without their
consent, for this time, (of which this Answerer does vainly endeavor to make
advantage in many places) yet have not they thereby any more power then what
they should have had without that Grant, and so they have acknowledged
themselves.

To conclude, Conscience cannot be truly persuaded this power of Supply, is in
the two Houses by the Constitution of this Government. But must needs see it is
inconsistent with it, and with that power the known established Law declares to
be in the King, and therefore Conscience cannot yield obedience to that power in
making resistance against the King.

The Answerer immediately after the text above cited by him, The higher power
is a minister for thy good, has these words, Page 12. Yes a fine way you will say
of preserving the King by fighting against Him. So starting from the safety of
the people (which was there spoken of as the highest end) to the Consideration
of the Kings safety, as if he had been struck on a sudden, with the terror of
that Battle that was made against the King, or else because Truth it self upon
the mention of the higher Power wrung from him a thought and acknowledgment of
His Majesty in it. Well, let us see how he will have the King preserved by
their fighting against Him.

No such matter (says he) the King has a double Capacity, Politic and
Natural, in fighting for the preservation of the Kingdom, they fight for Him
in His Politic Capacity as King -- in that He cannot be divided from His
Kingdom or Parliament -- They fight to disingage His Person from that unsafe
and unworthy employment those Enemies to Him and His Kingdom put it to --
however he be persuaded by them it is His cause that has engaged them; it is
their own guilt and danger, Page 12.

So we are usually answered, when we tell them of their Hands so many times
lifted up in Battle against the Lords Anointed, and of David's resolution upon
it, who can lift up -- and be guiltless? 1 Samuel 26. They reply it is but
against the Cavaleir's and that unworthy Company that is about Him, and have
thus engaged Him; and in so doing they fight for the Kingdom, and for the King
too, in His Politic Capacity. A shift that will no more save them from the
Guilt, then it will do Him from their violence. If He had been taken away in
His natural Capacity at Keinton Battle, had there been any such thing as a
King at Westminster? had it not divided Him in His Politic Capacity from the
Parliament there? take away the Body, and the shadow too, destroy Him in His
Person or Natural Capacity, and you destroy Him in His Politic, and the
Parliament too, which ceases upon it.

Nor is that distinction of His double Capacity altogether vain, but only in
this point of Arms and resistance by force; As just sentences of Judges,
against His Personal Commands, are for Him in His Politic Capacity; so all
denyalls of active obedience to unjust personal commands; why! here is all this
while no power taken from Him, or usurped against Him, No danger to His Person,
to His Natural Capacity; but in resistance by force of Arms, especially in a
Battle against Him, (which not only takes the sword out of His Hand and
usurpes the power, but may also take Him away in His Natural Capacity) the
distinction is most vain.

For the Enemies that are said here to enthrall His Person and persuade Him, I
suppose he means those Voted ones of which we spoke above; if any of them be
entertained lately; for one of them there is above a thousand of His good
Subjects, whose Nobleness and honesty has still engaged them honorably,
though to the weaker side; before in behalf of the Subject groaning under
former grievances, now in service to His Majesty opposed by popular fury,
Subjects that out of Conscience of their allegiance cleave unto him, as they
did to S^ul, whose hearts the Lord had touched 1. Sam. 10. On the contrary it
is well known how the guilt and danger of some desperate persons have engaged
the poor people and opposed them as a buckler betwixt themselves and the stroke
of Justice. And how ever this man thinks His Majesty is carried away; We are
sure he has spoken so much reason in His Expresses and Declarations, that it
plainly appears, He is not persuaded by Enemies to Himself or the Kingdom,
but has been forced to this just and necessary defense of Himself; and has
cause to think, He may be safer every way by his own Army, then by that which
pretends to preserve him in his Politic, but gave him Battle to the most
imminent danger of His Person and Natural Capacity.

SECT. VI. Of the final Resolution of this States Judgment, and power of
declaring Law.
THe Answerer goes on to his second Proposition, placing the final Resolution
of this States Judgment in the two Houses, unto which all must yield
obedience. Page 13. How proves he this? In this mixture of Supreme power and
trust of Government the two Houses make a part, what is their share? to consult?
nay, but to consent with the King in making Laws. Be it so, that share we
grant them; but if you will place the final resolution in them, you must not
speak of a share, but challenge the whole, The King is but a Cipher.

Then he tells us again of the first Constitution of Government, when the
people made the first King, but nothing at all to the proving of such a
Constitution, or clearing of such a final resolution settled in the two Houses;
And as if there were no way to overthrow the first Constitution of this
Government, as he has contrived it, but only by Conquest, he leapes from this
Final resolution, of which he should give us some proof, to speak of the
Title by Conquest.

Conquest I confess may give such a Right as Plunderers use to take in houses
they can master, Page 13. I had not mentioned Conquest, but to take away the
exception made to the Apostles prohibition of Resistance from the absoluteness
of the Roman Emperors, and to show they made themselves so absolute by force of
Arms; but seeing this Answerer will make a business of it, he must take
notice that Conquest is one of the means by which God translates Kingdoms;
and that David being provoked by the King of Ammon, brought that people under,
and had a right over them by Conquest, 2. Sam. 12. that the Edomites were so
brought under the Dominion of Judah, from which they revolted, 2 Chro. 21.8.
The Romans also had a right over Iudou, by Conquest, our Savior acknowledges
it in Caesar, give to Caesar, etc. and in his substitute Pilate, that he had
power given him from above. If this Answerer should look through all
Christendom, he would scarce find a Kingdom that descends by inheritance, but
it had a beginning in Arms, and yet I think he will not say the Titles of
these Kings are no better then of Plunderers; for though it may be unjust at
first in him that invades and Conquers, yet in the succession, which is from
him, that providence which translates Kingdoms, manifests it self and the
will of God; and there are momenta temporum, for the justness of such Titles,
though we cannot fix them.

If he say they begin to be just, when the consent of the people is yielded;
were it so; and not so till then; yet is that in all likelihood an overawed
consent (as he grants the consent of the people of Rome was to their Emperors,
Page 21.) and little to the advantage of the people; however let their consent
be free, what the people gain upon that consent, is by an after agreement, and
grant of the Prince, not by precontrivement at their making of the first King;
as he dreams it to be in this Kingdom; We need not look far for instance,
we see Mag: Char: begins each clause with a Concessimus to the ancient
liberties of the Subject.

By which we see how vainly he breaks into passion in the words following, How
undoctor all, how unchristian, inhumane Barbarism it is, to talk of a right
by Conquest in a Civil, a Christian State? Page 13. and a little after, how
many ways does this Resolver abuse His Majesty herein? I had indeed abused
Him, had I talked of His Right as fondly as this man has done; I said, he King
claims from the Conqueror, and that of uncertain plea of supposed first
Election could not give Subjects such power against him, as is now pretended
to. I showed the Emperors of Rome made themselves such by force of Arms, so
did the Saxons here, so did the Normans after them master this people; this
Answerer speaks nothing to these beginnings of this Government in the Saxon
and Norman Lines, but still tells us of a first Election, and it is un-Christian
to talk of Conquest, that is, to speak the truth.

David, as it was said above, being provoked by the King of Ammon, took away
his Crown, made that people to serve as sl^^es. The Conqueror had a Title from
the Saxon Kings, being denied, he pursu's it, and in the pursuit of it by Arms
subdues this Land; can we think he was bound to such a first Constitution, as
this man conceives? We see it otherwise; and what has been consented to by
succeeding Kings.

My Collection then was, shall the pretended right of the people by such an
Election be good against a King that claims not by it, but receives the Crown
by succession, descending through several Conquests, and yet the right of the
Roman people not good against their Tyrannical Emperors that made themselves
of Subjects, Lords over them by force of Arms! I know not how this should be
injurious to Christianity, unless it be un-Christian to restrain the
resistance and rebelling of Christians against a Christian Prince, when as the
Apostle did forbid Christians and all the people of Rome, to resist their
Emperor, though Heathen and Tyrannical.

Let us see whether it be injurious to His Majesty, How does he abuse His
Majesty herein? A Title he yields Him by Conquest; and yet He must not rule by
it, a King as Conqueror, and yet He must not rule as a Conqueror. How
injurious does he make the King to His posterity, in that he subscribes and
swears to a limited title, and has a free one the while to hold by? page 13.
it was no injury to his Majesty, to say, He cannot rule as Conqueror, for he
is not a Conqueror, but claims from him that was; nor is it injurious to His
Majesty's posterity, that he swears to a limited power (that limited title, as
this man has it, is a fancy) for he has not a free one as a Conqueror had,
yet not limited by such a first election and contrivement, as this Answerer
dreams of, but by privileges and immunities granted or restored to the people
since the Conquest, unto which His predecessors bound themselves by oath, and
so does he.

It is not for me to settle His Majesty's Right, but should I do it, as this
man has presumed, I had been injurious to Him and His posterity, for as he
says here of right by Conquest, though falsely, it may give ius in re, not ius
ad rem, so I of the right by such an Election as he has contrived, however it
might give His Majesty ius adrem, it seems to lend him but a slender ius in
re, a weak assurance of holding it, making Him like a Tenant at will, to be
outed of Possession, so often, and so long, as they that have the final
resolution, shall judge expedient; So has he conceived it.

Now let us go on, and examine how he makes good this final resolution. The
power of declaring Law, says he, Page 14. must rest some where; true; In
those, say we, that have the power of making Laws, (i.e.) in the King and both
Houses.

Here the Answerer puts two Cases. First, what if they be divided, as at this
time? does it rest in the King or the two Houses? In neither say we, fully, and
to the like purpose, as it does in the three Estates, which power is suspended
while one part suspends.

He endeavors to show, Page 15 and 16. this final resolution should rest in
the two Houses rather then in the King, from their ability and skill. their
fidelity, their ends and interests, which do not interferre so with those of
the Subject, Property, Privilege, etc. as those of the Kings do, absoluteness
of Rule, Monopolies, Patents, etc. the comparison is odious, though we are to
hope the best of the Members of the two Houses, yet we know they are men
subject to like passions, as others are, and we are assured the King is
entrusted with us as well as they, and has beside Rights and Privileges of His
own to look to; But seeing this is Comparative only, rather in them then the
King, not absolute, that it ought to rest in the two Houses; we may let it go.

His second Case is, Page 17. What if either of the Houses be divided into
equal parts? it is easily resolved, The Speakers voice casts it; True. But he
should have put two cases more; First, what if an opportunity be watched, and
one of these equal parts do not exceed the fifteenth part of the whole number,
by reason of the absence of the rest; we are in an ill condition, when that
must be the final resolution of this States judgment; nay, of that number
that prevails, may be scarce any Lawyer of known abilities, which was one of
his prejudices he laid against the King in his Comparative between Him and the
Houses for declaring what is Law.

The other case is, what if the two Houses be divided in judgment the one from
the other? where then resides this final resolution? It may be it will be
replied, they ought to sit together and vote together; so indeed some would
have it, but it is confessed that the Parliament consists of three Estates, and
that the Lords and Commons are two several Estates. Well then, if the King
concur in judgment with the Lords, why should not the final resolution be
in them? for we must here call him again to his reckoning, and tell him as he
did us, Page 3. it is easy to reckon the one is less then two.

And the more strange this will seem, if we consider what it is, that is now to
be declared, no case mis-judged in inferior Courts, no late written Law, whose
sense is doubtful, but the very constitution of Parliament that has continued
so many Ages, whether in that Consticution there be such a Law as gives this
power of Supply by seizing and commanding the Militia; We understand the
literal sense of the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance, and have it confessed
by this Answerer, that the Trust of the Militia is ordinarily in His Majesty,
Page: 10. and we suppose, no man can think that when the Kings of England swear
to observe the Laws and Customs of, etc. they ever took the Oath in such a
sense as to bind them to take for Law, what ere the two Houses shall, without
them, declare to be so; or that when we bound our selves by Protestation to
maintain the power and privileges of Parliament, we meant what ever they
declare to be such; for this were too much to resign up our faith to man.

Well then, if there be a disagreement upon such a declaring, it is better we
follow what the known Law commands us to, and that there be a suspension of
such a declaring, till all that are entrusted for us can agree, then that such
a power of declaring be assumed by any two of the three Estates, for in the
same 17. Page it is acknowledged Arbitrary.

SECT. VII. The final Resolution is not Arbitrary in the two Houses, but only
in the three Estates.
IT appears then, that this power is as arbitrary in the two Houses as it would
be in the King, I answer, it cannot be denied nor avoided, etc. It would not be
so in the King, so long as the two Houses have, what He denies them not, the
power of dissenting; But to tell us plainly, The Power is arbitrary in the two
Houses, is very ingenuous; this Answerer is seldom so, but here beyond all
reason, for it follows as an admirable proof of what he has confessed. As the
Government in the form of it, was at first an act of the will, and so
Arbitrary, so it still remaining the same, it must remain some where arbitrary
still, else our forefathers should not convey that same government to us,
which they began, they cannot bind us in that wherein they were themselves
free, Page 17. when were they free? it must be before they set up the
Government (i. e.) when they were without government. We cannot see when the
people were so free, or that the frame of this Government was an arbitrary act
of their will; enough has been said before against such conceits; The like we
have in those words, the Government still remaining the same; the same with
what? it must be with that arbitrary act of their will, which is supposed to
frame that government, or else no force of argument in the Consequence, to
prove our Government is still arbitrary some where; and if so, then no sense in
the Antecedent, that our government should be said to remain the same with the
arbitrary act of will, which at first framed it.

But to pardon his antecedents, let us see what follows; They were free when
they began, or set up this Government, therefore we are not bound, now it is
set up; that frame of Government was an act of their will, and arbitrary,
therefore the Government is still arbitrary in them; when people set up an
absolute Monarchy over themselves (as he says the people of Rome did, when
they consented to their Emperors) that form of Government was an act of their
will, and arbitrary when they began it, therefore still it is arbitrary in
them; These are good proofs, such indeed as this Answerer uses to bring, framed
only to deceive the unwary.

But sometimes he expresses that first Constitution, as made by consent of King
and people, sure then that Consent of the King at first was an act of His Will,
and Arbitrary; and so it follows, that the Government for making of Laws and
Constitutions, is Arbitrary in the King and people (i. e.) in the three estates
consenting and agreeing together, and that is the very truth. Only this
depends not upon an arbitrary Act of the peoples will, preceding all Government
when they were free, as he said (for that is not imaginable in this Government)
but must needs proceed from an after consent or grant of the King, admitting
them to this arbitriment or freedom of will in the making of Laws, which is
enough to bind Him and secure us.

Nor is this Arbitrarines best secured from doing hurt in the Votes of
Parliament (that is of the two Houses) by reason of their number, trust, and
self interest as he tells us, Page 17. But it is better secured in the three
Estates, that is, in all that are entrusted for us; for Arbitratines is likely
to do least hurt, where it depends upon those that have several wills, and
several private Interests, as the three Estates have, but whose public
Interest is the same; so that if the King pursue His private interest, it is
crossed by the private interest of the Subject, if they theirs, then will his
private interest hinder the compassing of it, if he may have, what for that
purpose is left in him by the Constitution of this Government, the power of
denying; that so being crossed in their private ways, they may meet in their
public interests the good and welfare of the whole State, which is best for
them both.

But he tell us, in the body Natural the will follows the last dictate or
resolution of the understanding, that being in this body Politic the wisdom
of its Great Council, page 17. That I may not trouble him in his Philosophy by
telling him, The will has an influence back again upon the understanding; I
know what he means by the application of it, That the King must always follow
the final resolution of the two Houses; which if so, what would he be better
then a Duke of Venice, or this State other then Popular. And to this end have
we so many discourses tending to the praise of Aristocraticall Government; and
he that put out the third Answer against my Book prefers the State of Venice
before all for the surest Government. Give me leave to note this by the way,
Although it be well known what inconveniences that State lies under, by reason
of the several sactions and sidings of their great Families, yet this means of
security they have, Their resolutions of high concernments are not carried but
by such a number of the whole Senate, though many be absent; And let me take
the boldness to say, We should conceive our selves in a suret condition, if
such businesser, which nearly concern the Kingdom and the very Constitution of
Government, were not carried by the major part of those that are present, but
by a more unanimous consent, that is by the better half, at least, of the
whole number, that belong to each house; such businesses, if need were, had
better stay till the trial could be made by such a number, then to run the
hazard of a watched opportunity, when sew are present; and such resolutions
would better sway with his Majesty, and better satisfy the whole Kingdom.

Now to this Argument of the last dictate; The debates and resolutions of the
two Houses are indeed great helps to inform His Majesty's understanding, but
not as the last dictate immediately to determine his will, for they are
extrinsecall to him, as the resolution of one House is to another, They being
three several Estates: His will must needs follow the dictate of his own
understanding, having received information from them. And whereas I said
concerning the Kings Judgment upon such an advantage, He sees with the eyes of
Others, even of those that are of different Judgment from him, this Answerer
makes me say, as he would have it, that the King is to see with the eyes of
others, as if, should they present him with black for white, He were bound to
think it so.

Then for the binding of the Subject to obedience by this final resolution of
the two Houses, he tells us, page 18. As their interests with us tie them more
to do aright, so our elections of them tie us more to suffer what they do, if
not aright. It would trouble this Answerer to give the Clergy any assurance
from these mutual interests; for they have none to represent them, they have
no voice in the election of them that vote there again; this reason from
representation and Election concerns only one of the Houses; and how men of
public trust may, and have pursued their private interests under pretense of
the public good, Experience has heretofore shown it, and time will discover
it ere long to eyes, that yet cannot see it. For their tie upon us we grant it,
but not to all purposes without His Majesty's consent; who is entrusted for us
as well as they, nay, in whom the Supreme trust of the Kingdom is. It is not a
tie to bind us to obey their arbitrary commands. M. Burrowes will tell us in
his Answer to the fifth Section, should a Parliament so far degenerate as to
enslave us, he thinks the light of nature would show us a way to provide for
our selves by re-assuming the power given to them.

There is nothing more usual in these men's mouths then the Law is our
inheritance, we are born unto it. It is true, and it concerns us to look to
it; but shall our freedom and inheritance, our Petition of Right, our liberties
and Privileges be only good against the King, and the resolution of the Houses
inevitable to us for all our interests, all we have? So this Answerer would
make us believe.

In the pursuit of his third proposition, he tells us, page 18. They are not in
themselves infallible, but to us inevitable; here is no Parliament Papacy, as
the Doctor pleases to descant. Certainly the Pope himself does not believe
himself to be infallible, nor do his learned flatterers, that would maintain
it; but the deceived people believe it down right, and it is for the advantage
of the other, that they do so; The Doctor said not there was infallibility in
the great Council, but wished the misled people to examine whether they have
not such a thought, to work them into an implicit faith of believing and
receiving without Examination what ever is concluded there.

He leaves us a private dissent of judgment from their determinations, but we
are bound by them from gainsaying, or resistance, and so it is to us
inevitable. Such a power of binding has a general Council to its decisions,
and why should a Civil General Council of England have less power in it? So
he, page 18. We Answer the great Council of England has such power of binding
inevitably if you add the assent of the King; as all Ecclesiastical Councels
expect the Confirmation of the supreme Civil power for the binding of those,
that are under them, to their Canons and decisions; But if we keep our selves
from gainsaying or resistance, will it satisfy? no, their Resolution or
Ordinance calls us all to active obedience, to Arm, kill, and slay; and this we
must believe after so many ages to be a fundamental Law; when as we hear the
known Law (which is inevitable to us) not only binding us from being active
against His Majesty, to the endangering of His Person, or diminution of His
Crown and Dignity, but also not suffering us to be silent or sit still when
the defense of His Rights, or Person requires our aid.

We have now done with his propositions, and his discourse upon them, whereby
he has wound himself up to the pitch of Bractons speech, which he brought and
rejected as too high to be attempted, page 4. the King has above him besides
God and the Law, His Court of Earls and Barons. But this Answerer has placed
both them and the House of Commons in that height, by this final Resolution
and arbitrary inevitable Command; and this reserved by them in their first
choice of a King, which according to the rules of Policy, makes the King to
have but imperium communicatum, leaves the supreme commanding power in them.

From the Premises he concludes his resolution for Conscience, page 19. This
great Centurion of the Kingdom, the Parliament, says to one of this now
necessary listed Army, Go and he goes, to another come and he comes -- what
other authority has a Sheriff to put a Malefactor to death? We have had
enough of the Centurion already, too much (God knows) of the Military
Commands; we should have liked it better if he had likened the Parliament to
that wise and peaceable woman which gave advice to throw the Rebels heads over
the walls, and so the matter was ended, 2 Samuel 20.18. But has the Sheriff no
other Authority but such as a Centurion gives to Kill and Slay? He has it
derived from the only Supreme Governor the King, and so should every one that
takes the Sword.

Conscience also has Gods warrant too, first of Charity, by the sixth
Commandment, which not only forbids Murder, but commands preservation of ours
and our Neighbors life; Secondly of Justice, Render to all what is due; to the
great Council what is due to it upon the Kings refusal; lastly, of obedience,
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man -- Hence every Soldier in this
Army has warrant enough for his Conscience if he apply it. I am sure his three
warrants here from Gods Law are misapplyed and will not secure their Soldiers
Consciences. First, that warrant of self defense and preservation tells us we
must not do it by murdering of others, which may happen when our self
preservation uses means not allowed by the Law, it is to be regulated by; if
it be the defense of the body Natural, then must it be according to the Law of
God and Nature; if of the body Politic, then according to its Law, which this
man has not any ways proved to prescribe this way of preservation by Subjects
taking Arms; we see by the Law, the King is the only supreme Governor, and so
the Sword is put into His hand for preservation of order, and executing of
wrath, from whom the Authority of the Sheriff and all other Ministers of power
is derived. But he that takes the Sword by his own authority, and not by
Commission from or under Him, commits murder, and shall perish by the Sword;
The Law is yet to make, that may derive the warrant of killing and slaying from
any other fountain of power.

Secondly, ^ender to all what is due, is a good rule of Justice, and tells us
what is due to the King by the fifth Commandment, Honor, and Fear, and
Tribute, as the Apostle goes on in that place, Romans 13. but it is misapplied by
the Answerer to urge the rendering of Obedience to the Arbitrary commands of the
two Houses, for unto such it is not due (as has been shown) though this man
fancy it never so strongly.

Lastly, The submission to every Ordinance of Man is also misapplied by him,
for there was never any such Ordinance or Contrivement, which reserved such a
power at the first Constitution of this Government, as he supposes, but never
could prove.

Therefore I may conclude according to my first resolve in my former Treatise,
Conscience cannot find any warrant or safe ground to go upon for making this
resistance. For, according to the principles of the now pleaders for this
resistance, It finds nothing but a pretended Constitution, at a supposed
Capitulating Election, contriving and reserving for the people such a power;
finds this un reasonable in it self, inconsistent with the usual and
established government of this Land, and so cannot think it safe to rest on,
or fit to give it warrant against the known Law which places the power of Arms
in the King, which acknowledges him Only supreme Governor, which challenges,
by Our Allegiance, aid and assistance from us for the defense not only of His
Person but also of His Rights, His Crown and Dignity, which are most
injuriously wronged by this Contrivement, or frame of Government, and
exceedingly invaded by this resistance and power of Arms raised and used
against Him at this day.

SECT. VIII. A Confutation of what is replied by the Answerers upon the first
Sect. of the former Treatise.
NOw we come to the application of what has been hitherto said, to see how it
meets with what was written in the former Treatise, where we shall take in the
other Answerers also; And first we must cast an eye over Mr. Bridge his
grounds, which he lays for this resistance, before he enters upon the first
Section.

He tells us, there are three grounds of their proceeding by Arms. 1. To fetch
in Delinquents to be tried in the highest Court. 2. To defend the State from
foreign invasion. 3. To preserve themselves and their Country from the
insurrection of Papists; And that all this is done as an act of
selfe-preservation, not as an act of Jurisdiction over their Prince, Page 2.
That Delinquents should be brought to a Legal trial, and the State defended,
is just and necessary, yet to be done in an orderly and Legal way; not by an
Army raised by Subjects, taking the Militia and power of the Kingdom out of
chose hands, in which the Law has in^^^sted it. And if Conscience were to
speak the Truth, it could not say, that any Delinquents were denied or
withheld, till the Militia was seized, and a great Delinquent in the matter of
Hull was denied to be brought to trial at His Majesty's instance, of which see
more above, Sect. 5. Neither can Conscience say, that Subjects have had cause
upon fears and pretenses of foreign invasion, or insurrection of Papists to
Arm and resist,

Whether this be done by an Act of jurisdiction, we may discern by the plea of
the fuller Answerer, for he would have us believe, they are enabled to this by
Law and the Constitution of this Government, and that they do it by an act of
judgment, the States judgment residing in their final resolution, and that
this power of theirs is transcendent to any power ordinarily in the King, for
it declares Law without Him, it does arbitrarily command the power of the
Kingdom, and the obedience of the people without and against the commands of
the King (so we found it in the examination of his discourse) and what is more
required to an act of Jurisdiction I know not; let Him and Mr. Bridge agree it.

Mr. Bridge gives us proofs for this way of preservation; First, from the Law
of Nature, self preservation is natural for a Man, for a Community; and
therefore when a Community shall trust a Prince with their welfare, that act of
trust is but by positive Law, and cannot destroy the Natural Law, which is
selfe-preservation, page 2. But the Fuller Answer will tell him there must be a
Constitution to enable them to this selfe-preservation. And were this Argument
good, then might private men, or the people without the Parliament, take Arms
and resist; for selfe-preservation is natural to them, and no positive Law
(which according to the Fuller Answer, restraines their resistance upon their
trust given to the Houses of Parliament) can, according to Mr. Bridge his
reason, destroy that natural Law. Also absolute Princes (with whom the people
have entrusted their welfare without any resevation might be resisted, (which
the Fuller Answer again denies) for that act of trust is but by positive Law,
and according to Mr. Bridge it must not restrain them, for it cannot destroy
the Natural Law of self-preservation.

But he should have observed, that as the natural body is to preserve it self
according to its Law, and no otherwise, so a Community or politic body, must
do it according to its Law, which prescribes the order, and way, and means of
preservation; and for want of holding to that way, we see people often, under
pretense of this selfe-preservation, drawn by seditious Leaders into Arms to
their own destruction.

Secondly, he proves it from the Law of God, by places of Scripture, but so
wildely, that I am ashamed to repeat them; yet the judicious Reader must give
me leave for the peoples sake, that are abused by these men's abusing of
Scripture.

1 Chronicles. 12.19. It is expressly said, that David went out against Saul to
battle, but he was Saul's subject at that time, page 2. A desperate
undertaking, to make people believe this is express Scripture, for Subjects to
go out to Battle against their King, but he should have added what is
expressed there, it was with the Philistines that he went out, and that He
helped them not, for he did but make show of tendering his service to Achish.
See below, Sect. 9. where this place is touched again.

Romans 13. Be subject to the higher powers. But the Parliament is the highest
Court of Justice, page 3. this is well assumed; but we grant the Conclusion,
there is a subjection due to them; and if he means by the Parliament, the three
Estates concurring, then all manner of subjection and obedience is due to them.
But he takes them as divided; for it follows, Though the King be supreme, yet
they have the high power of declaring Law, page 3. this is a good explication
of the Supremacy. Yea this Doctor confesses they are most fit to judge what is
Law. Take in all my words which were these (none so fit to judge what those
fundamentalls are, as They that have power to build new Laws upon them) and
then make what you can of them, or look what is spoken above of Supremacy.
Sect. 4. of the power of Declaring Law, Sect. 6.

Then he undertakes to show out of Scripture, that Kings receive their power
from the people, and has the ill hap to light on Saul, David, and Solomon, for
examples, because it is said, They made Saul King before the Lord, 1 Samuel 11.
and so of David and Solomon; which was the peoples not giving of power, but
receiving and acknowledging him for King whom the Lord had designed.

Lastly, he has found an example and proof for the trust of Parliament in
David's time, 1 Chronicles. 13.1, 2. David consults with the Captains and Leaders,
and with all the Congregation about the fetching of the Ark; what then? These
were Officers not of the King but Kingdom, and though under him, yet were they
with him trusted in the affairs of the Kingdom, page 5. Excellent Collections!
The Fuller Answer will tell him presently, that the Kings of the Jews were
absolute Monarchs; though I say not so, yet this I say, those were Officers of
the King and Kingdom, merely designed by him, not the people, and called by him
to that trust; what he infers, that the Parliament is entrusted by the people,
though not deduceible from that place, I grant; yet so, as that they have a
trust from the King upon them too; as was above shown, Sect. 4. But that in
case they think the King misled, it belongs to their trust, to take the Arms
of the Kingdom, as M. Bridge would infer, can neither be drawn out of that
place of Scripture, nor any Law of this Land, that ever could yet be seen. The
like rambling discourse he has upon the 5. Sect. touching the Monarchical
Government which God set up over his people, wherein as he is for the
conclusion altogether contrary to the Full Answerer, who held the Jewish
Monarchy absolute, so for his proofs and places of Scripture alleged,
altogether impertinent.

At length he will seem to give us Law for it, Inferior Courts have power to
send for by force, if need be, those that are accused, much more the
Parliament, the highest Court, page 6. And therefore also inferior Courts have
power to raise Armies to force in the Accused, if they refuse to come in upon
Summons; that would make good work.

But the Law has provided a force, if need be, a Posse Comitatus, and the Kings
Officer or Minister for that is the Sheriff; but this new way turns both the
King out of His power, and His Ministers out of their Office, sending
Volunteers and listed Soldiers into every County to force in Delinquents.

But he tells us, they may send a Sergeant at Arms for a Delinquent, therefore
twenty if twenty be accused, and therefore an hundred, and so goes on till he
has made an Army of 10000. Sergeants at at Arms, page 6. I did not know
before, that the Soldiers pretended to be sent from the Parliament: were all
Sergeants at Arms? what need so many? certainly before this Army of Sergeants
was raised, very few would have served to have warned in Delinquents; it has
made many a sorrowful Father in the Country to see his son called to such
an employment, whom he had bound Apprentise in London to another trade; Nay,
the whole Kingdom has rued the sending of such and so many Sergeants at Arms
(who do not only arrest men's persons as they please, but also plunder their
Estates) and does earnestly desire, that as it is pretended Delinquents must be
brought to trial by Law, so they may be fetched or forced in, by the way and
means, the Law (as was said) has provided.

He concludes with an Answer to an Objection, If the power of the Prince be
derimed from the people, then they may take it away, when abused, and depose
their Prince. Answ. No, we do not say so, the people need not think of such an
inference, because they never gave away the power of self preservation, page
7. These are but cold denials, though you say they need not go so far, yet
you have opened and paved the way for them, to be led on so far upon these
principles: and what shall withhold them? because they have the power of self
preservation by taking Arms, whereas if they had not that power, it were the
way to break all in pieces, page 7. So it seems, the way to keep people in
obedience, is to give them liberty of Rebelling; but what security has the
Prince, that they will trust him with the power again, if a few seditious
Preachers tell them, their Prince will not use the power well, if they trust
him again with it? they gave it him at first, and now they may confer it upon
another, who will manage it better in order to their safety; Or if they do lay
down their Arms and trust Him with power again, it shall be to his prejudice,
he shall be forced first to consent to what they please, and what this is
called by our Law, every one, that understands any thing, knows.

Then in Answer to what was said in the first Section of the former Treatise
(that our Divines by denying resistance unto Subjects, do not endeavor to
raise the King to an arbitrary power, for they allow the denying of Obedience
to all commands unlawful by the Law of God, or the established Laws of the
Land) M. Bridge first would seem to return me to a Catalogue of Protestant
Divines, allowing resistance in some Cases, and then tells me, if we may not
resist, we yield the King an arbitrary power. For His foreign Divines; the
testimony of the Centurists, speaks not to his purpose; Of the French, and
Low Country Divines he brings no testimonies, but for proof tells us, we know
their practice; so I for Answer may return him his own words, we know what
has been the practice of those Protestants, and so they are parties
interessed, not so fit to give in witness; but this I will say for them, they
can justify the cause of their Arms, better then M. Bridge can do his; Now
for our English Divines, its plain they speak of such Government, such
States, such cases as will not agree to this Kingdom, or this time; yet do
some of them allow of resistance in some cases; true, for since the revolt of
the Low Countries, and the first motions of the Protestants in France. I find
in many of our Divines a willingness to excuse, as much as may be. But if we
look beyond those times into our Homilies, we shall find the Doctrine of our
Church expressly against Subjects taking of Arms.

Then he tells us, though we may deny Obedience to the Kings unjust Commands,
yet if we may not resist, but suffer, when He pleases to punish for not
obeying, we raise him to an arbitrary power, Page 12. Answer: To say He may
command any thing not repugnant to Gods Law, and punish lawfully for not
obeying, is to raise him to an Arbitrary power; but to say He may not command
any thing against the Law of the Land, and if He punish for not obeying such
His command, it is unjust and against the Law; yet unlawful also for us to
take Arms against Him for it, is not to raise him to an arbitrary power; For
Arbitrary and limited power is distinguished by the Restraint, which the Law or
Constitution of Government casts upon the governing power, not by the abuse of
that power, which sometimes in the most limited Governments may break out into
a licentious arbitrarynes; If force and not Law must tell us what Arbitrary
power is, and releeve us against it in the Prince, I fear we should too often
feel it from the hand of Subjects.

The Fuller Answerer would make me contradict my self, in denying the King an
arbitrary Government, Sect. 1. and yielding him the final Judgment, Sect. 5.

Now the Reader will discern, this is not my failing, but his usual mistaking
of what I say; the place he aims at, is Sect. 5. Page 26. where in answering
the objection, many see more then one, and more safety in the Judgment of
many, then of one, it was said. The King sees with the eyes of those many, and
all times have thought it reasonable to have Monarchy, which settles the chief
power and final Judgment in one. That was for the general, which I suppose
is the reason and frame of Monarchy; how it was good in our King, by His power
of denying, appears in that place, for the final Judgment was no otherwise
challenged for him; Now if such a Judgment of the Kings be called a final
Judgment, because it is the last, and after the Judgment of many, it matters
not, it will not infer an arbitrary power, as the final Resolution, which this
man places in the two Houses, does; for if it be dissenting from the Judgment
of those many, it is only Negative, it is not Conclusive any other way. Such,
I say, is the Kings final Trust or Judgment, by consenting to those many, or
denying, not by concluding, or commanding any other way, as he pleases.

The last exception of these Answerers to the first Section, is against my
interpretation of Omnes ordines consentientes, to imply a general and
unanimous consent of the Members of the two Houses in this point of resistance;
First; they say it is enough if the major part agree, or else many Acts of
Parliament would be void. Answer: however it is enough to other votes and Acts,
if the major part agree upon it; yet in the concluding for resistance, if the
condition of it by there grants be, omnibus ordinibus consentientibus; and
their reason for it be, Rex est universis minor, and resistance it self be an
opposing of the body against the head; there must be in all equity an
universality in the consent, and an unanimous inclination of the whole body,
and not a part of the body against the head, and another part of the same body.

Secondly, Mr. Bridge replies. If this be our sentence, why does the Dr. object
against us, that the Christians in the primitive times did not take up Arms
against the Emperors, seeing they had not the consent of all the Orders of the
Empire, Page 13. The Doctor never intended that objecting of the Christians for
an argument by it self, and therefore to the Christians persecuted, did
usually subjoyn the Senate and people enslaved, showing they might not resist,
being all under that higher power or Supreme (as St. Peter calls the Emperor,)
and contained within that universal, whosoever resists.

SECT. IX. A Confutation of what was replied upon the second Section of the
former Treatise, touching places of Scripture pretended for, or alleged
against Resistance.
THe Fuller Answerer speaks confidently. The instances of Resistance (of the
peoples in behalf of Jonathan, of David's, of Elishah's,) we make no use of, we
need them not, and therefore need not Answer the refutation of them, Page 21.
But all your fellows make use of them, who having not so fine a wit to
contrive a power of resistance reserved by the people when they made the first
King, did conceive they stood in need of Examples to defend the peoples
assuming of such a power.

Well, however this Answerer pretends, he needs them not, yet does he stick
upon the example of David, and tells us, Page 21. what use of His Army, but to
fight against? nay, a reach above all his fellows, that David (though against
the King) is said to fight the Lords battles, 1 Samuel 25. The words are
Abigails, and the Comment is his, more then once given us in this book, he had
before spent two pages, the fixth and seventh, in repeating what notes he had
taken at Court-Sermons, now he gives us a taste of what is preached at St.
Margarets, and up and down the City. That to fight against the King now, is to
fight the Lords battles, or as Mr. Burrows in his Sermon, that the Armies now
against the King, are the Hosts of the Lord, and in his Epistle, he calls the
Earl of Essex, the Lord of their Hosts, so usually do they interesse the Lord
in their quarrel, and are bold again with his Titles; We know that to fight
the battles of the Lord, was against the Enemies of his people, Philistines,
Ammonites, etc. and that David was designed to it; that he had done it already
under Saul against the Philistines, and was to do it more fully after Saul's
death, against the enemies of Israel round about; and accordingly the words of
Abigail have this meaning; though it be known that my Lord is appointed to
fight the Lords battles, and to deliver his people from their enemies round
about, yet is there risen up a man to pursue after, etc. Certainly if to fight
against Saul had been to fight the Lords batrels, David had not fought them
well, that declined all battle with him, made use of no advantages when he had
Saul twice in his power. David knew the battles of the Lord, which he was to
fight, were against the Lords enemies abroad, not against the Lords anointed
at home.

But this Answerer said, what use of an Army, unless to sight against? we see
David did not put it, did not intend it for that use; yea, but he would have
put it to that use at Keilah, if the Inhabitants would have been faithful to
him: So they conclude upon David's intention, for defending of what was actually
done at Hull; I called that an uncertain supposition not fit to ground
Conscience on.

Mr. Burrows tells us, the case is as plain for David's intention, as if Sir
John Hotham, upon coming of the Kings Forces against Hull, should inquire of
the Townes-men, whether they would deliver him up or no, and upon knowledge
that they would, should fly away; were this an uncertain supposition that Sir
John would have defended himself there? In Sir John Hotham it would be a very
probable supposition, because we know the inclination of his mind, and the
intent for which he came thither, but in David it is not only uncertain but
improbable, for we know his resolution and custom was still to fly as the
King pursued, and to that end he enquires what they intended against him, and
in case they were minded to deliver him up, he might more timely provide for
his flight, and prevent their shutting of him up in that City, which, as the
text notes, had gates and bars.

M. Bridge upon the Answers in the former Treatise made to their instances of
resistance, replies, that, in saying it was a loving violence by which the
people rescued Jonathan, and David's Arms were merely for defense without all
offense, the Doctor gives away the Cause, and allows Subjects more then prayers
and tears, Page 14.5. The Doctor had no where (though M. Bridge makes him
often say so) prayers and tears, as the only remedy left to Subjects; but
beside their Cries to God, he allowed them Petitions to their Prince,
intercessions, reproves, denial of Subsidies and Aids; and the peoples
rescuing of Jonathan was by intercession set off with a Souldierly boldness,
such as the people used to David, 2 Samuel 18.3. and Ioab to David, 2 Samuel 19.5.
Nor is it the giving away of the cause to acknowledge David's Arms were for
such defense; for the several answers returned to David's example were given,
to show they that have now taken Arms may not do so much as David did, for
his example was extraordinary, and also that they have done more then David
did, for he used those armed men merely for his guard, without all offense to
Saul or them that were about him; and so David's example can no ways be
pretended to those that have now taken Arms, and use them as they have done.

If his example be extraordinary, then he had an extraordinary command for what
he did, if so, how does the Doctor say, there is no command or warrant in
Scripture for such a practice or kind of Resistance, Page 16. As if all
extraordinary warrants and instincts given to special persons should be
written in Scripture, Ehud sure had one to go and slay the Tyrant Eglon, Judge.
3. yet not expressed; Or as if extraordinary Commands, though expressed, were
warrants for all to do so; as that which the Israelites had for spoiling the
Egyptians, were now good warrant for the pretended Parliamentary forces, to
spoil all those they call Malignants, and esteem little better then Egyptians.

But a mere defense, how then a work extraordinary in David? ibid; if his
were not an extraordinary example, then may private and single men do so too;
But it is nor for Subjects private or public of themselves to draw armed men
together. The Houses when they conceived it fit to have a guard, could not
raise armed men for that purpose, but by desiring it of the King. Now we see
Armies of Subjects raised by Subjects, fly up and down all Countries. giving
the King himself and His men battle, where they can fall upon them with
advantage, and yet David's example is pretended; And Mr. Bridge will yet give us
one more instance from it, not much unlike what the Fuller Answer had above,
concerning David's fighting the Lords battles against Saul; it is this.

David would have gone with the Philistines into battle against Saul, 1 Chronicles.
12.19. and said to Achish what have I done, that I may not go fight against
the Enemies of my Lord the King? 1 Samuel 29.8. Now among those Enemies was Saul,
Page 15. Desperate shifts that these men are put to, when pretenses and
simulations must be made Scripture grounds for Conscience to secure it in
battle against the King; David a little before had made show of madness
before King Achish, 1 Samuel 21. had pretended to Achish, he had made an inrode
upon the South of Judah, 1 Samuel ^7. now might Mr. Bridge as well infer,
therefore he was mad, therefore he did fight against the Subjects of Saul, and
its lawful for Subjects to fight against Subjects of their King, but enough of
this.

In the example of the Priests, and King Vzziah out of 2 Chro. 26. he cannot
see why they should be commended for Valiant men if not for resistance, nor how
it appears by Scripture that Gods smiting him with leprosy should discharge
him of the Kingdom, Page 17. Surely they deserve the Commendation of Valiant
men, that when a King does or commands unlawfully, dare withstand either by a
home reproof, or by withdrawing from him the holy things, he is not to meddle
with. For the other matter, he might have remembered, that by the Law the Lepet
was to be put out of the Congregation and dwell apart, which is not consistent
with Government, therefore it is said of this King, He was a Laper and dwelt in
a several house, and Jotham his son reigned in his stead, 2 King. 15.5.

What is replied by Mr. Bridge, or Mr. Burrowes upon the Answer to the example
of Elisha, may be answered by what is said above, Sect. 8. concerning the
preservation of the body Natural and body Politic, and concerning the
sending for Delinquents.

Now for the instances that were brought in the former Treatise against
Resistance or Arms taken up by Subjects. To that of the power of the Trumpet
placed in the Supreme Magistrate, Numb. 10. M. Bridge replies. The Parliament
has sounded no Trumpet for War, but what the Supreme Power has given
Commandment for; For it is an established Law that the Parliament should have
power to send for Delinquents, and such Law is to be obeyed, because (as the
Doctor says, Sect. 1.) it has the Kings deliberate consent, however he is
pleased now to sound a retreat by his sudden will, page 20, 21. The King has
given His consent to that Law, that gives power to the Houses to send for and
censure Delinquents, and is still willing that accordingly, all Armies laid
aside, Delinquents should be brought to a legal trial; but He never gave
consent to a Law that should enable them to raise Arms under that pretense,
for there is no Law prescribes them that way or means to bring in their
Delinquents.

M. Burrowes replies. That of the Trumpet was a Judicial Law, and binds only
in the equity of it; Else it would be a sin to put the Militia into any other
hands for any time, for it might not then be done, no not with Moses his
consent. True, it was a Judicial Law, and that might have told M. Burrowes his
many exceptions from the circumstances and specialties of that Law were
needless. But an equity he grants, and so there is in all Judicial Laws, and
we require no more in this then the equity of it, which tells us (and we see it
in all Governments) the power of the Trumpet, or calling assemblies for War, is
still placed in the supreme Magistrate, and cannot be put into other hands,
without His consent.

To that place of 1 Samuel 8.18. The people had no remedy against the oppression
of their unjust Kings, but crying to the Lord, M. Bridge replies, Samuel tells
them not what should be their duty, but what their punishment. The Lord will
not hear you, page 20. It seems their duty was to take Arms and bring their
Kings into order; but he tells them not of their duty, he tells them of their
punishment, It was indeed their punishment, because all the remedy they had
(which was by crying to the Lord) should not help them; which had not been
such a punishment, if they had means to help themselves by power of Arms, the
power of self preservation, as these men call it.

To that which was said of the Prophets, It is a mavelous thing, that none of
them should call upon the Elders of Judah and Israel for this duty of
resistance against their cruel and Idolatrous Kings, Master Bridge replies,
see here is a Prophet Elisha calling on the Elders to imprison the Kings
messenger, Page 22. How happy are these men in their application of Scripture:
But what Elders were these? of the City without doubt, where Elisha was. And I
fear that some of the Elders of our chief City, have been animated by
Preachers, that never were brought up in the Schools of the Prophets, upon
such abused examples, to lay hold on the Kings Messengers coming with not such
an illegal commission, as this did, but lawful and necessary Commands and
Proclamations; Again, what did Elisha call upon these Elders for? to imprison
the messenger? that is more then the text will bear, unless to shut the door
against a man be to imprison him; for this performance there needed not the
authority of the Elders; had any else been with the Prophet they might have
done it without command, had they known the Messengers errand as the Prophet
did. It is no more then any Debtor may do, shut the door of his house against
a Sergeant though coming legally to arrest him; Had our City Elders (that now
have Forces at their command to secure themselves against all Ministers of
Justice, that have entered the Kings House and Castles, keeping the gates shut
against Him) done no more, but contained themselves within their own houses,
keeping the door fast against the Sergeant, the King would not have had cause
to complain of them.

To that place, 1 Samuel 8.18. and to that observation (that none of the Prophets
called upon the Elders for this duty of resistance) the sum of M. Burrowes
answer is, Page 118. and 122. the Argument is Negative, and he brings several
Instances negative, which hold not. Answ. It is true that many times such
Arguments fail, yet may they be within their own compass very convincing, as
in this case: It was said, the Apostles prohibition against resistance was very
express, and that Conscience could find no warrant or exceptions against it
from other places of Scripture; how should this be cleared, but by answering
such seeming instances as they brought, and by bringing such places, as were
most likely to have given allowance to this remedy which is placed in the power
of resistance? for if Conscience cannot find allowance for it in Scripture,
how should it adventure upon it against the express prohibition of the
Apostle, delivered without any exception or limitation?

One of his Instances I must touch, as seeming to concern the business more
nearly, when the ten Tribes cast off Rehoboams Government for his oppression,
no Prophet rebuked them, Page 122. They were not at that instant rebuked, for
the thing was from the Lord, and to take effect; yet as it was from their
licentious will of revolting, it is called Rebelling against the house of
David, 2 Chro. c. 10. v. 19. and reproved by Hosea, c. 8. v. 4. which is enough
to tell Conscience, what to think of it.

Now we come to the Fuller Answerer. To the Instances brought against
Resistance in the former Treatise he replies, They are all in simple and
absolute Monarchies, those of the Jews and Romans, nothing to our case, Page
21. This is short work; yet does M. Bridge, Page 40. tell us by the example of
the Jewish Monarchy, what government pleases him best: That, wherein the
people have choice of their King, and make a Covenant with him at his
Coronation, and have power to take up Arms against the Monarch when cause
requires, all this he endeavors to exemplify in the Jewish Monarchy, very
impe tinently, I must needs say, yet enough to show his disagreement, with this
Full Answerer.

Let us then see what satisfaction Conscinece can receive from this Answer,
either in the general, that Resistance is lawful in limited, not absolute
Monarchies, or in particular, that those of the Jews and Romans were such. An
absolute Monarch is he, that may impose Laws without consent of people; a
limited or not absolute one is he that has bound himself to require their
consent, and to rule according to Law so made. Now Conscience finds in
Scripture Manasses and such wicked Kings subverting Gods worship. Justice, and
all good government, and no resistance allowed, the Prophets never calling upon
the Elders of the people for it; also among the Roman Emperors, It finders the
like Tyrants, and still hears the Apostle forbidding resistance: Well, It is
under a Christian King, one not wicked but commended by many virtues, yet one
that has invaded some liberties granted to the Subject upon agreement; How
shall it think it has warrant to resist this King, because he is limited by
such an agreement, and the other not to be resisted? for it sees, that safety
of the State (in order to which this power of resistance is challenged) is the
end of government as well in the absolute as limited Monarchy. It sees also,
that the absolute Monarch is bound by the Laws of God and nature, and by that
duty of a Prince, which is upon him in order to that end, the safety of His
people, and it cannot be satisfied how the breach of something due by a civil
agreement or National positive Law should more expose the so limited Monarch
to this power or resistance, then those outrages against the Laws of God and
Nature, against the very end of Government do the absolute Monarch; It will not
think if it may not resist this for such heinous provocations that it has
power to take Arms against the other for the breach of some liberties due to
the people by a civil compact.

If it be replied that the King is limited by such a Condition as leaves power
of resistance in the people, reserved to them in the first constitution: we
answer, It has been cleared, that such a Condition is a mere fiction and most
unreasonable, a seminary of Tumults and Sedition; The King is limited, yet not
so, but (as above declared) by reason he cannot impose Laws by himself upon
his people.

Now in particular of your Jewish Monarchy; How appears it to be absolute? we
know those Kings could not make any Laws either with or without the consent of
people, but were limited by the positive Laws which God gave them for that
policy or Government; and me thinks that this man should have conceived, it
would make too much for the approving of absolute Government in Kings, to say
God set up an absolute Monarchy over his people; and if it was the wisdom of
God to entrust his people with absolute and unlimited Kings, why should not
Christian Kings be trusted a little more then Subjects would now have them?

But something he says by way of proof that it was absolute. The Jews
desired to be governed after the manner of the Nations which was arbitrarily
(as the Doctor observes out of Justine) and thereupon it is that God by Samuel
tells them, what such a King would do to them, not what he might do, as the
Doctor seems to infer out of that place, page 21. To say the Doctor seems to
infer so, is a gross mistake, not to have been admitted by him, if he would
have me or himself speak any sense; if I had inferred the Kings of the Jews
might do so, my argument thence had been none; but I concluded it plainly to
be unjust violence and oppression, and thence showed such usage of a people was
not just cause of resistance to them. As for his Argument, it concerned him to
infer they might do so, or else how does he show they had absolute and
arbitrary rule?

But his other inference from the Text is as good, That the people in desiring
to have Kings after the manner of the Nations, desired to be governed
arbitrarily, and that arbitrary government was set out in what Samuel declares
their King would do; As if the people here desired to have a King to oppress
and spoil them, the thing they complained of in Samuels sons, verse. 5. The
truth is, the people desired to have a King to judge them, we know in what
meaning that phrase (to judge them) is used in the book of Judges, and
explicated, Hos. 13. v. 10. viz. to go in and but before them, to save them
from their Enemies, and how that God had raised up hitherto Judges among them
to that purpose: Now they desire, not to have Judges extraordinarily sent them
as before, for they saw they lay long under oppression many times ere such
came, but to have a King among them as other Nations had by an ordinary
succession, so they thought they should not be to seek upon all occasions for
one, to go out before them against their Enemies; this is the sum of their
desire, not to have a King to Rule arbitrarily, to use them as he pleased, or
as Samuel told them he would, nothing here to prove the Kings of the Jews were
absolute Monarchs.

The Monarchy of the Romans he tells us was absolute too, by the consent of the
people, so does M. Burrows also. And this is one of their Answers to the 13. to
the Romans They might not be resisted for they were absolute Monarchs. It
concerned them to bring proof, for I had spoken to this in my other Treatise;
here again this Fuller Answer says barely, they were absolute Monarch's; and
M. Burrowes says it rested upon me to prove they had not absolute power, and
so puts it off; Indeed in strictness of dispute it is enough for the Answerer
simply to affirm or deny, but in giving an exception to a place of Scripture by
writing, and that for the satisfaction of Conscience, it had beseemed them to
prove what they say, theirs being the affirmative, mine the Negative.

I will therefore give my reasons against it, that there was not such a formal
consent on the peoples part, and such a total resignation of themselves to be
governed by those Emperors, as is required to make them lawful absolute
Monarchs. First, because its altogether improbable, that a people so addicted
to liberty should so consent to such a subjection, and again set up that
Regiam potestatem, that absolute Kingly power they so much hated; Therefore we
see how Brutus and Cassius were honored for restoring their invaded liberty;
and how again they were sensible of that recovered liberty, when Nero was
taken away; but they held it not, the Soldiers still putting Emperors upon
them one after the other.

Secondly, because unto all the Laws and Edicts of those Emperors, there was
required the consent of the Senate and people of Rome; they could indeed force
that consent upon all occasions, yet for form of Law still, Senatus Populusque
Romanus was added. Thirdly, we find in Suetonius how Caligula intended to
assume the Diadem, (which was the Sign of that Regia potestas) that is, to
profess he would Reign absolutely; but He was dissuaded by his friends.

This therefore being certain, that by force of Arms they made themselves
masters of that people, my inference is, as it was in the other Treatise, If
the Senate and people of Rome, who a little before had the Supreme Government,
might not resist the then Emperors, that of Subjects had made themselves Lords
over that people, much less can the people of this Land have power of
resistance, against the succession of this Crown descending from the Conqueror,
who by like force of Arms, but with more Justice, gained this Kingdom.

But the Answerer excepts concerning our King. His Title of Succession ways
excludes consent, for it began in the election and consent of the people, Tag.
21. The Roman Emperors by consent of the people were absolute (says this man)
and not to be resisted, our Kings by consent of the people are so limited that
the people have reserved a power of resistance; one as true as the other. If we
begin the title of succession from the Conquest, where is that election? that
consent, and reservation? if higher, we run Conscience upon uncertainties; it
cannot see how such an Election should give beginning to this Crown, but finds
the beginnings still in Arms, as the entrance of those Emperors was; which
beginnings might over-aw the consent of the people (as he says of the consent
of the Senate given to those Emperors, that it might be an overawed consent)
or else draw it; but cannot be imagined to arise from such a capitulating
Election such a pre-contriving arbitrary consent of the people, as this man
feignes.

M. Burrowes is very angry that I called Election, a slender plea, and says, I
cannot get a better and surer claim for the Kings of England, Page 129. But he
might have considered, I called it a slender plea, not fot succession of a
Crown, whenever it is made by a people that are free, as upon the failing of
the Royal line, but for resistance against it; it being all the plea that is
made for these Arms, or power of resistance, and a slender one, because it
appears not how election gave beginning to this succession, but that such an
election, and contrivement of the people reserving the power of resistance
should do it, is altogether improbable and unreasonable.

For the beginning of this succession at the Conquest, and the kings of England
claiming from thence (against which M. Burrows here inveighs) see above, Sect.
6. and below, Sect. 11.

The Fuller Answerer goes on with his replies to the 13. to the Romans If not
written particularly to the Romans who were under an Absolute Monarchy, and
then not concerning us, yet suppose it refer to all Government in general;
page 21. I would this Answerer would leave his uncertainties, now he deals with
conscience; the reasons the Apostle gives us in the 3.4, 5, 6. verse. plainly
show it concerns all times and Government, so long as in all government there
is order to be preserved, there is a minister of God to execute Wrath, there is
one that bears not the sword in vain; reasons essential to government, and
perpetual against resistance, as was shown in the former treatise, if this man
would have pleased to take notice of them.

Well, now that it refers to all Government, what then? It makes (says he)
altogether for us, it requires obedience to ordained powers, that is, legal
commands, not wilful pleasures of Governors. True, but we would know, not
what is required, but what is forbidden; we spoke not of obedience, but
resistance; we grant active obedience is to be yielded to ordained powers, and
denied to the illegal commands; but we may resist their power, if they employ
it tomake good those illegal commands? We must supply his Answer out of Mr.
Burrows page 113. If one that is in authority command out of His own will, I
resist no power, no authority at all, if I neither actively nor passvely obey.
Also, we distinguish between the man that has the power, and the power of the
man, the power must not be resisted, the illegal will of the man may, and p.
124. the Apostle requires them not to resist their power their (...), does not
charge them not to resist their Tyranny. Between the power, and the person
that bears it, as also between the power and the illegal will, or the abuse of
the power, we may distinguish in conceit, abstracting the one from the other,
and by our active and passive obedience we may distinguish them, yielding this
to the power and person that bears it, denying that to his illegal will, but
in resistance we cannot sever them, for the resisting of him that bears the
power, though unlawfully commanding, is a resisting of the power also; it is
plain by the Apostle, who speaks not here of power abstractly taken, for so it
cannot be the objectof our obedience or resistance, but Concretely as in the
subject or the Magistrate that bears it; therefore presently it follows in the
Apostles reasons against resistance, for he is the Minister, he bears the
sword; so St. Peter tells us what he means by the Ordinance the King as
supreme, or they that are sent by him; for though the will and command be
illegal, yet because he that bears the power lawfully, uses that power (though
illegally) to compass that will and execute that command, the power it self is
resisted in resisting him that so uses it; as Saul had lawfully the power and
command of Arms, but that power he uses unlawfuly; in pursuing his unjust will
against David; And I ask, when these Emperors took away lives and goods at
pleasure, was that a pwoer ordained by God? no, but an illegal will, a
Tyranny; therefore, according to M. Burrows, they might have been resisted in
doing so; No, for that power and sovereignty they employed to compass those
illegal commands was a power ordained and settled in them. When Pilate
condemned our Savior it was an illegal will, yet our Savior acknowledges in
it Pilates power that was given him from above.

Again this answerer of theirs makes void that distinction of private men, and
of public states in the point of resistance, it voids also their other
distinction of absolute Monarchs, and limited; For according to this answerer,
it shall be lawful for private men to resist their Princes, though absolute, if
they command illegally, and to say as M. Burrows teaches them; We resist no
power, no authority at all, but the illegal will and pleasure of man; and so
might the Christians have resisted, and so replied, if then answer be good.

The truth is, the lawful power is resisted, when arms are taken against
Princes abusing that power to the compassing of unlawful commands; which also
I insinuated often in the other treatise, and that from the Apostles reasons in
this place against resistance, drawn from that order, that good, for which the
power is ordained, though then the execution of the power in those Emperors
was nothing answerable to that end.

That which the fuller Answerer presently adds page 22 There are two kinds of
tyranny, Regiminis and Usurpationis; that of Government must be endured though
never so heavy; Not only to the good but to the froward also, 1. Pet. 2.18.
That other of Usurpation has no right at all. I know not what it means, if it
be not a plain confirmation of what I have said against resistance, and a
direct confutation of what himself and Mr Burrows has answered for it. M.
Burrowes also tells us, page 113. We profess against resisting power and
authority though abused. A man would think he came home to us, and so he must
if he will speak reason; but his device is, If those who have power to make
laws shall make wicked laws, and force obedience to them, there is nothing
left us but flying or passive obedience. In this hole he often lurks to defend
himself against the prohibition of resistance, by making us believe the abused
power, that must not be resisted, is only seen when sinful laws are made and
imposed; but I ask, have they power to make such Laws? No, for it is not of
God; they have power from Him to make Laws, but such Laws and Commands are
their illegal wills; then may they that resist say, in M. Burrowes words, we
resist no power, no authority, but the illegal wills of men. Pilate had power
from above to judge the accused brought before him, not to condemn the
innocent, that was the abuse of the Legislative power; and the power it self
is resisted by resisting the abuse of the one, as of the other.

Now all this has bin said against resistance, in case His Majesty's Commands,
in the use of that power which is in Him, were unlawful; but Conscience, that
knows He has by Law a power to command assistance for the defense of Himself,
and protection of His Subjects, will easily conclude it a Legal power and
command, not only not to be resisted, but also to be actively obeyed, as all
Legal and ordained powers ought to be. Notwithstanding these Scriptures so
plain against Resistance, or Arms taken up by Subjects, M. Burrowes professes
his Conscience is not one whit scrupled; I hope he will better consider it, ere
he come to dye and give an account of those poor souls he has seduced.

Finally, we must subjoyn M. Bridge his replies upon this 13 to the Romans, he,
as if his conscience were as little scrupled with the Apostles prohibiting, as
M. Burrowes his was, thus begins. The Dr. endeavors to sear the tender
Conscience with the word Damnation; but it is rather to be translated
judgment, and by it, is meant the punishment of the Magistrate in this life,
page 14. M. Bridge might have had respect to our translation which renders it
damnation, and with good reason, for resistance is a breach of the 5
Commandment, it is a resisting of the ordinance of God, as in this chapter,
and M. Bridge knows it is no vain scaring of Conscience to tell it, the breach
of Gods Commandment and ordinance makes it guilty of damnation.

And if we consider the condition of the Christians in those times, what great
matter had the Apostle told them, in assuring them they should be punished by
those Emperors if they resisted? when as they were sure of that, whether they
resisted or resisted not; but he gives them to understand, however those
Emperors were enemies to christianity, the resisting of them was an offense
against the ordinance of God: or if we consider the principles of these days,
which teach people to take the sword out of the Princes hand, and seize the
Arms of the Kingdom in order to their own preservation, what great matter would
the Apostle threaten to such, in telling them they should be punished by the
Mag strate? when as they have provided for their indemnity by taking the sword
from their Prince, or causing Him to bear it in vain; therefore there is the
stroke of a higher hand also to be expected, and those that have been lately
taken in actual resistance, and through His Majesty's mercy escaped the
deserved punishment of this life, must, if they continue not in obedience, look
for a greater condemnation.

Again, M. Bridge answers, That only active obedience to lawful Commands is
there enjoined, not passive under unlawful Commands, page 23. Both say we, as
appears by the injunction of subjection and prohibition of resistance; for if
the Apostle had enjoined only obedience to just commands, he had given the
Romans; that lived under such unjust Emperors, but a lame instruction; the
refore in ease they had unjust commands imposed on them, he tells them how to
behave themselves, that is, not to resist: what then remains but passive
obedience.

But he would prove it thus, The power they were to be subject to, and not
resist; is the ordinance of God, and the minister of God for good: but when a
Prince Commands a thing unlawful, He is not so, page 23. Answ. A lawful
Prince, though commanding unlawfully, is still the minister of God for our good
(i.e.) appointed for that end, and the power he is invested with, though abused
to the execution of such a command, is the ordinance of God; And that is it
which forbids our resistance according to the Apostles reasons here, which are
taken not from the actual ministration of any prince, as if we ought to obey
when he commands justly, and might resist when unjustly, but from the end, for
which God has ordained him to minister for our good; from which end though
princes sometime swerve (as these Emperors did usually) yet are they not to be
resisted, for that strikes at the power and Ordinance it self.

Yea, M. Bridge a little after acknowledges, that inregard of their place they
are Gods ministers, but in regard of the unlawful thing commanded they are
not. Therefore when princes command unlawfully we must look upon them with a
double regard, the one to the thing commanded, the other to their place, to the
unlawful command we must return a denial of obedience, but in regard of their
place use no resistance. Denial of obedience can sever the illegal command
from the place and power they bear, but resistance cannot; for it cannot oppose
the unlawful command, but by usurping the power, and invading the place God
has appointed them in.

But M. Bridge concludes, It is the Doctors continual mistake to think the
Apostle forbids the resisting of the higher powers in their unlawful commands,
when as he forbids the resisting of them in things lawful. We must bear with
the importunity of these men, who will not conceive the force of the Apostles
reasons, though laid op^n to their eyes, which was so often done in the former
Treatise, that they tell me, I had worn the place thread bare, and yet they will
not see the web and texture of it. Once more therefore; if the Aoostle forbid
resistance only in things lawful, it would not have bin a sufficient
instruction, whether we respect the duty of subjection, which by this would not
have bin directed, how to answer the unlawful commands of Princes; or whether
we consider those higher powers which then were tyrannical, usualy commanding
things unlawful; also this would have bin the way to leave the gap open to
Rebellion, for how easy would be the inference, therefore we may resist, when
they command unlawfully?

These Answerers it seems, are still willing to keep the gap open, or else they
might have seen how the Apostle brings reason enough to stop up the way against
all resisting of power though abused, for he takes it not from the use of the
power, but from the end for which God ordained it, the higher powers then being
nothing answerable to that end, not ministering for good, but rather subverting
of that which was good and just.

We come now to the other scripture, 1. Pet. 2.13. To the King as supreme, or
unto Governors, as those that are sent by Him. Out of which was proved, that
the higher power, in St. Paul, not to be resisted by any, was the King in that
state; and that in this Kingdom All, who have power, fall under that
distinction of St. Peter.

Now see how acutely M. Bridge replies (for these men have simplicity enough to
abuse the people) Dr. Bilson (says he) tells us by higher powers must be
understood not only Princes, but all public States where the People or
Nobles have the same entrust to the sword as princes have in this Kingdom. How
then will the Dr. have the King only meant by these higher powers? As if the D.
meant to prove that a King was the supreme or higher power in the republicke of
Vinice, or the Low Countries. But the Dr. acknowledges the Parliament is the
highest Court of justice, therefore they fall under these words, the higher
powers. It is the highest Court, but you must not then exclude the king, in
whom is the fountain of power; we farther grant, the two Houses by themselves
do also fall under the words higher powers in regard of the people, but not
under the word supreme, so were those, that were sent by the Emperor, higher
powers, yet subjects and inferior to him that is here called supreme.

Yea, but (as Calvin and other Interpreters tell us) the prononn (him) is
referred to God by whom all in authority are sent. ibid: It Is true, all are
sent by God, which might serve to check the bad construction and use these men
make of the foregoing words, every Ordinance of man. But it is as true, that
the Governors of the provinces, where these scattered Christians lived, unto
whom St. Peter writes, were sent by the King or Roman Emperor, and that he is
here called supreme; which being a word including a relation, might have told
M. Bridge, that al who had authority beside in the Roman Empire, were inferior
to him, and immediately sent by him, though originally their power was also from
God, or from above, as our Savior acknowledges in Pilate the Governor of
Judea under that Emperor.

The Fuller Answerer replies. The D. takes advantage in the words Supreme and
Sent, but the two Houses are called, not sent, a difference (at least) as great
as between to and from, Page 23. Very good. It seems he will have the people
suppream that sends them from the Country to the King; so are the Clerks of the
Convocation also sent from them that choose them. We speak not of Terms of place
but Reasons of Authority; if they be called by him, the authority is his, they
come not of themselves but at his call, and therefore sent by him.

But he adds, They are a Coordinate part with him in the supreme power,
otherwise they could not hinder him from making Laws, nor finally declare Law
without him, the two highest acts of supreme power. Declare Law without him?
then are they supreme without Him, and he is sent by them, He must go and do
as they declare; Can we think that he sends for them with such an intention? or
that they, which are called to advise and consent, come to such a purpose, to
do the business without him? But enough of this feigned Coordination, and of
the Supremacy above, Sect. 4.

SECT. X. A Confutation of what is replied upon the third Section of the former
Treatise.
AT the beginning of that third Section it was said. The groundwork of their
Fundamentalls is this; Power is originally in and from the people, therefore if
the Prince entrusted with the power will not discharge his trust, it falls to
the people to see to it, they may reassume the power and resist. M. Bridge
replies. Then indeed it falls to the people to look to it, which they do as
an act of self preservation, not of jurisdiction over their Prince, and this
is not to reassume the power, or turn the Prince out of Office -- as if we went
about to depose our King, Page 52.53. For your act of self preservation, and
Jurisdiction, we examined them above. Sect. 8. if we consider what power of Law
and Arms is now challenged and usurped by subjects, I think it cannot but
appear to be a resuming of the power entrusted with the King (for it leaves him
none) and a turning him out of office for the time, though you intend not to
depose him, but to trust him again, when and how you please.

And according to M. Bridge his similitude (so much used amongst them) if the
careless steersman, during the storm, be made to stand by, and another set at
the stern by the passengers, then is that steersman out of office, or put from
the execution of his office for the time but now for the application of this
his similitude: The Prince is not as the steerseman (for he executes by his
Ministers) but as he that stands above and commands to the Star-bord or
Lar-bord, and if the Prince command amiss, that is contrary to the Law, His
Ministers under him for execution may deny actively to obey, and may give
within the bounds of their place and office, direction according to the law and
their oaths, this does not put him out of office.

Then to that which was said in the same Sect: That the governing power, as it
is a sufficiency of authority for command and coercion running through every
form of government, is from God, though the limitations and qualifications of
it for the several ways of execution. it be of man by consent: and proved,
To. 13.1. The powers that are etc. M. Bridge replies. None denies it, only he
will make it inconsistent with what was said before. But if none deny it, why
then upon this principle of derivation of power from the people, do you ground
your resistance? for in doing so, what power or sufficiency of authority for
command or coercion, do you leave your Prince, the thing he has received (as
you deny not) from God alone?

But let us see how its inconsistent. By those words, The powers are of God,
Romans 13.1.1. the D. must understand the power it self of Magistracy,
distinguished from the qualifications thereof, and the person designed thereto,
how then did he say, Sect. 2. that the higher power in Paul is the same with
the King as supreme in Peter? Ans. The power of Magistracy, abstractively
taken, may be these words be proved to be of God, though the higher powers here
be understood concretely with connotation of the persons that bear the power,
for they are here proposed as objects of our obedience, which cannot be
directed but upon power in some person, and here it is said (...), the powers
that are, now power cannot be (...) existent, but in some person. Yet do these
words prove the power it self to be of God, for why else should these
Magistrates or Princes chosen by the people be said to be powers ordained of
God, but because the power and authority they bore was from God.

In like manner the Dr. proves the power is of God, because the Magistrate is
called the minister of God, slipping from the power it self to the Person
designed to the power, for the power it self is not called the minister of
God. Good stuff. I must come home to M, Bridge to make him understand the
force of my inference; The Major of Norwich is the Kings Minister, therefore
his power is from the King; will M. Brigde reply, no, for the power it self is
not the Major, or called the Minister of the King.

Then the Answerers come to the (...) in St Peter, the Ordinance of man, which
in the former Treatise was said to be taken subjectively in regard of the power
it self, which is from God causally, and placed in man as the Subject; and if
there be in that phrase any causality, or Creation, or invention of man
employed, it is to be understood of the qualifications and several ways of
executing that power in several forms of Government. Hereupon the Fuller
Answer and M. Bridge every where takes it for granted by me, that Monarchy,
Aristocracry and Democracy, are equally the inventions of man, which follows
not, as was explained above, Sect. 3. concerning the original of the governing
power, and the first beginning of Monarchy.

Lastly, M. Bridge concludes, that my proving of the governing power to be of
God, but the qualifications of it and the designation of the person to be of
man, gains nothing against resistance, or deposing of a Prince that does not
discharge his trust; for still the peoplemay say, we may alter the government,
and depose the Person, because he was of our designing, Page 55. Nothing so,
for if they resist they usurp a power that God has not given them, and invade
the power that God has given Him; if they depose Him, they quite take away
that power which God, and not they, placed in Him, for although they elected
and desgned the Person, yet is He the Minister of God, and from God he has His
Power and Commission; as if Citizens should take upon them to turn the Major,
that has his power and Commission from the King, out of office, because they
chose him. For altering the government, unless they be altogether free (as
upon the utter failing of the Royal Line) they cannot do it, no nor alter any
Laws or qualifications of the governing power, for they were not made by them
alone, but also, and chiefly, by the consent and authority of the Prince.

Upon that place, Psalm. 82. I have said ye are Gods, alleged in the former
Treatise, the Fuller Answerer replies, all Rulers are Gods alike, that word of
God comes to them All alike, to Pilate as well as Caesar, page 24. This text
was brought to prove the governing power was derived from God, because Rulers
were so called, as His Vicegerents, as having their Commission from Him, and in
his stead over the people, this was urged to take off the derivation of that
power from the people. He Answers, Inferior Magistrates are Gods too; that is
nothing to the purpose, but Gods alike, that is plainly false; for that word and
power comes first to the Supreme, and from Him to them that are sent by Him,
from Caesar to Pilate. Inferior Magistrates are as Gods to the people under
them, but the Supreme as a God to those Gods; Aaron was so to the people, but
Moses was as God to Aaron, Exodus 4.16.

SECT. XI. A Confutation of what is replied upon the fourth Section in the
former Treatise.
HIs fourth Section (says the Fuller Answerer) is spent against the Peoples
reassuming the power be trusted to the King, which no man maintains; what need
they reassume that, which in the first constitution of Government they
reserved? page 24. This man has often told us, the power of Arms is ordinarily
entrusted to the King, and that by the people in the first Constitution of
government to use it for the safety of the State. Well, He does not use it so,
as they conceive; they therefore dispose of it, taking the Sword into their own
hands, what is this but a reassuming, or (which is worse and more unreasonable)
an using of an higher power reserved and inherent in themselves; which is to
place the very Supremacy in the people, as has been often shown above.

M. Bridge bestows more labor upon this Section; But first He complains, The
Dr charges us, that we hold the people may reassume the power entrusted to the
Prince, making the World believe we contend for the deposing of Kings, page 24.
What some of you have contended for all this while, the Lord knows, that
knows your Hearts, yet this we know, the same principles will carry you so
far. But there is a difference between deposing the Prince, and reassuming
the power; for though you have not deposed the King, yet have you seized the
Militia; and Arms of the Kingdom, have commanded obedience from all His
people, have left Him nothing ye could take from Him, and what is this but, as
much as in youlyeth, to reassume the power? if there be any impropriety in the
speech, it is in calling that a reassuming, which indeed is rather a taking
away or dispoyling Him of that, you never gave Him.

But if you do not reassume the power, what means the difference you make of
things disposed by trust, from things disposed by donation, because they may be
recalled, these may not; so you say, Page 25. and in applying it, you tell us
the King has His Power by trust from the people, and should have proceeded to
confess, they may recall (i. e.) reassume it, you must hold it, if you hold to
your principles.

But let me tell you, that God entrusts the Prince with the power, and with the
people, and therefore the people cannot reassume it, And when they elect one to
bear that power, they do commit themselves to his trust, not giving so much as
receiving a benefit; and such elected Kings (as was said in the former
Treatise) are the Lords Anointed and his Ministers.

Then cannot Princes, whose coming to the Crown is merely Pactionall, be
deposed, for they are also the Lords Anointed and his Ministers, but the
Doctor granted, that the argument (speaking of the forfeiture of the Princes
power) has force in Governmente merely Elective and Pactionall, Page 26. The
Doctor by way of supposition passed it over in these words (although such
argument may seem to have some force in states merely Pactionall) to the
undeniable clearing of this State from the danger of such forfeiture. But if M.
Bridge will have me deliver my opinion absolutely, the reasons above mentioned
will not suffer me to think, the people may depose any King they have chosen,
upon what conditions soever they admitted him; and if they should choose and
admit one upon such condition of forfeiture it were turpis Conditio, most
unreasonable, the very Seminary of Jealousy and sedition; neither profitable
for King nor people, a plain encroachment of the peorle upon the governing
power, which was at first derived from God not through their hands, and should
always be left in the Governor sufficient to rule them.

The Doctor also confesses, it is probable that Kings at first were by
election here as elsewhere, yet will he not have the King claim by it, page
27. It is like they were so, as generally among the Heathen they began by
election; what then? must our King now claim by the first Kings in this Land?
and Conscience be put to drive into the obscure fabulous times before Caesar or
Brute his entrance, for that firstelection? We are upon the English government,
which followed the Saxons, or rather upon the Norman which followed the
Conquest; and as I said in that place, how can Conscience be satisfied, that
the argument drawn from the supposed first Election to prove the peoples
assuming this power, can have any force in this government, which began not so,
but as we see by the entrance of the Saxons and Normans: Thus it is with our
Prince, although he succeeded the Conqueror, yet does he also take in the
voluntary and free consent of the Commonwealth unto His Crown, page 28. That
was not the Consent of the first supposed election, but an after Consent
following the Conquest, as the Prince and the People could agree, which
agreement was not likely to leave them a power of resistance.

Now we see the Doctors mind plainly that he contends for an Arbitrary
government, for he says, page 11. the Emperors ruied absolutely and
arbitrarily, and here he says, how came they of Subjects to be absolute
Manarchs, but by force of Arms, the way that the Saxons and Normans made
themselves Masters of this people? The Doctor did not contend for an arbitrary
government, but did often (because he knew he should meet with those that would
made bad construction of his words) expressly declare the contrary; His intent
was to answer the Reply there made (that those Emperors might not be resisted
because they were absolute) by showing they made themselves so by Arms; and if
the people could not upon any former right refist in that Empire, no more can
they do in this, upon pretense of right by a first election, for here also the
Government began in Arms. None of my Adversaries have bitten at the edge and
strength of this answer, but only catched at the shadow of those two words
Conquest and Arbitrary. More was spoken above of Conquest, Sect. 6. and this I
may add, We see in the titles of many of our Kings before the Acts of
Parliament made in their times, a reference to the Conquest, as Edward the
third after the Conquest, which does relate not only to the Edward before the
Conquest, but also to the Conquest it self, as to a beginning of claim and
government, or else the number should have none on, and our Edward the third
should have been numbered the fourth. So Henry the seventh, and Henry the
eight, after the Conquest, quest, which relates to no such name before, but
only to the Conquest as a beginning of Claim and Government.

Then the Doctor comes to the matter of Covenant, to which we say, Every breach
of Covenant makes not a forfeiture, but we esteem a necessity of a Covenant,
which we see in Kings designed by God, 1 Chronicles. 11.3. and that this binds as
well the King to the People, as the People to the King, page 29. That Covenant
was not there a Condition on which those Kings were admitted to the Crown, no
more is it in this Kingdom, but a confirmation and strengthening of their
natural duties by promises and Oaths. That every breach the Prince makes in
that Covenant should forfeit his power, you cannot say indeed for shame, but
you canenlarge the breach as you please til you have made it wide enough for
Armies of seduced people to enter in upon Him. And we cannot but observe, how
you prepare for it in those words, the King as well bound to the people, that
is, they stand equally accomptable to each other; for you immediately infer,
Therefore it is as well unlawful for a King by force to oppress His Subjects
and to take up Arms against them, as for Subjects to take up Arms against him.
Both are unlawful and unjust, but not equally; for do not the mutual duties
of the fifth Commandment run betwixt superior and inferior? and is it as
heinous for the father to strike the son, as the son to lift up his hand
against the Father? If a King oppress His Subjects, it is an abusing of that
power which is in him, if people take Arms it is an usurping of power that
belongs not to them, which is of more dangerous consequence; if the people do
what is unlawful, the Magistrate bears not the sword in vain, God has
appointed him to punish them; if the Supreme Magistrate do unlawfully, he is
not to be punished by the people (for that were to overthrow the order God has
set) but is reserved for a Divine judgment.

In the Covenant twixt King and People though it be not expressed, that the
state of the Kingdom may take Arms and provide for its safety, in ease the
King will not discharge, yet must it in all reason be employed, that safety
being the end of that trust, and ratio Legis is Lex; as in Marriage it is not
verbally expressed, that the party committing Adultery shall he divorced, yet
that Covenant carries the force of such a Condition, page 31. That the King
ought to discharge is Law, and the end or reason of it is the safety of the
state, but that, in case he does not, or not according to the opinion of the
people, they by Arms should resist and provide for it, is neit her Law nor
Reason of any Law, but an unreasonable condition, were any King admitted under
it, and no rea onable means of safety, but the way of confusion and
destruction, as experience has always shown.

That Adultery is the breach of the Marriage Covenant and cause of Divorce, both
in the institution of Marriage, They two shall be one flesh, does in reason
imply, and the Law of God does expressly declare; and the like implication of
reason and declaration of Law must appear, before we can see any warrant for
Subjects to resist and provide for their own safety: for as of the parties
married, so of a Prince and the people entrusted to him by God, it may be said;
whom God has enjoined let no man put asunder; and let not the woman usurp
authority over the man, nor Subjects over their Prince.

SECT. XII. A Confutation of what was replied upon the 5th. Sect: of the former
Treatise.
Upon that which was said, They sharpenmany weapons for this resistance at the
Philistines forge, borrow arguments from the Papists, M. Bridge replies, There
is much difference between them and us in this particular.

I. The Papists contend for the Lawfulness of deposing Kings, we not.
Difference there must needs be between you in this particular, for they
Challenge such a power for the Pope, you for the people. But you do not
contend for the power of deposing, or as you told us above, the people from
their power of resistance need not make that inference; here is great security
for the Prince. We see your party making use of those Examples, which the
Papists bring for the deposing of Kings, as that of Saul, Vzziah, Athalia, and
one of your fellow Answerers has endeavored to prove such a power of deposing
(with whom we shall meet at the end of this Section;) and we know your
principles will carry the people so far if they will follow them, if, as you
teach them, they have justly taken Arms in order to their own safety, so they
shall think in order to the ^^fety they cannot lay them down, or any longer
trust their safety with the former Prince.

II. The Papists plead for power of deposing a Prince in case he turn Heretic,
we hold a Prince may change his Religion, and yet the Subjects thereby not
excused from their Allegiance. You will give him leave to change Religion
himself, so will the Papists, if all His Subjects may have free liberty of
their Religion; but in case he also endeavor to force that contrary Religion
upon his Subjects (for that must be supposed) how then will your Allegiance
hold? When you challenge the power of Arms in order to your own and the States
safety, will you think that the preservation only of your goods, Estates and
out ward liberty is concerned in it, and not of your Religion too? How have you
wrought the people into Arms against their Sovereign but by this name
Religion? and that, not because He is turned Heretic and changed his
Religion, or has imposed a Contrary Religion upon his Subjects, (that you could
not tell them) but only by making them believe He favors Popery, and there is
fear He will change Religion; which is as weak and low pretense as any Jesuit
can descend to for drawing People into Arms against their Sovereign.

III. The Papists hold it lawful to kill a Prince, and that a private man
invested with the Popes Authority may do it; We abhore it. That is their new
forge under ground, set up of late by Jesuits; I did not mean you sharpened your
weapons there, but at the old forge, where the Popes power of acquitting people
of their Allegiance, and commanding them into Arms has been beaten out some
hundreds of years. And however you say you abhor this Doctrine of killing
Kings, that is, of Butchering them by private hands, yet I fear, and tremble to
think, if your Sovereign had fallen in Battle by the edge of your sword or
shot of your Artillery, ye would have acquitted your selves, and found him
guilty of his own death, in that he would not, being desired, forbear to go
down himself into Battle against his Enemies. Some of your Fellows, M.
Bridge, are much wronged, if they did not after the business of Brainceford,
play the Popes in absolving the Soldiers, there taken, from the Oath, whereby
they had again bound themselves from bearing Arms against his Majesty; and I
can witness how the best of your party in Yorkshire had plited their faith for
conserving of the Pea^e of the Country, and how they were dispensed with and
commanded into Arms.

Let us proceed. The Fuller Answerer also complains, The fifth Section, is a
plain begging of three Questions the Resolver would have us maintain, Page 25.
To pardon your abuse of speech, we know what you mean, and must tell you, we
need not put upon you more then you undertake to maintain, which is more then
you can prove, more then former Ages have been Conscious of, enough to make
your Religion, if you have any, hear ill in after times. But let us see what
you say in vindication of your selves. We say not that every State has these
meancs of safety by resistance unless reserved by them. Answer, Yet is the
safety of every State as dear and hear to it self, as This; and for any
thing you have shown for it, any State may pretend such a Reservation, as well
as This; for you have not proved such a Reservation, and the general argument,
your Party uses, is from self preservation, which is common to all.

Then to the Argument of the Churches safety, (under pretense of which the Pope
challenges a power upon the failing of the Civil Magistate, as the people now
upon the refusal of their Prince) you say The Church is not a State by it
self, so also M. Burrowes and M. Bridge. It is not indeed the whole State,
comprehending the Civil State too, yet is the good Estate thereof, of as great
consequence as any Concernment of the body Politic. But the Church is not of
its own Constitution but of Christ's. What then? therefore it must be preserved
by the laws instituted by Christ; true, so must the Civil State by its
established laws, we desire no more; yet will you not give Him leave to be as
careful for the good Estate of His Church, in providing means of preservation
for it, in case the Civil Magistrate fail in his trust, as you are to provide
or reserve this power of resistance upon the Kings refusal? But he did not
provide such forceable means as are challenged by the Bishop of Rome, under
that pretense; and these means of a reserved power for resistance are as
unreasonable on your part: if both of you should be put to prove your
Traditions, He for his Excommunicating or deposing of Kings in order to the
Churches safety, and you for your reserved power of resistance in order to the
States preservation, Conscience would find as little satisfaction in the one as
in the other.

As for the matter of the Church, we turn (says M. Bridge, page 33.) the
Doctors argument upon himself, thus. If the Church cannot be preserved where
the officer is an Heretic, unless it has power to reject him, neither can a
Kingdom; when the officer is unfaithful, unless it has power to reject him,
neither can a Kingdom, when the Officer is unfaithful, unless it has power
either to depose Him, or to look to it self. It was not my argument; I did
but show how the Papists use the like argument for the Churches safety, as you
do for the States; and if you back again will gather strength for your
assertion from their reasons, be as like as you will one to the other, I cannot
help it, but I am forry for you (at least for the Religion you profess) that
you are put to such shi^ts. But the Church has Excommunication granted to it
by Christ for its own preservation from Evils and Errors; and the Body
Natural has power to deliver it self from its burden, therefore the Common
wealth also cannot preserve it self, unless it have power to deliver it self
from its burden, ibid. Then has this Church a Power of Excommunication still;
so it should be indeed, and the power cannot be taken away by any mortal
authority; but since the Act, which took away the High Commission, and (as the
party, you plead for, would have it interpreted) all Ecclesiastical Censure
too, where does the Exercise of that power rest? upon whom now is the Argument
turned?

The Body Natural has power to disburden it self, so has the Commonwealth
too, but will you have the natural body disburden it self of the Head, or work
without it, and say I have no need of thee? Or will you use letting of blood
for the disburdning of the Natural body, when sweating or gentle purges may do
it? So in the Body Politic, when a calm Reformation may purge out noxious
humors, will you put the sword into the rough hand of the people, which in
stead of opening a vein will cut the Arteries and Sinews of the Commonwealth?
Ye are too desperate Physicians, and that is plainly seen by the Consumption
and languishing Estate of this Kingdom.

It was urged in the former Treatise, as a reason against these means of
safety by this power of resistance. (If the representative body of the people
upon the Kings sailing in His trust, may take this power, then may the
multitude by the like rule, upon the failing of their representatives in the
discharge of the trust they were chosen for, take the power to themselves, for
it is claimed by them) the Fuller Answerer replies, They cannot do it, for the
people have not resorved any power to themselves from themselves in Parliament,
page 25. But it will be as hard for him to make them believe they have power no
otherwise, as to make it appear to us, there was any such power reserved at
all; for when the people come to be spoiled in their Estates and Liberties,
they will think it most unreasonable, that they should entrust themselves, and
all they have, to such Arbitrary disposing of their own Representatives;
especially having been taught by this rule so easily to disclaim the Trust of
their Sovereign.

He that wrote the book called Plain English, says expressly, that if the
Representative body cannot or will not discharge their trust to the
satisfaction of reason in the people, they may resume (if ever yet they parted
with a power to their manifest undoing) and use their power so far as conduces
to their own safety; and M. Bridge (though here he brings reasons against the
peoples recalling their Trust given to their representative body, yet) by his
argument of self preservation at the beginning of his book, has taught them to
say, It is natural for them to provide for themselves, and the act of Trust
given to their Representative body is but by positive Law, and cannot destroy
the Natural.

But forgetting what he said of the Natural Law of self preservation, he
gives us reasons why the people should not take the power in such a case. 1.
Because they cannot be so ready to think the Parliament (that is, the two
Houses) neglect their trust, page 36. not think so? but if by Ordinances thence
issuing, they be spoiled of their property and liberty (which is supposed in
the Case) they will quickly feel it is so. 2. Because there is not that
actual designing and election af the Prince to the present affairs of the
Commonweal, as there is of the Parliament men chosen for these particular
businesses. This is bold, and sets aside both King and house of Lords, putting
all upon the Sentence of those that are chosen by the people for the present
affairs of the Kingdom, those are his words; and unto their sentence the
people bind themselves to stand as parties disagreeing to do the sentence of
an Vmpire or Arbitrator, that is his similitude. What can be said more to the
dissolving of the temper of three Estates in Parliament, and to the overthrow
of this Government? 3. Because if the people, upon such surmises, should call
in their trust and their power, they would leave themselves naked of all
authority, and be private men. page 37. Naked of all authority? to do what? to
take up Arms? that must be your meaning; but what authority had they before the
King calls them together? were they any other then private men? or does he by
calling them give them authority to take Arms against him? And if the people
should recall their trust, why should they think themselves in that condition
more private men, then they were when at first (as you suppose) they elected a
King? did they then being private men give (as you maintain) all power of
Government, and will they conceive they cannot now use any? will they not as
easily conclude they may free themselves from their Trust given to those
Parliament men chosen by them, as renounce, according to your lessons, their
Trust given to their Prince? in all reason they will hold their Representatives
more accountable to them, then their Prince can be; who is entrusted for them
immediately by God and themselves.

To this we may add what he replies to the same purpose, page 42. The people
do all acknowledge that we are to be governed by Laws, And they feel the want
of it, and do earnestly desire they may once again see this Kingdom so happy;
Now the Parliament (as the Doctor says) is the Judge what is Law. He never
said so, unless you mean the three Estates of Parliament; How then can the
People think the Parliament does any thing contrary to Low, when they are the
Judges of it? This is to make them Arbitrary; and all their commands Laws, and
to lead the people after them by an implicit faith; But enough of the power of
declaring Law, and of these Arbitrary commands, Sect. 6. and 7.

Finally, Mr Bridge endeavors to show how they can answer the Oath of
Supremacy, and the Protestation, by taking of Arms. If the Popish party should
prevail, who knows not that they will force the King to another Supremacy, or
quickly make an hand of Him, Page 44. But who knows not that the King (by Gods
blessing) may prevail in the maintenance of His Crown and Right (for which he
is now forced to fight) without any prevailing of the Popish party? And who
knows not, if that party of Brownists and Anabaptists (which are now so
prevalent in the Arms taken up against the King) should get the upper hand,
what would become of the Kings Supremacy and this Government?

In the Oath of Supremacy we Swear Him our Sovereign to be Supreme, in
opposition to the Pope, or any other particular person. How does our Doctrine
or Practice infringe this, ibid. Is this all you can say for your Sovereigns
supremacy? the Declaration of Parliament (as was shown, Sect. 4.) teaches you
another Doctrine, that He is Supreme not so much in oppositio^ to particular
Persons, as in relation to the whole Body Politic of which he is the Head, and
accordingly you should regulate your practice and obedience.

In our Protestation we protest to defend the Kings Person, and hom can we say
with a good Conscience we do it, if we do not take up Arms in this time of
Popish insurrection? ibid. you protest also to defend his Honor and Rights,
which your Arms invade. And if the coming in of some Papists, in the duty of
Allegiance, to His aid against your violences may be called a popish
insurrection, (as you have the Art to make all things seem odious on the Kings
part) it was caused by your ^al^ing up Arms first, which the next Age will
truly call an Insurrection.

Or can we (if we take not Arms) in Conscience say, we defend the Privilege of
Parliament in bringing in Delinquents to their Trial, or the liberty of the
Subject, or the truth of Religion? I presume every good man that makes
conscience of his ways, will not be backward to advance this public design.
You cannot in conscience say, but you have had the security of all those
particulars offered and promised and might have had them better assured without
your taking Arms, if you had not some farther reach in your Public design.
However you can overrule your own, and your Peoples conscience, yet all good
men, that seriously consider your ways, cannot but conceive, the privileges
of Paraliment, Liberty of the Subject, and truth of Religion have suffered most
by this your pretended defense of them.

And now it is high time I say something (there need not much) to the Answerer
that would not be known by his name, but would be noted by his Margin painted
with Greek and Latin. He begins with Scripture, but stays not long upon it,
speaking indeed less from that, then any of the other Answerers to whom I have
already replied. He insists chiefly upon the grounds of Reason borrowed from
Anistotle, out of whom he would prove several conclusions; those, which
concern us, are touching elective Kingdoms, touching a power in the State to
bring Kings to an account, and to depose a Tyrant.

We reply to what he has brought out of Aristotle touching those particulars;
The Philosophers reasons may be good and useful in the founding of a
Government, but must they therefore obtain in this that is founded? If
Aristotle like of Kingdoms that go by choice, and approve the power which the
Ephori had over their Kings in Sparta, would this man have it so here? Let him
speak his Treason plainly in his own, not Aristotle's words, and say, He would
have a new Government, and Kings here made by choice, and some Ephori set over
them; surely he thought, as many more did, of a new erection, and had fitted
himself to give advice for it out of Aristotle. But however that Philisopher
gives us many fine hints of Political prudence, if this man were put to it, to
draw up that frame of that Government, which Aristotle seems to approve, and
by piecemeal to deliver, he would find the task very difficult, and we the
Government very strange, such as I believe, never was nor will be, deserving
almost as well to go into the Proverb, as his master Plato's did; as for
example, He would have Government go by choice, and that choice to follow
excellency, now seeing excellency, as he notes in 3. Pol. is in Riches, or
Power, or Nobility, or Virtue, we cannot see now he provides for the contenting
of those which excel in Riches, Power, or Nobility, that factions may be
prevented, and yet they, that excel in virtue, to carry the Government and be
willingly obeyed of all, as he would have it in that book; but where and when
will it be so unless in Plato's commonwealth?

Well; Aristotle's reason may be good, and yet my reasons, in the 5. Sect. of
the former Treatise against this power of resistance now assumed, stand firm
too; why? because if that power be used to bring this Government into such a
Mould, as this man phansies out of Aristole, can we expect any thing but a
succession of Givill war? for will it not always be more just for the Prince
to endeavor the recovery of his Rights and power, where with he is invested by
law, then it was for Subjects to force him from them? and this is not against
Aristotle, who speaking of Kings in Barbarous Nations that have a power very
near to Tyranny, those Kingdoms, says he, have their security, because the
Government is established by law and the Custom of the Nation. l. 3. pol. c.
14. Will this man then have Aristotl's reasons, belonging to such Governments
as he described, take place here against the Regal power established by law
and the Custom of the Nation? which establishment might give us Security too,
but for such unquiet spirits as this man pleads for.

One step farther; this Answerer has also a long plea against, Tyrants, for the
forceable bringing them to account and taking them away, upon which, after he
has spent many pages, he lays the conclusion thus, It is lawful for the
Kingdom to depose a Tyrant, Page 25. but many of his proofs seem to allow, it
may be don by assassination; I will not say it is his opinion, but he tells us
of the praise of Cassius and Brutus, that they were Romanorum Vltimi, and
accordingly styles some, in resistance now against the King, Anglorum Vltimos:
he speaks of the taking away of Caligua, Nero, Domitian, of the sentence of
Plotinus, Evil Kings rule by the Cowardlines of their Subjects, of which more
below; so that the people had need to use more discretion in refusing such
instances, then this man did in alleging them; but if it must be done by
deposing, his fellow Answerers are against it: and for the two Parliaments
which he cites, the Observatour tells us, No King was ever deposed by a free
Parliament, let this man make the application.

He tells me he cannot find what I spoke out of Tertullian his Apol. yet cites
me words within two lines of it. It runs thus in the Author, Si hosts, non
tantum vindices occultos agere vellemus, deesset nobis vis numerorum and
Copiarum? Vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, Castella, Castra; Cui bello
non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares copiis, si secundum istam
disciplinam non magis occidiliceret, quam occidere? Let the Answerer Consture
these words, and he shall easily perceive they will render the sense that I
gave of them, The Christians had number and force sufficient to resist; but
they had not warrant; And if he had looked a little before these words, he
might have seen Tertullian affirming, the Christians had none such as Cassius
among them.

Then out of his great reading, but small judgment (for he seems to turn his
books by their Indices only) he tells us, He believes the primitive Divines
held not such Tenets as are of late started up concerning Kings, for if they
did, surely the Parliament should have heard of it, Page 22. I believe they did
not indeed hold such, as are newly started up by those that the Houses have
been willing to hear; for my part, it was not my purpose (though the
performance had not been difficult) to tell the Parliament what the primitive
Divines held, but only to let the people know, what Scripture and reason taught
them to hold and rest upon.

But you give us some insta^ces out of antiquity. 1. Theoderet cites Plotinus
his saying, Evil men reign by reason of the Cowardlines of their subjects, we
must not so think of providence as to think our selves nothing. Ans. If
Plotinus had spoken to your sense for the Deposing of Tyrants, the Authority
had rested barely on Plotinus; for Theoderet cites him not to any purpose
concerning Kings, but only to show that Plotinus acknowledged Providence. Nor
is your sense the meaning of Plotinus, for his drift is to show that Providence
expects our endeavors (not to the deposing or killing of Tyrantrs, as you
desperately insinuate, and therefore translate the word Cowardlines, which here
signifies slothfulness, effeminacy, luxury, but) to the attaining of an happy
and quiet life; unto which purpose he there shows, how some men do bear the
punishment (...), of their sloth and luxury; how others though evil, yet
being laborious do reap more fruit of their tillage; and accordingly how evil
men rule through the negligence and sloathfulnesse of others, that is, they
being sedulous do gain the Dominion, or being in it, they turn evil for the
punishment of the sloth and vitiousnesse of their Subjects, for it follows
immediately, (...), (which you have left out) this is just; just? how? that they
should be so punished; and no reason their happiness should be procured by
providence or good Governors, when they will do nothing toward it
themselves; this is the full and only meaning of Plotinus. Ennead. 3. l. 2.
cir: med.

Secondly, Nicephorus you say, tells us, of the Godly zeal of a Nobleman who
took down Dioclesians Proclamation, and tore it in pieces: I could also tell
you out of Scripture of Peter's zeal who did strike with the sword in defense
of his Master; but was rebuked for it; for the zeal may be good and
commendable when the action is not so, but an excess, and not to be drawn into
a Rule or example.

Thirdly, That Nicephorus tells us, The Christians under the King of Persia
fled to Rome for succor, and how Atticus then Bishop of Rome obtained aid for
them -- and they were denied to the Persian King demanding his fugitive
Subjects -- we acknowledge such a story in Nicephorus, though no such matter
when Atticus was Bishop of Rome, unless you should mean new Rome, that is
Constantinople; it seems Nicephorus his manner of Calling those of that Eastern
Empire by the name of Romans deceived you; but what does the true part of your
story prove? that Subjects may fly from their persecuting King? or that one
Prince may protect the Subjects of another Prince, when they are come into his
Dominions for releife? be it so, neither of them will help your cause. But
enough of these impertinences.

SECT. XIII. An Answer to what was replied upon the two last Sections of the
former Treatise.
IT was there said. The defense of Religion, and the Subjects Liberty can be no
other then pretenses of this War -- and, It concern's them that will resist
upon the Principles, now taught, to render their Prince odious to his people --
To these and the like sayings Mr. Bridge Replies, These are sad charges, bold
and scandalous assertions, to charge a Parliament in the face of the world with
Hypocrisy; He declamed against uncharitableness in others, where is now the
Charity of this man? These were not Charges upon a Parliament, but upon the
chief Contrivers of, and Actors in this Resistance, as Mr Bridge might have
observed in the former Treatise; upon these indeed they will lie sad and heavy,
when he that knows the heart shall discover the Hypocrisy, and all those
generous, and honest, and noble spirits, to whose ears the true information of
things abroad is not suffered to come, shall see it (yea, and Mr. Bridge too,
if his heart be right) to their amazement. Nor does Charity bind the Conscience
to contradictions, or to judge against sense; or from condemning one part, when
it must Judge between two, as at this time between the King and Subjects in
Arms against Him; which rules of Charity were laid down and applied toward
the end of the former Treatise.

Whosees not how tender the Parliament has been of the Kings Honor?
therefore they charge all upon His Counselors, as David ^id upon those about
Saul, 1 Samuel c. 26. v. 19. If the Lord has stirred the^ up against me let him
accept an assering; but if they be the Children of men, cursed be they before
the Lord, for they have driven me out this day. And who sees not how tender His
Majesty has been of the reputation of Parliament charging the fault upon them
that give the Counsel, and are the contrivers of all that is done against Him.
Or who see^ not how David's words agree more properly to the King that has been
driven out and hunted up and down, then to His adversaries that have had their
abode at pleasure, and Reigned without Him? but if they will needs speak the
word, let them learn this lesson from them, If such as have unlawfully engaged
a King, cannot otherwise be brought to Justice then by Subjects taking Arms
and fighting against their King, it must not be done that way, but by referring
the matter to God, as David did here.

The King is no more bound by virtue of His Oath to maintain the Government of
the Church, as by Law established, then any other Law of the Kingdom, which if
the King and Parliament think fit to repeal, They may without breach of the
Kings Oath. Suppose they should think fit to do it, is it no more to take away
a Government, which had the consent of the Catholic Church, and has been
received and continued in this Land ever since the planting of the Christian
Faith here, then to repeal any Law made but yesterday in comparison, and in
materia particulari, of no such concernment? A fundamental of the Government
of the State may not be stirred, nor may the privileges of some men be
touched, and may the government of the Church be so easily torn up by the root
and foundation? the Estates and Immunities of so many free Subjects taken away?
But the King does not think fit to do it, shall he then by Arms be forced from
that, which He is both by Oath and Judgment bound to maintain?

Upon those words of the former Treatise (the Government of the Church by
Bishops is simply the best; the abolishing whereof is one of those many
inconveniences, which this Land is now threatened with, and which the King has
reason by power of Arms to divert) Mr. Bridge enters upon a loose discourse
against Episcopal Government. I refor him for his better instruction to a book
entitled, Episcopacy asserted, lately published and learnedly written. Then he
breaks out. Now the Dr. shows himself, be had rather the Kingdom be embrewed
in a bloody War, then Episcopacy should down; Judge ye, O all Englishmen,
whether it be better for you, to have this order taken away, then for the
whole Kingdom to lie embrewed in their own gore? Nay Mr. Bridge, you and your
party in Arms show your selves hereby what spirit ye are of, who will have
this Land embroiled in a bloody War, rather then Episcopacy, and some other
things by Law justly established, shall not down; for that is the case, and so
proposed in the former Treatise: and then judge all ye English men, whether it
be better for you to embrew this Kingdom in its own Gore, then to hold the
ancient and primitive Government of the Church; and hear, O Heavens, and judge
upon whom the guilt will lie; upon the King that will continue that Government,
according to Law and oath, or upon them that by Arms would force Him from it?

To that of Saul's spear restored, Master Bridge replies; Though restored
before demanded, yet not before Saul had humbled himself to David, saying, I
have sinned, J will no more do thee harm, because my soul was precious in thy
sight this day. -- We know what you look for; If you blush not yet to have
expected it, His Majesty has not been ashamed to do it with a great
condescension; He has even supplicated for Peace, He has redressed former
miscarriages of Government with new additionalls of Grace, He has promised and
protested for the future; Oh that He could say, My Soul has been precious in
your eyes this day, this whole year; or that He could find answerable
humility in the hearts of Subjects, whose Ambition has caused His troubles and
our miseries.

The Doctor defends the Kings entertainment of Papists by David's example; but
he must prove that Ziba, or those that resorted to David in his distress were
of another Religion, and by Law to be disarmed. What needs that? for the Doctor
intended only by those examples to show, that a Prince in His necessary
defense may entertain such men, as otherwise He would not make use of, and may
give some countenance to such as have relieved Him in distress, though
otherwise as ill deserving His Grace as a dissembling Ziba. And though, by Law,
Papists are not to have Arms at their disposing, yet are they not quit of the
duty and service of Subjects, they may by just authority bear Arms to use
them according to the direction of that authority; and if a List of the Army
against his Majesty were examined, there would be found, if not a confiderable
number of Papists; yet of such as they, that employ them, would have cause to
be ashamed of, such as by Law are to abjure the Land, as men not to be held in
with any government.

Upon the former particulars the Fuller Answerer is more bitter and malicious,
interpreting every thing, that had sharpness in it, as spoken of the
Parliament. It was said, That in such a case the State would be unreasonably
exposed to the danger, that every prevailing Faction might bring upon it; This
is, according to this man's interpretation, to call the Parliament, a prevailing
Faction. It was said, That the people are made to believe by their good
teachers, that the King was so and so affected, to whom no more need be said
then the Archangell did to he Arch-accuser, The Lord rebuke thee, also that
their preachings were the doctrines of this giddy age, and that many wicked
Pamphlets, and books written by Enemies to Peace, were suffered to issue forth
into every corner of this Land, This is according to this man's apprehension, to
call the Parliament Declarations wi^ked Pamphlets, and scandalous imputations
of this giddy ag^, and to liken them to the Devil the Arch-accuser. I had need
say again to this man, the Lord rebuke thee.

Lastly, it was said. If the Papist will show himself a good Subject, it is
just and reasonable that the King, when He is put to it, admit his help, and
the more shame for them, that profess the Protestant religion, to force him to
it. This is, according to this man's sense, to call the Papists good Subjects,
better then the Parliament, how will Romering of this? The Papists have no
cause to applaud themselves for any thing spoken by me, but this I can say, and
say it upon experience, that they take occasion to be confirmed and hardened in
their way, by the principles and practice of the adverse party: for how will
Rome ring of this, That Protestants should take Arms against their King
professing the same religion? that a concealed Tradition of a reserved power of
resistance should so far prevail, and the people be so finely led on by an
^mplicit faith to build upon it, that by virtue thereof the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance should be so easily dispenfed with? that the Jesuits themselves
should be clean out done in the cunning of Lies and Forgeries to uphold a
cause, that pretends religion?

This Answerer after a fit of railing concludes with Prayer. I shall only ^dde
this short prayer, and with my very soul I speak it, God bless the King and
send us peace, and if it must not be till one side have prevailed, I pray God
it may be that side that loves the King best. Truth would not let me bitherto
accord with this Answerer, but Charity now bids me join with him, and to add
unto his prayer; That it would please God to forgive that fide, which under
pretense of love to the King, has so deeply wounded him in his Person and
Kingly power, also that our peace may be restored, not through an absolute
prevailing of either side by Arms, but through a loyal submission of that
side, which has done the wrong to His Majesty and His People, by this Lawless
resistance. Amen.

We have done with this man; Let us see how Mr. Burrows concludes the
business, page 140. to the two last Sections which concerned matter of fact,
he briefly thus answers, The Doctor puts the case thus Whether Conscience can
be persuaded that the King is such, and so minded, as that there may be
sufficient cause to take up Arms against Him? In this he is as miserably
mistaken as in all his other grounds from Scripture and Reason; for we take up
no Arms against the King, and whatsoever the Kings mind be, there is
sufficient cause to take Arms, to defend our selves against others that seek
our ruin. Is it so that the Law is in your hand, and it concerns you not, What
ever the Kings mind be? He is bound by Oath to protect you against those that
seek your ruin, and accordingly has the power of the sword, and the defending
of Arms; will you not then know whether it be his mind to defend you, but
take the sword into your own hand? surely herein you are miserably mistaken, if
you think this is not to take Arms against the King, and against that power
which God and the Law entrusts him with, for your protection. Or have you not
read how Arms taken up by some in the latter end of the Queens time, to remove
evil Counselors, such as they pretended sought their ruin, were adjudged a
leavying of war against the Queen? it will not help you, to say Your Arms
are taken up by authority of Parliament; those were not, for that is not the
point, you may see by this, your Arms are against the King, and his power and
authority, if without it, under what pretense soever you may take them up.

If the King do but deny to assist in delivering us from such dangers, and in
delivering up Delinquents, there is cause enough to satisfy our Consciences in
taking of Arms. It seems now it concerns you to know, what the Kings mind
is, though not cause sufficient here to sati^^ie your Consciences, for you
cannot say he denied this, till you put your selves out of His protection, and
were your own protectors in Arms; Nay after you appeared in this posture, what
was denied you from Nottingham, that might give you cause to proceed in Arms
till you brought them to give the King battle? you take away His Arms and
power against His will, you use them in battle to the imminent endangering of
His Person, and yet you take not Arms against him, and you can satisfy your
Conscience of the lawfulness of it.

See now whether you can set such a Conscience before Gods tribunal, and there
lay the plea as you do, page 142. Lord thou who art the searcher of hearts
know we aimed at no hurt to our King, we desired to live in Peace, to
deliver our Kingdom and Parliament from the rage of ungodly men, to preserve
what thy Majesty, what the Law of Nature, and of this Land has made our own.
Dare you justify your selves thus at his Tribunal? you may blush to speak it
before man, that knows not your hearts, but sees, how you have actually invaded
the Kings Right and Power, and imminently endangered His Person, if the mercy
of the Lord had not preserved Him; how you break through the Laws of God and
Nature, not to preserve what is your own, but to gain the Lord knows what? Thou
tellest us, that it is not the part of a Christian, but of an Infidel, not to
provide for his family. Dare you thus entitle Him to your bloodshed and
rapines, whereby you provide for your selves? has he taught you to provide for
the family of the Commonwealth by binding the master of the family, and
smiting your fellow servants? as those did, Mat. 24.49. For the substance of
what we have done, it has been in thy name, that we may be faithful to our
King, Kingdom and Parliament, Pardon we beseech thee the failings. Let your
ends which you pretend, be never so specious, if the means you use be not
Lawful and Warrantable, as they are not, for the very substance of them,
either by the Law of God or Man, your plea will not hold, but your account will
be heavy for all the blood shed and miseries this Land has groaned under, which
might have been prevented if Reason would have satisfied you: Now the Lord that
is at hand, grant you moderation, and then we doubt not, but (with his
blessing) we shall have Peace in good time, to the restoring of his truth, the
Kings Honor and Rights, the due Privileges of Parliament, and the Subjects
Liberty.

ERRATA.
Page 2. med, your, for their. p. 9. l. 13. your for their. p. 49. l. 11. for
5. r. 15. p. 69. l. 9. natuall r. mutual.

The Contents of the several SECTIONS.
Sect. I. The Case, and the Question upon it stated. Sect. II. The frame of
this Government as it is phansyed in the Fuller Answer Sect. III. Of the
Original of Governing power; of Monarchy, and of the beginnings of Government
in this Land. Sect. IV. Of the Coordination of three Estates in Parliament, and
of the Supremacy of Power. Sect. V. Of the Supply which is phansyed upon the
former Coordination. Sect. VI. Of the final resolution of this States
Indgement, and of the power of declaring Law. Sect. VII. The final resolution
is not arbitrary in the two Houses, but only in the three Estates. Sect. VIII.
A confutation of what is replied by the Answerers upon the first Section of the
former Treatise. Sect. IX. A Confutation of what was replied upon the second
Sect. of the former Treatise, touching places of Scripture pretended for, or
alleged against resistance. Sect. X. A Confutation of what was replied upon
the third Sect. of the former Treatise. Sect. XI. A Confutation of what was
replied upon the fourth Sect. of the former Treatise. Sect. XII. A Confutation
of what was replied upon the fifth Sect. of the former Treatise. Sect. XIII. An
Answer to what was replied upon the two last Sections of the former Treatise.
FINIS.

