THE Wandering Bird's Wings Clipped: Or, A REPLY to Benjamin Bird Catholic HIS
PAGAN DESIGNS.
As a Bird that wandereth from her Nest, so is the Man that wandereth from his
Place, Prove. 27. 8. As the Birds that are caught in the Snare, so are the Sons
of Men s(...)d in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9.
12.
THE Love I bear to the precious Truth, and the sincere Professors thereof;
with the hearty Desire I have, That all Men might come to the knowledge of the
Truth, and be Saved.

Are strong inducements unto me, when I have seen both it and the Professors
thereof misrepresented; to use my small Endeavors to show wherein.

And wipe off that Dirt they throw upon us, that we may appear as we really
are. And doubt not but all, that with an unprejudiced and Impartial mind, will
like the Noble Bereans of Old search the Holy Scriptures, and compare our
Christian Doctrines therewith, will find we do not hold any that is contrary
thereunto: Neither do we desire any should receive any Doctrine we hold, but
what is agreeable to those Holy Writings, of which we do in Sincerity declare we
have a very Honorable Esteem; and account the Writings of the Old and New
Testament the best in all the World.

And now to this Author's Pamphlet I Reply.
I. I know no Quaker that has any Pagan Designs, to draw People off from the
Scriptures as B. Bird, that writes himself Catholic, does falsely affirm in his
Title Page, and I charge it on him, as a false and gross Slander, and let him*
read Prove. 10. 18. What he is that utters that, and remember its said, Psalm.
101. 5. That who so privily slanders his Neighbor, him will I cut off.

But he goes on and adds, -- To something above them which is in every Man,
etc. What is this an Offense to Labor, that People may be gathered unto
Christ, which is above the Scriptures, and to turn them from Satan's Power to
God's, and his Spirit in their Hearts when it is not? For that end, that any
should slight or despise the Holy Scriptures, but by that which is above them,
and by which the Holy Men wrote them, they might come rightly to understand and
have the Comfort of them; and if this be* Pagan, or to be Vile, we may say with
David, we will be yet more Vile.

Page 2. He says, Thou take pains to prove that Men may live without Sin.

II. And is this a Crime to show and prove from Scripture, that Men may by
Christ, that had no Sin, be saved from their Sins, and by him, and through his
Grace and Spirit be enabled and taught to live without Sin or a daily breaking
God's Commands: in opposition to his Sin* pleasing Doctrine, of its being
impossible while Men are here to keep God's Commands.

Let all that Read this, consider who is most to be blamed, I for advising him
in my former page 5. seriously to consider the Evil Consequences of that
Doctrine, viz. That it is impossible while Men are here to keep God's Commands,
and for my showing it was contrary to Christ's saying; and the Apostle, Paul
and John's Doctrine: Or he, for saying it is impossible to keep God's Commands,
and that M^n may not live without Sin, as if it was contrary to the Duty they
owe to God.

Surely this Man has either forgot his Catechism, or does not believe what
therein is declared in Answer to the Question.

What is thy Duty toward God?
Answ. My Duty toward God is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love him
with all my Heart, with all my Mind, with all my Soul, and with all my
Strength, to Worship him, to give him Thanks, to put my whole Trust in him, to
call upon him, to Honor his Holy Name and his Word, and to serve him truly all
the days of my Life.

Mind the Catechism says, its Man's Duty to serve God truly all the days of
Man's Life. But B. B. says, we may not live without Sin, its impossible to
keep God's Commands, why, because we may not live without Sin, says B. B? What
is there a necessity for it then? B. B. says its impossible, and does not that
imply a necessity? For of necessity that must be left undone, that its
impossible for Man to do.

Moreover this Man answered none of my former Instances I brought for Proofs,
nor brings none himself for what he asserteth, but his Ipse Dixit.

Page 2. He says, The Book of Common Prayer does not favor my Opinion.

III. But answered not any thing I brought out of the Common Prayer. Does he
think because he has added Catholic after his Name, I must conclude he cannot
Err.

If so, I answer no, no such matter, for I have shown his Error, as those that
Read my Reply may see.

And for his Flout at me, saying, If I have no Sin to confess, I have the more
for that.

I shall only answer that I own Confession of Sin, but shall not confess mine
to him, whom I esteem not sit to be my Confessor.

Page 2. He says, Though all Men are Sinners, yet good Men that confess and
forsake their Sins, shall find Mercy, -- and God has made them accepted in the
Beloved. This Doctrine your Friends on the other side the water cannot swallow,
and though you disown them, you have been abused by them. The Jesuits brag they
have been Twenty Years bringing you into Shape.

IV. I find that we are abused by B. B. and if he, through his intimacy, which
the Jesuits knows we have been abused by them, why is he so ready to follow
their Practice, but that confirms the Proverb like to like.

Howbeit, if those he calls our Friends, (and I call his Companions, for he
writes himself Catholic,) do not believe that all Men by Nature are Children
of Wrath and Sinners; and that good Men that confess and forsake their Sins
find Mercy, and through Faith and Obedience are made accepted in the Beloved.

I say, they that do not own this, are none of our Friends, nor of our Mind.
But if B. B. shows or any for him, that any are in the Beloved but new
Creatures, and that those that are Born of God, and made new Creatures, may not
live without Sin; and that its impossible for them to be other than Sinners all
their days, and yet are accepted in Christ; let him if he can prove this tr^e,
and according to Holy Scripture.

The next thing I take notice of, is his Reflection and false Affirmation,
which for want of Proof, he often makes use of, showing thereby he is wholly
barren of real Proofs, unless it be of his own folly, in which he abounds. --

Page 2. During King James's short Reign in Ireland, though Protestants of all
persuasions were misused, yet the Quakers were friendly dealt with; a sign,
says he, the Papists know you better than you know your selves.

V. Poor B. B. by this appears no true Catholic, although he assumed that Name;
for he is offended the Quakers should be friendly dealt with, though by a
Roman Catholic which he once owned* head of that Church he pretends to, and
defender of the Faith, which the Quakers never did; but because he was not
unfriendly to the Quakers, as B. B. and too many of his Brethren have been, he
is offended, and must Publish this unto the World, as one of his crasie
Conclusions, viz. That its a sign the Papists know us better than we know our
selves.

Shall I return this on B. B. and say, When King James came first to the Crown
in England, he promised to maintain the Church of England as by Law
Established. Its a sign that the Papists knew the* Church of England better
than they knew themselves, that he made this promise to the Church of England
only. This would not be well taken although I account there, is as much Reason
for this as the other, for we are as far from Popery as they.

B. B. Says, We had Ordination in the Church of England before Rome departed
from the Faith.

VI. And was that a Protestant Church of England, that you had Ordination in
before Rome departed from the Faith, or a Popish one. Come B. B. don't
Prevaricate nor Evade, let us understand what Church of England this was; and as
to thy Question, whence had we our Ordination? I answer, from God and Jesus
Christ, that only have power to make Ministers of the Gospel, and ordain them
to that Work.

Page 3. He says, And do you call upon all to come off from the Teachings of
Men, and to know the Teachings of God and Jesus Christ, by his Grace and Spirit
in their Hearts when they are without it, and therefore he is not in them.

VII. Yea, because God's Grace and Christ's Spirit appears and is given to all
for that end; but by this arguing all are Reprobates; but I would have him know
that Christ is the true Light that lights every Man that comes into the
World, and that he shines by his Light, and appears by his Spirit in them, to
show what is Good* and reprove for Evil, although all are not in him, yet he is on
this wise in every Man that has not sinned out the day of his Visitation;
otherwise how should any know and do those things that belong to their peace.
So though many are out of him, and without a sense of him in their Hearts, by
reason of their Sin and Unbelief: Yet he is so near as at the Door, and if
received by Faith will come in and bind the strong Man armed, spoil his Goods,
cast him out, purge the Flour, and make clean the inside that the outside may
be clean also.

B. B. Says, You begrudge us a Maintenance which God and Man allows us.

VIII. I may say, Nusquam sine querela aegra tanguntur, Sore things are not
touched without complaint. Howbeit, this I deny and charge on him as false.

But how agreeable a forced Maintenance for Christ's Ministers is, to his
Precept, who said, Freely ye have receiv^d, freely give, I shall leave those
that impartially search the Holy Scriptures to judge.

Also, how unlike it is to the practice of Christ's Primitive and present
Ministers, to sue at Law, Imprison and Seize the Goods of those that do not own
them to be his Ministers, and how contrary it is to the New Testament; for
Gospel Ministers to take Tithes which are Jewish, let the truly wise Judge.

And although its true what B. B. says, Joseph gave the Heathen Priests or
Princes what Pharoh allowed them, yet, we read not that they took that
allowance from any that were not of them.

And let them that own B. B's Ministry give him what they will, I shall not
bereave him of it, nor ^ob his Church or Barn; and if he would let others be as
quiet with what they have and labor for, and not Molest, Persecute, Sue,
Imprison, nor seize their Goods, that for good Conscience sake toward God
cannot pay him, it would be to his Commendation more than the contrary.

B. B. Has one thing more to tell, and that is, that the Gospel accepts the
will for the deed; and yet says, that we make our humble Supplications unto
God, that he would work in us both to will and to do.

IX. Now observe if the Gospel accepts the will for the deed, what need is
there to make Supplication to do the deed if willing only will serve. We read
that its said, Mat. 7. 24. Whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does
them, I will like him to a wise Man that built his House upon a Rock, and he
said to the Woman that said, Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps
that gave th^^ ^uck, that they were rather blessed that heard the word of God
and do it.

So its not enough to think well, unless there be a doing well; and therefore
its said, Depart from evil and do good, and live for evermore* and its said,
Glory, Honor and Peace to every Man that works ^ood to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentiles, for not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but
the doers of the Law shall be justified; yet its not for the doing sake that we
are justified, nor by works of Righteous that we have done that we are saved,
but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of Regeneration, and
Renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he sheds on us abundantly through Jesus
Christ our Savior, and by that Faith which works by Love and purifies the
Heart, and gives victory over the World.

There is one thing more which B. B. falsely insinuates against me in these
words: Let me desire thee to cease reviling Protestant Ministers, who are the
Servants of the most High God, that show unto us the way of Salvation.

X. I answer, his desire herein is needless, and his insinuation hase; for I
love and honor the Servants of the most High God, that show unto us the way of
Salvation.

Although I esteem not B. B. such an one, but the worst I wish him is, that he
was, and that he may forsake his false speaking, and misrepresenting me, my
Friends, and our Doctrines; and come to an amendment of his ways, and
acknowledge to the truth, that it may be well with him in his latter end.

But there is something farther to observe, that is, his Complaint, Page 3.
where he says to me, Thou call me Episcopalian Priest, Officious Scribler,
and Priest Bird; by which its easy to know you lighted your Candle at
Lucifer's Torch, and *it is his Light within you boast of, and would
Blasphemously Entitle Christ to.

What a Rage is this Man in! Does not he verify the Phrase? Saepe ad nos ira
venit, sapius nos ad illam, Anger often comes unto us, we oftener to it. For
must I for calling him as the Common Prayer calls him, be thus judged? For in
the Morning-Prayer he is called -- Priest, for the Priest is to say, Oh God
make clean our Hearts within us, and take not thy Holy Spirit from us.

Now if this Man did pray in Faith, and so experience his Heart made clean
within him; such foul things would not come out of him, such Rage and
Bitterness would not appear for my terming him Episcopalian Priest: I did not
call him Hireling, greedy Dumb Dog, nor Turn-Coat, yet I must be falsely told I
lighted my* Candle at Lucifer's Torch, and it is his Light within that I boast
of, and would Blasphemously Entitle to Christ. What strange, false, untrue, and
unscriptural Expressions are these? What Light within has the Devil? But let
him, and all know its Jesus Christ, the Beloved Son of God, that came from the
Bosom of the Father; that I do believe in who is the Light of the Word, and the
true Light that lights every Man that comes into the World, by whose Light
we have come to see our own States, and also therein to see how directly
contrary the Works and Fruits (of too many professing to be his Ministers) are,
to those that were, and are really his; which freely give what they receive,
and seek not People's goods, but their eternal good, and to gather them not to
themselves, but to Christ; and to know his Teachings by that Grace that came by
him, and not to set themselves nor one another as Teachers over them, to make a
Gain and Profit of them, nor to cause them to spend their Money for that which
is not Bread, and their Labor, for that which satisfies not, but direct them
to hear the voice of Christ, that their Souls might live, and they become the
Sheep of Christ's Pastor, and experience the Living God to be their Shepherd,
that they might want no good thing.

And as to my terming B. B. Officious Scribler, I have shown in my former, and
may now a little, that he appears so by interposing officiously in a
Controversy between Joseph Not called a Quaker; and the Presbyterians in his
writing a Book relating thereto, and Dedicating it to his worthy Friend William
Clap; who, or some other, clapped a Title Page to it, without B. B's privity, as
he now says, Page 1. What I did was in a private Letter to a Friend, says B.
B. upon whose Request it was Printed without my privity, and the Title Page is
not mine; and B. Bird is merely drawn in to bring up the Rear, Page 2.

Poor B. B. I may say to thee,

Invalidum omne, natura querulum est,
All weak things are full of Complaint.
However thou may the better make thy retreat, and learn to be wiser the
next time, than meddle with that which don't belong to thee; and do not trust
any Body with thy Scrible, lest it should be Printed again, and thy Folly and
Ignorance exposed without thy privity: But remember that a Fool, when he
holds his peace is counted Wise: And he that shuts his Lips is esteemed a
Man of Understanding, Prove. 17. 28. And only by Pride comes Contention, but
with the well advised is Wisdom, the which by the fear of the Lord, and
departing from Iniquity, thou may come to have, is the desire of him,

That wishes, and prays for the good of all Men. I. Field.

FINIS.

