A FIGHT AT SEA TWO Ships taken by Prince CHARLES his Officers. And Prince
Charles very ill, and in danger of Death.

THE Lord Willoughby and Sir John Batten, both put out, and Prince Rupert made
Admiral, and Captain Robert Welsh Vice Admiral.

The Estates Message to Vantrumpe, And the agreement at the Treaty.

ALSO Other Extraordinary News from the Earl of Warwicks Ships.

Brought on Monday November 6, 1648.

no: 7 LONDON, Printed for H. Beck, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.

A Fight at SEA, two Ships taken by Prince Charles his Officers.
And Prince Charles very ill, and in danger of Death.
SIR,
I Know many eyes are upon us, yet I doubt not, but that we shall give such an
account of this business of our undertakings here, as shall give good
satisfaction to the Parliament.

It is true, we were mistaken in our first thoughts, for it was supposed that
the Seamen would have all come in to the Lord Admiral upon the first Summons,
Indemnity being offered them.

But it seems they had not so much discretion, as to make use of that offer
when it was tendered, For by means of some moneys, and an high hand together,
over the Sea men, they were stopped from coming into us.

Yet now they are in as great (...) as ever, nay worse, for the Seamen fly out
high against the Lord Willoughby and Sir John (...) for ^s, and (...) they have
contracted to themselves, by deserting the Parliament, and that they did
always expect the performance of payment of moneys from them for they promised
it, and of them it is they expect to see it performed.

And their wants are very great, having spent since they arrived in Holland,
not only the pillage of their Piracies, but what they brought away from England.

Hereupon several Counsels of War were called to consider what to do, and
upon advice there amongst them, Prince Charles and the Agents have been
solicited by the Lord Willoughby, Sir John B^^ten; and other Officers; And they
have had good words, but no moneys.

At last the Lord Willoughby went to the (...) told him that there must some
course be taken for moneys, or else the Seamen would all dissert them, and
that he could not keep them in order without some thing for them to subsist by.

Then his Lordship was desired to try what interest he could make for the
borrowing of moneys for the Prince, to give the Seamen some pay, and that he
should do what he could to keep them in Order.

The Prince also declared unto him, that he would desire them that they would
be contented (only) until the Treaty between the King his Father, and the
Parliament of England was ended, that they might see what the end thereof would
be, and then they should see, that care should be taken for them, either (in a
short time) to have their Arrears, and all engagements made good to them, or
else that they should have both moneys and provisions for further employment,
if the King and Parliament should not agree.

In the mean time, the Lord Admiral sent to the Estates of Holland, to desire
that Vantrumpe might be recalled from guarding of the revolted Ships that
deserted the Parliament of England, and others from the Parliament were there
soliciting, that so the Lord Admiral might have an opportunity to reduce them.

And it was so far prevailed with the Estates of Holland, that an Order was
passed that Vantrumpe should withdraw, and take of^ his guards, and those ships
of theirs be employed upon other service for their own country. But I know not
how it came to pass but so it was, that either it was not sent, or not obeyed,
but I suppose there was some private countermand from the Prince of Orange, or
else that Vuntrumpe durst hardly have denied to obey those Instructions. And
the Estates have since made another Order to send to Vantrumpe, to know the
reason why those Orders were not obeyed?

Whether he was to withdraw presently, or convey them out of Gowry (which is
not probable) and then withdraw, I cannot tell certainly: but probably the
latter.

The Hollanders are much discontented to be at the charges, to maintain them
at their charge, for no benefit to themselves, especially having so much use as
they have for them at Sea.

But for (the future) perhaps they may not have altogether so much use for them
as formerly, for the general peace is now concluded and signed.

Now all this while Prince Charles his seamen go on high in discontents, and
break out into factions; their general cry being moneys, money, and indeed I
do wonder how they can make shift as they do.

And the Seamen sent to desire Prince Charles to come to them, and give them
some other satisfaction (for they were much discontented at the Prince for
leaving them and going to the Hague).

Yet it has so fallen out, that they cannot be satisfied in this; for Prince
Charles is sick of the Small Pox at the Hague and is very ill of them, in
great danger to fall into a Fever.

The Duke of York also and his sister are neither of them well. The Duke it is
believed will also have the Small Pox.

So that neither the Prince nor the Duke of York can go to them, whereby they
are like to rise into an high disorder.

The Prince there by the advice of his counsel about him, took into
consideration what was best to be done herein, for their Order and Discipline.

And it was concluded, that a message should be sent to the Lord Willoughby,
and Captain Batten, to know their minds, and try whether they could use a
^^^^s to settle and order the Seamen until the Treaty was ^^ded.

They returned Answer, that they could not possible do it without money, and
that they could not tell how to undertake any thing in discharge of their
places except some provisions was made for the Seamen.

Hereupon the Prince by advice of his council, concluded that the Lord
Willoughby and Sir John Batten should be dismissed. And that Prince Rupert
should be made Admiral and that one Welsh should be Vice-Admirally (this Welsh
is Robert Welsh that came out of Ireland, a poor sneaking fellow) are not
those like to prove good guides to an English Navy. But this will not be
sufficient to compose the Seamen, and notwithstanding their intentions for so
it is designed to send Landmen over them, to overawe them, and put a force
upon them.

The time of the Treaty they suppose but short, and so expect their work to be,
and so not much difficult. There are some of Prince Charles his Officers have
taken two Ships belonging to some Merchants of London, which they have seized
on, and plundered to a very great value.

Many ships were cast away the last great winds.

Gowry, From aboard the Vere-Admiral, Dated the 3 of November, 1648.
FINIS.

