J. F's Reply UNTO Thomas Crisp's Rapsody of Lies, Slanders and Defamations of
J. F. and R. R. etc. Entitled, The Fifth Part of Babel Builders, etc.
An unjust man is an Abomination to the Just, and he that is upright in the
way, is an abomination to the wicked.

There is a Generation whose Teeth are Swords, and their Jaw Teeth as Knives to
devour the Poor from the Earth, and the needy from among men.

The Soul of the wicked desires Evil: and his Neighbors finds no favor in
his eyes,

Prove. 21.10. Who whet their Tongue like a Sword, and bend their bow to shoot
their Arrows, even bitter words,

Psalm. 64.3.
To the Reader, showing in brief our present Exercise is not new.
Courteous READER,
I Thought meet to remind thee how that Enmity and wroth soon entered the Heart
of Cain against his innocent Brother Abel, because his offering was not
accepted. And there was a Korah, a Dathan and Abiram that pretended to
holiness, though wicked men, and rose up against that meek man Moses, Numb. 16.
And there was a Rabshekeh, that was highly conceited of himself no doubt, when
with vain words he said, I have Council and Strength, etc. and said, The Lord
said to me, Go up against this Land and destroy it, 2 Kings 18, 19. But the
Virgin Daughter of Zion despised him, shak'd her head at him, and laughed him
to scorn; and they that are in the same Spirit, now are his Offspring, for all
their high words and pretenses, of being the Christian Quakers, etc. There was
also, we read, a Judas that betrayed his Master, etc. and false Brethren among
the Apostles that did then as T. C. does now prate against the Truth; yea,
there were some that brought in damnable Doctrines, etc. and I shall leave thee
to Judge whether this man is not in the same Spirit, and instigated by him (out
of whose Mouth came the unclean Spirits like Froggs; see Rev. 16.13.) to belie,
slander, and mis-represent the Friends of Truth and People of the Lord in this
our Age, to whom I wish Repentance, to the acknowledgment of his Fault, and
remain thy Friend J. F.

And now I shall apply my self to T. C.
Thomas Crisp,
I Have seen a Paper of thine, wherein it plainly appears to me, thou have in
thy pride and wrath said, viz. For J. F. and R.R. they are such inconsiderable
Persons, that I am almost ashamed that I have taken any notice of them. Answ.
Well, Thomas, thou may be quite and altogether ashamed of thy belying,
slandering and defaming of us; but I perceive Solomon said true, A Fools mouth
is his destruction, and his lips the snare of his Soul, and proud and haughty
Scorner is his Name, that deals in proud wrath: for wrath kills the
foolishman, and envy slays the sillyone. But remember better is the poor that
walks in his uprightness; than he that is perverse in his ways, though he be
rich. And if thou T. C. art rich and wise in thy own conceit, them that thou
accountest poor, have understanding, and have searched thee, and find there is
more hopes of a Fool -- But as inconsiderable as we be, if T.C. or any other
can bring the man, that can prove, that ever either of us had any thing of any
but what we came honestly by (and without begging) or labored for, or received
of any one Farthing or Farthings worth, directly or indirectly for Preaching,
for every Penny they shall have two; for though we have and do Administer as
occasion serves, we do not receives. Through the Lord's blessing there is no
need. And truly, it thou art a rich man, it is pity thou should be so malicious
and foolish to turn Informer as thou do (in public Print, and in the very
Title page of thy Book) against an inconsiderable Person too in thy esteem,
sure thou wast more malicious than wise herein, for what could thou expect to
gain of such an one. Well, this is no new thing, for when the Devil could not
have his will of Job, to lead him into wickedness, nor prevail upon on him to
make him Answer his mind, etc. he turned Informer against him: so thou may
see and read who is the father of all mercenary and ungodly, malicious
Informers; and what became of Rich Haman that informed against poor Mordecai
(and sought the destruction of the people he belonged to, and told lies to
effect it) though a better man than himself, though not so Rich. Thou call
thy Book, A Reply to several Lies, Slanders, false and wicked Insinuations of
R. Richardson, and J. Field 's Inhabitant and Preacher, (and then tells where,
and the place of his abode) and adds, of G. F's Party. Pray observe the
Informers Information, and mark his Enmity, for his Book, I may say, is stuffed
with that he falsely pretends it is a Reply unto, viz. Lies, etc. and with some
Billingsgate (as thou say, page 17.) manners, for thee calls names, as
Drudges, Arrogant Prater, Inquisitor to the Bull and Mouth, like a lazy begging
Friar, false Accuser, like Mercenary Reformado's, Black Friar like Fellow; He,
viz. J. F. may have an Eye to an Apparitor or Informers place. Well, Thomas,
but what ever eye thou may maliciously suggest I may have, thou have taken
the Informers place before me; but I will not here tell where thou live, lest
others should hear of this thy new Undertaking. Besides, I wish thou may grow
wiser, though I am of the wise Man's mind, That there is more hopes of a Fool,
than a man wise in his own conceit: for the foolishman perverteth his way, and
his heart fretteth against the Lord; yea, and his People to, I may say, proving
That evil men and Seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
Thou chargest me with a Lie in thy 18 page for speaking of Friends, and saying,
Their Unity is in the eternal Spirit: Sure Thomas if thee Believes there be any
Friends to God and Christ, thou must grant their Unity is there, or else inform
me where it is (indeed page 3. thou say, there (quoting John) Their
fellowship is in the Light; and what difference is there between the Light (
John there spoke of) and the eternal Spirit. But prithee Thomas hear thy self a
little further how egregiously thou contradicts thy self, and Preaches the same
Doctrine, which thou art angry with me for, etc. page 6. thou say, I own all
faithful Friends and People of God, their Unity is in the eternal Spirit: Very
well, Thomas, and are not they that are faithful to the Spirit of God, faithful
Friends, I will assure thee I never meant nor said that unfaithful Friends, or
Ranters, and them that be not the People of God, were of one mind, or that
their Unity was in the Eternal Spirlt. And seeing thou say, p. 3. Take this
Assertion not strictly but to the Church or People of God, it seems contrary to
Scripture, etc. though thou in the 6. page* says, thou owns the People of Gods
unity is in the eternal Spirit. I shall here show that the Apostles exhorted
the Corinthians to be of the same mind, and Judgment though T. C. says, It
seems contrary to the Scripture, and quotes Romans 14.5. etc. as if the Apostles
contradicted himself, which would be wicked to Assert or insinuate. Now the 1
Cor. 10. its said Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions (or
Schisms) among you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind,
and in the same Judgment: And Romans 15.5, 6. the Apostle said, Now the God of
patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus; [or after the Example of him who did wear the
seamless Coat] That ye may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; see 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 14, 25. yea, the whole
Chapter. I think I may say if thou was not a Novice (as thou termest me) in the
Scripture, thou would never have made such a noise as thou have about this
Position, but I shall leave my Reader to judge whether thou art one of them
that thinks to be heard for thy much babbling, etc. or whether for this Doctrine
thus agreeing with Scripture, and owned by T. C. I (have proved my self like
the wicked Atheist, a Liar, wicked and false Accusers and proud Boaster) or T.
C.

Another Lie (in the 18 page.) thou chargest me with, is for saying, Thou
pratest against the Truth. But if all what thou have writ be true, I might
acknowledge it so, but its not, therefore remember a false Witness shall not be
unpunished; and he that speaks Lies shall perish; so read thy portion if thou
repent not, For the prating Fool shall fall, said Solomon. And, Thomas, I will
assure thee it is not thy thinking this or that, that is any proof, though it is thy
practice in several Pages of thy Book so to say, as rich as thou art, thy word
will not be taken herein, I doubt thou art a little pufft up in thy mind with
the conceit of thy Riches; well remember its said, It makes it self wings and
flies away; and therefore do not because of it, assume to tell my meaning, and
what I think, as in the 13 page, etc. for that thou know not; and therefore
in so saying, thou assumes God's Prerogative, who according to Amos 4. last,
shows what the thoughts are, and manifestest thy self a Liar as well as
Conceited; I don't say like Irish -- as thou speaks of, page 12. And in thy 4th
Ba. p. 12. thou say, I judge not nor condemn any person for their Judgment
and practice, that differs from me that is not a breach of the Revealed Will of
God, and have often certified as much. Then pray prove my Doctrine, viz. that
Friends Unity (viz.) faithful ones, is in that eternal Spirit that leads all
them, that are faithful thereunto, to be of one mind (prove I say this contrary
to the Revealed Will of God if thou can) and if their Unity is in it, as thou
ownest, then they are one in it, etc. if it be not thus proved the contrary by
the Revealed Will of God, without thy thinkings and say-so's! for alas that
will not do, indeed Tho. it wont, also prove that the names thou call'st me and
R.R. thy scoffing Lies and Raylery, in thy Book, is according to the Revealed
Will of God, which if it be the Scripture thou call'st the Revealed Will of
God, pray let me have Chapter and Verse, as thou say, p. 8.) and as also F.
Bugg, in his confused Book) well, Thomas, don't think I have here picked out all
thy Lies, Slanders, Nicknames, etc. in thy Rabble of Railery, thou callst
Babels Builders, etc. no, no, for I question whether all the Paper I have here
writ will hold them; but if thou persist, may be I may give a Catalogue of
them. But thy Tongue to me does not appear to be that, which is said to be a
Tree of Life, but rather to be set on fire of Hell. So I think I may conclude,
and say with Solomon, A poor man is better than a Liar; and he that has a
froward heart finds no good; and he that has a perverse Tongue falls into
mischief, yea, the fools lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for
strokes; So, Thomas, do thou make right application hereof, And take a large
measure or quantity of unfeigned Repentance, Humility, and the fear of the
Lord, and lie still therein until thou have felt the righteous Judgments of God
brought forth into victory over that Conceitedness, Pride and Wrath, which has
so much filled thy heart, that it has bred, as I may say, an evil disease that
sticks fast unto thy Soul, yea, and the very Scab of Contention; and if this
means the Lord inclines thy heart unto, thou may thereby obtain Cure: Which
that thou may, is my real desire, if it be God's Will, for I find, through
the goodness of the Lord, the Spirit of forgiveness in my Heart toward thee.

But if you still remain angry, I am of Solomon's mind, who says, Make no
Friendship with an Angry man; and with a furious man thou shall not go.

And Thomas, thou say, page 9. something about my having a high conceit of my
self, for which thou say, thou see no cause for it, except it is my high
living at -- where say thou, I think thou have no cause to complain of thy
high Rent. Well, Thomas, I perceive thou make the Proverb good, That every
Fool will be meddling, (though this concerns thee not) but I would have thee know
that I have, and do as honestly pay my Rent as thee; and for ought I know, thy
dwelling and mine considered as much as thou do. Well, Dust it is said is the
Serpents meat who creeps upon his Belly, and makes his Followers Back-biters,
Liars, and Creepers like himself, and his Children loves the same meat, and as
greedily feed thereof, when they get it, as is manifested by thy collecting the
Letters of diverse persons names in thy fourth Page, which, if true, manifest
thy self, to be one of cursed Ham's brood, etc.

And I observe that thou maliciously speaks in thy 5 page of some, That have
been guilty of evil words and actions, and yet have been owned as God's
faithful Servants -- and in the Power of God, and adds our Unity is in forms.
Answ. Observe his words (have been.) But I affirm no person in the eternal
power of God can be found in evil words and actions, neither can those that are
therein, have Unity with such, for all that goes into evil words and actions,
goes from the power of God, and are by the same power Judged and Condemned; and
them that keep in the eternal power of God cannot have Unity with them therein,
but if any have gone from the power of God, and they Return and Repent, they
may find mercy with God, and have Unity with his faithful people which we
desire, and if thou should so do we should greatly rejoice. And I would have
thee consider, whether thy exposing the Letters of the Names of those Persons
in page 4. does not prove that thou have in thy Forehead, the more certain and
legible Character of that thou call the Beasts mark, viz. Hatred and Strife.

Thou take little or no notice, as I observe, in thy Book of our 20, and 21
Pages of T. C's Envy Detected, etc. which shows how the Barbados Friends have
been abused by some (for ought I know of Party with thee, who got a wrong Copy,
not according to the sense of the Meeting; see our Book aforesaid. Do them
Justice, and do not abuse them in Print any more, but if thou do, read what
they say for themselves, and publish it too.

Also in thy 14. p. I find thee angry about my saying its thy Principle to Pay
Tithes and be Married by a Priest, saying herein (as his usual manner is) Lies
be his Refuge, and in the same Page thou say, I falsely insert that it was thy
Principle to Marry by a Priest and pay Tithes, and yet in the same Page thou
say thou asked J. B. and my self, whether thy self or another might not Marry
by a Priest, and pay Tithes, and to which say thou J. B. said he believed it
was my ( viz. T.C's.) Principle, to which thou T. C. Answers, it was, viz. that
one might Marry by a Priest and pay Tithes, and be a Christian. Well if this be
not thy Principle, why was it thy Practice, was it to manifest thy self an
Hypocrite, or one that acts contrary to thy Principle? I think if that was all,
thou might have spared thy pains, at least to many, who have and do know thee:
thou ask me in the 8. p. What warrant from Scripture I have to term thy
Marriage an Evil? etc. I answer, that when thou according to thy Assertion in
the 19. p. of thy fourth Babel, etc. has proved that there is President and
Command in Scripture for what thou did in that matter, and for having a Ring,
and saying after the Priest: I say when thou have proved this, thou may
expect to hear more from me. But this I may add, that in the 13. p. thou
say, But in case I had so said, ( viz. that to pay Tithes and Marry by a
Priest, etc. was my Principle) it does not follow, that I therefore must so do.
Well, Tho. it seems then thou do not look upon thy self bound to Act
according to what thou say; nay, nay, I am of the mind that is little enough
regarded by thee, etc. But who is the Quibbler now, which by long, practice is
grown expert? Oh, Tho. I tell thee, I for ever desire rather to be a Dunce in
saying one thing, and doing another, than Expert, except the saying has
relation, to slander, falsehood and untruth, etc. it would be better not to
practice such sayings, though it is too much thy practice in thy confused Babels
so to say. And in the 13. p. thou say, I am angry that thou said, That
Submitting to the Magistrates for Conscience sake, is accounted Submitting to
the Pope. And here Tho. thou have done worse than Quibble, thus maliciously to
insinuate, as if we accounted Submitting to the Magistrate for Conscience sake,
was a Submitting to the Pope, which is a lying, false and wicked Insinuation,
that tends to stir up and insence the Magistrate against our Friends; and it is
so much the worse, at this time, because many lies under severe and grievous
Sufferings, by Imprisonment, and spoil of Goods, etc. which ungodly and
unchristian Insinuation thou ushers in thus, 15 p. 4 Bab. It Is a wonder to me,
when I consider how many have been encouraged to deny or refuse Submission to
Authority, on pretense of Conscience: and such accounted faithful and valiant
Friends, etc. but for being subject to the Magistrate for Conscience sake is
accounted submitting to the Pope. Answ. But if I did not by thy Scribbling find,
that the Spirit of Enmity had entered thee, and that thou art thereby
instigated thus to write, I might wonder, that T.C. should thus falsely and
maliciously Inform against such accounted faithful and honest Friends, and
insinuate that they were encouraged to deny or refuse submission to Authority,
under (or on) pretense of Conscience. And do not the malicious Informers give
such like Evidence against our peaceable Meetings in the Sp. of Christ, etc. as
that they are on pretense or under color, etc. when the Lord knows it is no
truer than what T. C. enviously says, viz. notoriously false, for we refuse
not submission to Authority in any thing on pretense, etc. but in reality, and
we are subject to Authority either in Active or Passive obedience for
Conscience sake, desiring to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness
and honesty, making our Prayers and Supplications, etc. for all men, for Kings,
and them that are in Authority, knowing that it is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, who would have all men saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth. And now, Thomas, consider who is the Forger, Informer,
Maker of Lies, and thy Master (as thou mentions in the 10, and the 13 page.) And
whether thou art not in the very practice of Forging, Informing, and making
Lies, for thy Master and Father of Lies; I say, Consider of it, and Repent
thereof before it is too late, for he that sows iniquity shall reap vanity,
and the Rod of his anger shall fail.

Thou have not made a litttle Clamor about the Paper writ into the Country, in
which it was said at the Conclusion, viz. and have no Unity with T. C. this
thou call my Bull of Excommunication, though the words were used in a private
Letter, etc. But, Thomas, if it be a Bull of Excommunication for me to say, I
have no Unity with thee; what is it for thee to say I am of the Synagogue of
Satan, and to compare me to them Paul fought with at Ephesus; besides the names
mentioned before; nay, in the 13 p. to render me worse than a Cheat,
Pick-pocket, or Mercenary Reformado, as thy terms are, for I suppose thou will
grant these may be defamed as bad as they be; but thy Enmity is so great
against me, that thou say, I cannot defame thee. To which I Answer, The Lord
Rebuke thee thou false and lying Tongue, and may not be said unto thee, if
thou Repent not, Thou love all devouring words, Oh thou deceitful Tongue, God
shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck thee
out of thy dwelling place; and root thee out of the Land of the living; the
Righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him. Lo, this is the man
that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance of his Riches, and
strengthened himself in his wickedness. But to return, may not thy calling me of
the Synagogue of Satan, be termed thy Bull of Excommunication against me as
well as my saying, I have no Unity with thee, Is termed (by thee) my Bull of
Excommunication against thee. Who art thou that Judge another and do the
same things? Well, he that devises to do evil, shall be called a mischievous
person, and the thought of wickedness (it is said) is sin, and the scorner is an
abomination to men, and in that state I shall leave my Reader to view and pity
thee. In several pages, as the 1, 4, etc. thou pratest of G. F's Party, to
which I Answer, we disown all Parties out of Truth, for Truth leads not into
Sects, or to be Sect Masters, etc. Thou also in many pages termest G. F. mine,
and R.R. Master, to which I say, I own no Master, but Christ (according to
Scripture) Mat. 23.10. though I own and esteem G. F. as an ancient faithful
Friend and Labourer in the Gospel of Peace, yea, a Father in the Truth to many,
and matter not what T. C. in his rage and Enmity may say, because thereof, who
is manifesting himself to be like a raging Wave of the Sea, etc. and void of
Charity, as he speaks in his 4 p. by concluding me and many more (for no other
cause but owning G. F's Spirit) as none of God's Children, and so no
Christians, though I have told him I own G. F's Spirit, as governed by the Spirit
of God; and I am well and fully satisfied that G. F. serves God with his Spirit
in the Gospel of his Son; and in his wisdom Acts to the praise of his Grace,
who is over all, blessed for ever.

In p. 7. thou say, I prove not the observing any Command of God according to
the Scripture, only the imposing the Imaginations of G. F. etc. on People.

Answ. Here thou would maliciously insinuate, as if the Imaginations of G.
F. etc. was imposed on People, which I deny and charge it upon thee as a wicked
slander, also that any thing contrary to the Holy Scriptures is desired by us
to be practiced by any. Oh, Thomas, remember the Lord has said, He that
speaks Lies shall not dwell in his House, which thou do in p. 8. where thou
speak of many black Characters given those that -- only for disobedience or
Nonconformity to G. F's Imaginations or forms, as if our Unity stood in Forms
or Imaginations, I tell thee it is not, but in that Eternal Spirit in which all
faithful Friends and People of God's Unity stands, as thou ownest, p. 6. and
it is not thy bare (though confident denying us to be such is any proof thereof)
or as thou there say of our being Liars, wicked and false Accusers and proud
Boasters, but it may serve for a proof of the contrary, and of thy Malice and
enmity, which that Spirit that lusts to Envy, has brought forth in thee; so
that in p. 19. thou art at it again, saving, You be the Authors of Confusion
and Blasphemy, by contradicting the Scriptures, and your own former Testimonies
in imposing your own constitutions, on your Brethren, contrary to the Light, in
their Consciences, and therein setting the Spirit in Opposition to it self.
Answ. Alas, Thomas, would fasten that upon us, which thou art so apparently
Guilty of in thy Position, that the Spirit of God did or might allow one to pay
Tithes or Marry by a Priest, and that by the same Spirit of God another might
be required not pay them, or not do the same thing; but this Sham will not do, for
it is no truer than we are the Authors of Confusion and Blasphemy, and impose
our own Constitutions, etc. which is notoriously false. Thou say in thy 18 p.
J. F. says, He has not griped, nor overreached any man. To which thou
Answerest, I think he has little opportunity to do it, having so little
dealing with men, but I believe he gets or gripes (that is more than covet) as
much by 20 s. worth that he sells, as I do by 10 l. worth. Answ. Well, Thomas,
I see it is true that the ungodly man diggeth up evil, and in his lips there is
a burning Fire; and a Hypocrite with his mouth destroys his Neighbor: -- but
destruction shall be to the workers of Iniquity, for the man that wandereth out
of the way of understanding, shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead, so
read thy Station, for I intend to follow the wise man's advice, who says, Let
not thy heart Envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day
long. But I perceive thou would be willing to publish me if thou could
prove that I had griped or overreached any man, which say thou, for want of
proof, I think he has little opportunity (for he tells his belief in the
matter) which is, he gets or gripes more by 20 s. etc. than I by 10 l. (which
he affirms is more than Covet) so that he would insinuate (with his malicious
thought and false belief) that I did more than break that Commandment, which
says, Thou shall not Covet, etc. but by his thus writing, he puts me upon
thinking, that this came a little near him; for when the sore place is touched,
there is apt to be a winching: But thy Tongue, I may say, devises mischief
like a sharp Rasor, working deceitfully, thou love evil more than good; and
Lying rather than to speak Righteousness. And Thomas, thou have mentioned G.F's
Name (against whom thy Enmity seems to be great) 85. times in thy 2 sheets and
and mine 74. But know, That every Tongue that rises up in Judgment against the
Lord, in him and his Children ( viz. the Lords) God has given Power to
Condemn, but thy Old Bottle cannot hold no New, but Sower Wine, which the
Children of the Lord cannot Drink, for it is no better than the Wine of
Fornication, which the Whores Cup was filled withal, whose Name was Mystery
Babylon, the great, the Mother of Harlots, in whose Womb of uncleanness thy
Babels were conceived, and by the strength of her Power brought forth; in whose
Spirit thou Scoffingly speaks of G. F's Laws and Orders, etc. But never yet
(though often called upon) produced a Catalogue of them, thou so clamourest
against and rages at, which if thou dare, sure thou would by this time;
but, may be thou may consider if thou should, thy weakness, folly and
madness, would be more manifest, for crying, railing and clamouring against
that which is so consonant to, and agreeable with the Scripture, and Christians
commendable practice.

And in his 1 page he says: But seeing its my lot to be beset with such as
Paul Fought with at Ephesus, J. F. and R. R. and I shall endeavor to acquit my
self of them, and their Lies, etc. and then they are their own, seeing they
love them so well (viz. Lies) etc. as to make them their Refuge.

Answer, Well Thomas, passing by thy Comparison, which shows thy Envy more than
thy Honesty: I shall tell thee, that thy endeavors indeed is, and will be in
vain, as to the acquitting thy self of them Untruths and Lies, which in our
former we Charged thee with; for it is not thy laying thy Lies at our doors will
acquit thee from being the Father or Publisher thereof, nor make them ours, but
thou Insinuates as if we Loved Lies, etc. So well as to make them our Refuge:
Nay, nay, if we loved Lies, I am persuaded we should be better Loved by thee;
and as for making them our Refuge, I deny it, for blessed be the Lord, we have
a better Refuge; even him (that shall sweep away the Refuge of Lies) who we
believe will hide us, From the secret Council of the wicked, from the
Insurrection of the workers of Iniquity, who make their own Tongue to fall upon
themselves; and all that see them shall flee away, Psalm. 64.2, 8.

Again in his 5 page he says, I shall Answer some Lies J. F. charges me with,
viz. In the 9 page he says, I dealt by him like a wicked Atheist, etc.

Ans. Here I observe thou make some do, because the words (there is) were
taken into the Parenthesis; and says, there then remains only these words,
viz. no God: True, but this Phrase of Scripture I made use of only to show thy
abuse, in leaving out a Material Sentence of mine, that should explain the
rest, as these words, viz. (The Fool has said in his heart) explains the
following, viz. there is no God: Now to leave out the former (as thou did by
me) would make the Psalmist say, there is no God: So this will not yet prove I.
F. a Liar, nor like the wicked Atheist; the other Lie is, that I said, Friends
Unity is in the Eternal Spirit, which T.C. says in the the 5 page Is false:
But I do again affirm it is a Lie for thee to say, Our Unity is not in the
Eternal Spirit, and thou have proved to the contrary.

Again, in the 6 page thou say, J. F. Charges in the 11 page with Lies, in
saying, That they, viz. S. E. C. T. etc. have Adored or Worshipped G. F. and
his Laws, and that they (G. F. his Party) do make that the obeying G. F. his
Laws, can acquit in Gods sight, etc. which (thou say) thou shall leave to
the Truth in all to Judge.

Ans. The Truth in me, and many more, judges thee a Liar, and a false Accuser
therein, from under which, with all thy Shuffling and wrangling, thou can
never get, for we utterly disown all Adoration or Worship; to any Creature or
Created thing, it ( viz. Worship) being only due to God and Christ, and is only
performed by man and woman in the Holy Spirit.

And in the 14 page T. C. says, I fear the wicked one was so great with you,
to Instigate you to the publication of this, in hope thereby to make a
difference between us, that so you might have your desire on us: But I bless
God I fear not G. F 's whole Black-Guard of Liars, R. R. J. F. and C. T. etc.

Ans. That which he here says, he fears the wicked one Instigated us to the
publication of, was a Paper or private Letter, which was sent to a person in
the Country only to give an Account of him: What he had done, and what he was,
and how that he still remains a person with whom Friends have not Unity; and to
do his Wife Justice, Intimated therein, that she had condemned it, ( viz. her
being Married by a Priest, etc.) But this Account has greatly Angryed the man,
that though he pretends to Unmask others, would not be Unmasked himself, and
therefore calls this Letter or Paper, A Bull of Excommunication, etc. and now
pretends a sear which is altogether groundless and false, viz. That the wicked
one Instigated us thereto, etc. For if we had our desires, it is only your
Eternal well being, and in order thereto, desire thou T.C. may come to a sight
of thy evil, thou did in that Concern, so as thou may Judge it, as she did,
and that you both may be truly sensible of whatsoever else you have done that
is offensive to the Lord, and condemn it, that so you may come to know
Forgiveness at the hand of God, and Peace with him, and have Love unto his
People, and so bear the mark of the Disciples of Christ; and now I shall leave
my Reader to Consider who belongs to the Black-guard of Liars, etc. (as thy
Phrase is.) And of the Incivility of this man, and how full of Enmity he is,
thus to expose his own Wife, and render her deceived, etc. page 9. for her
giving out that Paper, which I am persuaded was from some Inward Sense she had
of that evil she had done, etc. And thou say (Scoffingly) Take a view of all
the wicked Crew of Confessors, etc. But had thou said, take a view of all the
wicked Crew or false Accusers, I think thy Wife might have found thee among
them, notwithstanding my desire is you may live in that Amity as becomes Man
and Wife.

Again, I find T. C. offended at what was Charged upon him in my last, (though
true) from these words of his, viz. But one Reason why I paid that so often
mentioned as Tithes, was as a witness that I was not taught my fear by the
Precept of G. F. etc. nor receive his Traditions for Doctrines, and that I had
not Sacrificed all my Faith, Conscience and Judgment to his Orders, your Idol
to Worship, that as too many both small and great do: But as a Testimony
against your Imposition, etc.

To which I Replied, Is not this an ungodly Insinuation is if all faithful
Friends had sacrificed all their Faith, Conscience and Judgment, etc. and this
Query he calls my Assertion, but takes no notice, that I called upon him (and
now do again) to prove any of the many, both small and great that so do. And I
would have the Reader observe he grants he paid (that so often mentioned) as
Tithes, and tells his reason for it, though in his 19 page he says contrary.
And you further evidence your not doing as you would be done by, by your
Printing in the three several Books, viz. T. C. said he paid Tithes lately,
notwithstanding it was answered to the contrary before in Print. Ans. hereby I
suppose he would have it thought that he did not pay Tithes, though he said to
me in the presence of P. E. that he had lately paid Tithes, etc. and consented
to have it writ and Printed, and took a Copy thereof with him; does not this
man manifest himself a Babel Builder, And like the foolish woman that pulls
down her House with her own Hands. I remember a Saying of Solomon, concerning
which I think may be in a great measure applied to T. C. which is, The foolish
Woman she is clamorous, she is simple and knows nothing; and if T. C. knows
any thing as he ought to know, he practiceth little thereof in his Scribble
against Friends, which also brings to my remembrance the saying of the Prophet
to the sottish Children, They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
knowledge. And in the 12 page says T. C J. F. says, A Remnant are taught not
to buy, or receive any of these men's corrupt Doctrines, (viz. Books) hereby
insinuating Friends should not read what was writ in detection of them, etc. To
which I Answer, I did (and do) say that God has so preserved a Remnant in his
fear, that from him they have received wisdom, and thereby are taught not to
buy or receive any of these men's corrupt words and false Doctrines, but I did
not say Books, that is a piece of Forgery, or something like it, of T.C's to
annex Books, which when he has slyly foisted in, he says, Therefore if you
will try all things, and see for your selves, and not give up all to them, then
you are not of one mind, and so not of the faithful -- etc. and charges us with
Impudence. Answ. Well, it is said, The wicked works a deceitful work; and I
shall leave my Reader to judge whether T. C. has not so done herein, by adding
the word Books, and then like a man fighting with his shadow, or one that
Beats the Air, he talks or writes; but it is like had he not stuffed in or added
that word he would have wanted matter to have quarrelled with, but at adding
and patching, curtailing, transposing, and mangling, and mischievously
misplacing, he is more ready than honest; see his Collection of Testimonies,
and called the third Edition, delivered at Grace Church Street the 26th of the
Fifth Month 82. in his 11 page, where he cites E. B's Works, and how grossly he
abuses him (let the Reader see and judge) by taking a few words in one place,
viz. the 852. p. and leaving off at a Comma, and then go back thirteen or
fourteen lines, and begin at a Semicolon, and leave off at a Semicolon, and
then go forward about 63 pages in Folio, to the 889. and takes a few lines
more; and then back again about 215 page to 594. and all to patch something
together, to make it speak as he would have it, by all which he manifest
himself, to be notwithstanding his pretenses, in that Spirit the Jews were in,
that cried up the Prophets, garnished their Sepulchers and show him that was
the Life of the Prophets, so T. C. cries up J. P. E. B. etc. and is in that
Spirit that would murder the Life that was in them, and is now in and among
Friends.

But I thought not to have spent so much time about his Railing Book, neither
have I taken notice of all I justly might; nor particularly Answered to all
them Assertions, as he (falsely) calls false, but leave them to the unprejudiced
with the Truth and Spirit of it to Judge, who all them Names, he calls me and
R. R. if rightly applied belong to.

And lastly observe in his last page, he seems to Apologize, (as it conscious
to himself) for his harsh or sharp Writing and Expressions, etc. and says,
They are our Weapons, and ground at our Grindstone, and sharpened by our
selves, and as uneasy as Saul 's Armor to David, and no more delightful to
him than a Wife and Children of Fornication, etc. To all which I in short
Answer, If it was true that they were ours, as it is false, it might mitigate
his fault; but let him prove, if he can, we ever called him the Names
aforesaid, Mercinary Reformado's, Inquisitor, Black Guard of Liars, and many
more, and therefore I advise him to do by this Old man, with his evil deeds of
Lying etc. As David did by Readiness Armor, also no longer to delight in a Wife
and Children of Fornication, etc. For the Lord has determined to Plague her,
Whose Cup is full of Abomination and Filthiness of Fornication, and to dash her
Children and Bratts against that Stone, which many now are stumbling at, for
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, and the
hold of every foul Spirit, and Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird, Rev.
18.2. Yea her Plagues shall come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine;
and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; therefore the voice from Heaven is,
come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her Plagues, for her sins has reached unto Heaven, and God has
remembered her Iniquities, (and therefore woe be unto all Babel builders) for
strong is the Lord that judges her, who will not regard the weeping, the
Mourning nor Lamentation of her Merchants, because no man buyeth her
Merchandise any more.

And Thomas, I understand thy Books were given away at the Meeting-house-doors
at Bull and Mouth the 14th of the 5th. Month 1682. which to me is one proof
more of thy great Enmity as well as Folly, in so publicly manifesting thy
Belying and Slandering etc. of me and Friends. So that in the words of the
Prophet I may conclude, Jer. 2.19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and
thy backslidings [and Lies, etc.] shall reprove thee; know therefore and see
that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God,
and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of Hosts.

Thou may take this at present, as an Answer to thy Railing Book, from thy
Belyed and Slandered Friend, J. Field, Junior.

THE END.

