THE ANARCHY OF A LIMITED OR MIXED MONARCHY.

OR, A succinct Examination of the Fundamentals of Monarchy, both in this and
other Kingdoms, as well about the Right of Power in Kings, as of the Original
or Natural Liberty of the People.

A Question never yet disputed, though most necessary in these Times.

LUCAN. Lib. 3.

LIBERTAS ( --) Populi quem Regna cohercent Liberate Perit: --

-- Neque enim libertas gratior ulla est Quam Domino servire bono --

CLAUDIAN.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

blazon or coat of arms HONI ^^IT QVI MAL Y PENSE
The Preface.
WE do but flatter our selves, if we hope ever to be governed without an
Arbitrary power. No: we mistake, the question is not, whethher there shall be
an Arbitrary power; but the only point is, who shall have that Arbitrary power,
whether one man or many: there never was, nor never can be any people governed
without a power of making Laws, and every power of making Laws must be
Arbitrary: for to make a Law according to Law, is contradictio in adjecto: It
is generally confessed that in a Democratie, the Supreme or Arbritrary power of
making Laws is in a multitude; and so in an Aristocracy the like Legislative or
Arbitrary power is in a few, or in the Nobility. And therefore by a necessary
consequence in a Monarchy the same Legislative power must be in one; according
to the rule of Aristotle, who says, Government is in One, or in a Few, or in
Many.

This ancient Doctrine of Government, in these latter days has been strangly
refined by the Romanists, and wonderfully improved since the reformation
especially in point of Monarchy, by an opinion that the people have originally
a power to create several sorts of Monarchy, to limit and compound them with
other forms of Government, at their pleasure.

As for this natural power of the people, they find neither Scripture, reason,
or practice to justify it: for though several Kingdoms have several and
distinct Laws one from an other: yet that does not make several sorts of
Monarchy: Nor does the difference of obtaining the Supreme power, whether by
Conquest, election, succession, or by any other way make different sorts of
Government. It is the difference only of the Authors of the Laws, and not of
the Laws themselves that alters the form of government, that is, whether one
man, or more then one make the Laws.

Since the growth of this new doctrine of the Limitation and Mixture of
Monarchy, it is most apparent that Monarchy has bin crucified (as it were)
between two Thieves, the Pope and the People; for what principles the Papists
make use of for the power of the Pope above Kings; the very same by blotting
out the word Pope, and putting in the word People, the Plebists take up to use
against their Sovereigns.

If we would truly know what Popery is, we shall find by the Laws, and
Statutes of the Realm, that the main, and indeed, the only point of Popery is
the alienating and withdrawing of Subjects from their obedience to their
Prince, to raise Sedition and Rebellion: if Popery and Popularity agree in this
point, The Kings of Christendom that have shaken off the power of the Pope
have made no great bargain of it, if in place of one Lord abroad, they get many
Lords at home within their own Kingdoms.

I cannot but reverence that form of Government which was allowed and made use
of for Gods own people, and for all other Nations. It were impiety, to think,
that God who was careful to appoint Judicial laws for his chosen people
would not furnish them with the best form of government: or to imagine that
the rules given in diverse places in the Gospel by our blessed Savior and his
Apostles for obedience to Kings should now, like Almanacks out of date, be of
no use to us because it is pretended we have a Form of Government now, not
once thought of in those days. It is a shame and scandal for us Christians to
seek the original of Government from the inventions or fictions of Poets,
Orators, Philosophers, and heathen Historians, who all lived thousands of years
after the Creation, and were (in a manner) ignorant of it: and to neglect the
Scriptures which have with more authority most particularly given us the true
grounds and principles of Government.

These Considerations caused me to scruple this modern piece of Politics
touching Limited and Mixed Monarchy, and finding no other that presented us
with the nature and means of Limitation and Mixture, but an anonymus Author:
I have drawn a few brief observations upon the most considerable part of his
Treatise, in which I desire to receive satisfaction from the Author himself if
it may be, according to his promise in his Preface; or if not from him, from
any other for him.

THE ANARCHY OF A LIMITED or MIXED MONARCHY.
THere is scarce the meanest man of the multitude but can now in these days
tell us that the Government of the Kingdom of England is a LIMITED and MIXED
Monarchy: And it is no mervail since all the disputes and arguments of these
distracted times both from the Pulpit and the Press do tend and end in this
Conclusion.

The Author of the Treatise of Monarchy has copiously handled the nature and
manner of Limited and Mixed Monarchy, and is the first and only man (that I
know) has undertaken the task of describing it, others only mention it as
taking it for granted.

Doctor Fern gives the Author of this Treatise of Monarchy this testimony,
that the Mixture of government is more acurately p. 3.
delivered and urged by this Treatise then by the Author of the Fuller Answer.
And in another place Doctor Fern says, he allows his distinction of Monarchy
into Limited and Mixed. p. 13.


I have with some diligence looked over this Treatise, but cannot approve of
these distinctions which he propounds, I submit the reasons of my dislike to
others judgments. I am somewhat confident that his doctrine of Limited and
Mixed Monarchy is an opinion but of yesterday, and of no antiquity, a mere
innovation in policy, not so old as New England, though calculated properly for
that Meridian. For in his first part of the Treatise which concerns Monarchy in
General, there is not one proof, text, or example in Scripture that he has
produced to justify his conceit of Limited and Mixed Monarchy. Neither does he
afford us so much as one passage or reason out of Aristotle, whose books of
Politics, and whose natural reasons are of greatest authority and credit with
all rational men next to the sacred Scripture: Nay, I hope I may affirm, and
be able to prove that Arist. does confute both limited and mixed Monarchy,
howsoever Doctor Fern think these new opinions to be raised upon Arist. p. 6.
principles. As for other Politicians or Historians, either divine or humane,
ancient or modern, our Author brings not one to confirm his opinions, nor does
he, nor can he show that ever any Nation or people were governed by a limited
or mixed Monarchy.

Machivell is the first in Christendom that I can find that writ of a Mixed
Government, but not one syllable of a Mixed Monarchy: he, in his discourses or
disputations upon the Decades of Livy falls so enamored with the Roman
Commonwealth, that he thought he could never sufficiently grace that popular
government, unless he said, there was something of Monarchy in it: yet he was
never so impudent as to say, it was a mixed Monarchy. And what Machivell has
said for Rome, the like has Contarene for Venice; But Bodin has laid open
the errors of both these, as also of Polibius, and some few others that held
the like opinions. As for the Kingdom of England if it have found out a form
of Government (as the Treatise lays it down) of such perfection as never any
other people could; It is both a glory to the Nation, and also to this Author
who has first deciphered it.

I now make my approach to the Book it self: The title is, A Treatise of
Monarchy. The first part of it is, of Monarchy in General: Where first, I
charge the Author, that he has not given us any definition or description of
Monarchy in General: for by the rules of method he should have first defined,
and then divided: for if there be several sorts of Monarchy, then in something
they must agree, which makes them to be Monarchies, and in something they must
disagree and differ which makes them to be several sorts of Monarchies: in the
first place he should have showed us in what they all agreed which must have
been a definition of Monarchy in General, which is the foundation of the
Treatise; and except that be agreed upon, we shall argue upon we know not what;
I press not this maine omission of our Author out of any humor of wrangling,
but because I am confident that had he pitched upon any definition of Monarchy
in General, his own definition would have confuted his whole Treatise: Besides
I find him pleased to give us a handsome definition of Absolute Monarchy, from
whence I may infer, that he knew no other definition that would have fitted all
his other sorts of Monarchy, it concerned him to have produced it, lest it
might be thought there could be no Monarchy but Absolute.

What our Author has omitted, I shall attempt to supply, and leave to the
scanning. And it shall be a real as well as nominall definition of Monarchy. A
Monarchy is the government of one alone. For the better credit of this
definition, though it be able to maintain it self, yet I shall deduce it from
the principles of our Author of the Treatise of Monarchy.

We all know that this word Monarch is compounded of two Greek words, (...) and
(...), is imperare, to govern and rule, (...) signifies one alone. The
understanding of these two words may be picked out of our Author. First, for
government he teaches us, it is Potestatis exercitium, the exercise of a
moral p. 1.
power; next he grants us, that every Monarch (even his limited p. 12.
Monarch) must have the Supreme power of the State in him, so that his power
must no way be limited by any power above his, for then he were not a Monarch,
but a subordinate Magistrate. Here we have a fair confession of a supreme
unlimited power in his limited Monarch: if you will know what he means by
these words supreme power, turn to his 26 page, there you will find, Supreme
power is either Legislative, or Gubernative, and that the legislative power is
the chief of the two, he makes both supreme, and yet one chief: the like
distinction he has before, where he says, The power of Magistracy, in respect
of its degrees, is Nomotheticall or p. 5.
Architectonicall: and Gubernative or Executive: by these words of Legislative,
Nomotheticall and Architectonicall power, in plain English, he understands, a
power of making Laws; and by Gubernative and Executive, a power of putting
those Laws in execution by judging and punishing offenders.

The result we have from hence is, that by the Authors acknowledgment, every
Monarch must have the Supreme power, and that supreme power is, a power to make
laws: and howsoever the Author makes the Gubernative and Executive power a part
of the Supreme power; yet he confesses the Legislative to be chief, or the
highest degree of power, for he does acknowledge degrees of Supreme power; nay,
he afterward teaches us, that the Legislative power is the height of power,
to which the other parts p. 4^.
are subsequent and subservient, if Gubernative be subservient to Legislative,
how can Gubernative power be supreme?

Now let us examine the Authors Limited Monarch by these his own rules, he
tells us, that in a moderated, limited, stinted, conditionate, ^. 12.
legal or allayed Monarchy, (for all these terms he has for it) the Supreme
power must be restrained by some Law according to which this power was given,
and by direction of which this power must act, when in a line before he said,
that the Monarchs power must not be limited by any power above his: yet here he
will have his Supreme power restrained; not limited, and yet restrained; is not
a restraint, a limitation? and if restrained, how is it supreme? and if
restrained by some law, is not the power of that law, and of them that made
that law above his supreme power? and if by the direction of such law only he
must govern, where is the Legislative power which is the chief of Supreme
power? when the Law must rule and govern the Monarch, and not the Monarch the
Law, he has at the most but a Gubernative or Executive power: if his authority
transcends its bounds, if it command p. 14.
beyond the Law, and the Subject is not bound legally to subjection in such
cases, and if the utmost extent of the Law of the land be the measure of the
Limited Monarchs power, and Subjects duty, where shall we find the Supreme
power that Culmen or apex potestatis, p. 16.
that prime (...), which our Author says, must be in every Monarch: The word
(...), which signifies, principality and power, does also signify, principium,
beginning; which does teach us, that by the word Prince, or principality, the
principium or beginning of Government is meant; this, if it be given to the
Law, it robs the Monarch, and makes the Law the primum mobile, and so that
which is but the instrument, or servant to the Monarch, becomes the master.
Thus much of the word (...).

The other word is (...), solus, one alone: the Monarch must not only have the
Supreme power unlimited, but he must have it alone (without any companions.)
Our Author teaches us, He is no p. 15.
Monarch if the Supreme power be not in one. And again he says, if you put the
apex potestatis, or supreme power, in the whole body, or p. 17.
a part of it, you destroy the being of Monarchy.

Now, let us see if his mixed Monarchy be framed according to these his own
principles: First, he says, in a mixed Monarchy p. 25.
the sovereign power must be originally in all three Estates. And again, his
words are, the three Estates are all sharers in the Supreme power -- the
primity of share in the supreme power is in One. Here we find, that he that
told us the supreme power must be in one, will now allow his mixed Monarch but
one share only of the supreme power, and gives other shares to the Estates:
thus he destroies the being of Monarchy by putting the Supreme power or culmen
potestatis, or a part of it in the whole body, or a part thereof, and yet
formerly he confesses, that the power of Magistracy cannot p. 5.
well be divided, for it is one simple thing or indivisable beam of divine
perfection, but he can make this indivisable beam to be divisable into three
shares. I have done with the word (...), solus, alone.

I have dwelt the longer upon this definition of Monarchy, because the
apprehending of it out of the Authors own grounds quite overthrows both his
Monarch Limited by law, and his Monarch Mixed with the States. For to Govern,
is to give a Law to others; and not to have a Lave given to Govern, and limit
him that Governs: And to govern alone is not to have sharers or companions
mixed with the Governor. Thus the two words of which Monarchy is compounded
contradict the two sorts of Monarchy which he pleads for; and by consequence
his whole Treatise, for these two sorts of limited and mixed Monarchy take up
(in a manner) his whole Book.

I will now touch some few particular passages in the Treatise.

Our Author first confesses, it is Gods express ordinance there p. 2.
should be Government, and he proves it by Genesis 3. 16. where God ordained Adam
to rule over his Wife, and her desires were to be subject to his; and as hers,
so all theirs that should come of her. Here we have the original grant of
Government, and the fountain of all power placed in the father of all mankind,
accordingly we find the law for obedience to government given in the terms of
honor thy Father: not only the constitution of power in general, but the
limitation of it to one kind (that is, to Monarchy, or the government of one
alone) and the determination of it to the individual person and line of Adam
are all three ordinances of God. Neither Eve nor her Children could either
limit Adams power, or join others with him in the government, and what was
given unto Adam was given in his person to his posterity. This paternal power
continued monarchical to the Flood, and after the Flood to the confusion of
Babel when Kingdoms were first erected, planted, or scattered over the face of
the world; we find Genesis 10. 11. It was done by Colonies of whole families, over
which, the prime Fathers had supreme power, and were Kings, who were all the
sons or grandchildren of Noah, from whom they derived a fatherly and regal
power over their families. Now if this supreme power was settled and founded by
God himself in the fatherhood, how is it possible for the people to have any
right or title to alter and dispose of it otherwise? what commission can they
show that gives them power either of limitation or mixture? It was Gods
ordinance, that supremacy should be unlimited in Adam, and as large as all the
acts of his will: and as in him, so in all others that have supreme power, as
appears by the judgment and speech of the people to Joshuah when he was
supreme Governor, these are their words to him, All that thou command us
we will do, whosoever he be that does rebel against thy commandment, and will
not hearken unto thy words in all that thou command him, he shall be put to
death: we may not say that these were evil Counselors or flattering
Courtiers of Joshuah, or that he himself was a Tyrant for having such arbitrary
power. Our Author, and all those, who affirm, that power is conveyed to persons
by public consent, are forced to confess, that it is the fatherly power that
first inables a people to make such conveyance, so that admitting (as they
hold) that our Ancestors did at first convey power, yet the reason why we now
living, do submit to such power is, for that our Forefathers every one for
himself, his family, and posterity, had a power of resigning up themselves and
us to a supreme power. As the Scripture teaches us, that supreme power was
originally in the fatherhood without any limitation, so likewise reason does
evince it, that if God ordained that Supremacy should be, that then supremacy
must of necessity be unlimited, for the power that limits must be above that
power which is limited, if it be limited it cannot be supreme: so that if our
Author will grant supreme power to be the ordinance of God, the supreme power
will prove it self to be unlimited by the same ordinance, because a supreme
limited power is a contradiction.

The monarchical power of Adam the Father of all flesh, being by a general
binding ordinance settled by God in him and his posterity by right of
fatherhood, the form of Monarchy must be preferred above other forms, except
the like ordinance for other forms can be showed: neither may men according to
their relations to the form they live under to their affections and judgments
in diverse respects prefer, or compare any other form with Monarchy. The point
that most perplexeth our Author and many others is, that if Monarchy be allowed
to be the ordinance of God, an absurdity would follow, that we should
uncharitably condemn all the co^munities which have not that form, for
violation of Gods ordinance, and pronounce those other powers unlawful: if
those who live under a Monarchy can justify the form they live under to be
Gods ordinance, they are not bound to forbear their own justification, because
others cannot do the like for the form they live under; let others look to the
defense of their own government: if it cannot be proved or showed that any
other form of government had ever any lawful beginning, but was brought in, or
erected by rebellion, must therefore the lawful and just obedience to Monarchy
be denied to be the ordinance of God.

To proceed with our Author, in the 3 page, he says, the Higher Power is Gods
ordinance: That it resideth in One or more, in such or such a way, is from
humane designment, God by no word binds any people to this or that form, till
they by their own act bind themselves. Because the power and consent of the
people in government is the burden of the whole Book, and our Author expects it
should be admitted as a magisteriall postulation without any other proof then a
naked supposition, and since others also maintain that originally Power, was or
now is in the People, and that the first Kings were chosen by the People: they
may not be offended, if they be asked in what sense they understand the word [
People] because this, as many other words has different acceptions, being
sometimes taken in a larger, other whiles in a stricter sense. Literally, and
in the largest sense the word People signifies the whole multitude of mankind,
but figuratively and synecdochecally it notes many times the major part of a
multitude, or sometimes the better, or the richer, or the wiser, or some other
part; and oftentimes a very small part of the people, if there be no other
apparent opposite party has the name of the people by presumption.

If they understand that the entire multitude, or whole people have originally
by nature power to choose a King, they must remember that by their own
principles, and rules by nature all mankind in the world makes but one People,
who they suppose to be born alike to an equal freedom from subjection, and
where such freedom is, there all things must of necessity be common, and
therefore without a joint consent of the whole people of the world, no one
thing can be made proper to any one man, but it will be an injury, and an
usurpation upon the common right of all others; From whence it follows, that
natural freedom being once granted, there cannot be any one man chosen a King
without the universal consent of all the people of the world at one instant,
nemine contradicente. Nay, if it be true that nature has made all men free;
though all mankind should concur in one vote, yet it cannot seem reasonable,
that they should have power to alter the law of nature; for if no man have
power to take away his own life without the guilt of being a murderer of
himself, how can any people confer such a power as they have not themselves
upon any one man, without being accessories to their own deaths; and every
particular man become guilty of being felo de se?

If this general signification of the word People be disavowed, and men will
suppose that the people of particular Regions, or Countries have power and
freedom to choose unto themselves Kings; then let them but observe the
consequence: Since nature has not distinguished the habitable world into
Kingdoms, nor determined what part of a people shall belong to one Kingdom,
and what to another, it follows that the original freedom of mankind being
supposed, every man is at liberty to be of what Kingdom he please, and so
every petty company has a right to make a Kingdom by it self, and not only
every City, but every Village, and every Family; nay, and every particular man
a liberty to choose himself to be his own King if he please, and he were a mad
man that being by nature free would choose any man but himself to be his own
Governor. Thus to avoid the having but of one King of the whole world, we
shall run into a liberty of having as many Kings as there be men in the world,
which upon the matter, is to have no King at all, but to leave all men to their
natural liberty, which is the mischief the Pleaders for natural liberty do
pretend they would most avoid.

But if neither the whole People of the world, nor the whole people of any part
of the world be meant: but only the major part, or some other part, of a part
of the world: yet, still the objection will be the stronger. For besides that
nature has made no partition of the world, or of the people into distinct
Kingdoms, and that without an universal consent at one and the same instant no
partition can be made: yet if it were lawful for particular parts of the world
by consent to choose their Kings, nevertheless, their elections would bind none
to subjection but only such as consented; for the major part never binds, but
where men at first either agree to be so bound, or where a higher power so
commands: Now there being no higher power then nature, but God himself; where
neither nature nor God appoints the major part to bind, their consent is not
binding to any but only to themselves who consent.

Yet, for the present to gratify them so far as to admit that either by
nature, or by a general consent of all mankind, the world at first was divided
into particular Kingdoms, and the major part of the people of each Kingdom
assembled, allowed to choose their King: yet it cannot truly be said that ever
the whole people, or the major part, or indeed any considerable part of the
whole people of any nation ever assembled to any such purpose; For except by
some secret miraculous instinct they should all meet at one time, and place;
what one man, or company of men less then the whole people has power to
appoint either time, or place of elections, where all be alike free by nature?
and without a lawful summons it is most unjust to bind those that be absent.
The whole people cannot summon it self, one man is sick, another is lame, a
third is aged, and a fourth is under age of discretion: all these at some time
or other, or at some place or other might be able to meet, if they might choose
their own time and place, as men naturally free should.

In Assemblies that are by humane politic constitution, the superior power
that ordains such assemblies, can regulate and confine them both for time,
place, persons, and other circumstances: but where there is an equality by
nature, there can be no superior power, there every Infant at the hour it is
born in has a like interest with the greatest and wisest man in the world.
Mankind is like the sea, ever ebbing or flowing, every minute one is borne,
another dies, those that are the people, this minute, are not the people the
next minute, in every instant and point of time there is a variation: no one
time can be indifferent for all mankind to assemble, it cannot but be
mischievous always, at the least to all Infants, and others under age of
discretion; not to speak of women, especially Virgins, who by birth have as
much natural freedom as any other, and therefore ought not to lose their
liberty without their own consent.

But in part to salve this, it will be said that Infants and Children may be
concluded by the votes of their Parents. This remedy may cure some part of the
mischief, but it destroies the whole cause: and at last stumbles upon the true
original of government. For if it be allowed, that the acts of Parents bind
the Children, then farewell the doctrine of the natural freedom of mankind,
where subjection of Children to Parents is natural, there can be no natural
freedom. If any reply, that not all children shall be bound by their Parents
consent, but only those that are under age: It must be considered, that in
nature there is no nonage, if a man be not borne free, she does not assign him
any other time when he shall attain his freedom: or if she did, then Children
attaining that age should be discharged of their Parents contract. So that in
conclusion, if it be imagined that the people were ever but once free from
subjection by nature, it will prove a mere impossibility ever lawfully to
introduce any kind of government whatsoever without apparent wrong to a
multitude of people.

It is further observable, that ordinarily Children and Servants are far a
greater number then Parents and Masters, and for the major part of these to be
able to vote and appoint what government or Governors their Fathers and
Masters shall be subject unto, is most unnatural, and in effect to give the
Children the government over their Parents.

To all this it may be opposed, what need dispute how a People can choose a
King, since there be multitude of examples that Kings have been, and are now
adays chosen by their People? The answer is. 1. The question is not of the
fact, but of the right, whether it have been done by a natural, or by an
usurped right. 2. Many Kings are, and have bin chosen by some small part of a
People, but by the whole, or major part of a Kingdom not any at all. Most have
been elected by the Nobility, Great men, and Princes of the blood, as in
Poland, Denmark, and in Sweden; not by any collective or representative body
of any Nation: sometimes a factious or seditious City, or a mutinous Army has
set up a King, but none of all those could ever prove they had right or just
title either by nature, or any otherwise for such elections: we may resolve
upon these two propositions. 1. That the People have no power or right of
themselves to choose Kings. 2. If they had any such right, it is not possible
for them any way lawfully to exercise it.

You will say, There must necessarily be a right in some body to elect, in case
a King die without an Heir. I answer, No King can die without an Heir as long
as there is any one man living in the world, it may be the Heir may be unknown
to the people, but that is no fault in nature, but the negligence or ignorance
of those whom it concerns. But if a King could die without an Heir, yet the
Kingly power in that case shall not escheat to the whole people, but to the
supreme Heads and Fathers of Families; not as they are the people, but
quatenus, they are Fathers of people, over whom they have a supreme power
divolved unto them after the death of their sovereign Ancestor, and if any can
have a right to choose a King, it must be these Fathers by conferring their
distinct fatherly powers upon one man alone. Chief fathers in Scripture are
accounted as all the people, as all the Children of Israel, as all the
Congregation, as the Text plainly expounds it self, 2 Chr. 1. 2. where Solomon
speaks to All Israel, that is, to the Captains, the Judges, and to every
Governor, the CHIEF OF THE FATHERS, and so the Elders of Israel are expounded
to be the chief of the Fathers of the Children of Israel, 1 King. 8. 1. and the
2 Chr. 5. 2.

If it be objected, That Kings are not now (as they were at the first planting
or peopling of the world) the Fathers of their People, or Kingdoms, and that
the fatherhood has lost the right of governing. An answer is, That all Kings
that now are, or ever were; are, or were either Fathers of their People, or the
Heirs of such Fathers, or Usurpers of the right of such Fathers: It is a truth
undeniable that there cannot be any multitude of men whatsoever, either great,
or small, though gathered together from the several corners and remotest
regions of the world, but that in the same multitude considered by it self,
there is one man amongst them that in nature has a right to be the King of all
the rest, as being the next Heir to Adam: and all the others subject unto him,
every man by nature is a King, or a Subject: the obedience which all Subjects
yield to Kings is but the paying of that duty which is due to the supreme
fatherhood: Many times by the act either of an Usurper himself, or of those
that set him up, the true Heir of a Crown is dispossessed, God using the
ministry of the wickedest men for the removing and setting up of Kings: in such
cases the Subjects obedience to the fatherly power must go along and wait upon
Gods providence who only has right to give, and take away Kingdoms, and
thereby to adopt Subjects into the obedience of another fatherly power:
according to that of Arist: (...). A Monarchy or Kingdom will be a fatherly
government. Ethic. l. 8. c. 12.

However the natural freedom of the People be cried up as the sole means to
determine the kind of government, and the Governors: yet in the close, all the
favorers of this opinion are constrained to grant, that the obedience which is
due to the fatherly power is the true and only cause of the subjection, which
we that are now living give to Kings, since none of us gave consent to
government, but only our Forefathers act and consent has concluded us.

Whereas many confess that government only in the abstract is the ordinance of
God, they are not able to prove any such ordinance in the Scripture, but only
in the fatherly power, and therefore we find the Commandment that enjoynes
obedience to Superiors given in the terms of Honor thy Father: so that not
only the power or right of government, but the form of the power of governing,
and the person having that power, are all the ordinance of God, the first
Father had not only simply power, but power Monarchical as he was a Father
immediately from God; For by the appointment of God as soon as Adam was Created
he was Monarch of the World, though he had no Subjects; for though there could
not be actual government until there were Subjects, yet by the right of
nature it was due to Adam to be Governor of his posterity: though not in act,
yet at least in habit Adam was a King from his Creation: And in the state of
innocence he had been Governor of his Children, for the integrity or
excellency of the Subjects does not take away the order or eminency of the
Governor. Eve was subject to Adam before he sinned, the Angels who are of a
pure nature are subject to God: which confutes their saying, who in disgrace of
civil government or power say it was brought in by sin: Government as to
coactive power was after sin, because coaction supposes some disorder which
was not in the state of innocence: But as for directive power the condition of
humane nature requires it, since civil society cannot be imagined without power
of Government: for although as long as men continued in the state of innocence
they might not need the direction of Adam in those things which were
necessarily and morally to be done, yet things indifferent that depended merely
on their free will might be directed by the power of Adams command.

If we consider the first plantations of the world which were after the
building of Babel when the confusion of tongues was, we may find the division
of the earth into distinct Kingdoms and Countries by several families,
whereof the Sons or Grandchildren of Noah were the Kings or Governors by a
fatherly right, and for the preservation of this power and right in the
Fathers, God was pleased upon several Families to bestow a Language on each by
it self, the better to unite it into a Nation or Kingdom, as appears by the
words of the Text, Genesis 10. These are the Families of the Sons of Noah, after
their generations in their Nations, and by these were the Nations divided in
the earth after the flood: Every one after HIS TONGUE AFTER THEIR FAMILIES in
their Nations.

The Kings of England have been graciously pleased to admit, and accept the
Commons in Parliament as the representees of the Kingdom, yet really and truly
they are not the representative body of the whole Kingdom.

The Commons in Parliament are not the representative body of the whole
Kingdom, they do not represent the King who is the head and principal member
of the Kingdom, nor do they represent the Lords who are the nobler and higher
part of the body of the Realm, and are personally present in Parliament, and
therefore need no representation. The Commons only represent a part of the
lower or inferior part of the body of the People, which are the Freeholders
worth 40s. by the year, and the Commons or Freemen of Cities and Buroughs, or
the major part of them. All which are not one quarter, nay, not a tenth part of
the Commons of the Kingdom, for in every Parish for one Freeholder there may
be found ten that are no Freeholders: and anciently before Rents were improved
there were nothing near so many Freeholders of 40 s. by the year as now are to
be found.

The scope and Conclusion of this discourse and Argument is, that the people
taken in what notion* or sense soever, either diffusively, collectively, or
representatively, have not, nor cannot exercise any right or power of their own
by nature either in choosing or in regulating Kings. But whatsoever power any
people does lawfully exercise, it must receive it from a supreme power on
earth, and practice it with such limitations as that superior power shall
appoint. To return to our Author.

He divides Monarchy into Absolute, Limited.

Absolute Monarchy (says he) is, when the Sovereignty is so p. 6.
fully in one, that it has no limits or bounds under God but his own will.
This definition of his I embrace; And as before I charged our Author for not
giving us a definition of Monarchy in general, so I now note him for not
affording us any definition of any other particular kind of Monarchy but only
of absolute, it may peradventure make some doubt that there is no other sort
but only that which he calls absolute.

Concerning absolute Monarchy, he grants, that such were the ancient Eastern
Monarchies, and that of the Turk and Persian at this day, herein he says very
true. And we must remember him though he do not mention them that the Monarchs
of Judah and Israel must be comprehended under the number of those he calls the
Eastern Monarchies: and truly if he had said that all the ancient Monarchies of
the world had been absolute I should not have quarreld at him, nor do I know
who could have disproved him.

Next it follows, that Absolute Monarchy is, when a people are absolutely
resigned up, or resign up themselves to be governed by the will of One man --
where men put themselves into this utmost degree of subjection by oath and
contract, or are borne and brought unto it by Gods providence. In both these
places he acknowledges there may be other means of obtaining a Monarchy
besides the contract of a Nation, or peoples resigning up themselves to be
governed, which is contrary to what he after says, that the sole p. 12.
mean or root of all Sovereignty is the consent and fundamental contract of a
Nation of men.

Moreover the Author determins, that Absolute Monarchy is a lawful government,
and that men may be borne and brought unto it by Gods providence, it binds
them, and they must abide it because an oath to a lawful thing is obligatory.
This position of his I approve, but his reason does not satisfy, for men are
bound to obey a lawful Governor, though neither they, nor their Ancestors
ever took oath.

Then he proceeds, and confesses that in Romans 13. the power p. 7.
which then was, was Absolute: yet the Apostle not excluding it, calls it Gods
ordinance, and commands subjection to it; so Christ's commands Tribute to be
paid, and paies it himself; yet it was an arbitrary ^ax, the production of an
absolute power. These are the loyal expressions of our Author touching
absolute or arbitrary Monarchy: I do the rather mention these passages of our
Author, because very many in these days do not stick to maintain, that an
arbitrary or Absolute Monarch not limited by law, is all one with a Tyrant, and
to be governed by one man's will, is to be made a slave: It is a question
whether our Author be not of that mind when he says, absolute subjection is
servitude, and thereupon a late friend, to limited Monarchy, affirms in a
discourse upon the question p. 54.
in debate between the King and Parliament, That to make a King by the standard
of Gods word is to make the Subjects slaves for conscience sake. A hard saying,
and I doubt whether he that gives this censure can be excused from blasphemy.
It is a bold speech to condemn all the Kings of Judah for Tyrants, or to say
all their Subjects were slaves. But certainly the man does not know neither
what a Tyrant is, or what a Slave is: indeed the words are frequent enough in
every man's mouth, and our old English Translation of the Bible uses sometimes
the word Tyrant, but the Authors of our new Translation have been so careful
as not once to use the word, but only for the proper name of a man, Act. 19.
9. because they find no Hebrew word in the Scripture to signify a Tyrant, or a
slave. Neither Arist: Bodin, nor Sir Walter Rawleigh (who were all men of deep
judgment) can agree in a definition or description of tyranny, though they
have all three labored in the point. And I make some question whether any man
can possibly describe what a Tyrant is, and then tell me any one man that ever
was in the world that was a Tyrant according to that description.

I return again to our Treatise of Monarchy, where I find three DEGREES of
absolute Monarchy:

1. Where the Monarch, whose Will is the law, does set himself no law to rule
by, but by commands of his own judgment as he thinks fit.

2. When he sets a law, by which he will ordinarily govern, reserving to
himself a liberty to vary from it as often as in his discretion he thinks FIT,
and in this the Sovereign is as free as the former.

3. Where he not only sets a rule, but promises in many cases not to alter it,
but this promise or engagement is an after condiscent or act of grace not
dissolving the absolute Oath of subjection which went before it.

For the first of these three, there is no question but it is a pure absolute
Monarchy; but as for the other two, though he say, they be absolute, yet in
regard, they set themselves limits or laws to govern by, if it please our
Author to term them limited Monarchs, I will not oppose him, yet I must tell him
that his third degree of absolute Monarchy is such a kind, as I believe, never
has been, nor ever can be in the world. For a Monarch to promise and engage in
many cases not to alter a law, it is most necessary that those many cases
should be particularly expressed at the bargain making: Now he that understands
the nature and condition of all humane laws, knows that particular cases are
infinite and not comprehensible within any rules or laws, and if many cases
should be comprehended, and many omitted, yet even those that were comprehended
would admit of variety of interpretations and disputations, therefore our
Author does not, nor can tell us of any such reserved cases promised by any
Monarch.

Again, where he says, An after condiscent or Act of grace does not dissolve
the absolute Oath of subjection which went before it, though in this he speak
true, yet still he seems to insinuate, that an Oath only binds to subjection,
which Oath, as he would have us believe, was at first arbitrary: whereas
Subjects are bound to obey Monarchs though they never take oath of subjection,
as well as children are bound to obey their parents, though they never swear to
do it.

Next, his distinction between the rule of power, and the exercise p. 7.
of it, is vain; for to rule, is to exercise power: for himself says, p. 1.
that Government is, potestatis exercitium, the exercise of a moral power.

Lastly, whereas our Author says, a Monarch cannot break his promise without
sin: let me add, that if the safety of the people, salus populi, require a
breach of the Monarchs promise, then the sin, if there be any, is rather in the
making, then breaking of the promise, the safety of the people is an exception
implied in every Monarchical promise.

But it seems these three degrees of Monarchy do not satisfy our Author, he is
not content to have a Monarch have a law or rule to govern by, but he must have
this limitation or law to be ab p. 12.
externo, from somebody else, and not from the determination of the Monarchs
own will, and therefore he says, by original constitution the society public
confers on one man a power by limited contract, resigning themselves to be
governed by such a law, also before he told p. 13.
us, the sole means of Sovereignty is the consent and fundamental contract,
which consent puts them in their power, which can be no more nor other then is
conveyed to them by such contract of subjection. If the sole means of a limited
Monarchy be the consent and fundamental contract of a Nation, how is it that
he says, A Monarch may be limited by after condiscent? is an after condiscent
all one with a fundamental contract with original and radical constitution?
why ye: he tells us, it is a secundary original constitution, a secundary
original, that is, a second first: And if that condiscent be an act of grace,
does not this condiscent to a limitation come from the free determination of
the Monarchs will? If he either formally, or virtually (as our Author
supposes) desert his absolute or arbitrary power which he has by conquest, or
other right.

And if it be from the free will of the Monarch, why does he say the limitation
must be ab externo? he told us before, that subjection cannot be dissolved or
lessened by an Act of grace coming p. 8.
afterward, but he has better bethought himself, and now he will have acts of
grace to be of two kinds, and the latter kind may amount (as he says) to a
resignation of absolute Monarchy. But can any man believe that a Monarch who by
conquest or other right has an absolute arbitrary power, will voluntarily
resign that absoluteness, and accept so much power only as the people shall
please to give him, and such laws to govern by as they shall make choice of?
can he show that ever any Monarch was so gracious or kind-hearted as to lay
down his lawful power freely at his Subjects feet? is it not sufficient grace
if such an absolute Monarch be content to set down a law to himself by which he
will ordinarily govern, but he must needs relinquish his old independent
commission, and take a new one from his Subjects clogged with limitations?

Finally, I observe, that howsoever our Author speak big of the radical,
fundamental, and original power of the people as the root of all Sovereignty:
yet in a better mood he will take up and be contented with a Monarchy limited
by an after condiscent and act of grace from the Monarch himself.

Thus I have briefly touched his grounds of Limited Monarchy; if now we shall
ask, what proof or examples he has to justify his doctrine, he is as mute as
a fish: only Pythagoras has said it, and we must believe him, for though our
Author would have Monarchy to be limited, yet he could be content his opinion
should be absolute, and not limited to any rule or example.

The maine Charge I have against our Author now remains to be discussed, and
it is this, That instead of a Treatise of Monarchy, he has brought forth a
Treatise of Anarchy, and that by his own confessions shall be made good.

First, he holds, A limited Monarch transcends his bounds if he commands beyond
the law, and the Subject legally is not bound to subjection in such cases.

Now if you ask the Author who shall be judge, whether the Monarch* ^^nscends
his bounds, and of the excesses of the sovereign power. His answer is, There
is an impossibility of constituting p. 16. p. 17.
a judge to determine this last controversy -- I conceive in a limited legal
Monarchy there can be no stated internal Judge of the Monarchs actions, if
there grow a fundamental variance betwixt him and the community -- there can
be no Judge legal and constituted within that form of government. In these
answers it appears, there is no Judge to determine the Sovereigns or the
Monarchs transgressing his fundamental limits: yet our Author is very
cautelous, and supposes only a fundamental variance betwixt the Monarch and
the Community, he is ashamed to put the question home. I demand of him if there
be a variance betwixt the Monarch and any of the meanest person of the
Community, who shall be the Judge? for instance, The King commands me, or gives
judgment against me: I reply, His commands are illegal, and his judgment not
according to law: who must judge? if the Monarch himself judge, then you
destroy the frame of the State, and make it absolute, says our Author, and he
gives his reason: for to define a Monarch to a law, and then to make him judge
of his own deviations from that law, is to absolve him from all law. On the
other side, if any, or all the people may judge, then you put the Sovereignty
in the whole body, or part of it, and destroy the being of Monarchy. Thus our
Author has caught himself in a plain dilemma: if the King be judge, then he
is no limited Monarch. If the people be judge, then he is no Monarch at all. So
farewell limited Monarchy, nay farewell all government if there be no Judge.

Would you know what help our Author has found out for p. 14.
this mischief? First, he says, that a Subject is bound to yield to a
Magistrate, when he cannot, de jure, challenge obedience, if it be in a thing
in which he can possibly without subversion, and in which his act may not be
made a leading case, and so bring on a prescription against p. 17.
public liberty: Again, he says, if the act in which the exorbitance or
transgression of the Monarch is supposed to be, be of lesser moment, and not
striking at the very being of that Government, it ought to be borne by public
patience, rather then to endanger the being of the p. 49.
State. The like words he uses in another place, saying, if the will of the
Monarch exceed the limits of the law, it ought to be submitted to, so it be not
contrary to Gods law, nor bring with it such an evil to our selves, or the
public, that we cannot be accessory to ^ by obeying. These are but fig leaves
to cover the nakedness of our Authors limited Monarch formed upon weak
supposals in cases of lesser moment. For if the Monarch be to govern only
according to law, no transgression of his can be of so small moment if he break
the bounds of law, but it is a subversion of the government it self, and may be
made a leading case, and so bring on a prescription against public liberty, it
strikes at the very being of the Government, and brings with it such an evil,
as the party that suffers, or the public cannot be accessory to: let the case
be never so small; yet if there be illegality in the act, it strikes at the
very being of limited Monarchy which is to be legal: unless our Author will
say, as in effect he does, That his limited Monarch must govern according to
law in great and public matters only, and that in smaller matters which
concern private men or poor persons, he may rule according to his own will. p.
17.


Secondly, our Author tells us, if the Monarchs act of exorbitancy or
transgression be mortal, and such as suffered dissolves the frame of
Government and public liberty, then the illegality is to be set open and
redresment sought by petition, which if failing prevention by resistance ought
to be, and if it be apparent and appeal be made to the consciences of mankind,
then the fundamental laws of that Monarchy must judge and pronounce the
sentence in every man's conscience, and every man (so far as concerns him)
must follow the evidence of Truth in his own soul to oppose or not to oppose,
according as he can in conscience acquit or condemn the act of the governor
or Monarch.

Whereas my Author requires, that the destructive nature of illegal commands
should be set open: Surely his mind is, That each private man in his particular
case should make a public remonstrance to the world of the illegal act of
the Monarch, and then if upon his Petition he cannot be relieved, according to
his desire, he ought, or it is his duty to make resistance. Here I would know,
who can be the judge, whether the illegality be made apparent; it is a maine
point, since every man is prone to flatter himself in his own cause, and to
think it good, and that the wrong or injustice he suffers is apparent, when
other moderate and indifferent men can discover no such thing: and in this case
the judgment of the common people cannot be gathered or known by any possible
means; or if it could, it were like to be various and erroneous.

Yet our Author will have an appeal made to the conscience of all Mankind,
and that being made, he concludes, the fundamental Laws must judge and
pronounce sentence in every man's conscience. Whereas he says, The Fundamental
Laws must judge, I would p. 18.
very gladly learn of him, or of any other for him, what a Fundamental Law
is, or else have but any one Law named me that any man can say is a
Fundamental Law of the Monarchy: I confess he tells us, that the Common Laws
are the foundation, and the Statute Laws are superstructive; yet I think he
dares not say that there p. 38.
is any one branch or part of the Common Law but that it may be taken away by
an Act of Parliament: for many points of the Common Law ( de facto) have, and (
de jure) any point may be taken away. How can that be called Fundamental,
which has and may be removed, and yet the Statute Laws stand firm and
stable? it is contrary to the nature of Fundamental, for the building to stand
when the foundation is taken away.

Besides, the Common Law is generally acknowledged to be nothing else but
common usage or custom, which by length of time only obtaines authority: So
that it follows in time after government, but cannot go before it, and be the
rule to Government, by any original or radical constitution.

Also the Common Law being unwritten doubtful and difficult, cannot but be an
uncertain rule to govern by, which is against the nature of a rule, which is
and ought to be certain*

Lastly, by making the Common Law only to be the foundation, Magna Charta is
excluded from being a Fundamental Law, and also all other Statutes from being
limitations to Monarchy, since the Fundamental Laws only are to be judge.

Truly the conscience of all Mankind is a pretty large Tribunal for the
Fundamental Laws to pronounce sentence in. It is very much that Laws which
in their own nature are dumb, and always need a Judge to pronounce sentence,
should now be able to speak, and pronounce sentence themselves: such a sentence
surely must be upon the hearing of one party only, for it is impossible for a
Monarch to make his defense and answer, and produce his witnesses, in every
man's conscience, in each man's cause, who will but question the legality of the
Monarchs Government? Certainly the sentence cannot but be unjust, where but one
man's tale is heard. For all this the conclusion is, Every man must oppose or
not oppose the Monarch according to his own conscience. Thus at the last,
every man is brought by this Doctrine of our Authors, to be his own judge. And
I also appeal to the consciences of all mankind, whether the end of this be
not utter confusion, and Anarchy.

Yet after all this, the Author says, this power of every man's judging p. 18.
the illegal acts of the Monarch, argues not a superiority of those who judge
over him, who is judged; and he gives us a profound reason for it; his words
are, it is not authorative and civil, but moral residing in reasonable
creatures, and lawful for them to execute. What our Author means by these
words, ( not authorative and civil, but moral) perhaps I understand not,
though I think I do; yet it serves my turn that he says, that resistance
ought to be made, and every man must oppose or not oppose, according as in
conscience he can acquit or condemn the acts of his governor; for if it enable
a man to resist and oppose his Governor, without question it is authorative and
civil, whereas he adds, that moral judgment is residing in reasonable
creatures, and lawful for them to execute; he seems to imply that
authorative, and civil judgment does not reside in reasonable creatures, nor
can be lawfully executed: Such a conclusion fits well with Anarchy, for he that
takes away all Government, and leaves every man to his own conscience, and so
makes him an Independent in State, may well teach that authority resides not in
reasonable creatures, nor can be lawfully executed.

I pass from his absolute and limited Monarchy, to his division or partition
(for he allows no division) of Monarchy into simple and mixed, viz. of a
Monarch, the Nobility and Community.

Where first, observe a doubt of our Authors, whether a firm p. 25.
union can be in a mixture of equality, he rather thinks there must be a
priority of order in one of the three, or else there can be no unity. He must
know that priority of order does not hinder, but that there may be an equality
of mixture if the shares be equal, for he that has the first share may have
no more then the others: so that if he will have an inequality of mixture, a
primity of share will not serve the turn: the first share must be greater or
better then the others, or else they will be equal, and then he cannot call it
a mixed Monarchy where only a primity of share in the Supreme power is in one:
but by his own confession he may better call it a mixed Aristocracy or mixed
Democracy, then a mixed Monarchy, since he tells us, the Houses of Parliament
sure have two parts p. 56.
of the greatest legislative authority, and if the King have but a third part,
sure their shares are equal.

The first step our Author makes, is this, The sovereign power must be
originally in all three; next he finds, that if there be an equality of shares
in three Estates, there can be no ground to denominate a Monarch, and then his
mixed Monarch might be thought but an empty title: Therefore in the third place
he resolves us, that to salve all, A power must be sought out wherewith the
Monarch p. 25.
must be invested, which is not so great as to destroy the mixture, nor so
titular as to destroy the Monarchy, and therefore he conceives it may be in
these particulars.

First, a Monarch in a mixed Monarchy may be said to be a Monarch (as he
conceives) if he be the head and fountain of the power which governs p. 26.
and executes the established Laws, that is, a man may be a Monarch though he
do but give power to others to govern and execute the established Laws, thus
he brings his Monarch one step or peg lower still then he was before: at first
he made us believe his Monarch should have the Supreme power, which is the
legislative; then he falls from that, and tells us, A limited Monarch must
govern according to law only; thus he is brought from the legislative to the
gubernative or executive power only; nor does he stay here, but is taken a hole
lower, for now he must not govern, but he must constitute Officers to govern by
laws; if choosing Officers to govern be governing, then our Author will allow
his Monarch to be a Governor, not else: and therefore he that divided Supreme
power into legislative and gubernative, does now divide it into legislative and
power of constituting Officers for governing by Laws, and this he says is left
to the Monarch. Indeed you have left him a fair portion of power, but are we
sure he may enjoy this? it seems our Author is not confident in this neither,
and some others do deny it him: our Author speaking of the government of this
Kingdom, says, The choice of the Officers p. 38.
is entrusted to the judgment of the Monarch for ought I know, he is not
resolute in the point, but for ought he knows; and for ought I know his Monarch
is but titular, an empty title, certain of no power at all.

The power of choosing Officers only, is the basest of all powers; Aristotle (as
I remember) says, The common people are fit for nothing but to choose Officers,
and to take accounts: and indeed, in all popular governments the multitude
perform this work: and this work in a King puts him below all his Subjects, and
makes him the only Subject in a Kingdom, or the only man that cannot Govern:
there is not the poorest man of the multitude but is capable of some Office or
other, and by that means may sometime or other perhaps govern according to the
laws, only the King can be no Officer but to choose Officers, his Subjects may
all Govern, but he may not.

Next, I cannot see how in true sense our Author can say, his Monarch is the
head, and fountain of power, since his doctrine is, that in a limited Monarchy,
the public society by original constitution confer on one man power, is not
then the public society the head and fountain of power, and not the King?

Again, when he tells us of his Monarch, that both the other States as well
conjunctim as divisim be his sworn subjects, and owe obedience to his commands:
he does but flout his poor Monarch, for why are they called his Subjects and
his Commons? he (without any complement) is their Subject, for they as
Officers, may govern and command according to Law: but he may not, for he must
judge by his judges in Courts of Justice only: that is, he may not judge or
govern at all.

2. As for the second particular, the sole or chief power in capacitating
persons for the Surpeame power. And

3. As to this third particular, the power of convocating such persons, they
are both so far from making a Monarch, that they are the only way to make him
none, by choosing and calling others to share in the Supreme power.

4. Lastly, concerning his Authority being the last and greatest in the
establishing every Act, It makes him no Monarch, except he be sole that has
that Authority: neither his primity of share in the Supreme power, nor his
Authority being last, no, nor his having the greatest Authority does make him a
Monarch, unless he have that Authority alone.

Besides, how can he show that in his mixed Monarchy the Monarchs power is the
greatest? The greatest share that our Author allows him in the legislative
power is a negative voice, and the like is allowed to the Nobility and Commons:
And truly a negative voice is but a base term to express a Legislative
power, a Negative voice is but a privative power, or indeed no power at all to
do any thing, only a power to hinder an Act from being done.

Wherefore I conclude not any of his four, nor all of them put p. 26.
into one person makes the state Monarchical.

This mixed Monarchy just like the limited ends in confusion and destruction of
all Government: you shall hear the Authors confession: That one inconvenience
must necessarily be in all mixed Governments, p. 28.
which I showed to be in limited Governme^ts, there can be no constituted
legal Authorative Judge of the fundamental controversies arising between the
three Estates: If such do rise it is the fatal disease of those Governments
for which no salve can be applied. It is a case beyond the possible provision
of such a Government, of this question there is no legal judge. The accusing
side must make it evident to every man's conscience -- the appeal must be to
the community, as if there were no Government, and as by evidence consciences
are convinced they are bound to give their assistance. The wit of man cannot
say more for Anarchy.

Thus have I picked out the flowers out of his Doctrine about limited Monarchy,
and presented them with some brief Annotations, it were a tedious work to
collect all the learned contradictions, and ambiguous expressions that accur in
every page of his platonique Monarcy, the book has so much of fancy that it
is a better piece of Poetry then Policy.

Because many may think that the maine doctrine of limited and mixed Monarchy
may in it self be most authentical and grounded upon strong and evident
reason; although our Author perhaps have failed in some of his expressions, and
be liable to exceptions. Therefore I will be bold to enquire whether Aristotle
could find either reason or example of a limited or mixed Monarchy, and the
rather because I find our Author altogether insists upon a rational way of
justifying his opinion. No man I think will deny but that Aristotle was
sufficiently curious in searching out the several forms of Commonwealths and
Kingdoms, yet I do not find that he ever so much as dreamed of either a
limited or mixed Monarchy: Several other sorts of Monarchies he reckons up. In
the third book of his Politiques he spends three whole Chapters together upon
the several kinds of Monarchy.

First, in his fourteenth Chapter he mentions four kinds of Monarchy.

The Laconique or Lacedemonian. The Barbarique. The Aesymneticall. The
Heroique.
The Laconique or Lacedemonian King (says he) had only Supreme power when he
was out of the bounds of the Lacedemonian territories, then he had absolute
power, his Kingdom was like to a perpetual Lord General of an Army.

The Barbarique King (says Aristotle) had a power very near to tyranny, yet
they were lawful and paternall, because the Barbarians are of a more servile
nature then the Grecians, and the Asiatiques then the Europeans, they do
willingly without repining live under a masterly Government, yet their
government is stable, and safe because they are paternall and lawful
Kingdoms, and their guardes are Royal and not tyrannical, for Kings are
guarded by their own Subjects, and Tyrants are guarded by strangers.

The Aesymneticall King (says Arist.) in old time in Greece, was an elective
Tyrant, and differed only from the Barbarian Kings in that he was elective and
not paternall, these sorts of Kings because they were tyrannical were
Masterly: but because they were over such as voluntarily elected them they were
Regal.

The Heroique were those (says Aristotle) which flourished in the heroical
times, to whom the people did willingly obey, and they were paternall and
lawful, because these Kings did deserve well of the multitude either by
teaching them arts, or by warring for them, or by gathering them together when
they were dispersed, or by dividing lands amongst them: These Kings had
Supreme power in war, in sacrifices, in Judicature.

These four sorts of Monarchy has Aristotle thus distinguished, and after
sums them up together, and concludes his Chapter as if he had forgot himself,
and reckons up a fifth kind of Monarchy, which is says he, when one alone has
Supreme power of all the rest, for as there is a domestical Kingdom of one
house, so the Kingdom of a City, or of one or many Nations is a family.

These are all the sorts of Monarchy that Aristotle has found out, and he has
strained hard to make them so many: First for his Lacedemonian King, himself
confesses that he was but a kind of military Commander in war, and so in
effect no more a King then all Generals of Armies: And yet this No-King of his
was not limited by any Law, nor mixed with any companions of his Government,
when he was in the wars out of the confines of Lacedemon, he was as Aristotle
styles him (...), of full and absolute command, no Law, no companion to govern
his Army but his own will.

Next for Aristotle's Aesymneticall King, it appears he was out of date in
Aristotle's time, for he says, he was amongst the ancient Greeks (...).
Aristotle might well have spared the naming him (if he had not wanted other
sorts) for the honor of his own Nation: for he that but now told us the
Barbarians were of a more servile nature then the Graecians, comes here and
tells us that these old Greek Kings were elective tyrants. The Barbarians did
but suffer tyrants in show, but the old Graecians choose tyrants indeed: which
then must we think were the greater slaves, the Greeks or the Barbarians? Now
if these sorts of Kings were tyrants, we cannot suppose they were limited
either by Law, or joined with companions: Indeed Arist. says some of these
tyrants were limited to certain times and actions, for they had not all their
power for term of life, nor could meddle but in certain businesses, yet
during the time they were tyrants, and in the actions whereto they were
limited, they had absolute power to do what they list, according to their own
will, or else they could not have been said to be tyrants.

As for Aristotle's Heroicke King, he gives the like note upon him that he did
upon the Aesymnet, that he was in old time (...) in the heroic times. The
thing that made these heroical Kingdoms differ from other sorts of Kingdoms,
was only the means by which the first Kings obtained their Kingdoms, and not
the manner of Government, for in that they were as absolute as other Kings were
without either limitation by law, or mixture of companions.

Lastly as for Arist. Barbaricke sort of Kings, since he reckoned all the world
Barbarians except the Graecians, his Barbaricke King must extend to all other
sorts of Kings in the world, besides those of Greece, and so may go under
Aristotle's fifth sort of Kings, which in general comprehends all other sorts,
and is no special form of Monarchy.

Thus upon a true account it is evident that the five several sorts of Kings,
mentioned by Aristotle are at the most but different, and accidental means of
the first obtaining or holding of Monarchies; and not real or essential
differences of the manner of Government, which was always absolute, without
either limitation or mixture.

I may be thought perhaps to mistake, or wrong Aristotle in questioning his
diversities of Kings: but it seems Aristotle himself was partly of the same
mind, for in the very next Chapter when he had better considered of the point,
he confessed that to speak the truth, there were almost but two sorts of
Monarchies worth the considering, that is his first or Laconique sort, and his
fifth or last sort where one alone has Supreme power over all the rest: thus
he has brought his five sorts to two. Now for the first of these two, his
Lacedemonian King he has confessed before, that he was no more then a
Generalissimo of an Army, and so upon the matter no King at all; and then there
remains only his last sort of Kings, where one alone has the Supreme power.
And this in substance is the final resolution of Aristotle himself, for in his
sixteenth Chapter where he delivers his last thoughts touching the kinds of
Monarchy, he first discharges his Laconick King from being any sort of
Monarchy: and then gives us two exact rules about Monarchy, and both these are
point blanke against limited and mixed Monarchy, therefore I shall propose them
to be considered of, as concluding all Monarchy to be absolute and arbitrary.

1. The one rule is, that he that is said to be a King according to Law, Arist.
pol. l. 3. c. 16.
is no sort of government or Kingdom at all: (...).

2. The second rule is, that a true King is he that rules all according to his
own will, (...).

This latter frees a Monarch from the mixture of partners or sharers in
government, as the former rule does from limitation by laws.

Thus in brief I have traced Aristotle in his crabbed and broken passages
touching diversities of Kings, where first he finds but four sorts, and then
he stumbles upon a fifth, and in the next Chapter contents himself only with
two sorts of Kings, but in the Chapter following concludes with one, which is
the true perfect Monarch who rules all by his own will: In all this we find
nothing for a regulated or mixed Monarchy, but against it.

Moreover whereas the Author of the treatise of Monarchy affirms it as a prime
principle that all Monarchies (except that of the Jews) depend upon humane
designment, when the consent of a society of men, and a fundamental contract
of a Nation, by original or radical constitution confers power. He must know
that Arist. searching into the original of government shows himself in this
point a better Divine then our Author, and as if he had studied the book of
Genesis, teaches that Monarchies fetch their petigree from the right of
fathers, and not from the gift or contract of people, his words may thus be
englished. At the first Cities were Governed by Kings, and so even to this day
are Nations also: for such as were under Kingly Government did come together,
for every house is governed by a King who is the eldest, and so also Colonies
are governed for kindred sake. And immediately before he tells us that the first
society made of many houses is a village, which naturally seems to be a
Colonie of a house, which some call fosterbrethren, or Children, and Childrens
Children.

So in conclusion we have gained Aristotle's judgment in three maine, and
essential points.

1. A King according to Law makes no kind of Government. 2. A King must rule
according to his own will. 3. The original of Kings, is from the right of
Fatherhood.
What Aristotle's judgment was two thousand years since, is agreeable to the
doctrine of the great modern politician Bodin: Hear him touching limited
Monarchy; Unto Majesty or Sovereignty (says he) belongs an absolute power
not subject to any Law -- chief power given unto a Prince with condition is not
properly Sovereignty or power absolute: Except such conditions annexed to the
Sovereignty, be directly comprehended within the laws of God and nature. --
Albeit by the sufferance of the King of England, controversies between the King
and his people are sometimes determined by the high Court of Parliament, and
sometimes by the Lord Chief Justice of England: yet all the estates remain in
full subjection to the King, who is no ways bound to follow their advise,
neither to consent to their requests. -- It is certain that the laws,
privileges, and grants of Princes have no force but during their life, if they
be not ratified by the express consent, or by sufferance of the Prince
following, especially Privileges. -- Much less should a Prince be bound unto
the Laws he makes himself, for a man may well receive a Law from an other man,
but impossible it is in nature for to give a Law unto himself, no more then it
is to command a man's self in a matter depending of his own will. The Law
says, Nulla obligatio consistere potest, quae a voluntate promittentis statum
capit. The Sovereign Prince may derogate unto the laws that he has promised
and sworn to keep, if the equity thereof be ceased, and that of himself without
the consent of his subjects, -- the Majesty of a true Sovereign Prince is to
be known when the estates of all the people assembled in all humility present
their requests and supplications to their Prince, without having power in any
thing to command, determine or give voice, but that that which it pleases the
King to like, or dislike, to command or bid is holden for Law: wherein they
which have written of the duty of Magistrates have deceived themselves in
maintaining that the power of the people is greater then the Prince: a thing
which causes often true subjects to revolt from their obedience to their Prince,
and ministers matter of great troubles in Commonwealths, of which their
opinion there is neither reason nor ground, for if the King be subject unto the
assemblies and decrees of the people, he should neither be King nor Sovereign,
and the Commonwealth neither Realm nor Monarchy, but a mere Aristocracy -- So
we see the principal point of Sovereign Majesty and absolute power to consist
principally in giving Laws unto the Subjects in general without their consent.
Bodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 8.

To confound the state of Monarchy, with the popular or Aristocraticall estate
is a thing impossible, and in effect incompatible, and such as cannot be
imagined for Sovereignty being of it self indivisible, how can it at one and
the same time be divided betwixt one Prince, the Nobility, and the people in
Common? The first mark of Sovereign Majesty is to be of power to give Laws,
and to command over them unto the subjects, and who should those subjects be
that should yield their obedience to the Law, if they should have also power to
make the Laws? who should he be that could give the Law? being himself
constrained to receive it of them unto whom himself gave it? so that of
necessity we must conclude, that as no one in particular has the power to make
the Law in such a state, that then the state must needs be a state popular. --
Never any Commonwealth has been made of an Aristocracie, and popular estate,
much less of the three estates of a Commonweal -- such states wherein the
rights of Sovereignty are divided, are not rightly to be called Common-weals,
but rather the corruption of Common-weals, as Herodotus has most briefly, but
truly written -- Commonweals which change their state, the Sovereign right
and power of them being divided find no rest from Civil wars and broiles, till
they again recover some one of the three forms, and the Sovereignty be wholly
in one of the states or other -- where the rights of the Sovereignty are
divided betwixt the Prince and his Subjects, in that confusion of state there
is still endless stirs and quarrels for the superiority, until that some one,
some few or altogether have got the Sovereignty. Id. lib. 2. c. 1.

This Judgment of Bodins touching Limited and Mixed Monarchy is not according
to the mind of our Author, nor yet of the Observator, who uses the strength of
his wit to overthrow Absolute and Arbitrary Government in this Kingdom, and
yet in the main body of his discourse lets fall such truths from his pen as
give a deadly wound to the Cause he pleads for, if they be indifferently
waighed and considered, I will not pick a line or two here and there to wrest
against him, but will present a whole Page of his Book, or more together, that
so we may have an entire prospect upon the Observators mind, Without society
(says the Observator) men could not live, without Laws men could not be
sociable; and without Authority somewhere to judge according to Law, Law was
vain: It was soon therefore provided, that Laws according to the dictate of
reason should be ratified by common consent: when it afterward appeared, that
man was yet subject to unnatural destruction by the tyranny of entrusted
Magistrates, a mischief almost as fatal as to be without all Magistracy. How
to provide a wholesome remedy therefore was not so easy to be invented, it was
not difficult to invent Laws for the limiting of Supreme Governors, but to
invent how those laws should be executed, or by whom interpreted, was almost
impossible, Nam quis Custodiet ipsos Custodes, to place a Superior above a
Supreme was held unnatural; yet what a lifelesse thing would Law be without
any Judge to determine and force it? If it be agreed upon, that limits should
be prefixed to Princes and Judges to decree according to those limits, yet an
other inconvenience will presently affront us: for we cannot restrain Princes
too far, but we shall dis-able them from some good: long it was ere the world
could extricate it self out of all these extremities, or find out an orderly
means whereby to avoid the danger of unbounded Prerogative on this hand, and to
excessive liberty on the other, and scarce has long experience yet fully
satisfied the minds of all men in it. In the Infancy of the world when man was
not so artificial and obdurate in cru^lty and oppression as now, and policy
most rude. Most Nations did choose rather to subject themselves to the mere
discretion of their Lords, then rely upon any limits, and so be ruled by
Arbitrary Edicts then written Statutes. But since tyranny being more exquisite,
and policy more perfect, especially where learning and Religion flourish, few
Nations will endure the thraldom which usually accompanies unbounded and
unconditionate Royalty: Yet long it was ere the bounds and conditions of
Supreme Lords was so wisely determined or quietly conserved as now they are:
for at first when as Euphori, Tribuni, Curatores, etc. were erected to poise
against the seal of Sovereignty, much blood was shed about them, and States
were put into new broiles by them, and some places the remedy proved worse then
the disease. In all great distresses the body of the people were ever
constrained to rise, and by force of the Major party to put an end to all
intestine strifes, and make a redress of all public grievances: But many
times calamities grew to a strange height before so cumbersome a body could be
raised, and when it was raised, the motions of it were so distracted and
irregular, that after much spoil and effusion of blood, sometimes only one
tyranny was exchanged for another: till some was invented to regulate the
motions of the peoples molimenous body. I think arbritrary rule was most safe
for the world: But Now since most Countries have sound an art and peaceable
order for public Assemblies, whereby the people may assume its own power to
do it self right without disturbance to it self or injury to Princes: He is
very unjust that will oppose this art or order. That Princes may not be Now
beyond all limits and laws, nor yet to be tied upon those limits by any private
parties: The whole community in its underived Majesty shall convene to do
justice, and that the convention may not be without intelligence, certain
times and places, and forms, shall be appointed for it reglement, and that the
vastness of its own bulk may not breed confusion, by virtue of election and
representation, a few shall act for many, the wise shall consent for the
simple, the virtue of all shall redound to some, and the prudence of some shall
redound to all: and surely as this admirably composed Court which is now called
a Parliament, is more regularly and orderly formed then when it was called
mickle Synod of Wittena* gemot, or when this real body of the people did
throng together at it: so it is not yet perhaps without some defects which by
art and policy might receive farther amendment: some divisions have sprung up
of late between both Houses, and some between the King and both Houses by
reason of incertainty of jurisdiction, and some Lawyers doubt how far the
Parliament is able to create new forms and precedents, and has a jurisdiction
over it self: All these doubts would be solemnly solved: But in the first place
the true privileges of Parliament belonging not only to the being and efficacy
of it, but to the honor and complement of it would be clearly declared, for the
very naming of privileges of Parliament, as if they were chimeras to the
ignorant sort, and utterly unknown unto the learned, has been entertained with
scorn since the beginning of this Parliament.

In this large passage taken out of the Observator which concerns the
original of all Government, two notable Propositions may be principally
observed.

First, our Observator confesses arbitrary or absolute government to be the
first, and the safest government for the world.

Secondly, he acknowledges that the jurisdiction is uncertain and the
privileges not clearly declared of limited Monarchy.

These two evident truths delivered by him, he labors mainely to disguise. He
seems to insinuate that arbitrary Government was but in the infancy of the
World, for so he terms it, but if we enquire of him, how long he will have
this infancy of the world to last, he grants it continued above three thousand
years, which is an unreasonable time for the world to continue under age: for
the first opposers he does find of arbitrary power were the ephori, tribuni,
curatores, etc. The ephori were above three thousand years after the Creation,
and the tribuni were later; as for his curatores I know not whom he means,
except the Master of the Court of Wards. I cannot English the word curator
better. I do not believe that he can show that any curatores or et caeteras
which he mentions were so ancient as the ephori. As for the tribuni he mistakes
much if he thinks they were erected to limit and bound Monarchy, for the state
of Rome was at the least Aristocraticall (as they call it) if not popular, when
tribunes of the people were first hatched. And for the Ephori, their power did
not limit or regulate Monarchy, but quite take it away; for a Lacedemonian King
in the judgment of Aristotle was no King indeed, but in name only, as
Generalissimo of an Army, and the best politicians reckon the Spartan
Commonwealth to have been Aristocraticall and not Monarchical, and if a
limited Monarchy cannot be found in Lacedemon, I doubt our Observator will
hardly find it any where else in the whole World; and in substance he
confesses as much when he says, Now most Countries have found out an art and
peaceable order for public Assemblies, as if it were a thing but new done,
and not before, for so the word Now does import.

The observator in confessing the Jurisdiction to be incertaine and the
privileges undetermined of that Court that should bound and limit Monarchy,
does in effect acknowledge there is no such Court at all: for every Court
consists of Jurisdictions and Privileges, it is these two that create a Court,
and are the essentials of it: If the admirably composed Court of Parliament
have some defects which may receive amendment, as he says, and if those
defects be such as cause divisions both between the Houses, and between the
King and both Houses, and these divisions be about so maine a matter as
Jurisdictions, and Privileges, and power to create new Privileges, all which
are the fundamentals of every Court, (for until they be agreed upon, the act
of every Court may not only be uncertain, but invalid, and cause of tumults
and sedition:) And if all these doubts and divisions have need to be solemnly
solved, as our Observator confesses: Then he has no reason at all to say that
Now the conditions of Supreme Lords are wisely determined and quietly
conserved, or that Now most Countries have found out an art, and peaceable
order for public affairs, whereby the people may resume its own power to do
it self right without injury unto Princes, for how can the underived Majesty
of the people by assuming its own power, tell how to do her self right, or how
to avoid doing injury to the Prince, if her jurisdiction be uncertain, and
Privileges undetermined?

He tells us Now most Countries have found an art, and peaceable order for
public Assemblies: and to the intent, that Princes may not be Now beyond all
limits and Laws, the whole community in it is underived Majesty shall convene to
do Justice. But he does not name so much as one Country or Kingdom that has
found out this art, where the whole Community in its underived Majesty did ever
convene to do Justice. I challenge him or any other for him to name but one
Kingdom that has either Now or heretofore found out this art or peaceable
order; We do hear a great rumor in this age of moderated and limited Kings,
Poland, Sweden, and Denmark are talked of for such; and in these Kingdoms, or
no where is such a moderated Government, as our Observator means, to be found.
A little enquiry would be made into the manner of the Government of these
Kingdoms, for these Northern people, as Bodin observes, breathe after liberty.

First for Poland, Boterus says, that the Government of it, is elective
altogether, and represents rather an Aristocracie then a Kingdom: the
Nobility who have great authority in the Diets, choosing the King, and limiting
His Authority, making His Sovereignty but a slavish Royalty: these diminutions
of regality began first by default of King Lewis, and Jagello, who to gain the
succession in the Kingdom contrary to the Laws, one for his daughter, and the
other for his son, departed with many of his Royalties and prerogatives, to buy
the voices of the Nobility. The French Author of the book called the Estates of
the world, does inform us that the Princes Authority was more free, not being
subject to any Laws, and having Absolute Power, not only of their estates, but
also of life, and death: Since Christian Religion was received, it began to be
moderated, first by holy admonitions of the Bishops and Clergy: and then by
services of the Nobility in war: Religious Princes gave many Honors, and many
liberties to the Clergy and Nobility, and quit much of their Rights, the which
their successors have continued. The superior dignity is reduced to two
degrees, that is, the Palatinate and the Chastelleine, for that Kings in former
times did by little and little call these men to public consultations,
notwithstanding that they had absolute power to do all things of themselves, to
command, dispose, recompense and punish of their own motions: since, they have
ordained that these dignities should make the body of a Senate. The King does
not challenge much right and power over His Nobility, nor over their estates,
neither has he any over the Clergy. And though the Kings Authority depends on
the Nobility for His election, yet in many things it is absolute after he He is
chosen: He appoints the Diets at what time and place He pleases, He chooses
Lay Councelors, and nominates the Bishops and whom He will have to be His Privy
Counsel: He is absolute disposer of the Revenews of the Crown: He is absolute
establisher of the decrees of the Diets: it is in His power to advance and
reward whom He pleases He is Lord immediate of His Subjects, but not of His
Nobility: He is Sovereign Judge of His Nobility in criminal causes. The power
of the Nobility daily increases, for that in respect of the Kings election
they neither have law, rule, nor form to do it, neither by writing nor
tradition. As the King governs His Subjects which are immediately His with
absolute Authority, so the Nobility dispose immediately of their vassals, over
whom every one has more then a regal power, so as they entreat them like
slaves. There be certain men in Poland who are called EARTHLY MESSENGERS or
Nuntios, they are as it were Agents of Jurisdictions, or circles of the
Nobility: these have a certain Authority, and as Boterus says, in the time of
their Diets these men assemble in a place near to the Senate House, where they
choose two Marshals by whom (but with a tribune-like authority) they signify
unto the Counsel what their requests are. Not long since their authority and
reputation grew so mightily, that they now carry themselves as heads and
governors, rather then officers and ministers of the public decrees of the
State: One of the Counsel refused his Senators place to become one of these
officers. Every Palatine, the King requiring it calls together all the Nobility
of His Palatinate, where having propounded unto them the matters whereon they
are to treat, and their will being known, they choose four or six out of the
company of the EARTHLY MESSENGERS, these deputies meet and make one body, which
they call the order of Knights.

This being of late years the manner and order of the government of Poland, it
is not possible for the Observator to find among them that the whole community
in its underived Majesty does ever convene to do Justice: nor any election or
representation of the Community, or that the people assume its own power to do
it self right. The EARTHLY MESSENGERS though they may be thought to represent
the Commons, and of late take much upon them, yet they are elected and chosen
by the Nobility as their agents and officers. The Community are either vassals
to the King, or to the Nobility, and enjoy as little freedom or liberty as any
Nation. But it may be said perhaps, that though the Community do not limit the
King, yet the Nobility do, and so he is a limited Monarchy. The Answer is, that
in truth though the Nobility at the choosing of their King do limit his power,
and do give him an oath: yet afterward they have always a desire to please
him and to second his will, and this they are forced to do to avoid discord,
for by reason of their great power they are subject to great dissentions, not
only among themselves, but between them and the order of Knights which are the
earthly messengers: yea the Provinces are at discord one with another: and as
for Religion, the diversity of Sects in Poland bred perpetual jars and hatred
among the people, there being as many Sects as in Amsterdam it self, or any
popular government can desire. The danger of sedition is the cause, that though
the Crown depends on the election of the Nobility; yet they have never rejected
the Kings successor, or transferred the Realm to any other family but once,
when deposing Ladislaus for his idleness (whom yet afterward they restored)
they elected Wencelaus King of Bohemia. But if the Nobility do agree to hold
their King to his conditions, which is not to conclude any thing but by the advice of his Counsel of Nobles, nor to choose any wife without their leaves,
then it must be said to be a Commonweal, not a Royalty, and the King but only
the mouth of the Kingdom, or as Queen Christina complained that Her Husband
was but the shadow of a Sovereign.

Next, if it be considered how the Nobility of Poland came to this great power;
it was not by any original contract, or popular convention, for it is said
they have neither Law, rule nor form written or unwritten for the election of
their King; they may thank the Bishops and Clergy: for by their holy
admonitions and advise, good and Religious Princes to show their piety were
first brought to give much of their Rights and Privileges to their Subjects,
devout Kings were merely cheated of some of their Royalties. What power soever
general Assemblies of the Estates claim, or exercise over and above the bare
naked act of Counselling, they were first beholding to the Popish Clergy for
it: it is they first brought Parliaments into request and power: I cannot find
in any Kingdom but only where Popery has been, that Parliaments have been of
reputation, and in the greatest times of Superstition they are first mentioned.

As for the Kingdom of Denmark I read that the Senators who are all chosen
out of the Nobility, and seldom exceed the number of 28, with the chief of the
Realm do choose their King. They have always in a manner set the Kings eldest
Son upon the Royal Throne. The Nobility of Denmark withstood the Coronation
of Frederick 1559, till he swear not to put any Noble man to death until he
were judged of the Senate, and that all Noble men should have power of life and
death over their Subjects without appeal, and the King to give no office
without consent of the Council. There is a Chancelour of the Realm before
whom they do appeal from all the Provinces and Islands, and from him to the
King himself. I hear of nothing in this Kingdom that tends to popularity; no
Assembly of the Commons, no elections, or representation of them.

Sweden is governed by a King heretofore elective, but now made hereditary in
Gustavus time: it is divided into Provinces: an appeal lies from the Vicount
of every teritory to a Sovereign Judge called a Lamen, from the Lamens to the
Kings Council, and from this Council, to the King himself.

Now let the Observator bethink himself, whether all, or any of these three
Countries have found out any art at all whereby the people ^r community may
assume its own power, if neither of these Kingdoms have, most Countries have
not, nay none have. The people or Community in these three Realms are as
absolute vassals as any in the world; the regulating power if any be, is in the
Nobility: Nor is it such in the Nobility as it makes show for. The election of
Kings is rather a formality then any real power, for they dare hardly choose
any but the Heir, or one of the blood Royal: if they should choose one among
the Nobility, it would prove very factious; if a stranger, odious, neither
safe. For the Government though the Kings be sworn to reign according to the
Laws, and are not to do any thing without the consent of their Council in
public affairs: yet in regard they have power both to advance and reward whom
they please, the Nobility and Senators do comply with their Kings, and Boterus
concludes of the Kings of Poland, who seem to be most moderated, that such as
is their valor, dexterity, and wisdom, such is their Power, Authority, and
Government. Also Bodin says, that these three Kingdoms are States changeable
and uncertain, as the Nobility is stronger then the Prince, or the Prince then
the Nobility, and the people are so far from liberty, that he says, Diverse
particular Lords exact not only customs, but tributes also, which are
confirmed and grow stronger, both by long prescription of time, and use of
Judgments.

The End.

