The Equallity of the Ministry plainly described, both by Scriptures Fathers,
and Councels.

Laid open to this present Parliament, to stop the mouths of all gayne-sayers
whatsoever.

By D.F. Minister.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the year of our Redemption. 1641.

The Equallity of the Ministry described by Scriptures, Fathers and Councels.
Laid open to this present Parliament to stop the mouths of all Gayn-sayers.
THe Lord has ordained that there should be one Bishop or Pastor (at the
least) president over every Congregation, or Flock, are of equal authority in
their several charges, and in the general government of the Church T. C. 1
Book, page 22. and 2. book 1. part, page 515.

They maintain contrary unto this, these two, viz.

1. That one may have two or mo charges, and be absent from them, as their
Dispensations and practice do prove. 2. That one Minister may have a
sovereign and Lordship over his fellow Ministers, which both being disprooved,
the former assertion will remain still sure.
Reasons against the 1. proposition.
1. One man may not have mo Charges then he is able in any measure to discharge
the duty, that is belonging unto mo flocks then one, seeing he cannot preach
unto them, both in season and out of season: therefore no man may have more
Charges then one, as I shall make it appear.

2. That which makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil, cannot be
lawful: for one to have mo Charges then one, makes open entrance for the
enemy to spoil, for the Wolf watches to devour and destroy, whilst the
Shepherd is absent: Therefore no man may have mo Charges then one, and
therefore it is unlawful.

3. That which has neither Precept nor President for it, either in Gods Word,
or any approved Writer, but only from Antichrist, is unlawful: But such is the
having of more Charges then one: Therefore it is accounted and esteemed
unlawful.

4. That which declares a Minister to be more desirous of the fleece, then to
profit the flock, that same is unlawful: But such is the having of mo Charges
then one, for were it not for the gain, they would think one a burden as
heavy as they could bear: therefore it is unlawful.

5. All the reasons that be alleged in this book, against Non-residence, are
forcible to this purpose, for if he may not be Non-resident, he may not have mo
Charges, unless he be willing to be quartred, that every Charge may have a
piece of him.

Hooper upon 8 command.
He reckons them among Thieves, and their action to be theevery, condemned by
that Commandment.

Therefore, if one man cannot in any tolerable measure discharge mo Charges
then one; Conclusion.
if to have mo makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil; if it have
neither precept, nor president for it, but only in the Kingdom of Antichrist;
if it declare the practice to be more desirous of the Fleece, then to feed the
Flock; if all the reasons that condemn Non-residency be against it: lastly,
if it be plain Theevery, then must it needs follow, that one may not have two,
or mo Charges.

Their objections, such as they be, shall be set down, and the answers to them
hereafter. The second proposition that they hold and reasons against it.


The second propostion that they hold, is thus.

One Minister may have a sovereign authority and Lord over his fellow
ministers: is thus disprooved.

1. They that have their Commission indifferently given them, without
difference between one and another, are of equal authority, and may not be one
over another: But such is the Commission of all Gods Ministers indifferently,
as appears Mat. 28.19.20. Therefore they are of equal authority, and may not
have any dominion one over another

2. That which Christ has directly forbidden, that one Minister should have
dominion over another Matt. 20.25. Luke 22.25. Therefore one Minister may not
have superiority or dominion over another.

3. They that may not be Lords over the people of God, may much less be Lords
over the Ministers; for the Ministers be (in respect of the Ministry) above
the people: But a Minister may not be Lordly over Gods people (as is testified
by him on whom they would father the greatest Lordlinesse) 1. Peter 5.3.
Therefore one Minister may not be Lord, or have superiority over another.

4. It is ordained, Cypria^ (...) 1: Epist. 3.
and is equal and right, that every man's cause be heard, where the fault was
committed, and it is meet to handle the matter there where they may have both
the Accusers and witnesses of the fault, which shows that every Minister had
authority over his own flock, and no other to meddle

5. Bishops, whersoever they be in all the world, are equal to our Bishops,
Luther adversus papat a Satana fundat:
or Parish Ministers and Preachers, of none it can be said one is Lord, another
is servant: whatsoever belongs to the Church, belongs equally to all,
saving that some are of better gifts then others, howbeit such gifts cause no
inequality or Lordship in the Church.

6. In the Apostolic Church, Musscul: loc com: de mini: ver by:
the Ministers of the Word were none above another, and were subject to no head
or president, etc.

7. The honor of a Bishop, The same upon the 2. These. 8.2.
being taken from the rest of the Ministers, and given to one, was the first
step to Papacy.

8. Christ did most severely forbid unto the Apostles and their Successors,
Confess. Hell. vet cap. 17.
primacy and dominion.

9. Equal power and Function is given to all ministers of the Church, The same
cap. 18.
and that from the beginning, no one preferred himself before another, saving
only that for order, some one did call them together; propounded the matters
that were to be consulted of, and gathered the voices.

Therefore, if all Ministers have their Commission indifferently given unto
them; Conclusion.
if Christ have forbidden, that one minister should have dominion over another;
if no Minister may exercise dominion over Gods people; if authority to handle
Controversies belonged to every several Congregation; if a Bishop and parish
Minister be all one; it in the Apostles time no Minister was above another; if
the superiority of one above another was the first step to the papacy; lastly,
if they have equal power and function from the beginning: then must it needs
follow, that no minister may have superiority, or exercise dominion over
another.

It remains that we prove more directly, A Bishop should be in every
Congregation.
that the Lord has ordained that there should be a Bishop Resident over every
Congregation, which is thus proved

1. If a Bishop and Minister be all one, then must there be a Bishop in every
Congregation, for every man will confess that every Congregation ought to have
a Minister: But a Bishop and a Minister is all one, as appeared by this, that
St. Paul discribeth not one quality for the Bishop, but it is also the quality
of every good Minister; and also in that he describes no other Minister, but
the Bishop: Therefore there ought to be a Bishop in every Congregation.

2. S. Paul's Bishops and his Deacons, were appointed to one place, as it fully
appears both in the description of them, and the practice of the Apostles:
But the Deacons were in every Congregation, which appears, Phil, 1.1, Acts
6.2. That office being needful every where; and in that it continued so;
longer then the Office of Bishops: Athanasius apol. 2. Ierom contra
Luciferianos, etc. Therefore there ought to be a Bishop in every Congregation.

3 That which Paul enjoined to Titus, is also to be practiced always in the
like case: But he commanded him to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5.
which are expounded in the next verse to the Bishops: Therefore there must be a
Bishop in every Congregation.

Ignatius ad Philadelph.
4 Every Church should have her Communion Table, and every Church her Bishop.

5 Where there was found any worthy to be a Bishop, there a Bishop was
appointed, Epiphan. lib. 3. tom 1. haeres. 75.
and where there was not to furnish both Bishop and preaching Elder ( he
means the Doctor) there the Apostles made a Bishop, and left the Elder.

6 If a Bishop run into a Slander, 1 Con^^: Carthag: tam: 1. c. p: 10.
and many Bishops cannot suddenly be gathered; his cause shall be heard of 12
Bishops, etc.

7 If an Elder be accused, 3. Council. tous. 1. cap. 8
he may call six Bishops from the place hard by.

8 Stories make mention of Bishops of little Towns, as Eusebius. lib. 5 cap. 16.
Solicus Bishop of the village Cuman: Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Mares, Bishop of a small Town called Solicha: Socrat. 4.26.
Gregory Bishop of a small City, called Nazianzum: Quest. 16. did. 50.
The Bishop of a Castle.

Jerome ad Evagrium.
9 A Minister, that is to say, a Bishop, and (a little after) the Apostle does
plainly teach, Minister and a Bishop is all one, and ( upon Titus) a Bishop and
a Minister are the same: and (ad Oceanum) with the ancient Fathers, Bishops and
Elders were all one.

10 D. Barnes ( in his first Article) says, Acts and Monuments fol. 216.
I will never believe, neither can I ever believe, that one man may by the Law
of God, be a Bishop of two or three Cities, yea of a whole Country; for that
is contrary to the Doctrine of St. Paul, who writing to Titus, commands that
he should ordain a Bishop in every town.

11 It is pity to see how far the office of a Bishop is degenerated from the
original in the Scripture; Hooper upon 8 Command. page 90.
it was not so in the beginning, when Bishops were at the best, as the Epistle
to Titus testifies, that wills him, to ordain in every City, etc. They
know the Primitive Church have no such Bishops as we have, until the time of
Silvester the first.

The Conclusion.
Therefore, if a Bishop and a Minister be all one; if Bishops were to be where
Deacons are, who were in every Congregation; if Paul enjoined Titus to ordain
Bishops in every City; and if every Church had her Bishop a long time after
the Apostles, as appears by the testimonies of Councels, Histories, and
Learned Writers, both old and new: then must it needs follow, that there ought
to to be a bishop in every Congregation.

FINIS.

