The Lawfulness OF Infants Baptism. OR, An Answer to Thomas Lamb his eight
Arguments, entitled, The unlawfulness of Infants BAPTISM.

And may serve also to the false minors, and old out-worne Arguments in the
late book of C. Paul Hobson, till a more particular and complete Answer come
forth to anatomise the fallasies of the said Book, entitled, The fallasie of
Infants Baptism.

For who has despised the day of small things, Zac. 4.10. The secret things
unto Jehovah our God: but those things which are revealed belong unto us, and
to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this Law. Deuteronomy.
29.29. By ROBERT FAGE Junior. Gent.

London, Printed by W. WILSON. 1645.

To the Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
LEt friends debate, but not abate one whit of their affection: it is one truth
we aim at, therefore we ought to strive for verity, not for mastery, when
truth is on the one side discovered, and the other do condescend, he is not so
much conquered as conqueror in yielding. I Will not say much, because he has said
little, aiming to be short in my Answer, as he is in his Arguments; desiring
that when we debate things in love, God who is love, would reveal the truth
unto us, that we may know how to make choice thereof for the good of us and our
posterity.

Thine in the fellowship of the Gospel, R. F.

An answer to Thomas Lamb his eight Arguments entitled, The unlawfulness of
Childrens BAPTISM.
Master Lamb,
IN your Title Page, you quote several Scriptures, as first, Romans 9.7, 8. Gal.
3.7.29. which places prove indeed, that none are spiritually blessed, and have
right unto the Covenant, but the spiritual seed. Yet this will not prove, that
a Church must baptize only those who are internally spiritual persons, (though
none are baptized indeed but such.) You know Simon, Acts 8. had outward
Baptism, and so those Antichrists. 1 John 2.19. were a while accounted Members
of ye Church, till they left it and were discovered: so that ^here is nothing
against the baptising of believers Infants being in no such danger of
hypocrisy at false brethren are in. You quote Acts 8.12. where, upon
profession of faith they were baptized both men and women. Proselites must come
in by acknowledgement and profession. So were these admitted. This does not
then exclude the male or female Infants of such Prosolites from Baptism, but
shows the largements of the Gospel above the Law: That sealed a male; but
this male and female. The other places, Acts 8. 37. and 10.47, 48. and 11.17.
all tend to one end in their true scope, that is, to bring the Gentile,
(sometimes afar off) now near, and that by profession of faith, even as the
stranger under the Law, might come in, and be one with the people of the Jews
by acknowledgement, and voluntary subjection to the Law, Exodus 12.48. and this
the Parent, a stranger was to perform, and then his Infant was also admitted
upon the parents voluntary manifestation of his desire. And the Churches of
Christ are now by faith come into the Jews state, and grafted in as they were
broken off: as they were broken off, To. 11.

Come now to your Arguments; your first is. That which makes the traditions of
men of equal authority with the Law of God, ought in no wise to be, Mat. 15.6.
Mar. 7.7. But the Baptism of Infants, though of believing Parents, does so.
Therefore that ought not to be.

Hear we deny the minor, which you go about to prove thus.

action of Religion supposed, to be performed, and not one jot or tittle of
the word requiring the same: Therefore, etc.

Hear we deny your minor again; for we have the Covenant made with Abraham and
to all believers, Genesis 17. That God will be a God to them, and to their seed
after them, explained in the second Commandment, That God will show mercy unto
thousands of them that love him and keep his Commandments. Therefore ( Isa.
44.3.) I will poor (says God) my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon
thine offspring; and they shall spring up as among the grass, as Willowes by
the water courses. And Isa. 59.21. this Covenant is renewed. My Spirit which is
upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed (says the Lord) from henceforth and for ever. Which Covenant was revived
to Abraham, and confirmed by Christ, Genesis 17.7. Romans 15.8. the Covenant being
still one, Heb. 13.20. though the typical ordinances thereof be changed. And
therefore were the Israelites nation called a holy seed, Ezr. 9.2. a godly
seed, Mal. 2.15. and were Circumcised, eat of the Manna), drank of the Rock,
passed through, and were Baptized in the Cloud and Sea: and those Ordinances
are declared to be the same with our spiritual Ordinances of Baptism, and the
Supper, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. The Gospel also declares that young children [Infants]
were brought to Christ, and he gave them imposition of hands, Luke 18.15. Mat.
19.15. And [little children] proposed as an example, and parterne of imitation
to the very chife of the Church Members, Mat. 18.2, 34. 1 Pet. 2.2. and Mat.
19.14. and Mat. 10.14. Christ would not have little children kept from him, for
of such is the kingdom of heaven. And Peter says, Acts 2.39. The promise is
to you, and to your children, whom Paul calls, holy Children, 1 Corinh. 7.14.
in relation to Ezra. And the Gospel (prophecy) of Zachary is, that the streets
of the City shall be full of boys and girls, playing in the streets thereof.
And Act. 2.17. God is said to pour out his spirit upon all flesh. The
believing Gentile by faith being engraffed, and his seed with him into the same
stock and state, out of which the Jew by unbeleefe is broken off. See Romans
11.19, 20, 21. As may also appear by comparing, Exodus 19.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 10.14,
15. with 2 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 1.6. where the Saints Titles and expressions are
applied to the believing Gentile, as they were to the believing Jew. Can any
man then forbid water to these (children of promise) who have received the Holy
Ghost as welll as we, Acts 10.47. John Baptist understood their right, when
there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and were
all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins, Mark 1.5.
Now that it was ordinary for the Parents to carry their children with them,
appears by those two examples of the five thousand men, besides women and
children, fed with seven loaves, Mat. 15.38. And the Churches bearing Paul
company with wives and Children, Acts 21.5. If you say* children could not
confess their sins, and profess repentance therefore were not baptized; I
answer, This will, not be granted, seeing submission to Baptism was it self a
Confession of sin, and profession of Repentance: as Circumcision made men
debtors to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. which no Infant could promise by word,
but his submitting thereto was his bond. And as John Baptist, so likewise
Christ himself also, by his Disciples, Baptized the Children, that came or
were brought unto him. As appears by that large testimony, That he baptized,
and all men came unto him, John 3.26. which compared with John 7.22, 23. Ye on
the Sabbath day circumcise a man: If a man on the Sabbath day receive
Circumcision, John 16.21. For joy that a man is borne into the world, Genesis 4.1.
I have gotten a man from the Lord. All which does show that children were
usually called men, and so not excluded from Christ's Baptism.

Your second argument is; Every affirmative command of Christ has its
negative, so that whosoever Christ has commanded to be baptized, ought so to
be, and all others prohibited. But the affirmative command of Christ to his
Apostles, is Matthew. 28.18. That they should teach all nations, baptizing them,
(that is, those that are taught either by themselves or some other) therefore
the Aposties were prohibited from baptizing any that were not first taught.

The minor of this Argument has some deceit in it, the commission here being
urged in another manner then the word in the original will be are, for it is
not to be translated, Teach all nations: but Mat. 28.19. Make all nations
Disciples* baptizing them, etc. ver. 20. teaching them. And here is indeed a
negative command, not to baptize any but Disciples, And this blames those who
baptize the Infants of them who are not visible Disciples: but here are two
things to be considered.
First, whether believers Infants are not Disciples of Christ, as the Jews
Infants were Disciples of Moses,
the Spirit using the same word, which it does here of Moses Disciples, John
9.28. who were sealed with Circumcision, as Christ's Disciples with baptism, (
and the believing Gentiles also, being in the same estate with the believing
Jew as was proved before.) ( Secondly, if an unbeleever be baptized with water
before he believes, and after come to believe, and to be a Disciple, whether
he must be baptized again? And for this, whether there be any word in Scripture
to warrant a second baptizing with water into the name of Christ. For my part I
know none? but this I know, that we must practice nothing without warrant: So
that this argument and your other, thereupon, which you frame thus, (If the
Apostles were prohibited in the negative of Christ's command touching baptism,
from baptizing any that were not first taught, either by themselves or some
other, then ought not the Infants no not of believers to be baptized, because
none can know them to be taught, seeng they make no profession of faith and
repentance: but the Apostles were prohibited from baptizing any that were not
first taught in the negative of Christ's command touching baptism. Therefore the
Infants of believers are not to be baptized.) will hold well against those that
are not made Disciples, but not against Infants as not taught, and the
commission being to make Disciples, all nations and baptize them, must needs
lead to baptize Infants as a part of them.

Your third argument is? That which overthrows the nature of the covenant of
grace, ought in no wise to be. But the baptism of Infants, though of
believers, does so. Therefore etc.

Here we deny the minor, which you seem to prove thus: the nature of the
covenant of grace, be cause persons have interest therein no otherwise then by
faith, Romans 4.16. Gal. 3.9.29. any thing else concluded so, makes the promise
or covenant void, Romans 4.16. Gal. 3.18. But the baptism of Infants, though of
believers, is administered upon a supposed interest in the covenant of grace,
without faith in ye person so interested, viz. the faith of their parents.
Therefore the baptism of Infants, though of believers, overthrows the nature
of the covenant of grace, and consequently ought in no wise to be.

I Ans. Your minor here is denied, as being quite contrary to the nature of the
covenant of grace: for ye doctrine of the covenant is that God of his free
grace has made a promise of grace and life to all his elect, upon whom he will
show mercy, To. 9.18. And that before they have done good or evil, while they
are enemies, reconciling them to God by the blood of his Son, Romans 5.10. and
loving them with an everlasting love, not that they believed or loved him, but
that he loved them first, 1 Ioh. 4.10.19. And this love he in time manifests,
taking his Abraham's, out of the land of the Caldeans, Act. 7.3. his Israel out
of Egypt, through the red Sea, verse. 36. and his people from the world, Ioh.
9.14. into fellowship and union with the Father and the Son, and communion of
the Spirit, verse. 21, 22.23. And thus God takes a nation out of a nation, Deu.
4.34. to be a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people unto him 1 Pet. 2.9. And the Spirit, in this spiritual house, he has
promised to be powered out upon all flesh both young and old, Act. 2.19. The
very children being holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. because children of promise, Act. 2.39.
having their sins forgiven for Christ's name sake, 1 John 2.12. Therefore are
they to be baptized into Christ, because they have visibly put on Christ, Gal.
3.27. And are distinguished from the world, in being the children, not of the
world, but of a believer; when God draws a people from the world into fellow
ship with himself, their little children are distinguished from the world, as
so many perfecters of the praise of God, Matthew. 21.16. and are owned freely in
his Son Christ before faith or works manifested actually in their own
persons. Those who deny the Infants of believers thus to be in Gods visible
house, must necessarily hold justification not to go before actual faith,
which is Arminius tenet, or deny original sin, or conclude al infants damned,
or else that those who are saved, are saved some other way then by the Gospel.
The places you quote, mean no other justification by faith, then imputation.
Faith to take hold of free grace, was required in the Jewish parents, even in
Circumcision, as appears by Deuteronomy. 10.16. and 30.6. ( without which the
Circumcision outward was nothing) and the like for baptizing of believers
Infants, the Jew within, Romans 2. ult.

Your fourth argument is: That which overthrows the nature of Christ's true
visible Church ought in no wise to be. But the baptism of believers Infants
does. So therefore, etc.

The minor is denied, you frame an argument to prove it, thus: If the matter of
the Church be only regenerate persons, and the matter of the visible Church,
such only as appears so by their profession of faith and repentance; Then to
baptize Infants, is to contradict this, and to overthrow the nature thereof,
seeing they are born in sin, and make no appearance to the contrary; but that
they so remain. But the matter of the Church are only regenerate persons, Ioh.
3.3.5. And the matter of the visible Church only such as appear so by the
profession of faith and repentance To. 8.15. 1 Cor. 4.15. Therefore to baptize
Infants though of believers, is to overthrow the nature thereof, and
consequently ought in no wise to be.

I Answ. Your minor is not proved, but begged, but we have proved the Infants
of believers to be a part of that nation taken out of a nation* Deuteronomy. 4.34. The
little ones whose sins are forgiven, 1 John 2.12. Holy children, 1 Corin. 7.14.
Children of promise, Act. 2.39. etc. Of such is the Kingdom of heaven says
the King himself, Matthew. 19 14. Therefore very meet to be of and in his
spiritual visible Church: and in their distinction from the world, being
believers Infants profession of faith and repentance may be appropriated unto
them visibly: as the Jews circumcision inward, without which Paul says, It was
not circumcision that was outward in the Flesh, Romans 2. ult: but that of the
heart, the answer of a goood conscience says Peter.

Your fifth argument is: That which makes religion subsist in the deed done now
in the time of the Gospel, ought in no wise to be. Phil. 3.3. John 4.23, 24.
But the baptism of Infants, though of believers, does so, Therefore, etc.

Answ. This miner is denied, your argument for proof of it is this: I An. The
minor is denied: Believers Infants are visibly in Gods decree in the Kingdom
of heaven, Mat. 19.14. Having the seeds of faith, without which they cannot
please God, Heb. 11.6. And the Spirit of Christ, without which they are none of
his.

Your sixth argument is, That which reviveth Judaisme, and so denies Christ to
be come in the Flesh, ought in no wise to be, 1 John 4.3. 2 John 7. But the
baptism of Infants, though of Believers, does so. Therefore, etc.

Answ. The minor is denied, your argument for proof thereof is,

Answ. The minor is denied. The practice of baptizing of the Infants of
Believers, is grounded upon the gracious covenant of the Gospel to all the
children of God. Out of which if all Infants visibly are, then either they are
all saved without the promise, or damned for want of the promise.

Your seventh argument is,



But the baptism of Infants, though of believers, does so. Therefore, etc.

Your minor is denied: your Argument to prove it is; Those who administer the
special privilege, and ordinance of entering persons into the Church; from
common causes which do belong unto the world, as well as to the Church, do
make the world and the Church all one, and confound the distinction that ought
to be betwixt them.

But to Baptize Infants, though of Believers, is to administer the special
privilege, the ordinance of entering persons into the Church, from common
causes, which do belong unto the world, as well as to the Church; to wit, the
general offer of promise, Matthew. 28.19. Acts 2.39. which is to be offered to
every man and woman in the world, Mar. 16.15. or else being borne of believing
Parents, which agrees to Ismael and Esau, as well as to Isaac and Jacob, and all
in this respect being but flesh borne in sin, and children of wrath, John
3.6. Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.3. Therefore, etc.

In this minor is considerable what is the ordinance of entering persons into
the Church? and that properly is not baptism, but the uniting of the members
of one body by one Spirit, to walk together under one Lord, in one faith, Ephesians.
4.4, 5. Whence Baptism and all other ordinances flow; for we baptize not to
bring into the Church, but because he is in the Church; therefore we baptize,
(The visible Church being generally considered) so that the minor is flatly
denied. And as for common causes, do you account it so common to be a believers
child, when Paul counted it as a privilege to Timothy, that he continued in
the same faith which dwelt, fust in his grandmother Lois, and his mother
Eunice, 2 Timothy 1.5. And so was borne of believing parents. But Ishmael and Esau
had that, as well as Isaac and Jacob. What then? Is it therefore such a common
cause with the world, as therefore believers Infants must not be baptized? Then
likewise none must be baptized upon profession of faith: Seeing Simon, Act.
8.13. Believed, made an outward profession) and was baptized, though in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, v. 23. Demas for all his
professions, forsook Paul, and embraced the present world, 2 Timothy 4.10.
Phigellus and Hermogenus turned away from Paul for all their professions, 2 Timothy 1.15. and Chapter 3. v. 5. The whole world are under a profession or form of
godliness, but have denied the power. Because therefore profession may agree
with the world, as well as with the Saints, will you therefore baptize none
upon it? This is still a very poor argument, like your former before. So is
your last argument, to which I come; which is,



Ans. This minor is denied, you argue to prove it thus,

This minor is very false again. Now you still prove it as slightly as you did
the former, thus: Because they baptize Infants? Is this a good consequence? The
Papists baptize Infants, therefore we must not baptize Infants. Then take these
with you also: The Papists read Scriptures, therefore we must not read
Scriptures. The Papists hold it lawful to pray, therefore we must not pray!
will not this be good stuff? I end.

The Lord teach us better arguments for the truth then you hava brought here,
and unite our hearts in every triuh of the Gospel.

FINIS.

