FESTA GEORGIANA, OR THE Gentries and Countries Joy FOR THE CORONATION OF THE
KING, ON St. GEORGES DAY.

-- Quis non laetabitur? -- printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXI.

FESTA GEORGIANA, OR THE Gentries and Countries Joy, etc.
I.
BEloved Albion, Happy Soil,
The eye of Islands, Fairest Land,
Who placed by careful Nature so do stand,
Thy fertile plains do scarce require a Toil.
Darling of Neptune, and the Seas,
Whose waves do seem themselves to please
When billowing in their unevened Ranks
They gladly come to kiss thy fruitful banks;
And joyful they may be
Honored in serving thee,
Thy Ships like numerous mountains may
Dance on their waves, and on their billows play.
Whilst the Caerulean god protects them from all harms,
And stored with Gold returns them with full tides into thine Arms.
II.
Happy in every thing that may
Enrich, or make a Kingdom blessed,
Fully replenished with all goods, the best,
But yet most happy in this glorious day:
This day, (the sum of all our joys)
For without it they all were toys,
Fancies Chimaera's, we could only boast,
The Gods had sent their bounties to our Coast;
But would not now they were at hand
Permit, or suffer them to land;
As if they had a mind to show
Their blessings to us, but still let us know,
That though they showred them, down with a plenteous hand,
Until confirmed by this days work, they were at their command.
III.
But now the Seal is past, and they
Made sure to us, the writings sound
And we may safely say, the gods are bound
Still to continue them whilst we obey:
Our happiness lies in our will,
Nor can we ever lose it, till
We first break Covenants, and so once more
Render our selves more wretched then before.
But that is a foolish Tennant sure,
Who having once made forfeiture
Of's Lease, when by the Courtesy
Of his good Landlord, it restored shall be,
Will desperately adventure for to break his bonds, forget
The kindness, and a forfeit make again of that and it.
IV.
Worthy St. George, Heroic Knight,
Mirror of valor, for which more
Shall we thy blessed Memory adore,
That with the Dragon thou maintain'dst a fight,
And did the beauteous Virgin save,
Who trembling stood to meet her grave,
Expecting when her Corpse should be made guest,
And lodged within the jaws of the fierce beast;
Or shall we Celebrate thy fame
That on thy day, and George Monck.
by thy name,
We freed are from a beast more fell,
Than three-headed monstrous Beast of hell:
For on this day is fully quelled a Dragon, who did stand,
Not ready to devour a maid, but this whole flourishing Land.
V.
No more shall Traitorous Villains now
Such fond and foolish reasons bring,
To justify Rebellion against their King,
'Cause yet the Crown had not enchas'd his brow
Such fiery Dragons now shall feel,
St. George can brandish still his steel;
And that the strong endeavors all are vain
Of those would snatch us from our joys again.
How would the grateful Romans strive,
To make the memory to live,
Of such a Saint, how would they build
Him Altars, and due Adoration yield!
But if we do deny him that, let us not do this I pray,
That though we Deifie not the Saint, let us Canonize the day.
VI.
A day that needs no outward show
To make it glorious, for within
Our hearts should Pageants of joy be seen,
They are the sacrifices which we owe
To such transcendent good, and bliss,
To such surpassing joy as this.
What need the Citizens such fabrics rear,
As if they would make them touch the very sphere,
As if they would the stars out vie,
And make St. Paul's Church not seem high.
'Twould be far better, could they boast
They sacrificed their loves, and not their cost:
But we'el not blame them, since such is their joy, they cannot with hold,
To offer up to it, the god they most adore, their gold.
VII.
Let them think so, they 'ave done their parts,
We Will strive their offering to out do
Though not so rich, our victimes are more true;
They offer dross, we put up loyal hearts:
Hearts which armed with Royal love,
Still shall soar, and mount above
All their vast Pyramids, and high built toys,
And there rest fixed for to confirm our joys:
Whilst the Trophies of their cost,
Will not last six months at most,
But must down; Our Loyalty
We Will propagate unto eternity,
And make the envions Sun too soon shrink in his head above,
To see he must withdraw his beams, e're we withdraw our love.
VIII.
Nor will we be wanting still,
To express our outward full content,
Though heaven to us the blessings have not sent,
To do like them, what we can do we will.
Though we cannot such Monuments raise,
But the wonder of nine days,
We Will raise our voices three notes higher, sing
Carols of joy to Glorious Charles our King.
And thus we will every year renew
Those sports shall make our joys still new
Freely chant our thoughts, not cares,
Invent no plots, nor study jealous fears:
Strive to make those our Counselors, who do no goodness own,
And but for faction and schism had never yet been known.
IX.
Our mirth shall harmless be, yet free,
Mixed both with love and Loyalty
We Will live as if the golden age were now
Returned, and with the Crown on Charles his brow:
All thoughts of mischief were exiled,
Those days returned when we beguiled
Our time with harmless mirth, before the pains
Rebellion brings, were crept into our veins,
Before that May poles were thought gods,
Or King and Parliament at ods.
Before Lawn sleeves were judged unholy,
Before 'twas thought a sin to seem but jolly;
Before we run our selves into that deep abyss of shame,
And by overthrowing Church and State, Murdring our Sovereign.
X.
This is true mirth, will make us blessed;
Thus we will enjoy our selves, no fears
Of innovations shall disturb our rest,
Or headlong set's together by the ears:
We Will blessed live in innocence,
Religion shall be no pretense
For Rebels, we will not credit Presbyt'ry,
'Cause we already know it so gross a lie.
Our Loyalty shall be our guard,
By that all mischiefs shall be barred
From breaking in, for to annoy,
Or in the least disturb our well fixed joy.
Plenty and riches too shall flow, while we enjoy our King,
Allegiance and Obedience it is, will peace and plenty bring.
XI.
We Will laugh at those fond fools who do
Think harmless mirth to be a sin,
Believe their outward purity but a gin
To draw us to those mischiefs we must rue.
The Rochet and three cornered Cap,
Shall be no more a Puritan trap
To drive us from our duty, we will believe
No longer there is a Dee'le in a Lawne sleeve.
The High Commission shall not fright us,
Alas! they cannot there indite us,
'Twas made for them whose purity
Seducing snares are, to catch others by.
Whilst in a doleful tone, Sternehold and Hopkins they disgorge,
We Will to the merry Organs sing Hymns to the brave St. George.
XII.
To brave St. George, whose happy day
Thus puts an end to all our woe,
Our merry songs, our joyful hearts shall show,
Not in dull strains, for ever and for aye;
No our inspired souls shall stretch
Out Paeans 'bove the Muses reach.
Phoebus to yield his harp to us shall not grudge,
Were not dull Midas, but skilled Orpheus Judge:
And yet our Songs shall something teach
Not such as Presbyterians preach,
Invectives, but more Loyal strains,
The Products of the Sack flows in our veins:
That cleares our blood, and makes it good, and that shall teach us sing,
With tides of joy, exalted notes to our new Crowned King.
SONG.
I.
Rejoice, Rejoice,
Strain, strain your voice,
A note or two yet higher,
Let the Bells loud ring,
Whilst we merrily sing,
More sweet than the heavenly quire.
Our Woes are all past,
For they could not long last,
To vex and torment us more,
Our joys are made sure,
And will now endure
More certain than ever before.
Then let us be merry, and drink full cups round
For to day, for to day, for to day our King's Crowned.
2.
By so much the more
Were our sorrows before,
By so much our joy shall be greater,
Though our griefs did long last,
Yet now they are past,
Our pleasures will be but the sweeter.
We may sing and carowse,
We may drink, we may bowse,
So still we continue but loyal,
Those blessings which before
Were denied us, we now more
Will enjoy, for our plagues were our trial.
Then let us be merry, and drink full cups round,
For to day, for to day, for to day our Kings Crowned.
3.
To St. George we will drink,
To St. George we will skink,
And offer whole quarts of Canary,
We Will clear our hoarse throats,
And strike up our notes,
And make the whole world to be merry.
We Will faction forswear,
And all Rebels Laws dare,
For he needs must be loyal that is jolly,
When the Devil first gave birth
To Rebellion on earth,
The Midwife was Melancholy.
Then let us be merry, and drink full cups round,
For to day, for to day, for to day our King's Crowned.
4.
Who a health does refuse,
Like the race of the Jews,
Let him prove both a scandal and scorn,
Let his Memory rot,
And his Name be forgot,
As if he had never been born.
It Is your merry, merry souls
Who take freely their bowls,
That still are as constant as fate,
Whilst your dull-beaded sots
Are construing of plots
To ruin the Church and the State.
Then let us be merry, and drink full cups round,
For to day, for to day, for to day, our King's Crowned.
XIII.
Thus in free jollity we will flow,
And yet not surfeit in our joys,
A moderation's good, to much annoys,
How far to pass, and where to stop we know;
The best of all things are made worse
Gorrupted; blessings may be made a curse,
No surfet's good, but the excess of things
We love, the worst of all diseases brings.
All things should have their time, though now
We joy at heavens smiling brow,
Yet we will not spend our joys unto a dearth,
Lest their decease should be our sorrows birth;
We can convert our smiles to tears, and make it our due cares
To pray, since God has blessed us thus, that still he would hear our prayers.
XIV.
We Will pray, that as our King is Crowned
So he may reign for ever, no hard fate
Put Period to his Life, our blessings date,
That as in Crowns, he may in good abound:
That no Puritan tricks may move
Subjects from his, him from their love:
That no Rebellion may disturb his ease,
Or break this Kingdoms but new-setled peace:
That both beloved and feared, he like a god
On Earth, may live loved here, and feared abroad:
That we may happy live, to see
Brave Royal branches of this Princely tree:
That as a George restored his Crown, the same George may advance,
The Conquering St. Georges Cross, into the heart of France.
FINIS.

