A REPLY UNTO SEVERAL TREATISES PLEADING FOR THE Arms now taken up by
Subjects in the pretended defense of RELIGION AND LIBERTY.

By name, unto The Reverend and Learned Divines which pleaded Scripture and
Reason for defensive Arms.

The Author of the Trea^ise of Monarchy.

The Author of the Fuller Answer his Reply.

By H. Fern D. D. etc.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the ^niversity. 1643.

The Contents of the several SECTIONS.
SECT. I. The Preface. In which the contradictory Assertions of the
Adversaries, page 2, 3. The General Resolution of the Cause, page 4. Doctrine
of Sedition, page 5. 6. SECT. II. Cases of Resistance, in regard of times of
peace or War; and in regard of Persons, Private or public, page 7. etc. SECT.
III. A defense of Subjects Arms in vain, sought by the distinction of
Monarchy, page 11. 12. The Governing Power is so derived from God upon Him, who
is Supreme, that the People cannot lessen or limit it, but only in the
exercise, page 13, 14. Of an Absolute and Limited Monarch, page 15. Limitation
and Mixture may be by after condescent of the Monarch, and only reach the
Exercise of the power, page 15. 16 17. Mixture differs from Derivation of Power
to substitute Officers, page 17. 18. Of Monarchy by Conquest, page 18.
Providence may so far discover it self by Conquest, that the People
Conquered shall be bound to consent and yield obedience to the Conqueror, as to
a Prince set over them by God page 19. 20 SECT. IIII. The Constitution of this
Monarchy; The Entrance of the Saxon and Norman Conquerours urged, not to prove
our Kings absolute, but to disprove such an Original Limitation and Mixture,
as the Adversary phansyeth in this Monarchy, page 21. to 28. Reasons for such
Original Limitation and Mixture answered, page 28. 29. Proofs for it from His
Majesty's Grants answered, page 30. 31. 32. SECT. V. Of Resistance in relation
to an Absolute Monarchy, page 33. 34. 35. in relation to a Limited Monarchy,
pa. 36. 37. 38. Limitation and Mixture in Monarchy does not infer a power of
Resistance in Subjects page 39. 40. etc. SECT. VI. A Refutation of the most
considerable passages of His Reply, that first styled himself Author of the
Fuller Answer, page 43. to 56. SECT. VII. Places of Scripture out of the Old
Testament. The Institution of the Israelitish Kingdom, in which the Jus Regis
employed a security from Resistance, page 56, 57, 58, 59. The Rescue of
Jonathan, page 60. David's demeanor toward Saul infers not a power of
resistance in Subjects, page 61, 62. His enquiry about the intent of the
K^ilites, page 63. Something extraordinary in the example of David, page 64 65.
The Prophets never called upon the Elders of the People for this pretended duty
of Resistance, page 66. SECT. VIII. Of Resistance forbidden in the 13. to the
Romans. The place is considerable, as it speaks of Government in Gener all,
and as it relates to those Times and Governors, page 67 That it is Powers in
the plural and in the Abstract, vainly observed and applied by the Reverend
Divines, page 67, 68, 69. That Subjection is not here restrained to Legal
Commands in Civil matters only, as they would have it, page 69. to 77. That
Christians might not resist, because Religion then was not established by Law,
and because the Emperors then were Absolute (as the Author of the Treat. of
Monarchy would have it) is not the reason of the Apostles prohibition, page 77.
78. Of the absoluteness of those Emperors before Vespasians time, and of the
Power of the Senate, and of the Lex Regia, page 79, etc. SECT. IX. Nine Reasons
against Power of Resistance in Subjects, drawn from the Consideration of the
wisdom of God, who put his people under Kings without power of Resisting them,
in the Old and New Testament. page 84. Of the Ordinance of God, that places the
Power of the Sword in Him that is supreme, which cannot be eluded by saying,
they resist not the Monarch, but misimployed fellow Subjects about Him, page
85. 86. 87. Of the mischiefs and inconveniences that would follow upon such a
power of Resistance in Subjects, etc. page 90. 91. Their reasons to the
contrary answered, -- page 93. etc. A brief consideration of the Case: That
they are far from (what they pret nd) the defense of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, by these Arms, and the Resistance now made, page 96. 97.
A REPLY TO SEVERAL TREAtises, pleading for the Arms now taken up by Subjects
in the pretended defense of Religion and and Liberties.
SECT. I. THE PREFACE.
IF it be enquired, why any Reply at all, or why so late? I may say, I had
determined not to be any more troublesome, and that there was no just cause why
I should be, were it well weighed what was said on both sides: but I must once
again beg leave to say something (the Importunity of Adversaries or the
expectation of Friends enforcing it) by way of Answer to some Books not long
since issued forth.

There are two especially which have drawn the eyes of many upon them; the one
bears this title, Scripture and Reason pleaded for defensive Arms, by Diverse
Reverend and Learned Divines. Who by laying their heads together have not found
out any more forceable Arguments or satisfying Answers, then they which went
before them; but only some newcases of Resistance to amuse the Reader, and new
instances to enforce former Reasons, and some popular amplifications to set off
the old Answers, thereby making the book swell to that bigness it appears in.

The other book bears this Title, A Treatise of Monarchy, by whom I know not:
but surely the Author (however he looks not with a single eye upon what I had
written, misconstruing it many times) does with much ingenuity disclaim, and
with no less reason confute several Assertions of those Learned Divines, and
other Writers of the Party; assertions that have very much helped forward this
Rebellion: such as these, That the King is Universis minor. That the People,
which make the King, are above Him, by the Rule, Quicquid efficit tale est
magis tale. That the final judgment of this State is in the two Houses. That
the Christians in the Primitive times might have resisted, had they had force.
These and the like he ingenuously disclaimes, but being engaged he sets up his
Rest upon a groundless fancy of such a mixture and constitution of this
Monarchy, as mustinable the Houses to restrain the exorbitancies of the
Monarch, by the Arms of the Kingdom: and to induce a belief of this, he has
prefixed a discourse of Absolute, Limited, and Mixed Monarchies, so framed as
is most applyable to his purpose.

He that wrote the Fuller Answer to my first Treatise had this conceit of
Mixture, whereby he placed the Houses in the very Supremacy of power, and did
thence (as one falsehood being granted does necessarily infer another)
conclude, that the Members of the Houses were the Kings Subjects divis^m, taken
severally, not conjunctim, as they are gathered together in their Houses; for
indeed how could they be His Subjects, and He their supreme Head, if they be
fundamentally mixed or joined with Him in the supremacy of power? The Author
of the Treatise of Monarchy, did see that this was repugnant to Law and Reason,
and therefore does acknowledge them to be subjects conjunctim, under the King
as their Supreme Head, yet being engaged he holds the ground upon which that
absurd assertion is raised, affirming and endeavoring to prove, that the
Mixture is in the supremacy of power, page 40. How then will he make the King
supreme, and they His Subjects? for this; he gives the King Apicem potestatis,
the top or Excellency of Power: that is, the King is the Crown or top of the
head, but the two Houses must be our head too and our Sovereigns, if they be
joined with the King in the very Supremacy of power: and so the matter will be
well mended. Again, The Full Answer, did from the same false supposed mixture
infer, that the final Resolution of this States judgment resided in the two
Houses, when the King refuses to discharge His trust for the safety of the
Kingdom; the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, did see and confess, that it
plainly overthrowes the Monarchy to place such judgment in the Houses: Yet
being engaged, He gives them power to take the Arms of the Kingdom; but least
they should seem Authoritatively to Judge or command in that case, they must
declare and make the appeal to the Community, as if there were no government,
and as men are in Conscience convinced they are bound to give aid and
assistance; so he page 8. 29. and elsewhere. A ready way to confusion; but of
these and such like contradictory conceits of the Assertors of Resistance more
below.

Of this Mixture there was not a little spoken in my Reply to the Full Answer:
but this Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, and Reverend Divin's take notice
only of my first Treatise, Having therefore made some short Animadversions upon
their Books as they came to my hand, I still waited to meet with something
directly against the Reply, but as yet have seen nothing, besides two trifling
Answers; the one a wild discourse by whom written I know not, but by such a
flirting phansy, I am sure, that he who reads one part, will not cast away his
time upon the rest: the other by him that styled himself Author of the Fuller
answer, still like himself; if he can be but witty or fasten a seeming
contradiction upon his Adversary it is enough; what he has material about the
Mixture of Government (which is the whole business of his book) is more
accurately delivered and urged by this Author of the Treatise of Monarchy; yet
because he is extremely confident, I shall bestow a Section upon him below, and
that is more then he deserves.

Therefore what the Reverend Divines, or the Author of this Tract of Monarchy
have drawn from Scripture or Reason, to justify their grounds of Resistance, I
shall briefly examine, after that I have declared my intent at first, and my
purpose now of proceeding in this Argument.

It was the intent of that first Treatise of mine, to resolve the Consciences
of misled People, Touching the unlawfulness of Arms now taken up against the
King: and because Conscience, if it resolve for them, must conclude upon these
premises (Subjects may take Arms against their Sovereign for defense of
Religion and Liberties, apparently in danger of Subversion. But such is the
case now,) and must be certain of the truth of both of them, for if either of
the premises be false or doubtful, Conscience is misguided in the conclusion;
therefore the whole Resolution of the case was to this purpose, as here it lies
open to the sight in these two assertions.

First, Were the case so as they suppose, that is, Were the King, as they would
have people believe, seduced to proceed in a way tending to the subversion of
Religion and Liberties, it were not safe to bear part in the Resistance of
Arms now used against him, there being no warrant for taking Arms upon such a
case, but evidence against it both from Scripture and Reason. So that at the
best the case can be even to them, that plead for resistance, no better indeed
then doubtful, and then Conscience according to its two Rules (what is not of
Faith is Sin, and, in doubtful cases, the SAFER WAY is to be chosen) will tell
them they should forbear and suffer, rather then resist, for they may be sure
that is a SAFE WAY, were the King indeed what they suppose him to be.

Secondly, Seeing the case is not so as they suppose, nor is it so with the
King as they would have the People believe, but most apparent, that He is
constrained to take Arms for the defense of His just Rights, and the
Protection of His Subjects; Every man may be clearly persuaded in Conscience
that the Resistance now made is unlawful and damnable, and that he is bound
not only to forbear from resisting, but also to assist His Majesty in so just a
cause.

The contrary Resolution (which concludes, That it is Lawful upon such a case
supposed to take Arms: and that the Case is now:) I doubt not to call a
Blaspheaming of God and the King; Of God, in charging such an imputation upon
his Word, as if it taught Subjects to take Arms for the defense of Religion
and Liberties against their natural Sovereign: Of the King, in casting such
aspersions upon His Majesty, as if He were seduced to the subversion of
Religion and Liberties.

Now although His Majesty's Cause be justified not so much by the falsehood of
this their Principle and ground of Resistance (it is lawful in such a Case to
take Arms) as by the clearness of His innocence, He being far from what
they suppose or proclaim of him to be: Yet because the very seeds of Rebellion
are sown upon that ground, and there cannot want either made pretenses to
bring them forth, or Fears and Jealousies to cherish and ripen them; it is
needful to show, that as Rebellion is not a plant of Gods sowing, so neither
is that ground a Truth of His Laying.

The Author of the Fuller Answer, in his late Reply Page 27. and 28. imputes the
beginning of this controversy (whether Subjects upon such a Case may take
Arms?) to my first unhappy and unchallenged Treatise (as he calls it) which
has exposed the other party to a necessity of a Reply, and caused so much to be
said, especially by Divines, in this sad and unwelcome subject. So he. These
men are loath to be called to account for what they say or do, as if they
were the very rule of Justice and Truth. They have Preached and Printed this
seditious doctrine over and over, welneere a twelve month before that unhappy
Treatise was published, thereby persuading the People into Arms, under
pretense of defending their endangered Religion and Liberties; and now they
think much it should be called in question or be made a Controversy. It had
been happy for them if they could have carried the matter so clearly without
being put to a Reply; or if now being put to Answer, they could make others the
Inc^ndiaries for the kindling of that fire which they have begun, and fomented
with seditious doctrines, blown over all the Kingdom. Surely if the Divines
and Lawyers, that are of contrary judgment to them throughout the Kingdom,
had in good time declared themselves herein, it would have given a seasonable
and happy check to these seditious principles, and to the unhappy Rebellion
that has been raised thereon; I for my part thought it concerned me to examine
a doctrine so much Preached and published, and could not think it possible that
Conscience should be truly satisfied in the Conclusion, without being secured
of the truth of both the Promises, of which this seditious doctrine is the
first, That Subjects may take Arms against their Sovereign for the defense of
Religion and Liberties, when in danger of subversion: for which as then I could
see no warrant that Conscience might rest on, no more can I now, but do find
it a Doctrine destitute of Scripture and true Reason, as will be cleared in the
process of this book. For,

First, Upon the examination of places of Scripture, it will appear, that Gods
People were continually under such Kings, against whom they might not resist,
and that Gods word as it affords us no precept, so nor any just example for
resistance, but much every way against it.

Secondly, Upon the Examination of Reason it will appear, how inconsistent
such a power of resistance in Subjects is with Government, and that (which
seems to be the reason of the Wisdom of God, putting his people under Kings
without any power of Resistance) more inconveniences and mischiefs would follow
upon such a power placed in the People, then if they were left without it.

I must needs say it does at first sight seem unreasonable, that Subjects
should be left without this Remedy, and I confess my own thoughts (according
to that natural inclination we all have to Liberty) have been heretofore
ready to suggest as much: till seeking warrant for conscience from Gods word, I
could meet with none, but found Reason presently checked with that saying of
our Savior, Mat. 10.25. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as his
Master. It is enough for us now, if by the denial of Resistance and Arms we
can be in no worse condition then our Savior was, and the Christians of the
Primitive times, and Gods people were ever in.

Likewise when I expect the Adversaries should bring express Scripture
(without which they profess not to attempt any thing of such moment) for
commanding or allowing this supposed Duty of Resistance, I find them altogether
failing, and in their Answers to places of Scripture, much disagreeing among
themselves. So that indeed all their faith and persuasion here is resolved into
an appearance of Reason, raised upon Aristotle's grounds or Principles, laid for
the framing of a government, and the means of restraining Tyranny.

Upon those grounds and Principles, Buchanan, and Iunius Brutus go so far as
to the Deposing and taking away of an Exorbitant or Tyrannous Monarch, -- The
writers of these days though they will not seem to harbor such an intention,
and the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy does expressly pronounce it
unlawful; yet do they all agree to use what force they can against such a
Monarch for the suppressing of his Tyranny, to give him battle in the field,
and make him accessory to his own death, if he fall by their hand.

To clear the way in the entrance of this Cause, I am called by the Learned
Divines, and the Author of the treatise of Monarchy, in the first place to
consider the several Cases of Resistance, and the several kinds of
Governments and Monarchies.

SECT. II. Cases of Resistance.
THe Reverend and Learned Divines, (who plead for Defensive Arms) to show what
great pains they have taken for the satisfying, or rather troubling of the
Consciences of the people, do every where blame the Resolver as indiligent and
careless. First in the explication of the Question propounded, that he
undertaking to resolve Conscience about Resistance, did not set down all
possible Cases, which they by laying their heads together have found out. Then
in the clearing of the 13. to the Romans that he mainly insisting upon that place
did not Analyze the Chapter, as they have done by breaking it into so many
pieces, as if they had meant to draw out so many points to preach upon, rather
then arguments to dispute by.

My Answer is, I did not intend that Treatise as a just Tractate of Resistance,
but as a Resolution of a particular Case; and therefore did not undertake or
endeavor to satisfy all doubts which every working brain (that has strained
it self to the disturbance of this State and people) might raise concerning
Resistance in general, but to resolve the Consciences of misled People in
relation to the resistance now made. Now because they must have things
delivered in gross to them, if we mean they should apprehend them, I did
therefore think it sufficient, first, in the Explication of the Question to
direct their thoughts upon the notorious Resistance then used, viz. by setting
up a Militia, raising Armies every where, and using them in Battle against His
Majesty, for unto that Resistance the Case propounded did relate, as was
intimated SECT. I. and then in the clearing of the 13 to the Romans it seemed
sufficient to let the people understand, That the King was the Higher or
Supreme power in this Kingdom; that All under the higher power were forbidden
to resist; that Tyranny and persecution were not sufficient causes of
Resistance, which appeared upon the consideration of those times; lastly, that
the prohibition of Resistance concerned all times, because the Apostle's
Reasons against it, being drawn from the institution of the Power, and the end
or benefit of it, are perpetual and concern all Governments. These few
necessary particulars deduced out of the Apostle, I thought more fit to let the
People understand, then to puzzle them with many needless terms of analyze
and division.

And now let us consider the Cases propounded by the Pleaders; amonst them all,
that only is pertinent which enquires, whether the resisting of a Captain of
the Soldiery having his commission from the King, and coming to act any
illegal commands with his bands of armed men, be a resisting of the King, and
so forbidden? page 1. Ans. They might easily have answered themselves, who, I
know, are persuaded that the resisting of Captains having Commission from the
Houses, and coming to plunder or take away the Estates of Malignants, is a
resisting of the Parliament; but more to this case presently. Only let us
consider their leading Cases first: What if it be doubted, say they, whether a
King be distracted, or bewitched, or forced by such as have him Prisoner, or
otherwise a command upon him; are Subjects bound from resisting His illegal
commands? page 2. Answ. If it be clear that a King is so, I suppose it is
clear in Law what course is to be taken; but being doubted only (as the case
is put) and that perhaps upon as little ground as some have endeavored to make
the People believe, their King is now held Prisoner by his Cavaleires, and
forced to do what he does; then the Safer way is to be taken, which is to do
no more by way of resistance, then is Lawful to do, when it is clear He is
not Forced or distracted, and that will better appear by the Case following:
suppose it be certain a King is not forced or distracted, yet doing as bad as
any distracted person can do by commanding Tyrannical Acts, why should His
Subjects hands be bound from resisting his followers, offering to act His
Tyranny more then if he were forced or distracted? Page 2. Answ. This is
needless and odious, and cannot concern the Case in Question, but by
reflecting upon His Majesty, but put this case of any King so doing: I Answer.
1. There is much difference twixt habituate distraction, and actual
extravagances or Tyrannical attempts, for by that a Prince is not master of
his Will, and is made unfit to bear the Power (i.) the administration of it,
but by these he is not so. 2. Because this falls in with the Case, as it is
propounded in better terms by the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, whether
the forceable resistance of inferior Persons misimployed to serve the illegal
destructive Commands of the Prince be unlawful? pa. 51. I answer, if by those
misimployed persons be understood, the Commanders and Soldiers of the Kings
Armies, I cannot see (nor any man else, I think) but the resisting of them by a
contrary Militia or Arms raised by Subjects, is a resisting of the King and
unlawful; and unto this Resistance the Case, as I propounded it did relate,
and accordingly the first Resolution was, That were the King what they supposed
him to be, there was no warrant for such resistance. But if by those
misimployed persons be understood other instruments of oppression in times of
Peace before it come to Arms, such as the pleaders for defensive Arms do
suppose (in their last Case, page 2.) to have counterfeited the Kings Seal or
Warrant, and by it to Spoil and Murder all the Kings faithful Subjects if
they be not resisted; or such as the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, does
(in his instances page 57.) suppose indeed to have the Kings Seal or Warrant,
wherewith they might range through the Kingdom, wasting and spoiling, taxing
and distraining, yea might destroy the Members of Parliament as they sit in
their Houses, if they might not be resisted. Ans. For that of the counterfeited
Seal, it is not to the purpose; if there be cause to doubt or suspect such a
Seal, there are undoubted Ministers of Power and justice to makestay of it
till it be made known above; as we see those dealt with, that bring counterfeit
Briefes, and as some years ago, he that counterfeited a Commission for taking
up Children for Virginia, was staid by authority and brought to Justice. But
suppose such instruments of oppression have indeed the Kings Seal, and Warrant
to Tax, Distreine, etc, May not private men resist such in their murdering
assaults, and the Ministers of Power and Authority suppress them in each
County by Force? I answer. This is an enlarging of the Case, which concerns
the present resistance as now it is undertaken by Subjects with Armies in the
field. Yet for farther satisfaction, and without prejudice to that which
clearly convinces the present resistance as unlawful, I conceive it
reasonable to say. First, if private men be suddenly assaulted in their
Persons by such instruments, without any foregoing pretense or reason (as of
Taxing, Distraining, Arresting) so that their life is imminently endangered,
and no means of avoiding by slight, then is personal defense Lawful; for
such sudden assault carries no pretense of authority with it; but if such
misimployed instruments come first to Tax, Distraine, Arrest, (as it is
supposed) private men ought not to resist, and so draw on the endangering of
life, but to seek redress above from Authority, and, if it may not be had, yet
not to resist. Secondly, If the Ministers of Power in each County do at first
stay, restrain, and commit such mis-imployed instruments, and so represent the
matter again to the King; if the two Houses of Parliament also, deal in like
manner with those that by virtue of any such Warrant should notoriously
trespass upon them, this is not to resist; for here is only a desire of
informing the King aright, not a will of contending with him, if he will not be
of another mind. Now (as the pleaders for defensive Arms say page 2.) The Law
supposing the King can do no wrong supposes wrong may be done in His name,
and therefore teaches the Ministers of Power and Justice under him, to presume
such illegal Warrants and surreptitiously or by fraud procured, and so at
first to make stay of such mis-imployed instruments, and to bring the matter
again to the knowledge of the King.

Secondly, Should a King be so obstinate, as to perfist in the maintenance of
those illegal courses, and to that end employed the Militia or power of Arms,
wherewith he is invested, it is neither Legal nor Reasonable, that the
Ministers of power under him, should pursue the opposition to the setting up of
a Militia or contrary power, to the introducing of a Civil War. For though
such Ministers of Power ought to use all fair and Lawful means for the
restraining of such mis-imployed instruments, and it is not for me to set
bounds how far they may proceed in preserying the Kings Peace, by using that
Power against mis-imployed Persons, yet surely they cannot proceed so far as
to a contestation of Power with Him whose Ministers they are, much less to a
Levying of War, as at this day, and an apposing of Armies against Armies.
This is the Resistance supposed in the Case, and in this Case to resist the
Kings Forces is to resist Him.

SECT. III. Several kinds of Monarchy.
IN the next place we are called to a consideration of the several kinds of
Monarchical government, that it may appear, whether in any of them this
Resistance by force of Arms may find allowance or otherwise.

The Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, observing there was but little
pretense from Scripture, either by precept or Example, for Resistance,
confesses that the Kings, under which the People of God were in the Old and
New Testament, might not be resisted, and therefore lays all the defense of
Resistance upon reason, drawn from the several condition of an Absolute and of
a Limited or Mixed Monarchy. For which purpose he spends the first part of his
book, in clearing the point according to his own principles, and then coming
to apply what he had said, touching Limited and Mixed Monarchies, to the
Government of this Land, he complains of us Divines, that we plead for
Absolutenesle of Monarchical power in this Kingdom, never making any
difference of Powers, but bringing proofs for Subjection and against
Resistance from places of Scripture (a sore fault) and examples which concern
the manner of the government of Judah, Israel, and the Romans: as if that
which holds in our government, did always hold in another, so he page 33. And
then he endeavors to prove this Monarchy, to be so mixed, as that the Houses
of Parliament be originally joined with the Monarch in the Sovereign Power.
Whence he thinks he has both an answer to places and examples taken out of
Scripture, that they belonged to absolute Monarchies, are not appliable to
ours; and also a demonstration of his conclusion for Resistance. viz. that by
the Mixed condition of this Monarchy (as he phansyeth it) the two Houses are
vested with power to restrain with force of Arms the Exorbitances of the
Monarch.

Ans. It was never my intent (nor was, I suppose, of other Divines) to plead
for absoluteness of Power in the King, if by absoluteness of power be meant
(as it should be) a power of Arbitrary command, but if by Absoluteness of
Power this Author means (as he does sometimes) a Power not to be resisted or
constrained by force of Arms raised by Subjects, such a power we plead for,
and do say, That as those places and examples out of Scripture did forbid
resistance then, and show, no warrant for it can be had either by precept or
example out of Gods word, so do they condemn resistance in this Government,
though Limited, as shall be shown.

We allow a distinction of Monarchies, and admit the Government of Kingdoms to
be of diverse Kinds, and acknowledge a Legal restraint upon the Power of the
Monarch in this Kingdom; but when this Author has made all the advantage he
can of his Limited and mixed forms of Monarchy, it will not avail him for the
Countenancing of Arms taken up by Subjects: for this will appear to be truth,
agreeable to Scripture and Reason. That ^overnment is not the invention of man,
but the institution of God, whereby he rules men by men set over them in his
stead; and though he does not now immediately design those his Vicegerents,
but by other means, be it by the choice of the People; yet have they their
power not from the People, (to whom it belongs to be governed, and do by
choosing a Governor, seek a benefit safely) but from ^od, by virtue of his
institution of Government. Also, that the Governing Power, is one and the same,
which God gives and settles upon the Person that is Supreme, and stands
immediately next to God, between Him and the People: only that Power may be
Limited in the exercise of it, as the People by agreement at first, or by
Petition after can procure. Also, that where the Prince stands Supreme, and
next to ^od above all the People, there Subjects may not take Arms, and make
forceable Resistance, notwithstanding he be exorbitant in the exercise and use
of that Power, to the invasion of such Rights and Privileges, as they enjoy by
first compact, or after procurement.

The pleaders for resistance on the other side, do wilfully embrace and rest
upon the Opinion of Heathen writers, touching the beginning of Government, and
the derivation of the Governing Power from the People, as if they had not
Scripture (which the Heathen wanted) to give them better direction herein.

The Author of the Treatise of Monarchy seems to refer the beginning of
Government to Gods ordinance, and to affirm the power to be from God, Page 2.
but in the process of his book, we shall find him deriving it indeed from
the People, and Page 4. he concludes thus for both. They, which say that
Sovereigns have their Power from God, speak in some sense truth, as also they
Which say that originallie power is in the People, may in a sound sense be
understood; and in these things we have D. Fernes consent in his discourse upon
this Subject, Sect. 3. Answ. you had not his consent in your sense; for in that
Sect. it was his intent to show that the Governing Power, (i) such an Authority
or sufficiency for command and coertion, was from God, though the designation
of the Person be by choice of the People, and the limitations of that power in
several kinds of Monarchy be by their consent and agreement. Now if to design
the Person, or procure limitation of the power in the exercise of it, be in
your sound sense to give the power, there is no great harm to us, or advantage
to you: you must have the power originally from the people in another sense, or
else you can make no pretense by it for your grounds of Resistance; and so you
do, when you tell us, Page 16. they sometime reserve a power to oppose or
displace the Magistrate: sometime they make the Monarch Supreme, and then they
divest themselves of all Superiority, and have no power left to oppose him in
Person, and Page 63. you call them Architectonicall powers, committing the
power of Government and Arms, etc. This is the riddle of this governing power
originally in the people, they are Architect. powers, but build upon
foundations laid in the air; they are invested with Superiority, but none can
tell over whom, besides themselves; they reserve a power, but such as they
never had; for before Government established, they have not any power of a
community or politic power, whereby a command may be laid upon others, but
only a natural power of private Resistance, wherewith every one of them is in
particular endued, which power they cannot use against the public Magistrate,
when once they have designed him.

Now let us take a nearer view of the forms of Monarchy spoken of by this
Author, and make a few observations upon such particulars, as will be of more
necessary consideration, when we come to the examination of Scripture, of
Reason, and of the Constitution of this Monarchy.

First, he tells us, Absolute Monarchy is when the Sovereignty is so fully in
one, that it has no limits or bounds under God, but the Monarchs own will: so
it is when a People are absolutely resigned up or do resign up themselves to
be governed by one man, page 6. We allow this description, but must remember it
below, when this Author will tell us, the Israelitish Kings were absolute
Monarchs, which will not appear by this description, also when he tells us that
to make a Monarch irresistible, is to make him absolute, for we see by this
description it is not the denial of resistance that makes a Monarch absolute,
but the denial of a Law to bound his will.

In the next place he tells us, He is a limited Monarch who has a Law besides
His own will for the measure of His power, page 12. This also is true. But he
supposes first, that this Monarch must be limited in the very power it self,
not only in the exercise of the power, for an absolute Monarch may stint
himself, in the exercise of his power, and yet remain absolute. Answ. True,
if such a Monarch limit himself to such a Rule in such a case, reserving power
to vary from it when he shall see good cause: but if he that is Originally
absolute and unlimited do in some particular cases fix a Law with promise not
to vary from it, he is so far forth, and only so far as concerns those
cases, limited and not absolute. Secondly, he supposes, such a Monarch must
be Radically (i.) Originally invested with such a measure of limited power,
and that he must have his bounds or limit^ of power ab externo, not from the
free determination of his own will. page 12. yet at the beginning of the next
page, he tells us, that soeveraignty comes thus to be desined to a rule, (i)
to be limited, either by Original constitution, or by after condescent, when
a Monarch, originally absolute, descends from His absoluteness to a more
moderate power. That which he has to salve it is, that this limiting by after
condescent, is equivalent to that which is by Original constitution; for there
is in it a change of title, and a resolution in the Monarch to be Subject to in
no other way, then according to such a Law, page 13. Answ. Where here is such a
change of title as this man supposes, it is done at once, and by express and
notorious resignation of the Monarchs former title and power. But it is not
necessary that an Absolute Monarch should come to a limited condition after
that manner, for a Monarch that was unlimited at first, by degrees may limit
and bind up his power, and give oath for greater security, that he will rule
accordingly, and requires not to be subject to, but according to such
limitations or Laws; and so it will appear that the pious Princes of this
Land have anciently done. Only when it is said, they require not to be subject
to but according, etc. it must be understood in regard of Active subjection,
which they cannot expect, if they shall command against those Laws, nor in
regard of Passive subjection, as if they allowed their Subject to resist upon
such commands; for it can scarce be imagined, that any Prince should condescend
to a limited use of his power, and blind himself by Oath not to transgress
the limits, he should also have the bands of force and constraint cast upon
him, for the keeping of Him within those limits.

The other distinction, which most concerns the business in hand, is of
Monarchy into simple, without any Mixture of Aristocracy or Democracy, and
Mixed, that has an allay from one or both of those. In the explication of
which, that he may lay convenient grounds for such a Mixture as he would make
in this Monarchy, he tells us; if the composition be of three, then must the
sovereign power be in all three Originally, and not one holding his power from
the other, but all equally from the fundamental constitution; His Reasons are.
1. Because else it would be no Mixture but a Derivation of Power to others,
which is seen in the most simple Monarchy. 2. Because the end of Mixture
(which ^s to keep each state from exorbitancy) could not be obtained by a
derivate power; for such a power cannot turn back, and set bounds to its
beginning, so he, page 25.

Answ. We see by thi^ where he will place the two Houses, in a Society of the
Sovereign Power, and that by Original constitution, which will appear but a
phansy when we come to examine it below; but for the grounding of it, he
supposes that Mixture must be in the very sovereign power, and that
originally, or from the beginning of the government; neither of which is
necessary: for I conceive that as Limitation in government, is in regard of a
Law or Rule, which bounds the will of the Monarch for those particulars that
Law concerns; and such limitation may be only of the exercise of the power
not of the power it self; so Mixtures is in regard of Persons joined to the
Monarch for certain Acts and purposes; but that such Persons should have a
share with the Monarch in the Sovereign Power, is so far from being
necessary to that mixture which Monarchy will admit of, that indeed it cannot
consist with that Supremacy which is supped to be in the Monarch, for it would
make several independent powers in the same State or Kingdom, which is most
absurd. If therefore the concurrence and consent of such persons be required as
necessary to the exercise only of the Sovereign power in such or such Acts,
it is sufficient to make a Mixture in the Government.

In like manner as it was said above of Limited Monarchies, that it is not
necessary they should be so Originally, but may become such by after
condescent, so may it be said of Mixed Monarchies. And it is clear that in
most Monarchies of Europe, which have been parts or branches of the Roman
Empire and by force of Arms broken off from it, the Monarch at first had
absolute power, (like as the Roman Emperors had over their conquered
Provinces) but by degrees have received Limitations to govern according to
such and such Laws, and have admitted Mixtures by a concurrence of such and
such persons, whose consent should be requisite and necessary to some exercises
of their sovereign power.

Now to his Reasons I answer, Derivation of power is either upon substitute
Officers and Ministers, which supply the absence of the Monarch in the
execution of Power and Justice for him upon his People, and such derivation of
Power is in the most simple Monarchy: or else it is upon such Persons or such
an order of men, whose concurrence and consent is required to certain Acts of
Monarchical Power, and this makes a Mixture, though they have no share in the
very power, but concur to the exercise of it only, and have not that neither
Originally, but upon condescent of the Prince; yet have it certainly and
irrevocably by Law settled upon them. Now if this Author will not call this a
Mixture, because it is not Originally in the power it self, we cannot help it;
we are sure it makes a large and real difference in Government, and may obtain
its end (the keeping of each State from exorbitancy) in that way it is intended
to do it in; which will give answer to his other Reason. For though a
Derivative power can (...) bounds to the Sovereign power, yet may it stand to
(...) way, those bounds, which the soveraig^ power has set to it self, and
made the Derivate power the keeper of. The Kings of the M^des and Persians were
in most things absolute, yet in this had they bound themselves, not to alter a
Decree made by the advice of the Septemviri, or the Princes and chief
Counselors of the Kingdom, as we see Dan. 6.14. and Est. 1.19. So may it be
easily conceived in any other State; the Prince, though unlimited at first, may
bind up his Power from such or such Acts, unless he has the consent of such
Counselors unto them; which consent and concurrence does not give them a share
in the Sovereign power, but makes them as Bounders in the Exercise of it; nor
does it imply in those Persons a power of forceable constraint, but only of
Legal and Moral restraint, as will appear in the fifth Section.

I will conclude this Section with a brief consideration of what he delivers
concerning Monarchy by Conquest. First, If the Invasion, says he, be made upon
pretense of Title, and the Pretender does prevail, it is not conquest
properly, but a vindication of a Title, and then the government is such as the
Title is by which he claimed, page 21. I will not dispute whether a people so
standing out do forfeit those Privileges and Liberties they formerly enjoyed,
or whether a Prince so forced to vindicate His Title ^y subduing the People be
not free from the former Limitations, to which Princes peaceably entering bound
themselves, and whether He may not use such a People as a Conqueror? I should
commend the Clemency and Piety of that Prince, that would not, but I do not
see the injustice, if he should so use them.

Secondly, He blames the Censure, which the Fuller Answer gave of Conquest,
that the title of it was such as Plunderers have, etc. and tells us, the Right
of Conquest is such, as the precedent War is, if that he Lawful so is the
Conquest, yet is it not the Conquest that makes them Morally bound, but their
own Consent in accepting of the Government, page 22. Well, but a forced consent
will suffice, and such will scarce be wanting to a Conquest, and they that
plead title of Conquest do not divide it from such a forced consent of People,
but from a free limiting election.

Thirdly, He grants that while their natural Sovereign is in being, the
People cannot by consent devolve a Right to the Conqueror: But suppose they
have not that tie upon them, may they perpetually stand out against the
Conqueror, or rather are they not bound to consent and yield to His yoke,
after they see they are wholly subdued, and he has settled a frame of Government
among them? He tells us Conquest may give title and power to dispose of the
Country, goods, and lives of the Conquered, but still it is in the Peoples
choice to come to a Moral condition of Subjection: if they will suffer the
utmost of Violence from the Conqueror rather, then consent to any terms of
Subjection, as Numantia in Spain, they dye or remain a free people, nor do
they resist Gods Ordinance, if at any time of advantage, they use force to free
themselves from so violent a possession: so he page 22. It is an
uncontrouleable truth in Policy, that the consent of the People, either by
themselves or their Ancestors, is the only Mean in ordinary Providence, by
which Sovereignty is conferred upon any Person or Family; so he concludes page
23. Answ. That consent of People is the only mean, in your sense, may be an
uncontrouleable truth in the Policy lately framed; but it is certain, that God
has power to dispose of us in ordinary providence, without expecting our
consents and choice; it is plain by Scripture, that Conquest is a Mean of
translating Kingdoms and disposing of People in the way of ordinary providence;
it was so when God gave Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar as an hire for his service done
upon Judah, so when the Ammonites and Edomites were subdued by David, of which
see below, Sect. 6. against the Fuller Answer. Had these no right over those
conquered Nations, but by expecting their consent? Yea, will he say, a Right to
dispose of their Lands and Goods, and lives, but not to challenge their Moral
Subjection, Well, we doubt not but such Conquerors could force their consent;
but I ask, were they not bound to yield it? is there no way for that
providence, which translates Kingdoms, to discover it self, but by the consent
of the Conquered People, that if they please to be obstinate, his providence
shall give no Right? his setting up a King by Conquest over such a people shall
be no institution o^ Ordinance? this is good Policy but bad Divinity: I
conceive it all (...) controuleable truth, that when the invading Prince has
perfectly subdued a People (there being no present Sovereign or apparent Heir
of the Crown, to whom they are bound) as has settled and disposed all things and
constituted a frame of Government, then I say providence does sufficiently
discover it self, and such a people ought to submit, and consent, and take
their Prince as set over them by the hand of Providence; so that, if they will
persist finally to resist (as this Author says they may) they resist the
Ordinance of God. If he will not believe me, let him hear Calvin, who in his
Instit. l. 4. c. 20. nu. 26, 27. does enforce obedience to that Prince which is
over us, by a reason drawn from that Providence of God, which disposes
Kingdoms, and sets up over us what Kings he pleases, and from the example of
Nebuchadnezzar, Ier. 27.8. does infer; Cuicunqve ergo delatum fuisse regnum
conslabit, ei serviendum esse ne dubitemus: But how shall we discover his
providence and will herein? the next words tell us: Atque simul ac in Regium
fastigium quempiam evebit Dominus, testatam nobis facit suam voluntatem, quod
regnare illum velit. So in his Comment upon 1 Samuel 26. Licet multi avaritia,
ambitione, crudelitate invascrit regna and imperia, tamen Dei voluntatem pluris
esse, quam omnia illa, faciendam sciamus; ac proinde nos illis ultro
submittamus, quos Deus Reges nobis praefecit. This is very home against this
Authors assertion, wherein he denies Conquest to confer a Sovereignty, and will
not suffer God in the ordinary way of Providence to dispose of a people without
their own consents. But enough of this; We come now to make Application of what
has been said to the Particular Monarchy of this Land.

SECT. IV. Of the Constitution of this Monarchy.
BEfore we come to examine how this Author has stated ^he point of Resistance
in relation to the several kinds of Monarchy, it will not be amiss to
consider unto what kind this Monarchy belongs; whether it be such a Limited
Mixed Monarchy, as this man would have it, Originally and Fundamentally, by the
placing of Nobles and Commons, as sharers with the Monarch in the Sovereign
power. It would be seem the skillful in the Law to speak to this point (if
they could be induced to deliver what they know) but seeing there is enough in
History and Reason, which speaks the Frame and beginning of this Monarchy
otherwise, then this Author or others before him have sansyed: it will not be
hard to say so much, as may (which was heretofore endeavored in ^^y Reply) let
Conscience see, it can have no plea for Resistance from the supposed grounds,
upon which these men lay the platform of this Monarchy.

I had twice occasion in my first Treatise to speak of the beginning of this
Government, in the Arms of the Saxons and Normans, which was not (as this
Author feignes, page 33. 34.) to prove our Kings Absolute; herein I challenge
his ingenuity, if either I proposed this as a Conclusion to be proved, That our
Kings are Absolute, or urged the entrance of the Saxons and Normans, as an
argument to prove it by; but only all adged it twice by way of Answer to what
was spoken by them, touching a right in the People by virtue of such a
capitulating election at first, as they suppose to have given beginning to this
Monarchy; in both which places I expressly intimated, those Conquests were not
mentioned to win an Arbitrary power to the King, but only to exclude
Resistance and such a supposed election.

The beginning of this English Monarchy, and the root of succession of the
Monarchs we must fetch from the Saxons, and this Author bids us look so far
back, when (to cut off the advantages that may be made against him from the
Normans entrance) he tells us, page 35. that Duke William came upon the old
limited Title, whereby the English Saxon Kings his Predecessors held this
Kingdom.

How the Saxons entered upon the Kingdom is well known: they made themselves
masters of this Kingdom by Arms, which although it does not infer our Kings
are now Absolute, (an inference as far from my intention as his) yet does it
plainly overthrow such an original Mixture in the sovereign power, as this
Author has phansyed: and herein (because I have spoken to this point, as
occasion required, in the third Sect. of my Reply to the Full Answerer (who had
the like conceit of such an Original Mixture, though not so refined as this
Author has given it us) I shall be the briefer in my Answer to this.

First, This Author says, It was not a Conquest that the Saxons made, but an
expulsion, page 35. Ans. This is neither true nor greatly material. Not true,
for it cannot be imagined but a great part of the Britains remained under the
Saxon yoke; so M. Cambden tells us, they were the fewer that fled toward
Wales, and defended themselves against the Saxons in the West: his words are,
Victi omnes in gentem, leges, nomen, linguamque vincentium, praeter paucos,
quos locorum asperitas in occidentali tractu tutata est, concesserunt. Camb,
Britan. Saxon. Nor is it greatly material, for if we could imagine that the
Britains were not brought under the yoke, but expelled, yet can we not
imagine, that the Government of those Saxon Kings (being made such by the
acclamation of their Soldiers, as when the Praetorian guard, or some Army
abroad saluted a Roman Emperor) was at first any other, then is the government
or command of Generals over their Soldiers, that is unlimited; much less so
Limited and Mixed, as this Author phansyeth it, who looking upon the Model or
Platform of this Monarchy, page 44. 45. does admire their Wisdom (as more
then humane) that had the contriving of it; but can any one suppose such a
Platform laid, that considers the beginning of the Saxon Monarchy, or imagine
such admirable Wisdom more than humane, in those rude and violent beginnings?

But he tells us in the second place, the Saxons planting themselves here under
their Commanders, no doubt continued the freedom they had in Germany, and so
changed their soil not their government, page 35, but what proof to put this
out of doubt? a conjecture out of Tacitus, that wrote of the Germans some
hundreds of years before this entrance of the Saxons; Among the Germans says
he, Nec Regibus aut infinita aut libera potestas. True, but we may see by those
Authors, that M. Cambden alleadges for the Original of these Saxons, that in
probability these Suxons were not then among those people of Germany, that
Tacitus speaks of, but did afterward break out of the Cimbrica chersonesus,
into that part of Germany where now we find the Saxons, and into this Land; But
why should we rest upon such dreams and uncertainties, as these men would put
us upon? this is certain, that the Saxons being entered, and having vanquished
the Britains did by degrees, as they could win upon the Britains, raise
seven Kingdoms or Monarchies independent, yet so as that still one of them,
the most powerful, was Monarch of All, or King of all England, as Mr Cambden
and others show out of Bid, till at length the King of the West Saxons,
Egbert, vanquished the rest, and settled the Succession of the sole Monarchy in
his Line, and those that should come after him.

Now would I fain know, how this Author, or any other of their best phansies
can conceive, that such a Mixture, as joins Nobles and Commons in the
Sovereign power with the Monarch (for so they would have it) can possibly
consist with such a beginning of Government? was it in them all seven? or could
it consist with that solenesse or height of Monarchy which was still in one of
them, and transferred from Kingdom to Kingdom, not by any fundamental
constitution, but by power, and the personal Prowess of the Monarch? Or did
Edgbert (that settled that condition of sole and chief Monarch upon his own
successors by the subversion of the other Kingdoms) know any Subjects of His
to be sharers with him in the Sovereign power?

This Author indeed tryes what his phansy can do, page 44. Where by six
suppositions he endeavors to bring the Reader to an apprehension of the
platform of this Monarchy; When you have made these suppositions (says he) in
your mind, you have the very Model and Platform of this Monarchy, Page 45. So
the Reader must rest upon his suppositions against the Credit of all Histories
and Chronicles; and those his suppositions begin thus page 44. Suppose a People
(1.) Nobles and Commons set over themselves by public compact one Sovereign,
and resign up themselves to Him and His heirs, to be governed by such and such
fundamental Laws; then suppose them Covenanting with their Sovereign, that if
cause be to constitute any other Laws, he shall not do it by His sole power,
but they erserve at first, or afterward it is granted them (which is all one)
a hand of concurrence therein, that they will be bound by no Laws, but what
they join with him in the making of. and so he goes on with six suppositions;
but first he must have a strong phansy that can conceive (as I said) this
consistent with the beginnings of the Saxon Government, as if it could be laid
in such a platform. Secondly, in giving us the brief of this Platform he
still tells us that by the Admirable wisdom of the Architects of this
Government, the Nobles and Commons have their power and Authority, not
depending on the Monarch, but radically their own, by fundamental Mixture, so
page 41. and elsewhere: but in the six suppositions wherein he would lay this
platform open to the view, he brings up the Houses to this power they have, by
steps of time; and coming to make those suppositions, he speaks doubtingly of
the Original contriving of this government, whether (says he) done at once,
or by degrees found out and perfected, page 44. but this contriving must be
made at once and at first, when they chose the first King, or else they cannot
have this power and Authority radically their own. And we cannot imagine but
Bid, and other Historians, would have observed such convention of Nobles and
Commons (as this Author supposed) for the contriving of this Government, in
which they demeaned themselves with such admirable wisdom; or if they could
not tell us of such a convention of them at first, for the contriveing and
beginning of the Government, they could not but observe some meetings of them
after, for the use of this power in the managing of the Government.

Assemblies doubtless there were for representing of grievances to the
Monarch, and for giving advise in the redress; and among the Orders, of which
those Assemblies did anciently consist, there were Procuratores cleri, the
representatives of the Clergy, (as I have heard good Lawyers affirm, and one
of my former Answers had it in his Margin, though little to his advantage) but
here we are called by this Author to believe or rather suppose an assembly
consisting of Nobles and Commons, vested with part of the Sovereign power by
orginall constitution; when as neither he nor any other Author could bring any
one Record for it above the Norman Conquest; and those Histories or Chronicles,
which mention the beginning of Parliaments as now they stand in Authority, do
not rise so high as those times; Now seeing the Parliament it self, 24 H. 8.
c, 12. does declare, that this Realm of England has been ever accepted for an
Empire, governed by one supreme Head etc. and tells us, that Histories and
Chronicles show as much, why should these Chronicles be so many ages silent in
the original Constitution, by which this Anthor gives the two Houses their
power from the beginning of this Monarchy, if either such a constitution ever
was, or indeed could consist with this Empire, and this one supreme head?

This Author tells us, page 36. that the Trial by twelve men and other
fundamentalls of Government, wherein the English freedom consists, were left
untouched by the Conqueror. But why could not he tell us as well, that this
power which he asscribes to the two Houses was left untouched? he would if he
could have made it appear to have been before the Conquest; Mr. Cambden names
the King before the Conquest, that first ordained the trial by twelve Men, but
what Chronicle can do as much for the other? the like original to that of the
trial by twelve men, had other Liberties of the Subject, to wit by after
condescent of the Prince, and yet this Author calls that Trial a fundamental:
and so it is, not of the Monarchy, but of the Subjects liberty, or, as he said,
of the English freedom.

We need not after all this (which has been spoken of the beginning of the
English Saxon Government (into which this Author says Duke William succeeded,
and in the same right of those Saxon Kings) seek advantage from the entrance of
that Norman Conqueror* Yet this we can say (and it appeare^ out of several
Authors cited by Mr. Cambd^n in his Britan. Norman) that the Conqueror
invictoriae quasi Trophaeum, as a Trophy and memorial of his Conquest,
disposed of the Lands of the Conquered, changed, their tenure, abrogated what
English Laws and Customs he pleased, and gave them what Laws he thought
good, and unto this the People were content to yield, which is more then can
evidently be said by this Author for the stating of the Roman Emperors in a
condition irresistible, as we shall see below upon the 13. to the Romans as we
can say this to the overthrow of their ground of resistance (that fundamental
mixture or joining the Houses with the Monarch, as sharers, in the Sovereign
power) so do we say, that what Limitations, Laws, Privileges, Customs, have
been after procured by, or restored to the People, all those the King as He is
sworn, so is He bound to observe, because of the Cath of God.

So that this Author speaks but his own Phansyes, when he concludes thus upon
William the Conqueror. By granting the former Laws and Government, he did
equivalently put himself and his successors into the state of Legal
Monarchs, and in that Tenure have all the kings of this Land held the Grown
unto this day, when these men would rake up and put a Title of Conquest upon
them, which was never made use of by him who is the root of their succession,
page 37. How far Duke William made use of his Title by Conquest, and how he
granted the former Laws and Government appears, by that which was spoken even
now out of M. Cambden, that is, he made use of it so far forth as he pleased,
and granted what Laws he pleased of the former Government, and what new ones
he pleased, those he imposed on the people; and unto this they agreed,
willingly or unwillingly it matters not, as is sometimes granted by this
Author. But by this he did equivalentlie put himself (says he) and successors
into the state of Legal Monarchs: He did so in a good sense, but not as this
Author means it; for we know (by that which was observed above Sect. 3
concerning a Monarch originally unlimited, but falling off into a more moderate
and limited condition) that his meaning is, that Duke William by granting such
Laws did put himself in such a Condition, as if at first he had been limited
so by the people, they reserving to themselves power of resisting his
exorbitancies, which should be destructive of those Limitations and Laws; this
is a Legal Monarch in his sense: but we say he became a Legal Monarch, that
is bound himself to rule according to such Laws as he had granted. Nor do
we rake up a Title of Conquest for his Successors, or would have them any other
then Legal Monarchs; but by that (which has been shown, and cannot be denied)
it appears, that the Root of Succession, whether English or Norman, sprang up
by conquest, and that the Privileges and Powers, wherewith we see the Subject
invested, were of an after spring, that is, of after agreement, or by condescent
of the Monarch; which Powers and Privileges, grants, Liberties, though not
original, yet are they irrevocable, the Prince is bound, as was said, to
observe them because of the Oath of God. I will but add M. Cambdens expression
of the Monarchical power. The Kings of this Land have potestatem supremam and
merum imperium, so he in his Britan. which as it excludes all Subjects from
having share in the Sovereign power, for in that respect it is Merum imperium
not mixtum; so does it not exclude such limitations and mixtures as have been
by after condescent, for the bounding of that Sovereign power in the exercise
and use of it.

But now this Author will endeavor, against the credit of History and
Antiquiry, to reason us into a belief of such a frame as he has molded this
Monarchy in. First he would prove, That the Sovereignty of the King is
radycally and fundamentally Limited, not only in the use and exercise of it,
but in the power it self, page 31 then, That the Authority of this Land is
Mixed in the very root and constitution of it. page 39.

This were an argument fit for a skillful Lawyer to Labor in, yet so much in
consequence I can at first sight perceive in his prooses, that I dare pronounce
them insufficient to clear what he undertakes. His proo^es are either his own
reasons, or drawn from the Kings own grants in his late expresses.

His reasons for the Limited condition of our Kings, are from the denomination
of Liege and Legal Sovereign, and from Proscription, which evinceth, that in
all ages beyond record, the Laws and Customs of this Kingdom have been the
rule of Government. page 32 Answ. This proves that our Kings are limited in the
use or exercise of their power, and noe more for neither that Denomination, nor
any prescription can make us believe that the Limitations of their power had
any other beginning, then from their voluntary and pious condescent to such or
such moderations and allayes, which by constant usage and custom, or eise by
express Laws were made ever after inevitable and irrevocable by the Monarchs
themselves; the Oath also of succeeding Monarchs, binding them to the observing
of such Laws and Customs.

His reasons Iikewise for the mixed constitution of this Government do prove a
mixture, but not such as he would have, nor from the beginning or first
constitution of the Monarchy; they are these: 1 Because it is a Monarchy mixed
with an A^istocracy in the Lords, and Democracy in the Commons, but the^e is no
Mixture which is not in the root and supremacy of power, page 40. 2. Because it
is a Monarchy where the Legis^^tive power is in all three, and therefore mixed
in the very root and essence of it, ibid. 3 Because it is a Monarchy in which
three Estates are constituted to the end that the power of one should moderate
and restrain from excess the power of the other, and therefore mixed in the
root and essence of it, ibid: the same reasons he uses, Page 43. to prove the
Authority of both Houses to be no derived authority, but equally original and
fundamental with that of the King; and says, he cannot devise, what can
reasonably be said in opposition to these Grounds proving a fundamental
mixture. Answ. And I must say, I cannot devise what sh uld move a man of
reason, (as this Author seems to be) so often to prosfesse as he does, that he
is convinced of such a fundamental constitution of this Monarchy; for I cannot
be convinced but his grounds are false supposalls.

For first, it is not necessary, the mixture should be in the root or Supremacy
of power: but it is sufficient, if there be a concu^rence of Persons, whose
consent is required to the exercise of that Supreme power, as was explained
above, Sect. 3. when we spoke of mixture. Nay, if it must be in the Supremacy
of power, as he will have it, how can he make the King the only Supreme, and
that one Head, to which the whole Body politic is bound and united, as he
grants, page 42.43. He cannot salve it with his Apex potestatis, which he there
gives to the King, uniesle the King must be the Crown or top of the head only;
for they also must be our Head and our Sovereigns, if they be mixed or joined
with him in the Supremacy of power, as this Author would have it,

Secondly, the phrase of Legislative power, ascribed to the two Houses is
satisfied and explained by that concurrence and consent of theirs in and to the
exercise of the Supreme power, as above; but I cannot be convinced, that it
argues the power it self, which gives life to a Law, to be in them, but their
assent to be requisite and necessary, so that without it no Law can be made;
which is enough if men could be content. So when it is said, Be it enacted by
the Authority of this Parliament: None denies, but to have such Vote or power
of affenting is a great Authority, but not such as makes them sharers in the
Supremacy of power, for then should they also be our Head and our Sovereigns,
as was said above; before that phrase was used, we find it r^n thus, The King
by the advice and assent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and at the
instance and request of the Commonalty has ordained. etc: which tells us
plainly, where the fountain of the ordaining or Legislative power is; and how
that power is excited or stirred up to Act, by the instance and request of the
Commons representing to the King the grievances of his People; and that the
efflux of that fountain, or the exercise of that power is not soly in his
Will, that is, comes not to the Act of ordaining without the consent of Lords
and Commons.

Thirdly, to his third Reason I answer; The end of this mixture or concurrence
is to restrain from excess; but the restraint is moral and legal, not
forcible by power of Arms, Parliamentary by way of assent or dissent to the
ordaining power, not military by Armies in the Field; as will more clearly
appear by the next Section concerning resistance in mixed Monarchies: Now such
a moral restraint does not argue the Monarchy mixed in the Root and first
constitution, for the Houses may be vested with such a power afterward; but the
Restraint that this Author intends is a forcible restraint by Arms, a mere
phansy, for if the fundamental Constitution had intended them such a power, it
would not have left a power in the Monarch to call them or dissolve them, which
would make this pretended power of theirs altogether in effectual, but would
have left them continually existing and in being.

His proofs from the Kings own Grants for the Radical Limitation of this
Monarchy are these, Page 31. His Majesty who best knows by his Counsel the
nature of his own power, says, That the Law is the measure of his power, and
in his Answer concerning the Militia, says, If more power shall be thought fit
to be granted them, then by Law is in the Crown, etc. whereby it is granted,
The King has no more power then by Law is in him: so he. Also for such a mixed
Condition of this Monarchy as these men would have, they usually urge what His
Majesty has graciously said in His Answer to the 19 Propositions, That there is
a power Legally placed in the two Houses, more then sufficient to prevent and
restrain the power of Tyranny. To this purpose it is also, that some make
advantage of the Kings speaking of Himself, as of one of the Three Estates.

Answer

1. It is well known, when the king was first forced to make his defense by
writing, how few he had about Him, being drive^ from his learned Counsel, or
they one way or other kept from Him. Yet trusting to the justness of his
Cause, and integrity of his own intentio^s, He returned such Answers as did for
the present much sattisfie all reasonable people, and will one day (what ever
advantage is now picked out of them) be witnesses against those Troublers of our
peace, that put him to his defense.

II. It is very unjust, that the gracious Expressions, which his Majesty has
had of his Intentions and desires to rule and Command no otherwise then
according to law, should be set upon the Rack and drawn out to his
disadvantage, for the gaining of such a power to the Houses, as the law speaks
not to be in them. If Trajan, fully purposing to rule Justly, does out of such
Confidence give a Prefect his Commission and power, delivering him a Sword with
these words, Hoc prome vtere sirecte impero, si male cotra me; If I Command
aright, use this sword for me, if not against me. Shall it be concluded, that
Officer might acordingly use his Sword against the Emperors? 'And if the King
speak of himself as of One of the three Estates, shall any Subject diligently
watch what fal's from Him, and return him his words again to his own
disadvantage, (as Ben. hadads Messengers did 1. Kings, 20.33. Thy Brother
Benhadad (your fellow States Sr?

III. That which can fairly be gathered out of these expressions as intended
by his Majesty, does not come up to these men's conclusions; the first and
second speeches do show, how tender he is of doing any thing he may not do by
law, acknowledging his power is bounded and limited by Law; but it does not
follow, that his power or Sovereignty, wherein it is not limited by law, is not
absolute and full; for so it is clearly, wheresoever a Monarchy, at first
unlimited, does afterward receive Limits and Mixtures; of which Condition this
Monarchy appears to be by that which has been spoken in this Section.

So in his Answer to the 19. Prop. His Majesty acknowledges a power Legally in
the Houses to restrain -- which can not be extended beyond a Morrall,
Parliamentary restraint; otherwise let them produce any law that inables the
Houses to restrain Tyranny by the Arms of the Kingdom; for as for their
deductions from supposed Fundamentalls, we can deny them, as fast as they bring
them, either as failing in thire Antecedents and false suppositions, or as
altogether inconsequent. Also when this author of the Treatise of Monarchy does
in regard of that power, which is placed in the two Houses to restrain the
ex^^bitancies of the Monarch, so much admire the frame of this Government, as
composed by more then Humane wisdom page 44. Does he fall into this
admiration for the placing of a power of restraint by forceable resistance?
nothing admirable in that, were that the frame of this Government. That which
is commendable indeed and admirable in the Limitations and mixtures of this
Government, is that Way of Legal, Morrall, or Parliamentary prevention and
Restraint, which is established by law for our security.

Lastly when his Majesty has spoken of himself, as of one of the three
Estates, he has but spoken to them in their own phrase (for they first styled
him so) and that usually in the point of his Negative Voice; for every Bill
comes to him in the third or last place, the Lords spiritual and Temporal,
who indeed are two of the three Estates, making a Concurrence in one Vote or
Voice. But his Majesty did never use that phrase with any intent of diminution
to his Supremacy or Headship; for properly the Prelates, Lords, and Commons,
are the three Estates of this Kingdom, under his Majesty as their head.

Thus if we will trust our own Eyes for what we read in History and Chronicle,
or stand to Reason for the clear Inferences which may be drawn from the
known laws of this Land, or use any ingenuity in the interpretation of His
Majeslies Gracious Expressions, We can never be persuaded that the beginning of
this Monarchy was such, as these men suppose, that is, so Limited and mixed
radically and fundamentally, as these Authors and others have described it.

SECT. V. Of Resistance in relation to the several kinds of MONARCHY.
WE are now to consider, how this Author states the point of forceable
Resistance in these several kinds of Government, Which we shall find to be in
away that lies very open to Rebellion.

First, He grants the person of the Monarch in all those several kinds of
Monarchy to be above the reach of all force or positive Resistance. This is
true: but if this Author will allow as he does, Subjects to raise Arms, and
with them to give battle to those that are about the Person of the Monarch, as
his Guard, how shall His Person be secured from the Force and violence of the
meanest hand? Nay the joining of Battle with Him, as it is necessary
consequence of Refistance by Arms, which must come to that, if it be pursued,
so is it a direct Force intended and offered against His Person.

Secondly, Concerning an Absuolte Monarch, he resolves it thus.

If such a Monarch should so far degenerate as apparently to seek the
destruction of the whole Community subject to him, then might such a community
constreined by the last necessity resist by force of Arms against any
instruments employed to effect the same, page 9. for such an intention cannot be
the Act of a reasonable will, page 10. But first, if he means by the whole
Community, the whole body over which the power is placed, as he speaks, page
10 I grant it the Act of a most unreasonable will, but cannot conceive, how
such an intention should fall into the mind of the worst Tyrant, as to leave
himself no people to reign over. Secondly, if he means by that community a
certain sort of people, as were the Jews in the Kingdoms of Ahasnerus, and
the Templars in these Western Kingdoms; the destruction of such a people may
be the Act of a reasonable will; Haman makes a fair pretense and reason for
the extirpation of the Jews, Est. 3.8. and Ahasuerus his decree was the act of
a reasonable, though misguided will; but that such a Community, upon the
knowledge of such an intention may take Arms, is not proved by this Author;
for to prove it as he does) by Davias example, who was but a particular man, is
to show that a Community may do it because David in his own particular might
do it, and so to prove it by afferting a greater absurdity, viz. that a
particular or private man may take Arms against an absolute Monarch. His other
example he would prove it by, is the Revolt of the United Provinces from the
King of Spain, who resolved to extirpate the whole people, page 10. But it is
evident, the Spanish King intended the extirpation of the Protestants only; and
as this Author^^s told us here his opinion of the Revolt thereupon in the
United Provinces, so I would desire him to deliver his opinion of the Revolt
and Rebellion of the Papists in Ireland upon their certain knowledge that
their extirpation was contrived here, this Author knows by whom; I plead not
for them but could wish that the assertions and practice of These times did not
give them too much advantage; I could tell him the opinion and Resolution of
the Jews under Ahasuerus, that they would not take Arms for their defense
till it was permitted them by the King, ^st. 8.11. and the opinion of the
Primitive Christans, that they allowed not resistance, although the destruction
of their whole Community was evidently attempted. This may be objected against
his Resolution of the point, to make it doubtful; I must needs say this Case
of general destruction and Extirpation (which some call extreme Necessity) is
a very hard case; and whether ^t will excuse a people, that in such necessity
shall take Arms, I dispute not, nor is it needful I should: for it neither
concerns the Cas^, as now it stands between our King and his Subjects, He
inviting them by all fair offers to return from their obstinate disloyalty,
promising assuring them the Preservation of Religion Laws, Liberties; and what
not? Nor does it concern the Question now in hand which supposes not
Extirpation of a People as cause of their Arms, but only Exorbitancies of the
Prince tending to a subversion of Religion and Liberties, which Exorbitancies,
if they should be patiently born for the time that they shall cortinue, do not
take away the being and subsistence of a people, as Extirpation does; but only
put them, for that time, under the inconveniences of arbitrary government;
under which the people of God in the old Testament, and the Christians in the
New, were left without remedy by forceable Resistance.

Again, if any particular man's life be invaded without any plea or Reason for
it, he thinks that such a one may use forceable Resistance against any Agents
in such assault of murder, and that it is justified by the fact of David, and
rescue of Jonathan from the Causeless cruel intent of Saul, page 10. The Rule
here seems to speak no more then a Personal defense against a Murdering
assault, which was allowed above Sect. 2 provided that it be sudden without
any foregoing reason or pretense of Authority, and also inevitable: but in the
Examples he would infer more then he speaks in the Rule; for he supposes the
people would have rescued lonathan by force, i^ Saul had persisted in his
intent, and upon that false supposall, insinuates thus much, that if particular
men's lives be sought after, others may interpose with Arms for their defense;
and the Learned Divines do expressly infer from it, that Countries may
aslociate and bind themselves by oath not to suffer any of the impeached
Members to be cut off: good doctrines these from Scripture, as we shall see
when we come to that place. So in David's Example he would insinuate that if
particular men's lives be sought after, they may raise and entertame Forces for
their defense, as David did; but ^f this seem most absurd and dangerous (a^
indeed it is) and if the Jsraelitish Kings were absolute (as this Author often
grants) then must be acknowledge (what he accounts but one of my shifts, page
57.) that David's example is not herein appliable, but in this way of defense,
extraordinary. Of which more particularly below, when we come to places of
Scripture, that concern David's behavior toward Saul.

Lastly, he tells us, (which he should have done in the first place) that
Subjects of an absolute Monarch must without resistance submit their estates,
liberties, and persons to his will, so it carry any plea or show of reason and
equity, page 11. Ans. Here the way is open enough to Rebellion, for every man
will be ready to think there is no reason or equity in the will of the
Monarch, when he is oppressed by him; and if the plea or show of reason and
equity must be the bar to Resistance, it will little avail him to answer
below, that the Roman Emperors might not be resisted, because they were
absolute, for never was there less plea of Reason and Equity in the will of
any Tyrants, then in theirs. But he will close up the way by telling us,
absolute Monarchy resolves all judgment into the will of the Monarch; so that
if his will judicially censu^e it just it must be yielded to as just, so he,
page 11. But did not Saul censure David is one affecting the Kingdom, and
therefore worthy to dye, which was the act of a Reasonable will, though
following a (...) ormed understanding; and did he not use a (...) ^^dicary
process in the Cause of Ionath^n, sen^e^cing him upon the trial of Lots, why
then were these examples brought, the Author in the former page for Resistance,
if such a will o^ the Monarch must be yielded to? and why is there such a
condition added in the Rule, so it carry any plea of reason and (...)? this is
fast and loose; he that would have ^rection for resistance is here left upon
uncertaintie.

Let us proceed to Limited and mixed Monarchies. In such, he tells us, if the
Exorbitancies of the Monarch be of less moment, and not striking at the very
being of the Government, they ought to be borne by public patience, rather
then to endanger the being of the State by a Contention between the head and
the body. page 17. but if they be such as being suffered do dissolve the frame
of Government, and cannot be redressed by petition, then is prevention to be
sought by resistance, page 18. and 29. Here I must first challenge the
Ingeinuity of this Author, who citing my words page 49. taken out of my first
Sect: (We may and ought to deny obedience to such commands of the Prince as are
unlawful by the Law of God, yea by the established Laws of the Land) could
give this censure upon them, here he says more then we say, yea, more then
should be said; it is not universally true that we ought: considering, that the
case was there put concerning exorbitancies, not of less moment, ^ut tending
to the subversion of Religion, Laws, Liberties, and the question upon it was,
whether upon such a case might we resist, and the explication of the word
Resist was into a denying of Active obedience, and an using of forceable
resistance. Now my saying was, that to such commands of the Prince we ought to
deny obedience, but not use forceable resistance; they say (as he does here) we
ought also forceably to resist; and yet I say more then they say. Secondly, we
would know who shall be Judge of the subversive Exorb^tances of the Monarch. He
grants there can be no Authoritative Judge to determine it, for that would
overthrow the Monarchy, page 17. This is ingenuous, and does indeed
sufficiently overthrow the conceit of the Full Ans^erer, placing the final
Resolution and Judgment of this State in the two Houses. But what then must be
done? In a limited Monarchy, he tells us, the Fundamental Laws must judge and
pronounce sentence in every man's Conscience, for in such a case as transcends
the provision of the government, people are unbound and in state, as if they
had no government, and the superior Law of Reason and Conscience must be
Judge; so he, page 18. This is a ready way to Anarchy and confusion: The people
by this have liberty enough to conceive of their fundamental Rights as they
please, and of the Exorbitancies of their Prince, as may be most for their
advantage, especially being upon such a case (which themselves may make)
unbound and at liberty, as if they had no government. But these are fitting
grounds for Resistance.

Likewise, in mixed Monarchies, he tells us, the accusing and wronged side must
make it evident to every man's Conscience; also the appeal must be to the
Community, as if there were no government, and then as every man is convinced
in Conscience, he is bound to give assistance, so, page 29. Here is good
stuff; not altogether so bad indeed as we see in the practice of these times,
for here is no forcing of men to a Covenant, no forceable taking of their
estates away, but a leaving of them to their Consciences: yet is this bad
enough; for he supposes it as a thing possible, that two. Estates may make a
consederacy against the third, page 28. therefore so often as they shall combine
and declare against the Monarch, the people are at liberty, as if there were no
government, and then it seems they have all the power again in themselves,
which they had at first according to these men's principles. Also in this
controversy, says he, the appeal is to be made to the Community (i.) the
people; which though we have seen practiced at this day in many Remonstrances,
yet I think it was never given as a Rule before, it being in it self most
unreasonable and disadvantagious to the Monarch, for the people will be more
ready to believe their Representatives; and in the consequence most dangerous
the high way to confusion, as will more sully appear when we come to Reasons
against this Resistance.

Lastly, we would know, what power there is in the community to make
resistance. He tells us, if the Monarch invade the power of the other Estates,
or run a course tending to the dissolution of the constituted frame of
Government, they ought to employ their power to preserve the State from ruin;
for that is the end why they have the power of restraint, and of providing for
the public safety, so page 28. but what power ought they to employ? any other
then they are expressly invested with by Law? which is a Parliamentary, not
Military power, a Legal restraining power, not a forceable constraint by Arms.

Yea bu^, says he, it is not only Lawful for the other Estates to deny
obedience to illegal proceedings of the Monarch, as private men may, but it is
their duty, and they are bound to prvent dissolution of the established frame,
page 28. He does not say to prevent it by Arms, but he means so by opposing
their duty of prevention, to the duty of private men in den^all of obedience.
But we must consider that the duty of pri^^e men is concerned when the Laws
come to execution, the ducy of the public States is seen, when the making or
abolishing of Laws is ta^en in hand; also we must consider that it is not the
abuse of power in the execution of Law that dissolves the established frame,
but the abolishing of old and making of new Laws; whereupon we say, that the
persons that make up those states taken out of their Assembly or Parliament,
are but private men, and then have no more power to withstand the illegal
proceedings of the Monarch, then as private men by denial of active obedience;
in their Assembly or Parliament, they have power of restraint by denial or
consenting, to prevent dissolution of the frame of Government, and indeed if
they use that Legal restraining power, as they are bound in duty to do, the
Monarch cannot alter the established frame; he may perchance make some actual
invasions upon their Rights and Liberties (as they may often upon his Right and
Prerogative) and run a course in it self tending to subversion, but alter
the frame or change the Laws without their consent he cannot; and whether it
be not better that such arbitrary illegal Acts of a Monarch (which are
transient and six no new frame of Government) should not for some time be
borne with, then to seek remedy against them, by a Civil war or contention
of the body against the head, will appear more fully when we come to Reasons
against such Resistance.

I will conclude the examination of this part of his discourse, with the proof
of this assertion; that Limitations and mixtures in Monarchy, do not imply a
forceable constraining power in Subjects (as he supposes) for the preventing
of the dissolution of the established Government, but only a Legal restraining
power, as was even now insinuated: First such a power must be in them by
reservation, and then it must be express in the constitution of the
Government, and in the Covenant twixt the Monarch and the People. But then, I
must say, I cannot believe but such a condition is unlawful and unreasonable,
against the order of Government, which will have the sovereign power secured,
unprofitable for King and People, a seminary of Iealousies and Seditions; we
need not spend time about this, for it is confessed that in the constitution of
this our government (to which all the contention relates) there is no
Reservation or Law expressly enableing Subjects with such power of Arms. This
Author acknowledges, page 63. that when the Houses by an Ordinance assume the
Arms, wherewith the King is entrusted, and do perform the Kings trust, such
Ordinance is not formally Legal (^.) there is no express constitution for it:
yet is it Eminently Legal, justified by the intent of the Architects of this
Government, when for these uses they committed the Arms to the King; so he.

Secondly, therefore let us see, whether it follows by implication upon the
Limiting and Mixing of Monarchy. It is ag^eed, that an Absolute Monarch is free
from all forceable constraint by Arms, and so far forth as he is absolute,
from all ^egall restraint of positive consti^utions; now in Limitations and
mixture there is only sought a Legal restraint upon the power of the Monarch;
if any more were sought or employed, it must follow, either from the Nature of
Limitation, or from the danger and inconveniences of exorbitancy of the
Limited Monarch, o^ from the consent and intention of the People choosing the
Mon^arch.

But first, Limitation cannot infer it, for an absolute Monarch is limited
also, not by civil compact indeed, but by the Law of God, of Nature and
Nations, which he cannot justly transgress; if therefore an absolute Monarch,
being exorbitant beyond his bounds, which the highest Laws have set him, may
not be resisted, how shall we think a limited Monarch may, for transgressing
the bounds set him by civ^ll agreement?

Secondly, the inconveniences of exorbitancy in Limited and mixed Monarchy
cannot infer a power of resistance by Arms, because the inconveniences and
evils (which are pretended as causes of resistance in such Monarchies) are the
same in Absolute; for Limitations and Mixtures, are but ^arres and s^^^itie,
against injustice, cruelty and oppress^^n, which are exorbitances also in
absolute Monarchies, and evils that bring as much detriment and suffering to
the Subject, as they do in Limited Monarchies; as for example, The imp^sing of
Taxes, if it be done when necessity requires not, or (...) very un^qually in
regard of Persons and estates, it is an injury and grievance even in an
Absolute Monarchy; only when necessity calls for such L^vies of Money, the
Monarch (that is of a Limited and Mixed condition) is bound to take in the
consent of others, to which the Absolute Monarch is nor bound. So in Trials
for Life and Estate, an unjust sentence is an oppression in Absolute as well as
Limited Monarchy, only the limited or Mixed Monarch is bond to pass sentence
upon the verdict of twelve men, or the like, the Absolute is not. Suppose then
a Prince in such a Limited or Mixed Monarchy should, when necessity does truly
require, impose taxes, lay them equally, expend them faithfully; and in trials
for Life or Estate, should give right judgment without the verdictof twelve
men, and in other points should rule most justly, though not according to
form, unto which he is limited by positive Law; here would be the main Rule of
Government observed, justice, and the end of Government (for which those limits
and Civil bounds were set him) obtained, peace and welfare of the People;
Will you then have such a Prince resisted by Arms, and the Kigndome embroyled
in Civil War, because he observed not the form, when he gives you the
substance? Yea but this would be an ill procedent and very dangerous; true,
there is danger, but no present evil; and what are the dangers or evill^
feared? Cruelty, Oppression, which other Princes might use, should they have
such liberty; true, but these evils, when they are are evils in Absolute
Monarchies, and for them resi^ance is not to be used there.

Thirdly, the consent and intention of the people choosing the Monarch cannot
infer: that a Limited Monarch may be resisted by Arms. This consent and
intention of the People is made by these men, not only the Ordinary mean of
con^erring the Power, but the very Measure of the Power it self, and the Bar
or inlet of resistance; for by that consent is supposed, the people give what
power they please, and reserve what they will. To which I say. 1. That the
consent of the people, may be the mean of designing the person, and of ye^lding
subjection to him, who else could not challenge it, more then another man; also
a mean of limiting that power in the exercise of it, according to agreement or
procurement: but it is not the measure of the power it self, which in such a
measure is given of God to all Sovereigns, and is not according to the peoples
will resistible or irresistible but according to the will of God above
resistance; forseeing that people have not of themselves, out of government,
the main power, the power of life and death, how can they give it either for
government, or reserve it for resistance?

Secondly, That the intention of the People, in procuring Limitations of the
Monarch's power, is, that they may be under a moderate use of the power; and
what is their security for that? those limitations which the Monarch agrees upon
Oath to observe; now this cannot infere resistance here, more then in absolute
Monarchies: for when a people leaves a Monarch Absolute trusting to his
prudence and moderation, they do not intend he should oppress them; yet is it
granted, such intention cannot enable them to resist, in case he do oppress
them. Now in agreeing for Limitations and set rules of Government, they gain a
farther security of such moderate use of the power according to those
limitations; for the observing of which, they have a tie upon their Monarch,
not from a power of forceable resistance in themselves to constrain him by
Arms if he exorbitate, but from His Oath or Covenant, and Gods vengeance
thereupon, if he falsify it.

Thirdly, If the Architects (as this Author speaks) of a limited or mixed
Monarchy, that is, the people setting up such a Monarch over them, did intend,
that the states joined with the Monarch should assume the Arms of the Kingdom
to restrain his Exorbitancies, surely they would not have left it in his power
to dissolve them, and so make all such power ineffectuall. It appears
therefore, that by such mixtures and limitations no more can be inferred, then
a Legal or moral restraint upon the power of the Monarch. And all this, that
has been spoken against the power of Resistance or assuming the Arms of the
Kingdom, inferred from the Limited condition of the Monarch, as it is good and
conclusive in Monarchies originally limited, so is it much more in Monarchies,
that have afterward received those Limitations and Mixtures, upon which this
power of resistance and assuming the Arms of the Kingdom is inferred; as it
appears this Monarchy has done. And therefore I conclude here, as I did
premise in the second Section, Where the Prince stands supreme, und next to
God, above all the People, there Subjects may not by force of arms resist,
notwithstanding he be exorbitant in the exercise and use of his Power to the
invasion of such Rights and Privileges, as they enjoy by first compact or
after procurement. And this being cleared already from those shadows of
reasons (which could be pretended against it from the several kinds of
Monarchy) will farther appear by that, which shall be said out of Scripture
and Reason.

SECT. VI. A Refutation of His Answer, that first styled himself the Author of
the Fuller Answer.
ALthough the substance of his discourse is already answered, by that which
has been said concerning Mixture and Supremacy, against the Author of the
Treatise of Monarchy, yet because he is extremely confident, and many times
unfaithful in his Reply's, I will briefly touch upon such passages, as may
seem most material, or any way availeable to abuse the unwary Reader.

It is his manner to gain seeming advantages upon his Adversary by his own
wilful mistakings; as in his Answer to the Preface; that which was spoken of
some particular Members, the Con^aivers of this Revolt and Rebellion, is by him
taken, and given out again to the Reader, as spoken of all the Members of the
Houses, that have by the cunning of those Few been drawn to Vote any thing in
order to this Rebellion. Also, what was spoken of private houses, where those
few Contrivers held their close meetings (that it was Gods great forbearance,
those houses did not break down, where the Consultations have been often held
for the direction of these ways) he renders as spoken of the Houses, where the
Parliament sits and Consults. But let them all, that have been Leaders or
followers in these perverse ways, look to it, and consider, how much they are
concerned in that place of Esaias, to which the allusion there was made; for
every one that looks nearly upon it, ( Esa. 30. verse. 10, 11, 12, 13.) will
easily see, (what ever application this Author makes of it) who they are, that
have silenced their Orthodoxe, and not long ago admired Teachers, suffering
none to speak right things, but smooth; such new unheard off doctrines as
please them; who they are that do trust in oppression and perversenes, and do
stay thereon having no other way to uphold this Rebellion, but by perverse
obstinacy, and horrible injustice exercised upon such, as have not yet cast off
all Conscience of just and right, or caused the fear of the Holy one of Israel
to cease from before them.

I would advise this Answere^ to look upon two places more of Esaias, cap. ^4.
v. 4. where they that have been oppressed, shall say of Babylon, how has the
Golden City ceased? and v. 10. art thou become weak as we, art thou he^^^^
like unto us? and cap. 23. v. 8. where he may find (...) threatened against
Tire, the Crowning City, whose Merchants are Princes, and then I would desire
him to consider, whether he (...) not cause to reflect upon that Golden,
Crowning City, wherein he lives.

In his second Section also, he would seem to gain advantages upon his
Adversary, by fastening upon him several Contradictions or pieces of nonsense,
as he calls them; but they are indeed so many wilful or gross mistakes of his
own. The first he thus delivers, as in my word, It Is better to be under the
Arbitrary Government of One, that challenges not obedience but according to
Law: so he repeates them and then descants, Arbitrary government, and yet
according to Law. But the words run thus in my Reply; Every man will think it
more reasonable to be under the Arbitrary government of One then of many: nay,
under the government of One, that challenges not obedience as due, but
according to Law, then of Many whose commands are Law unto us, as this Answerer
makes them. In which the Comparison, as any man may see, is double, first
between the Arbitrary government of One, and of many; then a fortiori, between
the Legal government of One, and arbitrary Commands of Many.

The second Contradiction he thus expresses. The Dr undertakes to satisfy
Conscience, that the Parliament has not this power, and yet says, he does not
undertake to set down, what power the Parliament has. It Is true the Dr did
undertake the first, and might do it without undertaking to set down the
extent of the power and privileges of the Houses; tho e were the words, and
where is the Contradiction? This Answerer may undertake to show, the King has
not such or such a power (as to make Laws himself, or the like) yet will not
I hope, undertake to set down the extent of the Kings power and Prerogative;
it was the very Instance there used, and the Reddition of it was, so may we
without offense conclude of the two Houses, that they have not such a power by
the first constitation of this Government, etc. A particular Negative may be
cleared by him, that cannot show the extent of the Universal Affirmative.

A third Contradiction or Nonsense he has found in these words. This
Coordination is but to some Act or exercise of the supreme Power, not in the
power it self. I acknowledge the words, and do thank him, that he took
notice of them for their sakes, who have mistaken that part of my Reply, as if
I granted a Coordination of Subjects with His Majesty in the supreme power but
then I must blame his ignorance. that cannot recontile this (as he speaks) to
any truce of Sense; for they that have written of Government and Policy, could
have told him, that the concurrence and consent of such or such persons,
required to some Acts of the supreme power, does not always argue a
communication of the Power; and the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy does
every where teach him to make a wide difference between the Power and the
Exercise of it. Out of this mistake and ignorance of distinguishing between
the Power it self and the Exercise of the Power, he runs away with it as a
thing granted, that the Houses are coordinate with His Majesty in the very
Supremacy of Power, so far as the Legislative and ordaining goes, which is
the principal, and that it remains for him only to prove, they are coord^^
with His Majesty in the other Act of power, as (...) Em^assyes, appointing
Officers, Iu^ges, etc. which h^ undertakes in his fourth Section, where we
shall m^^ wi^^ him. It was the work of my third Section to speak of the
beginnings of Government in this Land, and to show they were inconsistent with
his Conceit of the making of the first King, and the first Coalition of
Government, as he called it. To which after some trifeling, he replies in his
third Section, page 17. If the Dr thinks the uncertainties of the British or
Saxon Constitutions not fit to satisfy Conscience (as he speaks) how being
uncertain, can he satisfy Conscience (which is the title of his Boooke) that
those Constitutions were not such? so he. Answ. 1. If those Constitutions be
uncertain, it satisfyes Conscience that it can have no warrant from them,
which was the task of that book. 2, The uncertainties, which I said he run
Conscience upon, were in seeking the first King before the Saxons, for if we go
no higher for the beginning of this English government (as indeed we should
not) we have certainly enough to satisfy Conscience, that this Government was
not such in the first constitution, as this Answerer would make us believe.

But see him coming a pegge lower in the very next words. It Is enough that the
Constitution of our present Government was such, at least from the beginning of
it is being such; that by the same consent of the people, whereby the first such
King was made, His Majesty, that now is, becomes such a King, that the same
reason of state, which first contrived the Government (however sooner or leter)
such as now it is, remains still specifically the same in that, which the law
places it in, the Council of the Land to actuate and apply it. Answer, Nothing
can be truer, then that the government was such from the time, that it began
to be such, but he bore us in hand before, that it was such from the very first
beginning of the Monarchy. and so he ought to prove it to be; for else it must
become such by the consent of the King in being, condescending from unlimited
condition to a more moderate way of Government by several fixed laws; as was
showed above, when we spoke of Limitations and Mixtures, Sect. 3. but can we
think that while there was a King in being, the Council of the Land had power
to contrive and dispose of the frame of this Government, and that in a way
soprejudiciall to the King, as this Answerer would make it?

But he goes on. The truth is, the Doctor deals with us herein at Papists
usually do with Protestants, if they cannot name the particular Reign and
year when such a Doctrine took it is first rise, however palpable it now be,
we must believe there was no change at all: so if it be not assigned when such
or such a part of the Governments Constitution began, however evident it be
that it must have a beginning, because a being, we must confess it to have no
beginning at all. No Sir, the Doctor deals with you as Protestants do with
Papists upon that point; for as they show the Doctrine of the Romish Church was
not from the beginning, and because the year and age when every error crept in
cannot be named, do thereupon conclude certainly, That those errors came not
in at once but by degrees: so we require not the particular Reign and year when
each constitution came in, but do show that the Government was not such from
the beginning, and because the time cannot be shown, when the Limitations and
Constitutions came in, that made it such, we thereupon conclude, the Government
did not become such at once, but by degrees, and by the after Condescent of
Pious Princes. To that which was alleged out of the Preamble of a S^atute, 24
H. 8. c. 12. His poor shifts are, 1. That it is a piece of a preamble, not
part of the Statute. Answer. What then? it speaks never a whit the less
truth, nor has it the less authority, but (which is more) speaks an
anciently supposed truth always Confessed, and evident in Chronicles and
Histories, that this is an Empire, Governed by one Supreme Head, etc.

II. That the Title speaks it an Act against appeals to Rome. Answer. It
matters not what the occasion was, we (...) what it positively speaks touching
the Kings Supremacy and Headship. So they miserably shift off the obligation,
which the Oath of Supremacy has cast upon them, as if the Kings Supremacy were
asserted in it, in opposition to the Bishop of Rome, not in relation to the
whole body politic; that if they deny the Popes Supremacy, they think they
satisfy the Oath, what Subjects soever they join with His Majesty in the very
Supremacy it self.

So in the third place he says; that those words in the Statute: To whom a
body politic compact of all sorts and degrees of people, of the Spiritualty
and Temporalty are bounden, etc. cannot properly be meant of the Parliament,
but of the Kingdom at large. Answer, If of the Kingdom at large, then is it
true also of their Representatives, if of the Kingdom in it is defusive body,
then of it is Collective. But I turn him over to the Author of the Treatise of
Monarchy, who sufficiently Confutes this idle assertion, and does show the
Lords and Commons in their houses conjunctim are subjects, and the King their
Head. And this is enough for his third Section.

In his fourth Section, he endeavors to prove, the Houses are Coordinate with
His Majesty in all other Acts of Supreme power, as the Calling of Assemblies,
holding Treaties, sending Embassies, appointing Judges, etc. His proof is
first by reason, because they are Coordinate with him in the Supreme power of
making laws, which is the principal, and higher Cause to the Calling of
Assemblies, Treaties, etc. Answer, This he takes for granted, that they are
Coordinate with His Majesty in the Supreme power of Ordaining, or making laws,
which does proceed (as I noted above upon his second Section) from his mistake
or ignorance in not distinguishing the Exercise of the power, and the Power it
self, for they may concur to that, and yet not have share in this.

Secondly, He would prove it by Records, from page 22. to 27. Answ. 1. In these
we must trust his honesty, which we find not very faithful in repeating the
words of the book he undertakes to confute. 2. Were they truly alleged, they
yield but an Argument a facto ad Ius, Parliaments have done this or that,
therefore they have right to do so; it will be a bad argument in the next age
to conclude any thing right and just, because it was so ordained by the Houses
of this last Parliament.

III. Though some particulars cited by Him, might of right belong to them, yet
how does it prove, it was so originally and fundamentally, and not by after
condescent of the Prince, as we find many immunities, rights, and liberties of
the Subject to be? But for these Records he is beholden to Mr Pryn's
collections, who is said to be the Author of that book, which bears this
title, The Sovereign power of Parliaments, or the treachery and disloyalty of
Papists to their Sovereign; To their Sovereign? that is, to the two Houses,
by the former part of the title -- let him take heed, he proves them not good
Subjects. But what shall we make of it? it is certain, he fetches his
testimonies from times of Popery, showing what power Parliaments then have
assumed and used against the Sovereign, if he will give us leave to style the
King so; but how he should thereby show the disloyalty of Papists, and yet
prove the Soveraign^ power of Popish Parliaments, I cannot see, nor is it
greatly material; for let all his instances be true, and his Records
faithfully alleged, yet will the argument be inconsequent, that from them
shall conclude the Sovereign power of Parliaments.

After his Records, this Answerer enters a discourse of his own, touching the
Mixture of this Government. That which concerns me in it, is page 28. The Dr
in his former Treatise speaks of the excellent temper of the three Estates,
and in his Reply acknowledges them as Fundamentals of Government; and if
fundamentalls, how not all alike principal, and supreme, he has not showed in
his Reply though provoked thereto; so he. Answ. 2. The Dr did not any where
call them Fundamentals of Government, but acknowledged the constitution was
fundamental, that provided that Temper, and placed in the Houses that power
which they have; this his mistake I told him of in my Reply, page 16. and
showed him the absurdity it leads him into, by Concluding thence, that the
Houses are alike Principal or Supreme with His Majesty; an excellent argument
to provoke an Adversary upon; but this Answerer seems to have made his Reply
to one Section, before he had read the next, and when he was come to that, to
forget what he had read or writ before.

In like manner he tells us presently after, that he had proved, that the
Final Declaration and Resolution must remain beyond all further debate in the
Council of the Kingdom, which by its number, trust, interest, is only fit to
manage it: to all which the Dr has not vouchsafed to say any thing, but that
it wholly places the Supremacy in the two Houses, so he, page 31. Answ. If
nothing else had been said, it had been enough, and so the Author of the
Treatise of Monarchy, does sufficiently show, that to place such a final
Resolution and declarative Judgment in the two Houses, does make them
supreme, and this no Monarchy; but there was more said, even the better part
of three Sections was spent against that final declarative judgment and
Supply, which he places in the two Houses, and against his persuasions from
their Interests, Number, Trust; showing, how possible it is for them to lessen
their number, to neglect their trust, to make the private Interest devour the
public; I need say no more, these times speak sufficiently -- But it seems
this Answerer (as I said above) wrote down this, before he had thoroughly read
those Sections, and when he came to them, either had forgot, that he had said,
the Dr. vouchsafed to say nothing to his particulars; or else purposed to make
it seem so, by answering nothing himself to that which the Dr. had said,
touching that final declarative Judgment and supply, which he places in the
Houses.

But for this mixture of three Estates in the Supremacy of power, he has found
a new Argument in the Kings Answer to the 19. Propositions; wherein His Majesty
grants, That the Lords being trusted with a Iudicatory Power are an Excellent
Skreene betwixt Prince and people -- and that the power legally placed in the
two Houses, is more then enough to restrain Tyranny. Upon this he makes a long
descant, and propounds six Quere's. I will for brevity's sake, without any
wrong to Him that proposes them, reduce them to these two. 1. for the
Iudicatory power; How can such be in the Houses, and yet not the declarative
power of Law? For this, as before, I must turn him over to the Author of the
Treatise of Monarchy, who will ask him, how can such a final declarative
power be in the Houses, and yet this be a Monarchy and the King Supreme? and I
must farther ask him, why does he not place the final Judgment only in the
Lords house, seeing that Judicatory power is only in that, and not in the House
of Commons. 2. For the power of Arms; If the Houses have not such a power, how
have they a power more then sufficient to restrain Tyranny? let the Dr.
fairly resolve the Answerer in these plain inferences out of His Majesty's
words, and erit mihi magnus Apollo, so he.

Answ. I must first tell him, Apollo was more honored for his Art, then for
his bow, for his Rules of healing, then force of wounding; so the moral
restraints of Rules, and limiting Laws, and the obligation of an Oath, are more
reasonable and powerful for keeping the will of the Monarch within bounds,
then the forcible constraint of Subjects Arms. But this Answerer thinks there
can be no sufficient security for the people against the Tyranny of their
Prince, unless they have him fast bound; is the tie of established Law
nothing? the band of a Sacred oath nothing to restrain him, unless his
Subjects have the mastering power? God himself thought less means of
restraint sufficient for such security, as he was content his people should
have under the Iraelitish and Roman Government; why should not greater be held
sufficient for people under a Christian Monarch?

Again, when it was proved, that the Members of the Houses were Subjects
conjunctim, from their own addresses to His Majesty, wherein they style
themselves his Loyal Subjects: this Answerer replies unto it, page 39. How
weak is an argument from forms of addresses in words against a real Right?
what Right? to the Supremacy? how real that is, appears by all that has been
said: but we may here return him his own Answer, to his inference from His
Majesty's words, how weak is the argument from forms of words against a real
right! against His known Supremacy and Headship? Nay, how unequal is it to
take such large and gracious Expressions, issuing from the conscience of his
own intentions and desires altogether averse from tyranny, and stretch them on
the rack of finister Construction, to make them speak to his disadvantage? for
indeed no other power is granted to be in the Houses to restrain Tyranny then
a Legal, Moral, Parliamentary power, not forceable and military. See above
toward the end of the fourth Section, where these and other. Expressions of
His Majesty were objected and vindicated.

Now to his fifth Section: It was his Rule, Coordinates do supply one the
others failings; and thereupon he inferred, If the King refuse, the Lords and
Commons may supply. This was retorted upon him in my Reply: If the Commons
stand out and refuse, then may the King and Lords by his rule of Coordination,
supply, and command all. He answers, No qu^stion they may supply, as far as
their representation and trust reaches, that is for themselves, not for the
Commons of England whom they do not represent. Answ. Does this man know or
heed what he says? does not he make the safety of the Kingdom the Cause and
end of such supply, when one of the Coordinates stand out? and now he tells us
the King and Lords may supply for themselves (i. e.) they may save themselves,
if they can, but they have nothing to do with the Commons, whom they do not
represent: but can the safety of the Kingdom be provided for by this supply,
unless they also be commanded by the Coordinate parts, which are to make the
supply? and will he upon better thought's deny, that in order to that end (the
safety of the Kingdom) the King and Lords also are entrusted for the whole
people of England?

Again, this supply cannot be effectual without a Iudicatory power, but that
power we find only in the Lords, not Commons house, as he himself cited it
above out of the Kings words; well then, must they exercise this Judicatory
power upon themselves only, and not upon those that the Commons represent? or
can the Commons by themselves supply? that is against his own rule of
Coordination: but if he will forget that, us he does, yet will he not think,
they can make the supply without a Judicatory power. I will add to this, what
he has at the very end of this Sect. where we find him as considerate as
before: In order to his former rule, Coordinates supply one another failings,
he had said in his first Treatise, that he wonalted, we cannot see the King is
Vniversis minor, when as we may easily reckon, that of three, one is less then
all three. Upon this I called him again to his reckoning, telling him that, if
the King and Lords concur and the Commons refuse, it is easy to reckon that
of three one is less then two, repeating his words so, not for any advantage,
but merely to make him speak sense; he because he cannot answer the retortion,
complains of wilful and gross mistake of his words, which were, says he,
that of three one is less then all three (i. e.) a part then the whole. But is
that your meaning of Rex est Vniversis minor (i. e.) the King alone is less
then the King, Lords and Commons together? who cannot see that the Comparison
is between the King and the other two? and that in your rule of three
Coordinates, if one refuse, there remains but two to make the supply; and that
thereupon you should have said (if you would speak sense) that of three one is
less then two? I have heard Children, when their disorderly Babies have been
taken from them and presently returned them again in frame and order,
complaining, because they received them not, as they parted with them; so does
this Answerer of the putting his words into sense.

Let us now see, how in the same Section he answers for the Kings danger at
Keinton Battle. A^ in the making of Laws (says he) the King presence or
absence alters not the case, so in the executing of the Laws against
Delinquents, the Kings presence can no more hinder then his command. -- Answ.
His presence or absence does not indeed in the making Laws, but his Consent is
all, which he may give either present or absent, but will you for the Executing
of the Laws take arms without his consent, and use them too against him
personally present? or will you say, that your giving him battle at Keinton,
was an executing of the Laws against Delinquents? produce your Law that
enables you to such a proceeding against your pretended delinquents. Nor were
the hands of the Parliaments Army lifted up against the King more then David's
(whom the Doctor cites) who resisted his and the kings enemies, though about
the kings person. ibid. Ans. It does not appear where David did make that
resistance; but it is the unhappiness of these men to ground all their
resistance upon false suppositions; first they suppose David would have done
it, then they positively set down, that he did it, thence they conclude they
may do it, and acccordingly have done it, and much more.

The rest of this Section he thought good (neglecting what was rational in
mine) to spend in naming Delinquents in Yorkshire, for whose apprehension and
the bringing of them to Justice, the Parliament took Arms. Answ. All those
examples of Delinquents followed their putting of armed men into Hull, their
seizing the Magazine there, their denying the King entrance, their denying eo
bring Sir John Hotham to Justice; and in these, if any Delinquents were
detained and protected from their justice, as he complains, he may read the
carse of it: But these are matters of Fact, we are now upon the point of Reason.

In his sixth Section, he altogether neglects the cases, which were put him,
upon his placing the final resolution of this States judgment in the two
Houses, and only fastens upon that, which was spoken occasionally concerning
Conquest. First, for his Answer touching the Ammonites subdued by David, That
Abraham's posterity was entitled to their Land by God, Genesis 13.14. I would
desire him to look into, Deuteronomy. 34.4. (where the Lord gives Moses a sight of
that promised Land, saying. This is the Land which I swear to Abraham, etc) and
to examine, whether he can find the Land of the Ammonites in that prospect. And
surely if the Ammonites had been of the Inhabitants of that Land, David would
not have held league and frienship with them, as we see he does, 2 Samuel 10.

Next for David's subduing of Edom, he answers, The Doctor himself confesses
they revolted from Judah. What then? had they been before under Judah, and upon
their Revolt subdued by David, then indeed it had been not a Conquest but a
Reduction; but the Doctor confesses they revolted from Iehoram Ring of Judah, 2
Chro. 21. therefore they were justly subdued or reduced (that must be his
inference) by David, 1 Chronicles. 18. does he know what he says? But God had given
Israel (says he) a special promise for it too, over Edom will I cast my
shoe. Psalm. 60.8. Answ. This Psalm was made upon that very expedition in
which Edom was subdued, as appears by the title of it; and were those words
spoken by the Spirit of Prophecy, yet do they not make a grant, but only speak
the success of that enterprise, which then was undertaken.

Nor had the Romans any right over Iudaea by Conquest, says he, but by consent
of the People Conquered; without which consent all his Momenta temporum, (he
speaks of) to make a right or title, are like those Moments of the Papists
Antiquity to make a Truth. Ans. We find the Jews confederate with the Romans
1. Mac. 8. and not long after, their Subjects, brought under by Pompey: we
cannot think they changed their condition willingly, but that their consent was
forced by the Conqueror; Conquest then will easily command that, which will
give it Title in these men's opinion: And though no antiquity can make falsehood
Truth, yet are there Momenta temporum, when providence (which translates
Kingdoms and can give Title to the Conqueror) does discover it self; and
then the Conquered People ought to consent to, and receive the Government which
the Conqueror settles among them; ^^e above at the end of the third Sect.
where the Title of Conquest is examined.

There is nothing in his seventh Sect. worthy of the Readers patience in
hearing it refuted; only he makes show of some Statutes, which truly I could
not find, nor was there cause why I should bestow much time in seeking them,
for a little Logic will serve to discern, that the words, he cites out of
them, will not infer any conclusions prejudicial to his adversary.

His last and eight Section concerns Scripture; he mutters some thing in it,
concerning David's fighting against Saul, and the absoluteness of the Jewish
Kings; which shall be distinctly and largely considered in my next Section. And
for the new Testament, he turns his Reader over to the interpretation which
the Reverend and learned Divines having given on the 13th to the Romans, and
which he so far magnifies, that he beelieves the Doctor will not reply in
haste; so he concluds his book, and he shall see he had cause so to believe,
when we come to the consideration of that place.

SECT. VII. Places of Scripture out of the Old Testament.
NOw we come to the examination of what is alleged out of Scripture in this
cause, whereby it will appear, that there can be no warrant derived thence for
resistance, but that the Kings, we read of there, were such as might not be
resisted, and that Gods people were always under such. We begin with the Old
Testament, and will be very brief, propounding only what is Material.

This has been heretofore clearly proved by these two Arguments especially: 1.
Because the Institution of the Israelitish kingdom was such, as does plainly
exclude resistance. 2. Because so many Prophets, bitterly reproving those
wicked Kings for sub^cision of Religion and Justice, did never call upon the
Elders of the people for this duty of resistance. I shall open the first, and
enforce it alittle more, and then answer what is brought against either.

In the first of Sam. c. 8 we have the institution of the Kingdom; where
Samuel is commanded to tell the people, Ius Regis the manner of the King v. 11.
He will take your sons. -- your daughters -- your field, etc. And ye shall
cry out in that day etc. As if he should have said, you desire a King, and do
not consider what power you put your selves under, such an one, as if he
command you ^^d yours at pleasure, you must patiently endure; this is the
meaning of Ius Regis, which implyet not a Right of doing such unjust Acts, but
a Security from resistance and force if he ^oes them. Moses did show the right
and Manner of the King, what he should justly do, Deuteronomy. 17. Samuel the right
of the King, not in doing, but in being secure from the peoples force, if he
did unjustly: Moses admonishes the King of his duty, showing what a good king
ought to do. Samuel endeavoring to dissuade the People, shows what they must
patiently suffer from evil kings.

Many Authors might be alleged (if need were) for this meaning of Ius Regis,
I will name one without exception, Calvin in his Comment upon the place, and in
his Institutions: He speaks to this purpose; Samuel, when he would show the
People what great things they should suffer under Kings, tells them, this shall
be Ius Regis the manner of the King, He shall take your Sons, etc. not that
their Kings could do so Iure justly, for the Law did teach them all moderation
and justice, sedjus in populum vocabatur, cui parere ipsi necesse esset, nec
obsistere liceret, so he, Instit. l. 4. c. 20. nu. 26. And in his Comment upon
the place, he does sufficiently set out those, as Tyrannical Acts, but shows
that for all that, Subjects ought not to resist, nec quicquam adversus Reges
movere, licet Tyrannidem exerceaxt, and rapinis sint graves subditis, nullamque
nec Dei nec aequi rectique rationem habeant, what more full? which also
appears by the 18. v. Ye shall cry out in that day, etc. That they were left
without this remedy of resistance, Calv. in his Instit. the place above cited,
thus, Eo so proripiet licentiae Regum libido, quam cohibere vestrum non erit,
quibus hoc restabit unum, lussa excipere ac dicto audientes esse; and a little
after, non westrum esse, his malis mederi; hoc tantum esse reliquum, Domini
opem implorare, there can be nothing spoken more plainly against the power of
resistance in Subjects, then this. We have Adversaries confessing the same, the
Author of the Fuller Answer acknowledged, those Kings of Jsrael might no^ be
resisted; and this Author of the Treatise of Monarchy confesses, that the
People there had no other means to help themselves by, but cries unto the Lord,
so he, page 58.

By this appears what little weight there is in the exception which the
Pleaders for defensive Arms make to this place, This was (say they) a
prediction of punishment, that should befall them for their impetuous asking of
a King, not a prohibition of resistance, page 18. And in the same page, This
prediction of punishment does not prove, it was unlawful, for them to defend
their goods against their Kings Tyranny, but that it should be vain to them,
because if God would not hear their Cry, their defense would be to little
purpose. Answ. The punishment foretold is, that they should be thus and thus
evil entreated by their Kings, and that without remedy: but that in all this
there is nothing to prove it was unlawful for them to resist such Kings, is a
bare assertion against former proofs, which show there was on the Kings part a
Jus or right of security against such Violence. But to acknowledge, as they
do, that this prediction of punishment does prove their defense would be
vain, i^ God did not hear their Cry, is to confess, that, when God suffers
Kings to exercise Tyranny and Oppression upon the People, over whom he has set
them, it is a scourge and punishment from him upon that people for their sin,
and that it is vain for them to seek remedy by resistance; which is a most true
and pious argument against resistance, as we shall show, when we come to
reasons against it.

A second exception is, that the Israelitish Monarchy was Absolute, and
therefore excluded the resistance of Subjects; so this Author of the Treatise
of Monarchy. The pleaders for Defensive Arms, although they are against
absolute Monarchy as unlawful, and therefore do not say this Monarchy set up
over Gods people was such, yet do they say, what was here foretold or enjoined
to that people, cannot be a Law or punishment intended to other Nations under
oppressing Kings, no more then that, which the Lord imposed on the Jews and
other Nations in Nebuhcadnezars Time, their putting their neck under his yoke,
Jer. 27. can prove that any Nation is bound to yield to a foreign enemy
invading them, so they page 18.

Ans I. Although this Monarchy of Israel were granted to be Absolute, and the
instances brought should be peculiar to that people, not intended as Laws, and
Rules to other Nations, yet do: they sufficiently prove what I intended in that
part of my first Treatise, which was to show that there was no Warrant for
resistance from Scripture, which still gives us examples of Kings set over Gods
people, who might not be resisted.

II How the Author of the Treat of Monarchy can say the Israelites Kings were
absolute Monarchs according to that description of Absoluteness; which he gave
above, I cannot see: for he told us, that Absolute Monarchy is, when the
Sovereignty is so fully in one, that it has no limits or bounds under God but
the Monarchs own will; It is true they were not so limited, as some Kings are
now; but we know, there was a fixed judicial Law, which in many particulars
secured the propriety and liberty of that people, there were special
limitations for their Kings, Deuteronomy. 17. There was also a standing great
Council, the Saned^im, whose sentence in many things the King could not at his
own will and pleasure reverse, if we believe them that are skillful in the
Jewish Antiquities. Grotius in his first book de Iure belli and pacis c. 3.
places the Israelitish kingdom in a Middle condition between a mere absolute
Monarchy, and that which is altogether limited and conditionate, that is, those
Hebrew Kings were in some things absolute, in some things Limited, which may be
said of every Limited Monarchy at this day, that was at first unlimited; and is
true of the Monarchy of this Land, where I cannot but conceive the Monarch is
free, and (if you please) absolute in all such things, in which he is not
expressly limited.

III. Instances drawn from that Monarchy against Resistance are forceable in
this Monarchy, if we either consider what was now spoken against the mere
absoluteness of that Monarchy, or look back to the Reasons which were given in
the end of the fist Section to prove that Monarchies are not therefore exposed
to resistance, because they are limited.

IV. Calvin upon this place 1. Sam. 8. does apply it to other Nations, even to
all that are under Kings, who have not Ephori or Magistrates over them, to whom
they are accountable, as the Lacedaemonian Kings had, but our Kings have not;
his words are these, Ex quibus apparet, subditos Regibus, nec posse nec debere
adversus ipsos quicquam movere, licet Tyrannidem exerceant, etc. and in his
Instit. l. 4 c. 20. nu. 27. He expressly takes away the Objection, (That this,
which is imposed upon the Jews 1. Sam. 8. and Ier. 27. was peculiar to that
Nation) showing plainly it was not peculiare mandatum, but tells us thus much
in General, cuicunque delatum est Regnum, ei serviendum, which being inferred
from those places, does imply, we must serve the King, as the People se^ved
Nebuchadnezar, or their own Kings of Israel, viz. without resistance, for, for
that purpose Calvin alleadges those examples. So that although this example
does not bind us to yield to a foreign enemy invading us, as the Pleaders
needlessly replied, yet does it in Calvi^s judgment bind us, to yield obedience
without resistance to that King, whom it appears God has set over us.

In the next place let us consider the Rescue of Jonathan, urged by the
Pleaders for Defensive Arms, page 11. It has been answered, that for this
Rescue, they did not of themselves draw into Arms, but being present at Saul's
command, did rescue Jonathan from Saul's intended violence, not by force of
Arms, but of a loving importunate violence by way of intercession, set off
with a Souldierly boldness. The pleaders teply. The violence was outrageous
enough, for Saul swore his death and they his life, what then? this was still
but a Souldierly boldness of speech, But they make two collections thence. 1.
That the people may swear an Association, that not one of the Parliament shall
be put to death, unless found guilty, notwithstanding any Proclamation. A good
inference! as if the Commanders of an Army do agree among themselves to
intercede for a fellow Soldier, (one not so innocent as Jonathan, but justly
sentenced to death) and in that intercession be more importunately bold then
they ought, and through that importunity draw their King off from his
resolution of executing that sentence: may I with any reason conclude thence
that the several Counties of his kingdom may enter an Association against him
for the rescuing of any unjustly sentenced to death? 2. They collect from
thence, That if Saul by himself, or others, had attempted Jonathans death,
they would have actually resisted them even with Arms. Imagine they would have
done so, you have but an uncertain supposition to secure your resistance, and
the heat of a Souldierly boldness to defend the furious disposition of your
spirit; how far these Soldiers would have proceeded, I know not, but we
shall see below, that the Christian Soldiers in Iulians Army would not proceed
so far in the like case; and I dare say with Peter Martyr, si is it a sedit^^se
fec^ri^t, quasi Jonathanum Regiper vim trepturi, nullo modo possunt excusari:
if they had proceeded to force, they could not have been excused. How
impertinently and inconsiderately the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy made
use of this Rescue of Jonathan, was shown above, Sect. 5. concerning
resistance in absolute Monarchies.

Now we come to examine David's demeanor toward Saul; in which his taking of
Arms, and the use he made of them is considerable. The Answers, that were made
to this objected example of David, did in general insinuate thus much. That
they, which now pretend it for the defense of their Arms, have done far more
then David did or intended to do, and that they have not warrant to do so
much, (i) that there is nothing alike in David's Arms and Theirs. The
particulars were these.

First that David's purpose in having armed men about him, was merely to secure
his person against the cut-Thro^tes of Saul, that is, against his private
Emissaries, such as were sent to take away David's life, 1 Samuel 19.15 or against
the surprise of ill minded people, among whom he should abide, such as the
Ziphites, who else might have carried David himself to Saul, as well as the
news of his being among them. The Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, page 51.
and the Divines that plead for defensive Arms, page 12. reply, that this is
enough for the resistance they plead for. But who sees not a large difference
between securing a man's self from sudden surprises of private Emissaries or
close Enemies, and appearing in the Field with Arms against the Armies of the
Prince? if a private Gentleman do endeavor the former by more then ordinary
retinue, no man will speak him guilty of the second; for the one is used but
in order to an escape by flight, but the other is in order to a forceable
constraint and final contestation with the Prince, if he will not change his
mind; which is the Cause of these Times, and the thing supposed in the
Question: as we explained above, Sect. 2.

Secondly, we see that David did accordingly give place and fly as Saul
pursued, using no violence against Saul, or his followers, when in his power.
1. Sam. 26. The pleaders for defensive Arms, reply, It was not wisdom in
David to encounter Saul, for he was not strong enough to do it, page 12. Answ.
so shall we see these Pleaders below finding the like wisdom in the primitive
Christians, as if they forbore to resist, because they had not force enough:
which wisdom does foolishly charge the doctrine of the Gospel, even in the
judgment of the Author of the Treat. of Monarchy. But might not David with his
600 men have encountered 3000 sleeping? he kenw that a sleep was upon them from
the Lord, and if he with Abishai alone durst go down among them, what might
he not have done with 600 men? The Pleaders answer out of much compassion,
That they which are upon the Defensive, ought not in cold blood to kill
sleeping Enemies, or such waking, farther then appears much advantageous to
the Defense. page 12. But do they hold to this practice? do any of the Kings
party sleeping or waking find this mercy? would they not think it much
disadvantagious to the Defense, to let whole companies of them escape as David
did here? for hear what follows, If the killing of as many, as they could
that night, wouldhave given hopes of ending Saules pursuit and making Peace,
then the Pleaders doubt not, but David would have done it: It Is pity David had
not then such Counselors about him as these; Abishai was too bloody in
advising to have Saul himself killed, but these men would have councelled him
to sl^ughter the Soldiers, and take Saul prisoner, and force him to other
Conditions; so would they do, if they had their King at the like advantage;
and so if David would have done, he might have had hope of ending his troubles.
If David would have used the means and practices of these days, if he would
have proclaimed abroad what Saul was, and that he himself endeavored only to
reduce him to a Religious and just way of Government, and thereupon called in
more forces, he might have quickly had an Army able to encounter and overmatch
Saul in the open Field. But nothing is done by David to the countenancing of
the Rebellious practices of these days. He gives not an ill word out against
Saul, he invites none into his aid; he called not these men he had together,
clangore tubae, as Calvin observes; he did not use them for the suppressing of
any of Saul's bad instruments, but he leaves him to the hand of God, 1 Samuel
26.10. and them to the curse of God. v. 19. he tells Abner, that he and his
Soldiers are worthy to dye, because they had not kept their master the Lords
Anointed more carefully, v. 16. How can our defenders now pretend David's
example for the lawfulness of their fighting against the bad instruments of
Oppression, that are (as they say) about the Kings Person, when those, that
were about Saul, are justly blamed for not carefully keeping and defending
their master against any violence, that might come from some misguided hand of
David's men?

Thirdly, concerning David's intent to defend Keilab, against Saul, it was
answered that such an uncertain and improbable supposition was not warrant for
Conscience. The Pleaders reply, that David's second enquiry concerning the
affection of the Keilites, and his going whither soever be could go, as its
said, 1 Samuel 23.11. do plainly show, it was his purpose to have stayed there,
and that he was disappoynted of his purpose, pa. 12. Answ. 1. If David had at
first such a purpose of defending the Town against Saul we see he fell from
it, as he did from his purpose against Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. and has I f^us in both
an example of forbearance, no warrant to proceed to such extremities. II. He
might enquire concerning the Keilites, not out of a purpose to defend the City
against Saul, (for had he had such a resclution, he could have mastered the
Citizens and turned out the disaffected, as they do now, that pretend his
example) but for the more timely providing for his flight out of a City, (which
as the text notes) had Gates and Bars; lest if he should stay till Saul drew
near, the Townsmen by treachery might hinder or impeach his flight, that be
should not get clear of the Town till Saul had beguirt it. But his enquiry
and his going whither, he could go, do show he depended on immediate direction
from God in all these actions, and therefore his example not so imitable by
these defendants; which gave occasion to a fourth Answer.

IIII. It was answered: That David's example was extraordinary; he was Anointed
and designed by the Lord to succeed Saul, and questionless had warrant for an
extraordinary way of safeguarding his person. This concerns his having an Army
about him for his guard; that as by the former particulars it was clear, that
those, which have now taken Arms, have done far more in the use of them, then
David did or intended to do; so by this last Answer it will appear, that they
may not do so much, or that they may not pretend David's exampl, for the
ra^sing or having an Army. The Pleaders reply. 1. Then might every successor
or Heir to the Crown plead the like Authority in the like danger, page 13.
Answer. David's right to succeed did not authorize him, but his being designed
for Saul's successor, as he was, makes it more then probable that he had
special warrant from God (whose direction we see was not wanting to him) for
this way of safeguarding his person: also, that (as some Interpreters have
observed) seeing Saul's posterity was to give way to him, he might not come to
the Crown, as one crept out of an hole or some lurking place, but accompanied
with a strength; for which he is called back by the Prophet into the Land of
Judah, 1 Samuel 22.5. that the eyes of the people might be upon him, even while
Saul lived.

II. They reply, Its a strange way of answering Scripture Examples, that such
a thing is extraordinary, when no such thing can be gathered out of the Text.
The ancient Rule holds good, Praxis Sanctorum est interpres praeceptorum: David
did thus against Saul's violence, therefore this is an Interpretation of the
honor due by the fifth Commandment. Answ. Beside the former Reason, it is
plain in every passage how David depended upon extraordinary direction.
Calvin, 1 Samuel 22.2. finds something extraordinary and peculiar in David's
receiving these men for his guard: Peculiare factum (says he) in generalem
regulam non trahendum; and shows how ready men are to pretend this example of
David, for the maintaining of a just cause by unlawful means, saying, quare
ego bonam and justam Causam agens, non uterer medijs qua so miloi offerunt?
Where Is now his praxis Sanctorum, to say David did this, therefore I may; nay
David did not that against Saul, which these men pretend; and what David did,
cannot be fellowed by another example to make it Praxin Sanctorum: whereas we
have many examples of Kings as bad as Saul, and find the Saints living under
them, never attempting any thing tending to resistance; there is praxis
Sanctorum, imitable by us.

III. They reply, David's unction ought rather to have strengthened his faith,
but this was a disparagement to his faith and to Gods honor, that His Anointed
should be safeguarded for so long together only by a way, which in all others
had been abominable, -- this proves the means both lawful and ordmary, page
13. Answ. David's Unction did strengthen his faith, but under such means too, is
it pleased God to vouchsafe him for the greater Corroboration, such a Guard of
so many hundreds; God thought it no disparagement for his honor to bring out
his people with the spoils of Egypt, and we must give him leave in the
extraordinary dispensa^^ns of his providence, to take what way it pleases him;
h^ could have preserved David from Saul's fury, as he did Eliah from Ab^bs,
which was after a more private way, but he thought more fit to let David be
strengthened by the accession of much people, as a praeludium to their falling
off from the house of Saul into him. Lastly, if this way of preservation by
bends of armed men were ordinary (as these men will make it) then may one
single Subject, as David was, draw armed men together, be Captain over them,
and lead them up and down for his own, and their preservation that do adhere
unto him; which if they will not a low, then must there be in David's example
something more then ordinary.

And here I must challenge not only the Reason of the Author of the Treat of
Monarchy, who calls it a shuffling Answer, to say David's example was
extraordinary, page 5.7. but also his Ingenuity, who confesses that the people
under the Israelitish Monarchy might not resist, and had no other me^nes to
help themselves, but cries to God, page 58. and yet urges the example of
Ionathans rescue, of David's raising Forces, of his intent to defend Keilab, for
the defending of arms taken up, and used by Subjects in making resistance. He
deals with us herein, as the Popish writers do in the point of Invocation of
Saints, they acknowledge the Fathers of the Old Testament were not then in a
condition to be invocated, yet do they allege Testimonies out of the old
Testament for the proof of that point to deceive the unwary.

Elisha^s example was altogether impertinent, yet from thence occasion was
taken to speak of Personal defense, upon which these Pleaders ma^e a long and
ted^ous Reply, page 14, 15, 16. The substance of which is delivered in the
Reasons, which the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy makes for resistance^ and
therefore because this Reply of theirs, is no way strengthened by Elisha's
example, but is altogother rational, we will defer the examination of what
is material in it, to the last Section.

To conclude, It was a general collection, but yet a very forcible Argument
against resistance; that among so many Prophets, bitterly reproving wicked
Kings for subversion of Religion and justice, there was not one, that celld
upon the Eiders of the people for this duty of making Resistance. The Pleaders
reply, scarce like Reverend and learned Divines. That in the times of good
Kings we find the Princes, Elders, and Nobles very Corrupt, who then can
marvail if they were stark naught, where the King was maught, or why should it
be expected, that the Pro^hets should call upon them to resist the King being
on his side, and be^on theirs^ page 20. Answ. If it were the Duty of those
Elders and Princes (as these pleaders do conceive it was) with force to oppose
the exorbitances of those Kings, then was it the duty of those Prophets to
admonish them of it; and the more cause had the Prophets to recall them to it,
the further they were from it; the desperate condition of such Princes and
El^ers might take away hope of prevailing, could not excuse the Prophe^s
silence, and neglect. We conclude therefore, that the Scriptures of the Old
Testament do not give any Warrant by precept or example, for the Arms and
Resistance of Subjects now against their Sovereign.

SECT. VIII. Of Resistance sorbidden in the 13. to the Romans.
IN the new Testament, that of the 13. to the Romans is most considerable, the
full examination of which will also (...) other places which may seem to
concern the point in hand; lest Servants and Subjects, upon the doctrine of
Christion Liberty, should conclude themselves free from Masters and Gove^nors,
who then were cruel for the most part and Tyrannous, the Apostle does often
call servants to a continuance of their obedience, and here Subjects to the
duty of subjection without Resistance: as likewise S. Peter does, 1 Ep. cap. 2.
The place is confiderable: first in it self, as it teaches the Institution and
the End of Government; by that the Power and Authority; by this the duties of
Governors are seen, and from both the duty of Subjects in yielding Subjection
and forbearing Resistance is inferred. Secondly, (...) is considerable in
relation to those times, as it is applyable to the then governing powers, and
to the Christian Subjects, to whom S, Paul. then wrote; and thence we must
conclude (if we will think S, Paul wrote pertinently, and meant that those he
wrote to, should receive direction by what he commended to them) that however
the Governors then were not answerable to the End of government, and were
far from the duties there specified, yet had they the Power and Authority,
and those duties which are there enjoined for the yielding of Subjection, and
forbearing of resistance, were to be performed by their Subjects then living
under them.

The Reverend Divines have written such for the explication of this place, to
bring it to their pu^pose, and have in several places of their book, e^forced
the same things upon the Reader, to persuade or weary him. What they have
ma^^riall I shall examine.

First. They observe that it is Higher Powers in the plural; not Higher Power,
as the Doctor, say they, usually had it, and in this they suspect a great
fraud, Page 3. and take it to be a dangerous fallacy in the present question,
as if the King only were not to be resisted, page 9. when as we may not resist
the meanest Officer, not a Constable, arresting us, or distraining our goods,
ibid, Answ, A dang ^^ous business. I promise you, and such an one, as it
concerned these Learned Divines to give the Reader so often warning of as they
do; but to answer the^ once for all; The Higher power in the Singular was
commonly used, not in alleging the Text, as if it were so in the Apostle; but
in the applying of it to the present case, which laying the Hypothesis or
Question between the powers themselves in this point of Resistance or Armer,
might very well allow the King to be deciphered by the Higher power, or the
Supreme, in relation or opposition to other Governors under Him, although they
also be Higher powers, in respect of the people under them, and not to be
resisted by their inferiors. It is but what themselves have expressed in the
same page, 3. By Higher powers are meant All in Civil legal Authority, which
in Saint Peter's phrase, is of the King as supreme, or Governors. for these are
higher then the People, though lower then the King: the very same thing
intended and spoken by me. But these men, when they have gotten a seeming
advantage, and think the People cannot see the vanity of it, never know when
to have done with it.

Secondly. They obseive, that it is Power in the abstract, which notes the
Authority, wherewich the Person is invested, and not the person in the
Concrete; lest that might be understood of his personal commands beyond or
against his authority, which the Apostle does greatly prevent by using the word
Power. So they page. 3. which is the groundwork of their disti^ction between
Resisting the Personal Commands, and resisting the power of the Governor: but
we shall see the Apostle gives no ground for it.

I suppose they have taken the hi^t of this their Cavil from Th^ophylact, or
rather from Chrysostom's words upon this place, who (...), the Apostles speech
is not (...) of particular Princes, but of the thing it self (i.e. of the
Office, which words are nothing to the meaning of these men: for Chrys^stome,
observing that the Prince then governing were not such, (...) the Apostle
describes, v. 3.4.6. did therefore say the Apostle speaks of the Office not of
them that bore it (i.e.) not of those individual Persons then in power, who
were far from the performance of those duties; out if we look to the duty
there required of Subjects in regard of Obed^ence and resistance, it was never
i^ Saint Chrysostomes mind to think that the Apostle did not speak of that, as
due to the Persons then Governing. Well, to let the Commentator go, let us
look into the Text, where it plainly appears, that it is the Apostles intent
to show the duty of Subjects, and for that purpose he speaks of the power it
self, and of the Person that bears it, that is from the power which he shows
to be of God, he enforces obedience to the Persons that are in power, yea with
respect to the Persons then governing.

For first, Those words, the powers that are, do plainly include the Persons;
because Power in the Abstract, cannot be (...) existent, so as the Apostle
speaks of it here, making it the object of obedience. Again, those that he
calls Powers in the first verse, he calls Rulers in the third, and the
Ministers of God in the fourth v. And thou shall have praise of the power, v.
3. What, can Power in the Abstract give Praise? or is tribute paid to the Power
in the Abstract? In a word. The Power or Authority is the Reason why we yield
Subjection and Obedience to any person, but the Person that bears the Power is
the Object of our Subjection and obedience; and because he bears the Power and
is set over us, we must not resist him, though he abuse the Power.

Their third observation or Conceit (upon which their m^it. Answer to this
place depends, and for which the Fuller Ausuerer has applauded them) is the
restraint of Subjection enjoined here, to Legal commands in Civil matters
only: their words are, The things, about which the Authority and so the
subjection in this place is conversant, are Civil matters belonging to the
Second Table, between Man and Man; for then the Magistrates commanded not for
but against Religion and the first table; and therefore the Active subjection
at least here required is limited to Civil Matters, or at least passive
yielding to the pet nalty of the Laws, in case of not obeying actively; and
neither active nor passive subjection farther, then to Legal Commands, so page
4. Ans. 1. How far they extend those Civil matters, to which they will have
this Subjection here confined, they have not distinctly skewen, whether to
things only of indifferency determined by the Roman Laws, and belonging to
the Second Table, in regard of the general end of it, forasmuch as they were
so determined for the more convenient proceeding of Justice, and the better
conserving of order and Peac^tor to thing also in themselves good or bad; for
it is certain the Roman Laws also concerned these. There are indeed that say,
by good works, in the 3. v. are not meant works M^rally but Civilly good,
which is very answerable to these men's re^traint, whom it concerned to make the
way they will go in for Obedience, as narrow as they can, for that will leave
the way for Resistance so much the Wider; only I must return the blame of
carlesnesse (which they would often cast upon me) upon themselves, that making
such a restraint, they would not more distinctly fix the bounds of it.

2. It is true, that the Apostle enjoynes them Subjection here to all Legal
Commands in Civil matters, but it is not to be so restrained; for put the
case, If they that were in Authority, should command contrary to their own
Laws in Moral things, or contrary to Religion and the first Table; were
Christians bound to obey? for active obedience the point is clear, they were
not bound: but were they bound then to suffer for not obeying actively? These
Divines tell us the Subjection here enjoined by the Apostle concerns only
Civil Matters, a thing of which there was less doubt; and so Christians are
left altogether without direction, in regard of the other Matte^s, which more
concerned them: unless they will take the desperate Resolution these men give,
as we had it above, Neither active or passive Subjection is here required
farther, then to Legal commands. So then, Christians, according to these
Divines, were free and might resist, when they had such commands imposed on
them; but can we think the Apostle should give them so lame an instruction, as
to teach them Subjection only in Civil Matters, and leave them either without
direction what to do in the other cases, or permit them to make the inference
for resistance, as these men do, contrary to the very practice of Saint Paul
himself, and all the Apostles, and all the Christians of those primitive
Times, who did yield passive obedience under the illegal commands of the then
governing Powers.

But they endeavor to prove it; page 4. and 5. from the context by the
inference, Whosoever therefore resists, etc. which is made, say they, from Gods
ordaining the power; and if I be bound to be subject to Tyranny, or to suffer
violence of a Tyrant by virtue of the commandment here, then is Tyranny the
Ordinance of God, and Magistrates have power ordained of God to use Tyrannous
violence page 4. Answ. It follows of Active Subjection, not Passive; If I be
bound actively to obey such commands of Tyranny, then would it be truly
inferred that Tyranny it self were the Ordinance of God; but if I be bound
only to suffer patiently under the illegal commands of Tyranny, then does it
not follow, that Tyranny is theordinance of God, but that those Tyrants do
bear the power ordained of God, though abufing it sometimes for the just
punishment of those they are set over by God. I would also defire these Divines
to consider, how finely they teach private men to resist, by arguing as they
do here, If I be bound to be subject to Tyranny, etc.

The like instances repeated over and over they have in the beginning of page
5. which are satisfied by the like Answer, but they enquire a little after in
the same page Seeing the Doctor will not say, that the most pereusptory
refusing to obey actively Tyrannous Commands is resistance, by what authority
of Text or Context will he stretch the prohibition to the refusing to suffer
Tyrannous Violence? Or how does any resist unlawfully (though by Arms) when
unlawful violence is offered him, which God no where gave Authority to use
against him, nor ever commanded him to yield unto? Answ. 1. Seeing your
Argument from those word words (the Ordinance God) would, if it were good,
allow private mento resist, I pray you by what authority of Text or Context do
your Patrons forbid Resistance to be made by private men, but allow it to
Magistrates or the infetior powers? is it from the consideration of those to
whom the Apostle wrote, who had not then any Magistrates of their own
profession among them? though that be no good ground to raise that distinction
of private men and public in the point of resistance (for the Apostles
reasons against resisting of Higher powers do concern all times) yet will the
consideration of those persons to whom, and of those times in which the Apostle
wrote, give us authority to stretch the prohibition to the refusing to suffer
Tyrannous violence; for we must conceive, that he gave them instruction which
did nearly concern them, which might in some reasonable manner direct them,
which was agreeable to Saint Peter's advice, 1 Ep. 2. cap. which was consonant
to the practice of the Apostles, and all other Christians of those and the
following primitive times; but the instruction that the Apostle here gives them
cannot be such, unless it forbid the refusing to suffer under the Tyrannous
violence of those times.

2. Answ. If he that resists by Arms, does not resist unlawfully (as you say)
when unlawful violence is offered him, which God no where gave authority to
use against him, where has God, I pray you, given authority to Parents or
Masters to use unjust violence to their Children or Servants? yet is not their
resistance unlawful? for though God has not given those authority to do it,
yet has commanded these to suffer it, if done. The like may be said of Kings
and Subjects; for has not God put Kings, Fathers, and Masters all in one
Commandment and enjoined this duty and reverence to them under one word,
Honor? and S. Peter, next to the fear of God, has placed Hon^ur the King, and
advises Christians to suffer though wrongfully, under the then Tyrannous
Governors, and froward Masters. Did not God put his People under this
Subjection, when he put them under a King, 1 Samuel 8.? where this immunity of
their Kings from their resistance and forceable Coer^ion is called Ius Regis,
not because God gave them power and right to use unjust and oppressing
violence, but because if they did so, they were by the Law and Ordinance of God
secured from the violence of the People, and reserved for the judgment and
vengeance of God, that ordained them and set them over his people; as appeared
above in the former Section.

But they go on; and seem to conceive, that by the powers not to be resisted,
the Doctor means only the Supreme, and those that Act his will; but denies
the like security to subordinate Magistrates, if they be Tyrannous, without any
command from the Supreme page 6. Answ. The Doctor by maintaining, the Supreme
power might not be resisted by the Subordinate powers under Him, did not
thereby imply, that these might be resisted; but still the higher spower is not
to be resisted by those that are under it.

But if he say, that neither Supreme nor Subordinate may be resisted, then may
every mean. Officer ruin the whole neighborhood, and so the blessed
Ordinance of God in Magistracy shall turn to the greatest Curse to mankind, so
they page 6, Answ. There are superior powers that can protect, so that if the
subordinate power do wrong, the complai^t lies still to the higher power; if
the Supreme or highest be engaged in the Violence, the redress is to be sought
by petition and suite, if not succeed, the complaint lies to heaven, resistance
is not the remedy.

They conclude; Therefore as the Apostle, in the following verses, does banish
Tyranny out of the context, describing, every where a righteous Magistrate: so
is Tyranny banished out of the interpretation of this Text, which allows him
that is a Tyrant no security that he shall be endured, and not resisted even
with Armet; though it does secure a just ruling Prince from all resistance
under the heavyest penalty of Damnation, page 6. Answ. It is true that the
Apostle banishes Tyranny out of the duty of a Magistrate by the following
verses, but it is also true, that he banishesresistance out of the duty of
Subjects by the former verses. He describes a rightcous Magistrate; but could
he then exemplity? were the Governors then such? If not such, as they were not
then would this Text, according to the interpretation of these Divines, give
but a lame direction to the Christians, how they should carry themselves
toward the then unjust Governors; nor would this text, which forbids
resistance, at al secure those Governors from their resistance; nay, I would
feign see what any Jesuit can say or desire more from this text then that it
gives a Tyrant no security, that he shall be endured. Lastly, if the penalty of
Damnation laid upon the people, will secure a just ruling Prince from all
resistance, as they tell us, why should not damnation laid upon every unjust
oppressing Prince, secure the people from Tyranny? one would think it most
equal that the Highest Power should have the greatest security, and so God in
his wisdom thought fit, when he put his people under Kings without power of
Resistance; as was she wen in the former Section, and will be a forceable
reason against resistance, in the next Section.

Now let us consider this Text with application to those Times, and to the
Powers then ruling; upon that consideration it was inferred, that Tyrannous and
oppressing Princes are not to be resisted by Arms, and that the Apostles
reasons taught us; that for the good which is generally received by Ruling
powers, we must bear with them, though abusing their Authority, as the
Emperors then did; which also took away their distinction of resisting not the
power, but the abuse of the power. These Divines in Answer to it, spend many
pages, from page. 22. to 28. and again, from 47. to 51. where, (after some
thing said of small moment concerning the Kings Supremacy and the Roman Senate;
page. 22.23, of which I have had, and shall have presently occasion to speak
upon more weighty consideration brought by the Author of the Treatise of
Monarchy) They tell us. First, The Doctors vain Confidence will appear in
thinking he has made void the distinction of Refisting not the power, but the
abuse of it; for when he grants that active obedience is to be denied to the
illegal Commands of the Prince, he distinguishes himself hetweene the Power
and the abuse of it; and why may not we distinguish upon the (...) in the
second verse, as well as he does upon the (...) in the first, so page 26. Answ,
You cannot so well make the distinction in in regard of resistance, as it may
in regard of subjection or Obedience; for I can sever the power from the abuse
of it, by denying my active obedience to the abuse or illegal command, and by
yielding my passive obedience under such a command; but by making resistance
you cannot sever them, for you cannot resist the abuse, but by resisting of the
power in him that bears it.

Secondly, they tell us, that the Apostles reasons forbid only resistance to
Legal Commands -- and still they ask, does the Apostle else know what he
says, when in his reasons ^e tells us, Rulers are not a terror to good
works, and he is the minister of God to thee for good? can this be said of the
Emperors then? therefore the Drs sense must be renounced, and it must be said,
the Apostle medles only with Civil matters here, so page 47.48. Answ. That
is, the Apostle medles with that, which did little concern them, and gives
them no instruction in that which did most pr^sse them: the Tyrannous Commands
and violences of the then Emperors: can we think he was well advised, if he had
made them a discourse of Government, which they could make no use of, for the
then urgent necessities? when therefore he says, Rulers are not a terror, --
and they they are Ministers of God for good, etc. it was true of the then
Rulers in regard of some Civil good which they did in some measure procure,
(for S. Paul did often find relief in that Government, and was often rescued
from the violence and cruelty of his Enemies, as we read in the Acts of the
Apostles) though it was true also, that their Government was full of Tyranny
and injustice: what shall we say then to these reasons of the Apostle, but that
he forbids resistance under those Tyrannous Governors, and urges it from the
end of government, which was for good, and which their Subjects did in regard
of Civil matters in some sort enjoy under them? but we cannot think, that he
medles with Civil matters only, or forbids refistance to Legal commands only,
unless we should also think, that the Apo^^le left the Christians to infer
from these reasons, as these Divines do, that if Rule^s do not accordingly
minister for good, but are a terror to good works, they may and ought to be
resisted, and that the Christians, had they had force, might have resisted, so
they affirm, page 49. We see then the conclusion they are necessitated to by
their interpretation of this place, in restraining the prohibition of
resistance only to Legall-commands: which conclusion (being so scandalous to
Christian Religion, so opposite to the practice of the Apostles, and the
express doctrine of those and after times) does show, that these Divines did
not know what they said, when they inferred from the Apostles reasons, that
Resistance only to Legal Commands is forbidden, and that Christians might have
resisted.

Let them hear what Bucer says upon the (...) be subject, the word, says he,
signifies to be plene sub imperio and in potestate, fully under the power of
Rulers, and that the Apostle by that word gives us to understand opertere
nostraomnia ponere in man's ^orum, qui publicam potestatem gerunt, sed propter
Dominum, ideo quae Domino debemus, ea semper and ante omnia praestand^ sunt:
interim tamen si magistratsu ob id nobis non res odo^, sed ipsam etiam vitam
conetur eripere, ferendum est, neque potestati obluctandum; this is full, and
forbids resistance under illegal commands and sufferings for obeying of God --
Then upon the Apostles Reasons, He is the Minister of God to thee for good,
etc. the same Bucer shows, They are drawn from the good and benefit for which
government was ordained, which good is obtained (...) for the most part, and in
some measure; the like says Calvin upon the place -- who persuading submission
under Tyrannous Rulers concludes thus, Nulla ergo Tyrannis esse potest, qua non
aliqua ex part subsidio sit ad tuendam hominum societatem, the like does Peter
Martyr upon the place.

Let them also read how the Author of the Treatise of M^narchy censures these
Divines for their inferences from the Apostles reasons; that the Apostle,
according to such a meaning, should have taught them a Doctrine of resistance
rather, then subjection, and that the received Doctrine of the Saints in
ancient and modern times, could never find in that place of the Apostle such a
license for Christians, to use Arms in their defense, against the Tyranny of
their Emperors, page 64. with several reasons which show the scandal of such
Doctrine, page 66.

What then will this Author of the Treatise of Monarchy, that pleades also for
Resistance, answer to the Apostles prohibition of it? he grants they might not
resist in that Monarchy, but affirm, that Subjects may in this; why? Because
Religion then was no part of the Laws, but here it is; Also because, that was
an Absolute Monarchy and Sovereignty, this a limited and Mixed. So we have two
exceptions of his as he dilivers them, page 59. 64. and 66.

His first exception is, Religion then was no part of the Laws, and so its
violation no subversion of Established government, -- Herein we have Doctor
Bilson consenting, who says, That the superior power forbidden here to be
resisted, is not the Princes will against his Laws, but agreeing to his Laws.
I think the day it self is not more clear. page 64. and 57. I do concur
with Mr. Burrowes, professing against resisting of Authority, though abused:
That if those who have power to make Laws, make sinful Laws, and so give
authority to any to force obedience, there must be either flying or passive
Obedience, and page 66. In the case of the Arms now taken up, there is no need
of those offensive Grounds which the Reverend Divines run upon) Religion
being now a part of our National Law. So he. Answ. What Dr. Bilson and other
of our Divines have written in favor of Resistance, they m^ane it of such
States, as may by the known Laws use forceable restraint against the
exorbitances of the Monarch; and as they were willing after those motions of
the Protestants in France, and the Low Countries, to excuse as much as might
be, so had they lived to have seen the Commotions and Rebellion of these days,
I make no doubt, but they would have spoken more cautelously; I am sure, the
Homily against Rebellion speaks home, and will not admit such distinctions,
that make way to the Resisting or Rebelling against evil Princes, which
command against the Laws and Religion, for of such it speaks.

But let us try the force of this exception; he professes with Mr. Burrowes
against resisting of Authority, though abused; and with Doctor Bilson admits of
Resisting the Princes will against the Laws; this is fast and loose, for what
is the Princes will against the Laws, but abusing of Authority? It may be he
would salve at, as M. Burrowes seemed to do, by telling us, that he means by
Authority abused, the Authority, employed in Making sinful Laws; for such
Authority though abused, this Author acknowledges to be the Ordinance of God
and not to be resisted, and disputes it against the Reverend Divines, page 64.
65. I agree with him; but further would have him show why Authority abused in
the Execution of Law, that is, in pursuing the Princes illegal will, should
not be also the Ordinance of God and secured from resistance? Indeed there is a
great difference between Resistance made against a Prince commanding according
to Law, and that which is against a Prince commanding contrary to Law, but it
does not make the business as clear as the day: nay it does not at all
satisfy him that will enquire --

First, concerning that government under which the Apostle lived; might
Subjects then resist, If the Higher Powers commanded contrary to Law, as they
did often? we find that the Christian Orthodox Religion was part of the Laws
in Constantines and the suceeding times, and that Christians did not resist
when Julian persecuted them for it, nor did the Orthodox Christians resist when
the Arrian Emperors endeavored to subvert the faith. If he reply, they were
Absolute Emperors, and that their Edicts made a change of the Law, by which
such Religion was established: why then does he, speaking of these absolute
Emperors, distinguish the will of the Prince from the Law, and think to
satifie us by telling us, Religion then was no part of the Law; when with one
breath they could make any thing Law, and by another reverse it; according to
this Authors acknowledgement of their absoutenesse.

Secondly, Nor will this exception satisie him, that shall enquire concerning
this Government. 1. Whether the first Parliament in Q. Elizabeth's Reign might
have resisted her, endeavoring to change the then established Popish Religion?
Had those Popish Lords and Commons, which Q. Mary left, been pleased to hold
to that Religion which was then part of our National Law, they might have
taken the Arms of the Kingdom, and have used them in the defense of it, by
the Rule of this Author, and the pretenses of the Arms now taken up; I would
very feign see, how they will make this as clear as the day. 2. How can they
be justified, that did at first take Arms, and do still continue them (as
themselves stick not to profess) for the pulling down of Episcopal
Government (that I may not say, of the Church Liturgy and public service too)
which is, and always has been a part of the Law of this Nation? So little can
this Author satisfy us in this first exception, by saying, Religion was then
no part of the Law, and therefore Christians might not resist, but now it is
part of our National Law, and therefore allows the Resistance of these days.

His other exception is; they were Absolute Monarchs, and therefore not to be
resisted; He who reads Tacitus (says he) cannot but see the Senate brought to
a condition of basest servitude, and all Laws and Lives depending on the will
of the Prince; -- They were become the sworn vassals of an absolute Lord, we
the Subjects of a Liege or Legal Prince, page 59. Answ: This is the Sword to
cut the knot when it cannot be untied: but the edge is easily taken off from
it, by enquiring whether those first Roman Emperors had de jure such absolute
power; and by considering, whether the Apostle had any respect to such
absoluteness of their power, in his reasons against resistance: and lastly,
whether limitation of Power in the Sovereign, does infer power of resistance
in the Subject.

1. It cannot be cleared that those first Roman Emperors were so absolute de
lure Legally, by such consent and surrender of the People and Senate, as is
required to the estating them in such an absolute condition, There seems to be
two Reasons inducing this opinion of their absoluteness. 1. Because they took
upon them as absolute Lords. That cannot be denied indeed, but it makes no
right; nay, they crept into the power by degrees, which argues, they had it not
by such consent as is pretended, but got it by practice. 2. Because of the Lex
Regia, which this man does not mention, but it is much spoken of to this
purpose; for thereby it is conceived, that they were estated in such Absolute
sovereignty: thus it runs, as Vlpian gives it us, A Law, qua populus ei
(Principi) and in eum omne suum imporium and potestatem contulit. Tit. de
Constitut-Principis. That there was such a Lex Regia, cannot be denied, but the
Question is, when it was made, and what or how much is granted by i^? This has
caused several opinions among the Civilians some thinking the people only
gave away their power, making the Prince their perpetual Tribune. Some that
the Senate also parted with their power. Some, that neither of them parted
wholly with their power, but communicated it so far forth to the Prince in
the administration of the Commonwealth, that they still kept the Summum
imperium in themselves. This variety of opinion is unfit to make a certain
ground for Conscience, or to give interpretation to the Apostle, as if then be
forbad Resistance, because those Emperors were Absolute.

I conceive it to be clear that the draught of that Lex Regia appears no
where before Vespasians time; that the people had before parted with their
power, but the Senate not wholly; therefore Augustus (to whom (...), the
Principate was granted for life, as Srabo says toward the end of his last
book) took upon him as Tribune of the people, and had it from ten years to
ten years, as Al^iate shows in a little Tract, de Magistratib. Civilibus.
That the succeeding Emperors encroached by degrees upon the liberty and power
of the Senate, making their way by sear and flattery; but had not that power,
which by fits they assumed, from such a Covenant and Consent of the State, as
is required, to make that Legem Regiam, as Connanus shows out of Dion,
Suetonius, and Tacitus. Also that the Emperors though they were, for the more
ready execution and ministration of the affairs of the Commonwealth, sol^ti
Legibus, which was first granted to Augustus, yet did they perquamdiu magnam
potestatis partem cum Senatu communicare (as Hotoman shows, de Constitutionib.
Princip and cut of that power, which the Senate did still conceive to be in
them, they declared Nero an Enemy to the State. Add to this, that though we
read not of Plebiscita after the beginning of these Emperors, yet we meet with
Senatus Consulta; and of the power of the Senare in passing their Decrees,
^acitus says, They did it sometime inscio and absente Principe, but never
indeed invito, against his will; Suetonius also tells us that Caligula intended
to assume the Diade^, which was a sign of that Regia potestas,and had been a
profession that he would reign absolutely: nec multum abfuit, quin speciem
principatus, in Regni formam converteret, but he was dissuaded from it by his
friends, faith that Historian.

During these Times the Apostles lived and wrote; for I go not so low as
Vespasian, unto whom that Lex Regia seems to be solemnly granted by a formal
consent; and yet after that we find Pliny in his panegyricke tell the Emperor
Trajan, sedem Principis tenes, ne sit Domixo locus: which shows, they had not
resigned themselves up to the Emperor, as sworn vassals to an Absolute Lord,
but had set a Prince over them for the readier dispatch of the affairs of the
Commonwealth, which often suffered (and in those times more then ever) by the
crossings and Divisions of the People and Senate. The form of the Government
was thereupon, I acknowledge, changed, and the Supremacy settled upon the
Prince: yet may it, I conceive, from the former allegations be as well
concluded, that the Senate had their share in the Supremacy with the Prince
till Vespasians time, as that the two Houses are Originally Mixed or joined
with the King in the supreme or Sovereign power, which this Author undertakes
to prove.

2. It is to be considered that the Apostle in his reasons against resistance,
has no respect to the Absolute or Limited condition of those Roman Emperors,
nor to any consent or compact of the people, by which they should be made such,
(for then he might have told them, If they resist they resist their own
Ordinances) but draws his reasons from the Ordinance of God, who sets up
rulers, and from the End and Benefits of Government, which are Reasons, common
to all Government, not to be eluded by saying, Ours are limited Monarchs, and
therefore may be resisted; for those reasons tell us, that resistance against
Him, that bears the Sword, (i.e.) against the Supreme power, (for that is
signified by those words, as Musculus and Bucer show out of Vlpian) is
unlawful in all governments.

3. As the Apostle had no respect to the Absoluteness of Power in those
Emperors, nor to the consent of the people, by which they are said to have
such power, so neither indeed does the limited condition of a Monarch infer
he may betesisted for his Exorbitancies more then an Absolute may for his,
whether we consider the Exorbitancies of an Absolute M^narchy, which may be
destructive of the public, or look to the compact of the people (by which he
is left Absolute) who did not thereby intend, he should oppress and destroy
them, or command and judge them beyond Reason and Equity, as this Author
acknowledges, page 11. But it was proved more largely above at the end of the
5. Sect. That limitednesse of power in the Sovereign, does not infer a power
of Resistance in Subjects. So that absoluteness of power in those first Roman
Emperors is causelessly alleged by this Author as the reason, why they might
not be resisted.

This Author concludes, All that can be justly inferred out of the Text, we
grant, but can any living man hence collect, that therefore no resistance may
be made to Fellow Subjects, executing destructive illegal Acts of the Princes
Will in a Legal Monarchy? Will he affirm that the Ordinance of God is
resisted, and Damnation incurred thereby? Gods Ordinance is the power, and the
person invested with the power, but here force is offered to neither, page 59.
Answ. The Question is not put of making no resistance to fellow Subjects, but
of such resistance, as is made against them under the command of their
Sovereign, by a contrary Army of Subjects, a resistance that undertakes a
final contestation with the Sovereign, to constrain him to be of another mind,
as it was explained above, Sect. 2. Now if he means, this Resistance cannot be
collected out of the Text, because it is made in a Legal Monarchy, then is it
the same exception, which even now he made from the Absoluteness of those
Roman Monarchs; but if he means it cannnot be collected, because it is no
resistance of Gods Ordinance, from whence the Apostle draws his reason against
resisting; then I say. 1. That when Subjects are drawn into Arms by the
Sovereign, who has the power of the Sword, and do act and move under his
command, to make opposition by a contrary army of Subjects is a resisting of
the power, and a taking of the Sword without the Sovereign, against the
Ordinance of God, and a shedding of blood without warrant. 2. This exception
seems to be the same which was made by the pleaders above, where they
objected, If I be bound by the Ordinance of God, to suffer violence of a
Tyrant, then is Tyranny the Ordinance of God. This was answered above, and is
rejected by that Author of the Treatise of Monarchy: yet does he in effect
argue to the same purpose, as we shall meet with him presently, among the
reasons of the next Section.

And thus much of the 13. to the Romaxs, in the asserting of which, it has been
shown against the Rev. Divines who pleaded for defensive Arms, That forcible
Resistance against the illegal and Tyrannous commands of the then ruling
Emperors was here forbidden; and, That Christians, had they had force
sufficient, might not resist. Also against the Author of the Treatise of
Monarchy, That his exceptions from the Laws being then against Religion, and
from the Absoluteness of those Emperors, were not sufficient to satisfy, or
make us believe, that therefore the Apostle forbad them to be resisted; for we
find him to draw his reasons against Resistance, from that which is common to
all Times and Governments, the Ordinance of God, the end and benefit of
Government. There are many more places of Scripture usually brought, which may
very aptly and powerfully persuade patience under evil Governors, but I have
chosen to insist only upon such as are more pregnant and fi^ to bear argument
against the power of Resistance in Subjects.

SECT. IX. Reason against the Power of Resistance in Subjects.
IT is clear, that (as it has been often insinuated above) if a Prince stands
supreme and next under God above all the People, His Subjects may not proceed
to such Resistance by armed Forces, as is supposed in the Question, and at this
day practiced to the utmost; It is also most manifest that our King is so,
being expressly acknowledged the only Supreme Head and Governor: and this
might be sufficient Reason without more ado, to conclude against Resistance.
The adversaries not well knowing how to divide Supremacy and irresistibility,
have vainly endeavored to join the Houses as sharers in the supreme or
Sovereign power, for which we had so much concerning Mixture above; and do
think to satisfy that Supremacy, they leave in the King, by yielding his
person to be above the violence of Resistance; but as for the Forces about his
person, the arms of the Kingdom may be employed against them, as against
misimployed agents; and from the taking of those arms to make this resistance,
they conceive they are not debarred by His being Supreaeme Head and Governor,
but are enabled to it by a supposed reservation of the people, and by the
necessity of the States preservation, requiring such a power of resistance in
Subjects, upon which grounds their Reasons for resistance do mainly proceed. I
shall therefore so frame this trial of Reason, (to which we are now come) as
it may best meet with the force of their Reasons and Exceptions.

I. It was the wisdom of God to put his people still under Kings, without
power of resistance, as we found it in the two former Sections: and that
wisdom of God should be to us in stead of the most forcible Reason, and
silence all gainsaying pretenses.

II. If this power of Resistance in Subjects were so necessary for the
preserving of Religion and Justice, as is pretended, certainly the word of God
would have given direction for it; but as in the Old Testament, we no where
find the Prophets calling upon the Elders of the people sin th^^ supposed d^^y
of resistance, so in the New Testament we every where find patience in
suffering for well doing no mended to (...). This Author of the Treat. of
Monarchy, does often admire the wisdom of the Architects of this Government,
that so provided for the safety of it, by placing such power of Arms and
resistance in the two Houses: but we do not find such a provision within that
wisdom and care, which it pleased God to show in the Government he put his
people under; nor would we indeed find such a power of forcible resistance,
provided in the constitution of this monarchy, when we examined it above.

III. From the Institution and Ordinance of God, which gives the power,
according to the Apostles argument, who draws his reason against resistance,
not from any Compact of the people, but from the Ordinance of God, which cannot
be E^uded by any reservation of the people (the pretended ground of resistance)
but shows the power given by it must be borne with, though abused, as then it
was, when the Apostle gave his reasons against resistance.

IIII. To be Supreme and next to God over the people, or to have the power of
the sword, implies a security from resistance; It is the Ius Regis which Calvin
and most Authors acknowledge upon 1 Samuel 8.11. and is expressed, Prove. 30.31. A
King, against whom there is no rising up. It is generally acknowledged, that
Princes which be supreme are free from the Coactive power of the Law; It is
apparent, that resistance cannot be made by Subjects, but by taking the power
of the Sword which belongs to him that is supreme. Lastly, it is evident in
reason, that if the two Houses be enabled to resist and constrain the Prince
by force to his duty, then have they the power of the Lacedaemonian Ephori,
which, as this Author of the Treatise of Monarchy acknowledges, does overthrow
the Soveraignity of the Monarch.

The general exception, which the Adversaries make to these two last Reasons,
is, that they resist not the Sovereign power, but only misimployed instruments
and fellow Subjects executing his illegal commands. Answ. As if the
Sovereigns could by himself execute his Commands without under Ministers of
power; so that the resisting of them, acting by the power which he has
committed to them, is a resisting of him. And such a resistance, as is supposed
in the Question, necessarily proceeds to an opposing of Him personally, in
giving of Him Battle, and forcing of Him from His Right and Power to new
grants of Security.

In particular, This Author of the Treat. of Monarchy, thus reasons from the
Ordinance of God. To Resist such misimployed Instruments, is no resisting of
the Ordinance of God; for it neither resists the Person of the Sovereign, for
we spoke of resisting his Agents; nor His Power, for the measure of that in our
Government is the Law, and therefore He cannot confer Authority to any beyond
the Law, page 52. Answ. I would desire this Author to look again upon the two
Assertions of the Reverend Divines, which he rejects, page 63. They run thus,
Those Govern urs, whether Supreme or others, who under pretense of Authority
from Gods Ordinance, disturb the quiet and peaceable life in Godliness and
honesty, are far from being Gods Ordinance in so doing: also; This Tyranny not
being Gods Ordinance, they which resist it even with Arms, resist not the
Ordinance of GOD: and then to consider, whether those D^vines might not in
desence of those Assertions answer, as he has done here, that to resist the
misimployed Agents of Tyrants commanding against Law, is not to resist the
Ordinance of God, for they cannot confer Authority to any against the Law; for
my part I cannot conceive, how he can retain his own Assertion, and reject
theirs.

But to Answer him more particularly; He that bears the Sword (i. e) has the
supreme power, gives power and Commission to under Ministers for executing of
Justice and to other Officers for the Militia; If those therefore, though
abusing the Power, be resisted by them who are under them, it is a resisting of
the Power; and if these, in time of War and insurrection, being drawn
together by the Sovereign, and acting His Commands under Him, be opposed by
contrary force and arms of Subjects, it is a resisting of the power lawfully
placed in such persons, though illegally used and employed; it is a taking and
using of the sword to the shedding of blood with u Warrant.

The defense (which this Author makes, page 62) of their taking the sword
without the Soveraign^, and against his Comman^, is grounded upon that former
groundless suppos^ll of their being joined with the King in the Sovereign
power it self; of which a^undantly in the 4th and 5th Sections above.

V. Because Obedience, Honor, and Su^j^ction, ^ue to a Ponce are enjoined, and
th Contrary forbidd^n without any ^^stincti^n o^ a Good or Bad Prince; S^. Paul
shows, that h^ill must not he spoken of the worst Rulers, Act. 23. What is
^aesars, ^u^ Savior bids give unto Caesar, when he was as bad as might be; and
for this Cause pay you Tribute, and Honor, says S. Paul, when the higher
powers were extreme^y evnd. -- This cannot consist with taking Arms against a
Prince: for they that do so, must speak evil of Him, make Him appear O
(...) to His people, and will not, cannot let Caesar have what is His, His
Revenues, Customs, Tribute, Arms, but w^ll tell Him, they are not His, but
the King fomes, to use as the State shall think sit, when he abuses them, And
as the Scripture does not, so not her does our Law make any d^stinction of good
^^d bad Princes in this point; It enjoynes Honor, Subjection, Allegiance,
Customs, without any such distinction, and determin^s Insurrection, and
Levying of War to be Treason, not only against a good King, but indefinitely
against any.

VI. It is good reason, that He which has the Supreme Trust next to God,
should have the greatest security, but if the people have power of Arms upon
such or such Cases, the strongest and last security is on their side. In other
kinds of Government, we see the security is still upon the Governing Part;
Parents are secured from the force and violence of Children; and as unto the
first Rule of Fathers, the Government of Kings did succeed, so unto Kings is
Honor commanded under the Name of Fathers, that we might conceive the
unnaturalnes of War and forcible Resistance against them. The Husband also,
who is the head of the Wife, had the advantage on his part in the point of
Divorce; He might give the Bill to her upon Jealousies and displeasure, she
could not to Him; This Liberty was permitted to good and bad Husbands equally,
notwithstanding the occasion, that evil Husbands might take thereby to be
unjust and cruel; as it is usually objected against this Ius Regis, or
advantage of security on the Kings part.

VII. From the end and benefits of the Governing power, for the enjoying of
which it is good reason we should bear with the Exorbitancies of the power.
The Divines, that plead for Defensive Arms, reply. This is as good a Reason,
as if we should say, God has ordained Ministers to Preach, and administer his
Sacraments for the good of the people, that they may be saved, therefore be
their Ministers never so careless, or perverting the Word and Sacraments, the
people may not seek their Souls safety from some other, page 56. Answ.
There Is a great deal of difference between these two Reasonings, if we
consider the Remedy which may be had against unfaithful, scandalous Ministers;
for first, as these Divines suppose forcible Resistance, to be the remedy
against Exorbitant Princes, when the Good for which Government was ordained,
cannot be received by them, so should they in this their Reasoning, have
concluded for a violent suppression of such Ministers, as an answerable Remedy
against that mischiese. Indeed this Age has seen the proceedings against both
much alike, Ministers pulled out of their Pulpits by the people, cast out of
their Houses, spoiled of the benefit of their Livings, and Teachers drawn from
the Lowest of the people, thrust into their places without any Legal process;
and it is openly professed, that these Arms are still held up to pull Bishops
down. These men forget what our Savior said to the people, of the Scribes and
Pharisees, They sit in Moses Chair; what then? pull them down? No: hear
them, and do what they teach you out of Moses.

As against their Pastors, so have they proceeded against their Prince,
forgetting those many precepts and examples, which the Scripture gives us, of
Obedience and subjection yielded even to Tyrannous Kings; now if they will
reason thus, God has ordained Rulers for good, therefore we may use force to
constrain them to their duty, that we may receive that good by them: So, God
has ordained Ministers for good, therefore we may violently suppress them, and
cast them out, if we cannot receive that good by them; then I confess, one
Reason is as good as another, but both bad enough.

Secondly therefore, we must consider there is a Remedy to be ha^against
unfaithful scandalous Ministers, by complaining to their Superiors, who set
them over the people, and can displ^ce them; but the Remedy against Princes
that Rule not well, is by complaint to God, that set them up, and can turn
their Hearts; now if they will reason thus, Pastors are ordained for good,
therefore if they do not minister unto that, we may use the remedy against
them, which God and good Laws have allowed; so Rulers are ordained for good,
and if they do not attend upon it, such r^medy may be used as God and good
Laws do approve of; then I confess, both Reasonings are good; but neither
does conclude for forcible Resistance.

Now if we will consider the force of this seventh Reason against Resistance,
which is drawn from the end and benefits of Government, we shall find it,
however the Reverend Divines make light of it, to be the same that the Apostle
makes, v. 7. Render therefore, etc. wherefore? because they are the Ministers
of God for good, etc. But who were they, to whom Tribute, and Honor, and
Custom, was then to be rendered as due? Those Rulers that were then far from
those duties; yet, because Rulers, appointed for that end, Render therefore,
etc. Calvin upon the place tells us, Loquitur denativo Magistratus officio, a
quo tame^se non raro degenerant, qui principatum tenent, nihilominus deferenda
est us obedientia, quae principibus debetur. For whether we consider Government
in general, it does (as Bucer upon the place speaks) (...), for the most part
obtame its end in some good measure: or any Government in particular, there is
a benefic of protection from it beyond the particular injuries suffered by it;
to this purpose Calvin upon the place, Quanquam ne sic quidem unquam abutuntur
sua potest ne Pr^^cipes bonos vexando, ut non in sua Tyrannide speciem al quam
just^ dominationis retineant; Nulla ergo Tyrannis esse pot^st, quae non aliqua
ex part subsidio sit ad tuendam hominum societate^. And P. Martyr shows it by
the rescue, defense, and protection, which S, Paul found through the benefit of
the power, and by the appeal he made to Nero the worst of Tyrants; all which
appears by several passages in the Acts of the Apostles.

VIII. This Power of Resistance in Subjects, would be a Remedy against the
Exorbitancies of Princes, worse then the chsease, and more subver sive of a
state, then if they were left without it. This the Wisedom^ of Go^, ^he God of
Order did forefee, who put his people under King, wit ont such power of
Resistance, as was above (...). This both Reason and experience does show, that
it is a remedy not to be managed without bringing greater danger; the being of
such power in Subjects would be a continua^l Seminary of jealousies twixt
Prince and People, for the using of it, they would not want pretenses
causelessly made, and in the using of it could not show m^deration: they would
not be content with the recevering of their Liberties, but seek to lessen the
Princes power for their farther secutity; they would not rest upon the Princes
promise for it, and then how would he upon theirs for obedience? they would
fear his return to exorbitancy, and be their violence would proceed to a
deposing of H^^; and what could be the issue but confusion through the
continuance of the Mischiefs of Wa^te? The confideration of these times and of
the persons that have had the managing of this forcible Resistance, show ^t to
be a Remedy not to be used.

The author of the Trea^ise of Monarchy, replies. It is strong that the
Resistance of dest^uctive disorder should tend to the overthrow of Order, or be
a remedy worse then the disease; It may for a time disturb, as Physic does
the Natural body, while it is in working, if the p^ccant humors make strong
opposition, but as this tends to health, so dath Resistance of disorder to
Order page 6. Answ. It is not so strange, for there is Order under the greatest
Tyranny, as was shown in the former Reason, and in the exorbitances of
P^inces, which in themselves tend to the subversion of the established Order,
there is more Order, Law, and Justice, then in the use and effects of this
Remedy by resistance. Such lewd Remedies (as it is in the first part of the
Homily against Rebellion) are far worse then any other Maladies and
d^sorders, that can be in the body of the Common wealth.

Now to his simili^ude. In the applying of Physic, we look to the Medicine or
remedy it self, and do not use the Sword to those parts of the body, which
will only admit of Fomentations and Lenitives, and patience for the cure of
them: nor do we commit the applying of the physic to every hand and
judgment, but the ^and and judgment, by which this ph^sick of forcible
R^si^ance i^^tance is that of the people, for this Author tells us, in such a
case the Appeal must be to the Community, and they must aid and assist, as
they are in Conscience conviced. But how shall they be persuaded to use a mean,
who will be still applying and keeping this Physic working, when perchance the
Houses, that called them to the C^^e, would have it cea^^? do we not see what
Humors this physic has s^irred in the body Politic? where there is any
possi^i^ity, it is better to let Nature work it cut, though we give it a
longer time to ^oe it in, then to think to help it by a poisonous purge.

But if any shall think, the Art and wisdom of the Houses can correct the
malignity of the Remedy, or the rashness of the people, that are used in the
application of it, I appeal from his judgment to these Times; when could
better and more (...) success of this Remedy be expected? by whom could it
better be applied and managed then by the Members of this late Parliament, so
much extolled for their Religion, Prudence, and Equity? yet let the issue
spe^k, what little good there is to be hoped for by the use of such mischicvous
remedies. The fourth part of the Homily, above cited, speaks thus. Peaceable
King S^lomon was judged of God more meet to build his Temple (whereby the
Ordering of Religion is meant) then His Father David, who had shed much blood
in his wars, though against the Lords Enemies: what Religion is it then, that
such men, by such means would restore? Even as good a Religion as they are
good Subjects, or as Rebellionis a good mean of redress and reformation, being
it self the grearest deformation that possible may be. But as the Truth of the
Gospel being quietly and soberly taught, though it cost them their lives that
do teach it, is able to maintain the true Religion, so has a frantic
Religion need of such furious mainteinance as is Rebellion.

IX.Lastly, therefore we are taught to refer the Remedy to God, who has told
us, that the hearts of Kings are in his hand, and he turns them whithersoever
he will, Pro. 21.1. to make us apply unto him for the turning of them. He
shows that he is the judge of the King, by that Conditionate covenant he makes
with him, 2 Chronicles. c. 6. v. 16. Where the promises made to David for the
continuance of his Kingdom, are repeated with this condition, Yet so that thy
Children walk in my Law, So also 2 Chro. 7.17. But the Covenant 'twixt King and
People, 2 Samuel 5. is not Conditionate to render him obnoxious to their
judgment and force. To this purpose Nation, in his first Orat. against Julian,
showing how that wicked Emperor was repressed through the Mercy of God, does
blame those, who being too much intent upon the present, cannot depend upon
providence and expect the execution of the Counfell of God in his punishing of
wicked Princes: P. Martyr in his Comment on the 13 to the Romans showing out of
Dan. 4. that God translates and disposes of Kingdoms, observes this way of
providence, that evil Princes are raised for the punishment of the wickedness
of a People, sed postquam sic casti^ gatt homines ad Deum redierint, ille
mitiores Principes, and justiores provides, and accordingly, says he, we
find in History of Kings, that God did, Tyrannis semper miscere bonos aliquos
and justos Principes, Calvin likewise upon the 13 to the Romans tells us
piously and judiciously, That an evil Prince is the scourge of God upon the
Peoples sin, and therefore as we must acknowledge it is through our fault, that
the great blessing of Magistracy is turned to our punishment, so must we
nevertheless reverence the Ordinance of Power, which we shall easily do, si
nobis ipsis quiequid mali in ipsa erit, impatemus, if we impute the abuse of
the power, or the evil that we suffer by it, to our selves. I will conclude
with the like advice, given us in the first part of the Homily against
Rebellion, The heart of the Prince is in the hand of God, wherefore let us
turn from our sins to the Lord, and he will turn the heart of the Prince to
our Wealth: Else for Subjects, when they have deserved through their sins to
have an evil Prince, then to Rebel against Him, were a double evil, by
provoking God to plague them more.

The Reasons which the Author of the Treatise of Monarchy has brought for the
power of Resistance i^. Subjects are such as follow.

First. Because to resist misimployed instruments acting or assisting to the
performance of the destructive commands of the Prince, is no resisting of the
Ordinance of power, because power cannot be conferred to any beyond the Law. So
he page 52. How far this concerns the question, was shown above under my
third and fourth Reasons, where it was propounded and answered.

His second Reason. Because without such power of Resistance in the hands of
Subjects all Limitation of Government is vain; all forms resolve into
Absolute and Arbitrary. page 53. Answ. Your Argument is inconsequent by your
own descriptions of Absolute and Limited Monarchy, which you drew from the
consideration not of force or resistance, but of Law to set bounds to the
Monarchs Will as was observed above, Sect. 3. So that the restraint of a
limited Monarch is Legal and Moral, not forcible and military. Nor is there,
by the Limitation of the Monarchs power, a power of Arms acquired to the
people, but only a Moral security sought after by the restraint or bands of
Laws and Oath cast upon the Monarch: which makes not a vain limitation of
Government, but binds the conscience of the Monarch, and by his Conscience his
hands are bound, more powerfully, then by a contrary power or force in the
people, see above toward the end of the fifth Section, that Limitation of the
Monarchs power inferres not a power of Resistance in Subjects.

He adds to the same Reason, If a Prince be taught, that he may take, what he
pleaseath, from His Subjects without being resisted, cases and reasons will
soon be brought to persuade him, etc. page 53. Answ. He is not taught he may
Lawfully do so: but if Subjects be taught, that they may lawfully take Arms
upon such or such cases, and take from their fellow Subjects, what they please,
to maintain those Arms, pretenses and cases will not be wanting, as at this
day. In a word, some must be finally trusted when all is done, and who may
better challenge it then the Supreme Governor that stands next to God above
the People, as was said above in the fourth Reason: and it were fit we should
for the redress of Evils in Government, trust God and depend upon his
providence more, then these men would have us.

H^s third Reason. Eccause such power is due to a public State for its
preservation, as is due to a particular person, page 55. Answ. The Proposition
is not universally true, but is thus far granted, such power is due to a
State for its preservation, as is allowed by the just Laws thereof; for as the
body Natural defends it self from outward force by its Law, so the body
Politic by its Law. Now though a particular person by the Law of nature has
power of self preserva^ion against the force of another private person, yet is
this power yielded up in regard of the Civil power (by the benefit of which
particular persons have protection from the injuries of all other) and not to
be used against persons endued with such power, against such persons illegally
and suddenly assuiting a man, where the danger is imminent and unavoydable by
flight, there was no more allowed in my first Treatise, then a mere personal
d^fence, by warding of blows without returning any: yet does this Author
complain. The Doctor is so heavy a friend to the State, that he thinks it
not sit to allow it that Liberty, he gives every private man, page 55. As the
Liberty which this Author allows a State for its preservation, tends rather to
its suoversion, so are there many differences between it, and the Liberty or
power allowed to private men.

For first, That power of preservation which is allowed to a private man,
against a private man, is against an our ward force, but this which is
challenged for the State is by a Civil contention of the body against the
Head, or of other part of the body against the Head, and another part of the
body. 2. That defense, which was allowed against Ministers of Power in their
unavoydable assaults, was without all off^nee, but this defense by Armies,
which is challenged, for the State cannot be so. 3. That power of defense is
such as nature has endued every particular man with, and the law of the
Society has not forbidden so far forth, as was said, to be used: but this is
such a power as no Law enables Subjects to, a taking and using of the Sword
without warrant, as has bin often shown. 4. Such near personal defense is
not destructive of Order, but this by the civil contention of the Head and
body, is, as at this day.

The Pleaders for Defensive Arms, make a long reply to that which in my first
Trea^, was spoken, concerning this personal defense, the substance of it is.
First, though the body natural can do nothing against, or without the
guidance of the Head, yet the Body Politic can, being a company of Reasonable
men, whose actions may be divided from their Head. Page 14.15. Answ. They are
Reasonable men, but as they make up the body politic, the Law is their
Reason, and they cannot move or act further then it directs them, nor can they
divide themselves from the Head, to which the Law joins them, nor of
themselves, perform the supreme Acts of Power belonging to the Head. 2. It is
granted, the body Politic may defend it self against an outward force, then
suppose the King employ Danes or Irish, against the Kingdom, may we resist,
Page 15. Answ. I determine nothing of their supposition, which I hope will
never come to pass; but they should have considered, when the Doctor said, the
Body politic defends it self against an outward force, li^^e as the body
natural does, he did not take the body politic divided from the Head, as it
is in the civil Contention. 3. The Doctor supposes the Prince bent to subvert
Religion, Liberties, Lowes, what greater destruction of Order can be feared by
such antention or resistance. Page 15.16. Answ. What was meant by that
supposition, has bin often explained, the Prince bent, or seduced to subvert,
(i. e.) doing many acts arbitrarily, which of themselves tend to subversion,
but indeed the Frame of Government and Laws cannot be subverted without the
consent of the two Houses. It may happen, that actual invasions may be made
upon them; and it is plain, that such had better be borne with, and other
lawful and reasonable remedies sought, then to endeavor a forcible redress
by a Civil Contention, for under such actual invasions, of the Subjects
Rights, nay under the greatest Tyranny, there is more Order, Law, and Justice,
then under such civil discords and Wars, as was fully evinced above, by the
7. and 8. Reasons.

The fourth Reason of the Author of the Treat. of Monarchy is grounded upon
that false supposall of the two Houses being joined with the King, in the very
Sovereign Power, page 55. which was at large examined above. His last reason
is from the Power of inferior Courts, where the Judge it to proceed to the
Censure, and punishment of the Malefactor, notwithstanding the Kings Warrant to
the contrary, much rather may the assaults of p^tvate men be resisted by the
Parliament, page 56. Answ. The A^gument from the process of inferior Courts
to sentence and punishment, or from the Parliaments power to resist and commit
such private men assaulting them, is altogether inconsequent to prove their
power to raise Armies, and by them to oppose the Forces of their Sovereign,
which is the resistance supposed in the Question, and condemned as
unwarrantable by all that has hitherto bin spoken from the Constitution of this
Government, from Scripture, and from Reason.

And all this that has bin spoken hitherto, belongs to the Resolution of the
first Question, That it is not lawful for Subjects, upon the supposed Ca^e of
the Princes subv^rsive Exorbitances, to take Arms and resist as at this day,
The other should follow: that the Case supposed is not now, or, That they have
no, those Causes for their Arms, which they pretend. But of this there has
bin so much said in so many Declarations, and Books, written to inform the
world aright, that I need not be any longer troublesome, only I would desire
the Reader, upon their pretending the defense of the established Religion and
Laws by these Arms, to consider;

First, that they cannot say, another Religion is commanded or enforced upon
them, only they will say they fear a change, I would to God, that all offenses,
which the liberty of these unsettled times has produced, were taken out of the
way: but was there ever any before these Times so desperare, as to maintain,
Subjects might fight against their Sovereign, for a Religion they freely
enjoy, only because they fear a prevailing of the Contrary? And if the Reader
do consider, that this Army (which pretends the defense of the Established
Religion) besides some Tr^^^es of Forreiners and Papists, and some Bands of
unwilling Prest-men, has its chief strength from the prevalency of such Sects,
as are condemned by Laws of this Land, he may well cry out in the words of the
Homily above cited, What Religion is it that such men would by such means
maintain? -- A frantic Religion needs such furious Maintenances, as is
Rebellion.

II. They cannot but say, that the continuance of the established Religion, and
of the Government of Church and State, together with a just Reformation of all
abuses has bin offered, promised, protested for by their Sovereign ^. but this
will not content them, unless the established Liturgy may be abolished, the
Government of the Church by Bishops, which has always bin, may be no more,
and the Power which by Law is his Majesty's, put into their hands. And because
these are not granted, their Arms are continued, and for the mainteining of
them, the Liberty and Property of their fellow Subjects is invaded. So that if
the Question be put, who are those misimployed fellovv Subjects, that these
men pretend to fight against? It is plain, they are such, as defend their
Sovereigns Power and Rights, the Established Religion and Government of this
Church and State, their own property and Liberty: in a word, such, as will
not change their Sovereign, or the Established Frame of Government. The God of
power and Wisdom cast out all Councels, and defeat all designs, that are
against the restoring of our peace, and the continuance of the true Reformed
Religion. Amen.

FINIS.

