MASTER FYNES HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT: Touching the proffer of the City of
LONDON by the Lord Mayor: on Thursday the 17. of February, 1641. to disburse
60000 l. toward the suppressing the Rebellion in IRELAND.

woodcut of a crown bordered by two birds

LONDON, Printed for F. C. and T. B. 1641.

MASTER FYNES HIS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT: Touching the proffer of the City of
London by the Lord Mayor, on Thursday the 17. of February, to disburse 60000l.
toward the suppressing the Rebellion in Ireland. Anno Dom. 1641.
Master Speaker,
THis proposition made by the City of London, for the loan of the sum of
money, toward the suppressing of the Rebels in Ireland, is not in my opinion
to be rejected: The conditions under which they will disburse the same, is now
the thing we have to consider of: viz.

1. That Londonderry in Ireland, now in subjection to the Rebels, when
recovered, may be restored to them; and satisfaction made by the Rebels for the
damage done thereto.

2. That all that shall be won, both lands and goods, from the Rebels, by the
Army paid with their money, may be theirs for the same.

3. That if naught be recovered from them, they are willing to lose their money.

These propositions I conceive (under favor) to be very reasonable, and may
without much difficulty be consented unto, and that for these reasons.

1. The rebellion in Ireland is so general, that it is not the force of one
Army can suppress them in every place; and if the like proffer were made
either by other Cities, or the Merchants join together, or if any great
personages in this Kingdom, whereof money or arms, or what force they could
raise for other several places in subjection to the Rebels, and upon such
propositions to be presented unto the Parliament; I conceive it would be the
speediest course to subdue the Rebels, and reduce that Kingdom to the due
obedience to His Majesty and the Crown of England, and to the Laws and
Ordinances made by His Majesty, and His States of both Kingdoms.

2. By this means the Soldiers will be much animated and encouraged to fight,
when they shall fight not only for Religion, their King and Country, but also
for their own profits and particular benefit, that what they valiantly win is
their own: This will put life and vigor into them, make them cheerful and
willing to hazard themselves, not only in their persons, but even their
estates and fortunes, if need require, upon such grounds and hopes, conceiving
if they lose their lives, or fortunes, or both, yet may they be confident of
their reward in the other world, even from God himself, and his Christ, whose
cause they have undertaken, whose most holy Word and Doctrine they strive to
maintain in its purity and sincerity, his true religion seek to uphold and
defend, and his honor and glory endeavor to vindicate. They cannot likewise
expect otherwise then reward in their posterity and kindred by their King and
Country, whose cause it is also they undertake to defend, and whose honor and
ancient fame and glory they endeavor to revive, and vindicate against the open
and public enemies and adversaries to the same.

3. By this means many that are revolted from the Protestants to the Rebels may
be drawn to return, and many that are not yet revolted (although favorers of
their cause, and well-wishers to them) nay perchance of their Religion, be
dehorted from the same, and merely for hopes of profit and preferment, may
remain faithful and steadfast in their service to their lawful King and
native Country; What man but desperate will take part in the defense of a
cause that no way can be conceived prosperous or profitable; they may increase
in strength, and be permitted to do great mischief and damage to the
Protestants, but this must have an end, this cannot long continue, blood
requires blood, vengeance will be at last repayed by him who has all power in
his hands both of Heaven and Earth, to their shame and utter confusion, and
Christ and his servants must have the victory: nay, former times have made this
manifest. The troubles in this Kingdom in the reign of King Henry the eighth,
by that faction raised after that Prince endeavored to purge the Church and
this Land of Idolatry, which continued from the 28. to the 31. year of his
reign, yet at last they were subdued both in this Kingdom and the Kingdom of
Ireland, and the troubles in the reign of Queen Elizabeth of good memory not
much inferior to the present distempers of both States, raised also by the
same faction, were at length appeased and brought to true subjection to the
Queen and Crown of England: We have had experience as well now of later times
as formerly of their devilish practices and stratagems privately agitated when
they could not prevail by public insurrection, yet few through the good
providence of God have taken effect, but have been avoided and prevented by
some means or other. These things considered and joined with future hopes of
preferment, may prove a maine cause to dehort Soldiers from revolting to the
Rebels, and to draw such as are revolted back again to their lawful service
and true obedience.

4. Lastly, hereby may foreign States be moved to withdraw their aid and
assistance, intended to supply the Rebels withal, when they shall perceive
that such force is providing of all sorts of men for supply of the Protestants,
and the reasons and grounds which moves them so willingly to take Arms, that
it is very improbable and unlikely such success of their enterprises will
follow as is desired: And that the Rebels are very unconstant if in danger to
be overcome, and considering the unjustnesse of their cause, being only
public rebellion against their lawful Sovereign, only cloaked and covered
under the bare title of the defense of their Religion, and pretended liberties
in the exercise thereof in that Kingdom, they (I conceive) will be the more
cautious how they entangle themselves in the defense of their unjust quarrel.
And thus much of the reasons why I conceive these propositions of the City of
London is convenient and necessary to be consented unto, and confirmed by
Parliament: which notwithstanding I humbly leave to the further consideration
of this Honorable House.

Averred by George Nixon Clerk.

FINIS.

