A FIGHT THE Lord GORING beaten at COULCHESTER in ESSEX.

The Suburbs taken by the Lord General, part of it Fired.

Sir THOMAS HONYVVOOD taken Prisoner, and 20 killed.

Killed of the Enemy 100. and taken 500 Prisoners.

With the particulars of the said FIGHT.

ALSO A Declaration from the Gentlemen of SOVTH-WALES.

And the Proceedings of Lieutenant General Crumwell.

London Printed for Richard Smithurst, and are to be sold near Hosier-Lane,
1648.

A Letter from the ARMY NEAR COULCHESTER in ESSEX, WHERE The Lord General
entered the Suburbs.
Noble Sir,
THe Lord General marched out this day to view Coulchester, with some
Inhabitants that could descry the Town, for the better ordering of the advance
of the Army thither.

His Excellency had with him only two Regiaments of horse, and one Regiament
of foot, with whom he marched for this Design.

The Lord Goring, Sir Charles Lucas, and their body of Horse and Foot, being
quartered in and about the Town.

But the Cavaliers were secure, not dreaming of so sudden an approach of his
Excellency, and the rather because our Artillery (they knew) could not be yet
come.

Upon his Excellencies approach, the Enemy in Coulchester took an Alarm, and
all (so far as they had supplies) rise in Arms, and some got upon the Walls,
others upon the Steeple, and other places to view our Forces.

But the resolute party of Cavaliers, made a sally out of the Town, and faced
our Regiaments.

Our Forces (hereupon) put themselves into a posture to receive them, which
they did with much gallantry,

There was a hot dispute but short, some killed and taken on both sides.

But (at last) the Enemy was put to a retreat, into the Town, the Lord General
pursuing them to the very Suburbs, doing execution.

His Excellency has already entered the Suburbs, where some Houses near the
gate, are at this instant on fire.

Sir Thomm Honywood is with the Essex Forces, and a party from the Army, gone
toward Suffolk borders, to prevent the Cavaliers from flying that way, and
care is taken to prevent their marching Northward.

The Dispute does still continue, for the Town. which is probable will ere long
be ours, as secure as Maydstone, Rochester, or Canterbury in Kent.

But his Excellency had no intent at this time to engage, only to have viewed
the Town, and ground. And to have marched up when the Artillery, and body of
the Army were come up, then to have fallen to the business.

Sir Alexander Ratcliffe is taken prisoner at Rumford, with some others, by
some of the Country.

There are few that continue in Arms against us here, save such as were
formerly in Arms against the Parliament. And some others of desperate
fortunes, and discontented persons.

There are diverse Inhabitants of this County, that spoke formerly well of them,
that now none are more against them. The reason is, as they said, because they
had assurance upon the faith and honor of diverse of them, that they should be
protected from all harm or damage. And yet they are plundered by them as well
as any others.

The civil Women and Mayds, where these men come are afraid to go out of
their Houses, by reason of some incivillitie offered to some of their
Neighbors.

This County has been already damnified by the rising of the Cavaliers (as is
guest) at last 10000 li. already. Besides the sufferings of the Inhabitants for
lack of Trade, The poor being ready to starve for want of employment.

Dated in the Field, near Coulchester, this 13 of June, 1648.
A Declaration by the well-affected Gentlemen of SOVTHWALES.
WHereas it was in the last weeks Diurnall, Viz. That Poyer holds to his first
resolution of such and such things as he demanded, not at all having assisted
the party that was commanded by Major General Laughorn, nor permitting any of
those that fled from the Battle, to come in to him.

Which particulars are very untrue, and purposely given in by some of Poyers
agents here, to extenuate the foulness of his Rebellion, and that he may be
received in upon advantageous conditions: But the truth is, and it is most
certainly known, that Poyer sent up from Pembrookshire to Powel, then mustering
of the County of Carmarthen, and before the Rout in Clamorganshire 400 Foot and
Horse, and since their defeat in Glamorganshire, Poyer has received Laughorn,
with the remainder of the fugitives from Glamorganshire into the Town of
Pembrook, and Poyer has since declared to live and die with them, and spared
them the provisions he had plundered from the well-affected of that County, and
does join with Laughorn, in opposing the Lieutenant Generals Forces, now
besieging the Town and Castle of Pembrook. And to ammuse the people of the
Counties of Pembrook, Carmarthen, and Glamorgan, as instruments to raise an
Army for Laughorn, against his going down from hence, they made several
Declarations to the said Counties.

In the County of Pembrook they declared for King, Parliament, Covenant, and
against the Lord Generals Army.

In the County of Carmarthen, for King, Parliament, and against the Army.

In the County of Glamorgan, for the King, and against the Army. This their
juggling with God and man, thrived accordingly.

Its hoped that Poyer having first appeared in Rebellion of any in the Kingdom,
and having rejected those several fair offers made him by the Lord General,
touching payment of his Arrears, and Indemnity upon his surrendering the said
Castle, and having plundered and ruined the well-affected Gentry of that
County, who were forced by him to leave their Country, and to repair to Coll.
Horton for safety, shall not receive conditions of Indemnity, or more mercy
then a Council of war in Justice shall do him.

June 10. 1648.
Honored Sir,
WE had last night a very hot dispute at our entering of these suburbs, the
Enemy sallyed out of this Town of Coulchester upon three Regiaments that came
to view the place: we fought them, and, through Gods mercy to us, are entered
the Suburbs. They have two Drakes within, and have made many shot at us. There
are all the grand Cavaliers within: the Lord Goring, the Lord Culpepper, Sir
Charles Lucas, and their Cavalry, and we hope can hardly escape us. In the
fight last night we lost some 20 men, and have many wounded. We killed 100 of
them, and wounded abundance as we hear. And we have taken 500 Prisoners, 400
of whom they kept out. And hope to give (God strengthening us) a speedy account
of reducing all the rest, to which the Country comes in freely (by reason of
the Cavalliers ill usage toward them) to give us assistance.

Coulchester Suburbs this 14 of June 1648.
FINIS.

