A FIGHT AT Dunin in Scotland, between the Scots women, and the Presbyterian
Kirkmen:

AND The pitiful Defeat the Women gave the Synod-men.

With the particulars thereof.

And their triumph with Clubs and Bagge-Pipes.

And the Votes made in Counsel under protection of the Lord Friedland.

printer's or publisher's device

June.22. Edinburgh, Anno. Dom. MDCLII.

A Fight at Dunin in Scotland, between the Scotch women, and the Presbyterian
Kirk-men.
SIR,
I Must acquaint you with a sad story, of a fearful conflict betwixt the
Scotch women and the Presbyters, in the Town of Dunin, in the County of Pearth,
upon the ninth of this instant, thus:

Upon the eighth our Scotch women Dragooners of the Province (being big with
child of a strong fancy, that their inheritance was invaded by some of their
Brethren, formerly deposed for their dislike of that Sinodicall Government
(resolved to be brought to bed at this little Hamlet, where after a long
congratulatory prosopopia of the good success of their deformed reformation,
ordered those Preachers who had re-invested themselves, both with the Church
and Livings (by virtue of a Call from their Parishioners) to be cited to
appear on the morrow at ten hours in the fore-noon, under pain of that
fearful Bull of Excommunication, in obedience whereof the Indictment is
presented by the Officer to the Wives, in their Husbands absence, who promised
to be with them on the morrow, and to be as assisting as possible they could,
for curing their mallady; that night the Women were most careful, in drawing
together their Forces, and having met about four in the morning, they went to a
wood hard by, and each of them provided a strong Club (they being about one
hundred and twenty in number) with a loud Bag-pipe, after four miles march,
furprised the Town, and possessed themselves of the Churchyard, one of those
flea-bitten Synod is sent to those Amazons, to see if the Brethren might meet
in the Church, as had formerly been appointed; which being denied, he threatens
them with Bell, Book, and Candle, and they baste him for his pains, detain
him Prisoner, dispatches sixty of their number to surprise the remainder in the
Marketplace, the order was instantly executed with so much life, that all
their Body was broken, and routed in their several Parties, that they lost all
their Baggage, and twelve of their best Horses in the Conflict, one Rollock
getting out of the throng with loss of Horse, Hat, and Cloak, saved himself
in the end of a Land, a second sorely affrighted, and bruised with strokes,
after a miles running, taking all the Creatures of the field for his enemies,
with a superstitiously bended knee, did beg quarter of a Soldier, who
understanding nothing of the matter desired to know his meaning; the honest
Preacher (surprised with the fear of his former danger) without reply fell to
the ground; in the mean time, those victorious Gallants having laid hold on
the Synods Clerk for a Preacher, did beat him to some tune, he forswearing his
Office, upon assurance never to appear in their Conclave was released, Master
Haliburtonne not intending to be a Martyr, desired a Parley, for which he is
reputed to have been of the Party, the rest of them being well routed, some
twelve or thirteen of them rallied again, and about four miles from the place,
at a Village called Torgane, where being under the protection of the Lord
Fredland, they voted:

1 That never any Provincial Assembly, should sit at the forenamed Dunine,
but that the same should be accursed, and that every ninth of June should be a
feastivall day for their great deliverance.

2 That contrary to the definition of the Presbyterian Kirk of this Land, in
the year, one thousand six hundred thirty eight, and one thousand six hundred
thirty nine, when godly women were called up, for stoning the Bishops.

3 That ever hereafter the whole Sex shall be esteemed wicked, and for a
Penance be condemned to wear (if not the Breeches) at least Calsones as a
sign of their miscarriage.

Thus have you the brief story of this sad day, from

Dalkeith, June 12. 1652. Sir, your Honors most humble and ever obliged
Servant, A. B.

FINIS.
depiction of the Scotch women and Presbyterian kirkmen at Dunin


