A FIGHT at SEA Between the Parliament Ships and those that revolted, AND The
boarding of some of the Parliament Ships, by a party from the three Castles in
KENT that are kept for the King And the storming of WAYMOR Castle. Also a
bloody fight in Ireland. And a treaty of the Commanders of the Revolted ships
with the Duke of YORK.

depiction of a warship armed with cannon

June 30th LONDON Printed for H. Beck, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley.
1648.

A LETTER Concerning, Some passages of the revolted SHIPS and the three Castles
in KENT, against the Ships sent with relief to the Protestants in IRELAND.
SIR,
MY last was of the 8 of this present from the Downs, since which time we have
attempted to put to sea, several times, but was forc'st back thither again, by
extraordinary storms, and cross winds, by which we were all in some danger of
the Kings ships, and the three Castles in the Downs, to be stayed and
plundered by them.

As for the Kings ships, they sent men aboard of all our three ships, to demand
Powder and Ammunition for them and the Castles, and go aboard of them, and to
show their Bills of Laydings, and Letters, who affirmed they had none, nor any
powder or ammunition, but for the use of their ships; whereupon they were
threatened to be carried for Holland, unless they would confess and deliver
what was desired, nevertheless at the last all our Masters were released, and
the Kings ships set sail for Holland upon the 12 day to speak unto the Duke of
York as they pretended.

And upon the 17 day the Castles sent several men and boats aboard of all our
ships, with order to search and plunder us, but being withstood they went
ashore, and swore God damme them, they would go ashore and sink every ship of
us, and in pursuit thereof they did their best indevours, by shooting 12 pieces
of great Ordnance at the least, which forced us to weigh Anchor, and fall off
to the Sea: Although the wind was contrary and calm, so that we lay at their
mercy, and in great danger, if we had not been timely relieved, by a good party
of the Lord Generals Army, that marched toward the several Castles, and
found them other employment, which fell very happily out for us, for by this
means we gained time to go out of their command without any hurt or loss,
only Captain Newburts was plundered of two rich swords, worth five or six
pound, as he affirmed, we being thus forced to Sea, and the storms arising
continuing for the space of two days, did put our Ships in some danger,
nevertheless, thanks be to God, we heat it out, and recovered this place the
20 day, where we Ride safely in this Bay, ready for the first fair wind, which
God in his mercy grant, and that with speed, for the Corn is very prout, and is
in danger to be spoiled.

From aboard of the Supply in Portland Bay near Waymouth, the 22 of June 1648.
The Copy of a Letter from Portsmouth
Noble Sir,
THe nine ships in Holland, viz.) The Reformation, the Convertine, the
Antelope, the Swallow, and the rest at Gorith that revolted from the Parliament
of England, are making addresses to the Duke of York, to join with them, and
send them in provisions, which they want, and are laboring for: But the Duke
told them at present he could not satisfy their desires, because of his want
of moneys, The falling off of those ships has put the Navy much out of order,
and makes other Seamen tumultuous, and if some course be not taken to reduce
them, I fear no Commander will be safe in any ship except it please God that
some way be found out for agreement between the King and Parlia. I pray God so
to direct the Parliament to propound, and his Majesty's heart to incline to
grant, that there may be a peace. Waymer Castle was stormed with some loss,
It was thought Prince Charles would have been with Langdale in the North of
England by this time, but moneys coming not in as expected, it caused his stay
to raise moneys upon use. Captain Crowders the Reare-Admiralls ship is to be
rig'd before she can go out, God send a speedy and safe peace.

Portsmouth 25 June, 1648.
The copy of a Letter from Dublin in IRELAND.
SIR,
THe Enemies abroad are at great discord amongst themselves: and there is blood
spilt, for they say that one Neale Mac Kenna a great man of the party of Owen
Roe is slain: The Popes Nuntio has excommunicated all the supreme Council at
Kil-kenny, and likewise Preston and his Army, and all that does adhere unto
him, and the cessation with Inchequeen: The supreme Council and Preston, and
all their adherence protests against the Popes Nuntio his excommunication, and
does appeal to the Pope of Rome, and has made a Declaration of all their
reasons for their appeal, which Declaration and appeal in Print I believe
Col. Jones has now sent into England: I assure you the Enemies are exceedingly
out of heart, and the generality of the people desire a peace, and to be from
under this Irish rebellious government for all sorts of people suffer extremely
in their estates: and hardly can support their families: the Taxes and Levies
being so exceeding great: So that none gets by this war, but the Popish
Clergy, and the rascal rout, and men of broken fortunes, which lives by all
robberies and stealths: There is a report here that the Marquess Ormond is
landed in Munster; this news comes out of the Irish quarters, but I do hardly
credit it to be true, Inchequins revolt has for the present much supported the
Irish, and prejudiced the Protestant party in this kingdom: but I hope it will
little avail them in the end: for if it please God to protect England from a
new war, and that the Parliament send over speedily in time; sufficient
recruts of men, to go abroad into the field next Month. I doubt not by Gods
help this Summer will finish the war in this kingdom, Col. Jones and Col.
Monks, agree and sement close together: and will hold firm and sure to the
Parliament: they intend to join together as soon as possibly they may, to take
the field Col. Moncks was here, and departed home yesterday.

My Brothers Troop had a great loss last week in the County of Wicklow, for
the enemy came suddenly over the place where their horses grazed, and took-away
sixteen of the Horse, with one Graham, and Adam Loftus, that then kept the
Horses at Grass: I hope we shall get the two men to be exchanged and brought
home.

Dublin 20 June 1648.
FINIS.

