Unparalleled REASONS for abollishing Episcopacy.

1. It will assure his Majesty's authority Royal. 2. Increase his Revenue. 3.
Settle a good union in his Majesty's own Kingdoms, and between them and other
reformed Churches. 4. Cause a good understanding between his Majesty and his
people.
By N. F. Esquire.

fleur de lis

Printed at London for S. S. dwelling in Budge-row, at the sign of the black
Bull. 1642.

Unparalleled Reasons for abolishing of Episcopacy.
1 It will assure his Majesty's Royal Authority.
THe Bishops have, and do claim their power as of divine right, intitling
themselves to their several dignities by the permission or Grace of God; and
their authority accordingly: delegating it to others to execute under them in
their own rights, in their names and under their Seals, terming the Clergy
under them their subjects, and exacting an Oath of obedience from them.

It is very prejudicial to sovereign power that such a claim should be set
up or upheld, because it not only introduces a right superior to all Civil
power, so that it neither may be limited, nor can be controled by it, but also
inforceth by consequence the acknowledgement of Foreign power, for the limits
of Civil Jurisdiction, being not of force to set bounds unto Divine Right; a
Bishop shall by divine right have authority within the Dominions of a prince to
whom he is no subject, in case his Diocese shall extend into the territories
of several sufferages, which it may do as well as the pretended Jurisdiction
of the Bishop of Rome does.

2 It may be very dangerous to Sovereign power, and the whole Civil State,
that the Clergy should in-body it self within it self by which means it may
be drawn into a faction against it, for being united into a body it is made
able to be a strong faction, and being so is liable by practice to be drawn
against the State. The more united this Body is, and the greater dependence it
has by subordinate Officers, upon some one or few heads, the more dangerous it
is; because more exposed to parties, and more capable to act or to be acted,
and to put any thing into execution, speedily, secretly and unanimously.

By means of this Corporation of the Clergy with their dependence upon a few
Bishops, and of them upon one Archbishop, the Pope ruling the whole body of
the Clergy within this Kingdom at his pleasure, raised constantly a potent
Faction against the Kings of this Realm.

Since the Reformation though Bishops have bin knocked off from the Pope, yet
were they never joynted into the King and his Authority, to derive and exercise
power under him, but remain in all things as before, and so are ready upon any
occasion to be coupled again to their old head, or to any other which they
shall make amongst themselves when time shall serve, and the time will serve
for such a purpose, when by his Majesty's power they shall have totally
suppressed the party opposite unto them, whereof they stand in fear, for they
will then reduce the Clergy unto an absolute blind obedience unto them again,
and by them the people, and by both the Prince as formerly they have done.

3. Such a Faction cannot be safe for the King, for if they be used against
him, they are as dangerous as they are potent, and if they be used by him it is
worse, by reason it will continually keep up great jealousies and
mis-understandings between him and his people.

Besides, to make the prince which should be the head of the whole, to be the
head of a Faction is a demunition tending to destruction, the next step below
it tending to make him head of nothing, in case the party whereon he does rely,
either fail him, (...) betray him, and that Faction that one while may seem
to serve (...), another while upon the turn of times, and change of
circumstances may be used as powerfully against him.

4. The two opposite parties the Bishops and those that are against them, are
now so exasperated and pointed one against the the other, that either the one
or the other must fall and be suppressed, if the Bishops supported by his
Majesty shall prevail, and suppress totally the other party, his Majesty
will be wholly in their hands again as his Predecessors have been, for they will
be able to rule absolutely the Clergy, and the people, and then it was not
their use to be ruled by their Prince, if the other side prevail against the
Bishops (as possibly they may have to deal with a party long since rejected by
other reformed Churches, and lately so blasted in both the Kingdoms of England
and Scotland) then will his Majesty run the hazard that they do, which support
a tottering wall.

5. It will increase his Majesty's revenues. The temporalities of the Bishops
being in this bill granted to the King, there will be an augmentation of his
revenues, by the constant rent of them, and besides by fines upon leases and
otherwise there will be opportunities and mean^ for his Majesty to gratify
his servants, that will be now disappointed of monopolies and projects. And
that his Majesty may take these lands thus given without scruple, is clear by
these considerations following. As times termed that the Clergy in the
constitution they now are in under Bishops, have been a potent faction against
the liberties of the Subject, and the purity and power of Religion, the
abolishing of Episcopacy must needs give them a great ground of assurance in
those respects.

As to civil rights and liberties, because men of all ranks have suffered in
their person and estates by the power of this faction. Those of the better sort
have felt their sharp teeth, and their ill will to the Subjects liberties in the
house of Peers, Star Chamber, Counsel Table and the high Commission. Those of
inferior ranks have felt the sting of their tayls in their Eclesiasticall
courts, wherein by their under Officers, they have pilled and polled the poor
people at their pleasure, and laid upon them a burden heavier then ever ship
money was unto them.

Neither can they believe that these have bin the personal faults only of some
few men, seeing it has been so general to the whole tribe, and so constant at
all times, not this time excepted that they have lien under such a cloud, and
yet have been as ready to do or suffer any thing, which might be to the
prejudice of the Subject as heretofore.

Lastly, they find that their aims, interests, and dependancies are such, as
that they will always do the like, and that both the fearn and exercise of
their government, being altogether diverse from, and disproportionable unto
that of the civil state, they are obliged thereby to run counter to it.

As to Religion because the jealousies of an alteration intended therein
arising from the introduction of diverse popish innovations and ceremonies, and
the suppressing of preaching, it is evident that the Bishops and their
adherents, have been the author thereof. And consequently;

1 There can be no means so potent to assure men's minds that there is no
intention of returning to popery, as the abolishing of Episcopacy, whereby we
shall receive further from popery, than ever we did since the reformation, as
by the late innovations we were drawn nearer to it, then ever we were since the
reformation. Those that think this to be a running too far to the other
extreme, should also consider, admitting it were so, yet being a thing
indifferent, and fearful to be done, whether it be not necessary, at least
expedient to do it at this time, for the satisfaction of men's minds, that have
bin possessed with so great and so just a jealousy in respect of the latter
declining so far to the other extreme.

2. Multitudes cannot think themselves secure from popery and popish
innovations so long as Episcopacy continues, because conceive, that as
Episcopacy and Popery were hatched and grew up to their height together, so
that they are bottomed upon the same grounds and principles, there being the
same reason for an Archbishop, and so for a Patriarch, and a pope, to keep
Bishops from Schisms and factions as that there should be a Bishop over other
Presbiters, to keep them from schisms, and generally throughout, that the
same reasons which serve to maintain the one, serve proportionably to maintain
the other, and that the same effects that follow upon the one, will also
proportionably follow upon the other, and withal they observe that there has
not been the like show and fear of defection unto popery in any reformed
Church, as in this, where Bishops are retained, and that it has proceeded also
from the Bishops and their adherents.

3. Multitudes cannot think themselves secure from alteration in religion, till
they are assured of the preaching of Gods Word, whereby men's minds may be
instructed, and established in the truth. They cannot be assured of the
enjoying of preaching so long as Bishops continue, for they have found to be
the violent suppressors thereof.

The Bishops will always suppress diligent preachers which carry away the
reputation from them, may in time also carry away their reward and share their
Bishoprics among them; and for the same reason they will alwais favor dumb
priests, that preach as little as themselves* because they neither eclipse
their honor, nor endanger their profits.

The Bishops neither can nor will be diligent preachers themselves, so long as
besides their Ministerial functions they have a whole Diocese to rule, and
cumber themselves with places of civil Jurisdiction besides, and they much
accompanied with great temporal dignities and revenues: multitude and
diversity of employments make them unable, and the height of temporal honour^,
excess^ of w^rldly wealth, make them too stately, and too idle to discharge
their Ministerial functions as they ought, so that they must leave their
sweetness and their fatness, if with the bramble they will reign over the
trees.

Upon the whole ma^ter the questi^n is, whether the appointing of a certain
number of Laymen, by his Majesty and his Parliament to exercise all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under them, and by their authority instead of
Archbishops and Bishops, appointing a certain number of Laymen to exercise it
under them by their authority, in their names and under their seals, and
whether 5 or more of their learned Divines appointed by authority of Parliament
to ordain Ministers in stead of one man (when his Majesty gives the title of a
Bishop) appointed to do it by act of Parliament together with 4 or more other
Ministers, be an alteration of that consequence, as to be put in balance with
the safeguard of his Majesty's royal authority, the increase of his revenue,
the unity of his Majesty's Kingdoms in and between themselves, and with other
reformed Churches, and the settling of a good understanding between the King
and his people by securing unto them their Religion and Liberties.

FINIS.

