AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE JURYMEN OF ENGLAND, Touching Witches. TOGETHER WITH A
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN An ENGLISH AND HEBREW VVitch.

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for Richard Royston, At the Angel in Ivie-lane, 1653.

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE JVRY-MEN, OF ENGLAND.
THe late Execution of Witches, at the Summer Assizes in Kent, occasioned this
brief Exercitation, which addresses it self to such as have not deliberately
thought upon the great difficulty in discovering, what, or who a Witch is. To
have nothing but the public faith of the present Age, is none of the best
evidence, unless the universality of Elder times do concur with these
Doctrines, which ignorance in the times of darkness brought forth, and
credulity in these days of light has continued.

Such as shall not be pleased with this Tractate, are left to their liberty to
consider, whether all those Proofs and Presumptions numbered up by Mr. Perkins,
for the Conviction of a Witch, be not all condemned, or confessed by himself
to be unsufficient, or uncertain.

He brings no less then eighteen signs, or proofs whereby a VVitch may be
discovered; Which are too many to be all true: His seven first he himself
confesses to be insufficient for conviction of a VVitch; His eight next
proofs (which he says, men in place have used) he acknowledges to be false
or insufficient. Thus of his eighteen proofs, which made a great show,
fourteen of them are cast off by himself; there remains then his sixteenth,
which is the confession of a Witch, yet presently he is forced to yield that a
bare confession is not a sufficient proof, and so he comes to his
seaventeenth proof, which is, two credible witnesses, and he here grants that
the league between the Devil, and the Witch is closely made, and the practices
of Witches be very secret, that hardly a Man can be brought, which upon his own
knowledge can aver such things. Therefore at last when all other proofs fail,
he is forced to fly to his eighteenth proof, and tells us, that yet there is a
way to come to the knowledge of a Witch, which is, that Satan uses all means
to discover a Witch; which how it can be well done, except the Devil be bound
over to give in evidence against the Witch, cannot be understood.

And as Mr. Perkins weakens, and discredits all his own Proofs, so he does the
like for all those of K. James, who as I remember has but 3. Arguments for the
discovery of a VVitch. First, The secret Mark of a VVitch, of which M. Perkins
says, it has no power by Gods Ordinance. Secondly, The discovery by a fellow-
VVitch, this Mr. Perkins by no means will allow to be a good proof. Thirdly,
the swimming of a VVitch, who is to be flung cross ways into the water, that
is, as VVierus interprets it, when the Thumb of the right hand is bound to the
great Toe of the left Foot, and the Thumb of the left Hand, to the great Toe of
the right Foot: against this Trial by water, together with a disability in a
VVitch to shed Tears (which K. James mentions) Delrio, and Mr. Perkins both
argue, for it seems they both write after K. James, who put forth his Book of
Doemonologie in his Youth, being in Scotland, about his age of thirty years.

It concerns the People of this Nation to be more diligently instructed, in
the Doctrine of Witchcraft, then those of foreign Countries, because here
they are tied to a stricter or exacter Rule in giving their sentence, then
others are; for all of them must agree in their Verdict, which in a case of
extreme difficulty is very dangerous, and it is a sad thing for Men to be
reduced to that extremity, that they must hazard their Consciences, or their
lives.

Errata.
PAge 12. l. 32. for they have, read it has. p. 3. l. 5. for these, read
those. p. 5. l. 3. for egrinus read egimus.

A DIFFERENCE BETVVEENE An ENGLISH AND HEBREW VVitch.
THe Point in Question is briefly this; whether such a Witch as is condemned by
the Laws, and Statutes of this Land, be one and the same with the Witch
forbidden by the Law of Moses.

The Witch condemned by our Statute Law is,

1 JACOB. CAP. 12. One that shall use, practice, or exercise any invocation or
conjuration of any evil or wicked spirit, or consult, covenant with, entertain
or employ, feed or reward any evil or wicked spirit, to, or for any intent or
purpose; or take up any dead man, woman, or child, out of his, her, or their
grave, or any other place, where the dead body rests, or the skin, bone, or
other part of any dead person, to be employed or used in any manner of
Witchcraft, Sorcery, Charm or Enchantment; or shall use, practice, or exercise
any Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm, or Sorcery, whereby any person shall be
killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed, pined, or lamed in his, or her body, or
any part thereof. Such offenders duly and lawfully convicted and attainted,
shall suffer death.

If any person shall take upon him by Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm, or
Sorcery, to tell or declare in what place any treasure of Gold, or Silver,
should or might be found, or had in the Earth, or other secret places, or where
Goods, or things lost or stolen should be found or become: Or to the intent, to
provoke any person to unlawful love, or whereby any Cattle or Goods of any
person shall be destroyed, wasted, or impaired, or to destroy or hurt any
person, in his, or her body, though the same be not effected, etc. a years
Imprisonment, and Pillory, etc. and the second conviction, death.

In this Statute these Points are Observable.
1. That this Statute was first framed in 5. Eliz. and only the penalties here
a little altered, and the last clause concerning provoking of persons to love,
and destroying of Cattle, and Goods, etc. is so changed, that I cannot well
make sense of it, except it be rectified according to the words of the former
Statute which stands repealed.

2. Although the Statute runs altogether in the disjunctive Or, and so makes
every single crime capital, yet the Judges usually by a favorable
interpretation take the disjunctive Or for the copulative And; and therefore
ordinarily they condemn none for Witches, unless they be charged with the
Murdering of some person.

3. This Statute presupposes that every one knows what a Conjurer, a Witch,
an Inchanter, a Charmer, and Sorcerer is, as being to be learned best of
Divines; and therefore they have not described, or distinguished between them:
and yet the Law is very just in requiring a due and lawful conviction.

The definition of Witchcraft.
FOr the better discovery of the qualities of these crimes, I shall spend some
discourse upon the Definition of these arts by Divines, for both those of the
reformed Churches, as well as these of the Roman in a manner, agree in their
Definition of the sin of Witchcraft. I shall instance in two late Writers,
viz. Mr. W. Perkins in his Discourse of Witchcraft, and in Martin Delrie a
Jusuit of Loraine in his book of Magical disquisitions.

Our English word Witch is derived from the Dutch word, Witchelen, or
Wijchelen, which does properly signify whinying o^ neying like a Horse, and
does also signify to foretell, or prophecy; and Weicheler signifies a South
sayer, for that the Germans from whom our Ancestors the Saxons descended
usually, and principally did as Tacitus tells us, Divine and foretell things to
come by the whinying, and neying of their horses, Hinitu and fremitu are his
words.

Cap. 1.
For the Definition Mr. Perkins says, Witch craft is an Art serving for the
working of Wonders, by the assistance of the Devil, so far as God shall permit.

Lib. 1. c. 2.
Delrio defines it to be an Art which by the power of a contract, entered into
with the Devil, some wonders are wrought which pass the common understanding
of men. Ars qua vi pacti cum Daemonibus initi mira quaedam communem hominum
captum superantia officiuntur.

In these two Definitions, some Points are worth the noting.

1. They both agree in the maine Foundation, which is a Contract with the
Devil, and therefore Mr. Perkins thought it most necessary, that this maine
point should be proved, to which purpose he promises to define a Witch, by
opening the nature of Witchcraft, Cap. 2.
as it is delivered in the Old and new Testament, and yet after he confesses
a manifest Covenant is not so fully set down in Scripture; Cap. 2.
And out of the New Testament he offers no proof at all, though he promised
it, nevertheless he resolves us that a Covenant is a most evident and certain
truth, that may not be called in question.

For proof of a Covenant he produces only one Text out of the old Testament,
neither does he say, that the Text proves a Contract with the Devil, but
only that it intimates so much; Thus at the first he falls from a proof to
an intimation only. Cap. 2.
The Text is Psalm. 58. ver. 5. of which his words are these, howsoever the
common translation runeth in other terms, yet the words are properly to be
read thus; which hears not the voice of the mutterer joining Societies
cunningly -- the maine Foundation of the Charm Societies or Confederacies
cunningly made not between man and man, but as the words import between the
Enchanter and the Devil Deuit. 18. 11.

Answer. Though there be neither mention of Spirit, or Devil in this Psalm,
yet Mr. Perkins would have us believe that there can be no conjoyning or
consociating but with the Devil: But Mr. Ainsworth as great a Rabby as Mr.
Perkins, finds other interpretations of this Text, and though he mentions
fellowship with the Devil, yet he puts it in the third and last place as the
newest and latest interpretation; for he teaches us that the Enchanter had
his title both in Psalm 58. and in Deuteronomy. 18. either because he associats
Serpents, making them tame and familiar that they hurt not, or because such
persons use to bind and tie bonds, or things about the body to heal or hurt by
Sorcery; also he teaches us that a Charmer does join, or speak words of a
strange language, and without sense, etc.

Delrio, it seems puts no confidence in this Text of Mr. Perkins, for he does
not cite it to prove a Contract, yet he has also one Text of his own to that
purpose, Lib. 2 Qu. 4.
it is Esaias 28. 15. where it is said, we have made a Covenant with Death, and
with Hell we are at an agreement, percussimus faedus cum morte, and cum inferno
fecimus pactum, and Delrio tells us that Tho Aquinas did apply this Text to
Witches* magis satis probabili interpretatione.

Answ. If this Text be considered, it proves nothing at all, for it does not
charge the proud and drunken Ephramites, of whom it is spoken that they had
made any agreement with Hell, but it is only a false brag of their own to
justify their wickedness by a lie; for it is not possible to make a Covenant
with Death, which in it self is nothing but a mere not being; and whereas it
is called an agreement with Hell, it may be translated as well, if not better
in this place an agreement with the Grave, and so the interlineary Bible has
it, and Tnemelius and Junius render it pepigimus faedus cum morte, and cum
sepulcro egrinus cautum, which they term a thrasonicall hyperbole, and
Deodatus his Italian Bible has habbiamo fatto lega col sepolero, so likewise
the Spanish Bible translates it, concierto tenemos hecho con la muerte, e con
la sepultura hazimos acuerdo.

It may be wondered that neither Mr. Perkins nor the Jesuit have any other, or
better Texts to prove this Contract between the Witch and the Devil. But the
truth is it is very little that either of them say of this great point, but
pass it over perfunctorily. Perhaps it may be thought that King James has
said, or brought more and better proofs in this point; but I do not find
that he does meddle with it at all, but takes it for granted that if there be
Witches, there must needs be a Covenant, and so leaves it without further
proof.

A second note is that the agreement between the Witch, and the Devil they
call a Covenant, and yet neither of the parties are any way bound to perform
their part, and the Devil without doubt notwithstanding all his craft has far
the worst part of the bargain. Cap. 11.
The bargain runs thus in Mr. P. the Witch as a slave binds himself by Vow to
believe in the Devil, and to give him either Body, or Soul, or both under his
hand Writing, or some part of his Blood. The Devil promises to be ready at
his vassals command to appear in the likeness of any Creature, to consult,
and to aid him for the procuring of Pleasure, Honor, Wealth, or Preferment, to
go for him, to carry him any whither, and do any command. Whereby we see the
Devil is not to have benefit of his bargain till the Death of the Witch, in
the mean time he is to appear always at the Witches command, to go for him,
to carry him any whither, and to do any command, which argues the Devil to be
the Witches slave* and not the Witch the Divills.

Though it be true which Delrio affirms, that the Devil is at liberty to
perform or break his compact, for that not man can compel him to keep his
promise; yet on the other side it is as possible for the Witch to frustrate the
Devils Contract, if he or she have so much grace as to repent, the which
there may be good cause to do, if the Devil be found not to perform his
promise: Besides a Witch may many times require that to be done by the Devil,
which God permits not the Devil to do; thus against his will the Devil may
lose his credit, and give occasion of repentance though he endeavor to the
utmost of his power to bring to pass whatsoever he has promised, and so fail
of the benefit of his bargain, though he have the handwriting, or some part
of the blood of the Witch for his security, or the solemnity before witnesses
as Delrio imagines.

I am certain they will not say that Witchcraft is like the sin against the
Holy Ghost, unpardonable, for Mr. Perkins confesses the contrary, Lib. 5.
Sect. 18.
and Delrio denies it not, for he allows the Sacrament of the Eucharist to be
administered to a condemned Witch, with this limitation, that there may be about
four hours space between the Communion, and the Execution, in which time it
may be probably thought that the Sacramental Species (as they call it) may be
consumed.

3. Delrio in his second Book, and fourth Question gives this rule, which he
says, is common to all Contracts with the Devil, that first they must deny
the Faith, and Christianisme, and Obedience to God, and reject the patronage of
the Virgin Mary, and revile her. To the same purpose Mr. Perkins affirms that
Witches renounce God and their Baptism. But if this be common to all Contracts
with the Devil, it will follow that none can be Witches but such as have first
been Christians, nay and Roman Catholics, if Delrio say true, for who else
can renounce the patronage of the Virgin Mary? And what shall be said then of
all those Idolatrous Nations of Lapland, Finland, and of diverse parts of
Africa, and many other Heathenish Nations which our Travailers report to be
full of Witches? And indeed what need or benefit can the Devil gain by
contracting with those Idolaters, who are surer his own, then any Covenant can
make them?

4. Whereas it is said that Witch craft is an Art working wonders, it must be
understood that the art must be the Witches Art, and not the Devils, otherwise
it is no Witchcraft, but Devils-craft: It is confessed on all hands that the
Witch does not work the wonder, but the Devil only. It is a rare Art for a
Witch by her Art to be able to do nothing her self, but to command an other to
practice the Art. In other Arts Mr. Perkins confesses, Cap. 1. Sect. 4.
that the Arts Master is able by himself to practice his Art, and to do
things belonging thereunto without the help of an other, but in this it is
otherwise -- the power of effecting strange works does not flow from the skill
of the Witch, but is derived wholly from Satan. Cap. 4. Sect. 1.
To the same purpose he says, that the means of working wonders are Charms
used as a Watchword to the Devil to cause him to work wonders: so that the
Devil is the worker of the wonder, and the Witch but the Counselor,
Perswader, or Commander of it, and only accessory before the Fact, and the
Devil only principal. Now the difficulty will be how the accessory can be
duly and lawfully convicted and attainted according as our Statute requires,
unless the Devil who is the Principal be first convicted, or at least
outlawed, which cannot be, because the Devil can never be lawfully summoned
according to the rules of our Common Law. For further proof that the Devil is
the principal in all such wonders, I shall show it by the testimony of King
James, in a case of Murder, which is the most capital crime our Laws look
upon. First he tells that the Devil teaches Witches how to make Pictures of
Wax and Clay, that by the resting thereof the persons that they bear the Name
of, may be continually melted or dried away by continual sickness -- not that
any of these means which he teaches them (except poisons which are composed
of things natural) can of themselves help any thing to these turns they are
employed in. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
Secondly, King James affirms that Witches can bewitch, and take the life of
Men, or Women by rosting of the Pictures, which is very possible to their
Master to perform, for although that instrument of Wax have no virtue in the
turn doing: yet may be not very well by that same measure that his conjured
Slave melts that Wax at the fire, may he not I say at these same times
subtilely as a spirit, so weaken and scatter the spirits of life of the
patient, as may make him on the one part for faintness to sweat out the
humors of his body; and on the other part for the not concurring of these
spirits which cause his digestion, so debilitate his stomach that his humor
radical continually sweating out on the one part, and no new good Suck being
put in the place thereof, for lack of digestion on the other, he at last shall
vanish away even as his Picture will do at the Fire. Here we see the Picture
of Wax roasted by the Witch, has no virtue in the Murdering, but the Devil
only. It is necessary in the first place that it be duly proved that the party
Murdered be Murdered by the Devil, for it is a shame to belly the Devil, and
it is not possible to be proved if it be Subtilely done as a spirit.

5. Our Definers of Witchcraft dispute much, whether the Devil can work a
Miracle, they resolve he can do a wonder, but not a Miracle, Mirum but not
Miraculum. A Miracle says Mr. Perkins, is that which is above, or against
nature simply; a wonder is that which proceeds not from the ordinary course of
nature. Delrio will have a Miracle to be Praeter, or supra naturae creatae
vires, both seem to agree in this that he had need be an admirable or
profound Philosopher, that can distinguish between a Wonder and a Miracle; it
would pose Aristotle himself, to tell us every thing that can be done by the
power of Nature, and what things cannot, for there be daily many things found
out, and daily more may be which our Forefathers never knew to be possible in
Nature. Those that were converted by the Miracles of our Savior, never stayed
to enquire of their Philosophers what the power of Nature was, it was
sufficient to them when they saw things done, the like whereof they had neither
seen, nor heard of to believe them to be Miracles.

6. It is commonly believed, and affirmed by Mr. Perkins, that the cause which
moves the Devil to bargain with a Witch, is a desire to obtain thereby the
Soul and Body of the Witch. But I cannot see how this can agree with another
Doctrine of his, where he says, the Precepts of Witchcraft are not delivered
indifferently to every Man, but to his own Subjects the wicked; and not to
them all, but to special and tried ones, whom he most betrusteth with his
secrets, as being the fittest to serve his turn, both in respect of their
willingness to learn and practice; as also for their ability to become
Instruments of the mischief he intends to others. All this argues the end of
the Devils rules of Witchcraft is not to gain Novices for new Subjects, but
to make use of old ones to serve his turn.

7. The last clause of Mr. Perkins definition is, that Witchcraft does work
wonders so far as God shall permit. I should here desire to have known whether
Mr. Perkins had thought that God does permit farther power to the Devil upon
his contracting with the Witch, then he had before the Contract; for if the
Devil had the same permission before the Contract, then he does no more
mischief upon the Contract, then he would have gladly done before, Cap. 7.
seeing as Mr. Perkins says, The Devils malice toward all Men is of so high
a degree, that he cannot endure they should enjoy the World, or the benefits of
this life (if it were possible) so much as one hour. But yet afterward I
find Master Perkins is more favorable to the Devil, where he writes, that if
the Devil were not stirred up, and provoked by the Witch he would never do so
much hu^t as he does.

Of the Discerning, and Discovery of a Witch.
Cap. 7. Sect. 2.
A Magistrate, says Mr. Perkins, may not take upon him to examine whom, and
how he wills of any Crime, nor to proceed upon slight causes, or to show his
Authority, or upon sinister respects, or to revenge his malice, or to bring
parties into danger, and suspicion, but he must proceed upon special
presumptions.

Cap. 7. Sect. 2.
He calls those presumptions which do at least probably, and conjecturally note
one to be a Witch, and are certain signs whereby the Witch may be discovered.
I cannot but wonder that Mr. Perkins should say that presumptions do at least
probably, and conjecturally note, and are certain signs to discover a Witch;
when he confesses that though presumptions give occasion to examine, yet they
are no sufficient causes of conviction: and though presumptions be never so
strong, yet they are not proofs sufficient for conviction, but only for
examination. Therefore no credit is to be given to those presumptions he
reckons up. 1. For common fame, it falls out many times, says he, That the
innocent may be suspected, and some of the better sort notoriously defamed. 2.
The testimony of a fellow Witch, he confesses, does not probably note one to
be a Witch. The like may be said of his third and fourth presumption, if after
cursing, or quarreling, or threatening there follow present mischief; And the
fifth presumption is more frivolous, which is, if the party be the Son, or
Daughter, or Servant, or Friend near Neighbor, or old Companion of a VVitch.
The sixth presumption Mr. Perkins dares not, or is loath to own, but says,
some add, if the party Suspected have the Devils Mark, and yet he resolves
if such a Mark be descried, whereof no evident reason in nature can be given,
the Magistrate may cause such to be examined, or take the matter into his own
hands, that the truth may appear, but he does not teach how the truth may be
made to appear. The last presumption he names is, if the party examined be
unconstant, or contrary to himself, here he confesses, a good Man may be
fearful in a good cause, sometimes by Nature, sometimes in regard of the
presence of the Judge, or the greatness of the Audience, some may be suddenly
taken, and others want that liberty of speech, which other Men have.

Touching Examination Mr. Perkins names two kinds of proceedings, either by
simple Question, or by Torture. Torture, when besides the enquiry by words, the
Magistrate uses the Rack, or some other violent means to urge Confession;
this he says, may be lawfully used, howbeit not in every case, but only upon
strong, and great presumptions, and when the party is obstinate. Here it may be
noted that it is not lawful for any person, but the Judge only to allow
Torture, suspicious Neighbors may not of their own heads use either Threats,
Terrors, or Tortures; I know not any one of those presumptions before cited to
be sufficient to warrant a Magistrate to use Torture, or whether when the party
constantly denies the Fact, it must be counted obstinacy. In case of Treason
sometimes, when the maine Fact has been either confessed, or by some
infallible proofs manifested, the Magistrate for a farther discovery of some
circumstance of the Time, the Place, and the Persons, or the like, have made
use of the Rack, and yet that kind of torture has not been of ancient usage
in this Kingdom, for if my memory fail not, I have read that the Rack has
been called the Duke of Exceters Daughter, and was first used about Hen. 6.
days.

From presumptions, Mr. Perkins proceeds to proofs of a Witch, and here he
has a neat distinction of proofs, less sufficient, or more sufficient; by
less sufficient he means insufficient, but gives them this mild and strange
phrase of less sufficient, that it may not displease such friends (as I
conceive) allow those less sufficient proofs for sufficient, though he
reckons them for no better then Witchcraft. Those unsufficient sufficient
proofs are weaker, and worse then his presumptions which he confesses are no
proofs at all; yet we must reckon them up, his first less sufficient proof
is, The ancient trial by taking red hot Irons, or putting the hand in hot
scalding water, this he says, has been condemned for Diabolical, and
wicked, as in truth it is, for an innocent Man may thereby be condemned, and a
rank Witch escape unpunished. A second insufficient proof is, Scratching of
the suspected party, and the present recovery thereupon. A third is the burning
the thing bewitched, as a Hog, an Ox, or other Creature, it is imagined a
forcible means to cause the Witch to discover her self. A fourth is the
burning the Thatch of the suspected parties House. The fifth less sufficient
proof is the binding of the party hand and foot, and casting cross ways
into the water, if she sinkes she is counted innocent, if she floate on the
water, and sink not, she is taken for a Witch, convicted, and punished. The
Germans used this trial by cold water, and it was imagined that the Devil
being most light, as participating more of Air then of Water, would hold them
up above the Water, either by putting himself under the Witch, and lifting her
up, as it were with his back, or by uniting himself, and possessing her whole
body.

All these less sufficient proofs, says Mr. Perkins, are so far from being
sufficient, that some of them, if not all are after a sort practices of
witchcraft, having no power by Gods Ordinance. Hereby he condemns point
blanke King James's judgment as savouring of Witchcraft in allowing of the
trial of a Witch by swimming as a principal proof. And, as I take it, he
condemns himself also, except he can find any ordinance of God, that the
having of an incurable, and insensible mark, or sore, shall be a presumption,
or certain sign of a Witch.

A sixth less sufficient proof is the Testimony of a Wisard, Witch, or cunning
Man, who is gone or sent unto, and informs that he can show in a Glass the
Face of the Witch. This accusation of a Witch by an other Witch, Mr. Perkins
denies to be sufficient, and he puts this case. If the Devil appear to a
Grand Jury, in the likeness of some known Man, and offer to take his Oath that
the person in question is a Witch should the Enquest receive his Oath, or
accusation to condemn the party? He answers, Surely No; and yet that is as
much as the Testimony of an other Witch, who only by the help of the Devil
reveals the Witch: if this should be taken for a sufficient proof, the
Devil would not leave one good Man alive in the World.

This discrediting of the Testimony of a Witch takes away the other (for he
has but two) of King James maine proofs, for the discovery of a Witch, for he
says, Who but Witches can be provers, and so witnesses of the doings of
Witches? and to the same purpose Mr. Perkins himself confesses, that the
Precepts of Witchcraft are not delivered, but to the Devils own subjects, the
wicked.

A seventh less sufficient proof is, when a Man in open Court affirms, such
a one fell out with me, and cursed me, threatening I should smart for it in my
person or goods, upon these threats such Evils and Losses presently befell
me; This is no sure ground for conviction, says Mr. Perkins, for it pleases
God many times to lay his Hands upon Men's persons and goods, without the
procurement of Witches; and yet says Mr. Perkins, Experience shows that
ignorant people will make strong proofs of such presumptions, whereupon
sometimes Jurors do give their Verdict against parties innocent.

The last less sufficient proof is, if a Man being sick, upon suspicion,
will take it on his Death, that such a one has bewitched him, it is of no
moment, says Mr. Perkins, it is but the suspicion of one Man for himself, and
is of no more force then an other Man's word against him.

All these proofs, says Mr. Perkins, which Men in place have ordinarily used,
be either false, or insufficient signs.

At the last Mr. Perkins comes to his more sufficient proofs, which in all are
but two. The confession of the Witch, or the proof of two witnesses. Against
the Confession of a Witch Mr. Perkins confesses, Cap. 7. Sect. 2.
it is objected that one may confess against himself an untruth being urged
by force, or threatening, or by desire upon some grief to be out of the World
or at least being in trouble, and persuaded it is the best course to save their
lives, and obtain their liberty, they may upon simplicity be induced to
confess that they never did, even against themselves. The truth of this
allegation Mr. Perkins does not deny, but grants it, in that his Answer is,
That he does not say a bare Confession is sufficient, but a Confession after
due Examination taken upon pregnant presumptions. But if a bare Confession be
not a sufficient proof, a pregnant presumption can never make it such; or if
it could, then it would not be a sufficient proof. For the farther weakening of
the Confession of a suspected Witch, we may remember what Mr. Perkins has
formerly answered, when it was alleged that upon a melancholy humor many
confess of themselves things false, Cap 7. Sect. 13
and impossible; that they are carried through the Air in a moment, that they
pass through Keyholes, and cleffs of Doors, that they be sometimes turned
into Cats, Hares, and other Creatures, and such like, all which are mere Fables
and things impossible. Here Master Perkins answers, that when Witches begin to
make a league, they are sober and sound in understanding, but after they be
once in the league, their reason, and understanding may be depraved, memory
weakened and all the powers of their soul blemished, they are deluded and so
intoxicated that they will run into a thousand of fantastical imaginations,
holding themselves to be transformed into the shapes of other Creatures, to be
transported in the Air, to do many strange things, which in truth they do not.

Now Mr. Perkins will confess that the Examination, and Confession of a
suspected Witch is always after such time as her Covenant is made; when she
is by his Confession deluded, and not fit to give testimony against her self.

His second more sufficient proof (he says, if the party will not confess,
as commonly it falls out) is two witnesses avouching upon their own
knowledge, either that the party accused has made league with the Devil, or
has done some known practices of Witch craft, or has invocated the Devil, or
desired his help. But if every Man that has invocated the Devil, or desired
his help must have formerly made a league with him, then whole Nations are
every Man of them Witches, which I think none will say.

As for the League, and Proof of VVitch-craft, Mr. Perkins confesses, Some
may say, if these be the only strong proofs for the conviction of a Witch, it
will be then impossible to put any one to Death; because the League with Satan
is closely made, and the Practices of Witchcraft are also very secret, and
hardly can a Man be brought, which upon his own knowledge can aver such things.
To this Mr. Perkins answer is a confession, that howsoever the ground and
practice be secret, and be to many unknown, yet there is a way to come to the
knowledge thereof -- Satan endeavoreth the discovery, and uses all means to
disclose Witches. This means he speaks of should be in the power of the
Judge, or else it is no help for the Discovery of a Witch, but only when the
Devil pleases. I do not find he proves that it is usual with Satan to
endeavor any such Discovery; neither do I see how it is practicable by the
Devil, for either he must do it by his own relation, or report, which as it
cannot be proved he ever did, so it is vain, and to no purpose if he do it,
for Mr. Perkins has discredited the testimony of the Devil as invalid, and of
no force for conviction, or else the Devil must discover it by some second
means; and if there had been any such second means usual, Mr. Perkins would
have taught us what they are, and not have left us only to his two more
sufficient proofs, which he confesses are not infallible.

Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
King James tells us, that the Devils first discovering of himself for the
gaining of a Witch, is either upon their walking solitarily in the Fields, or
else lying pausing in their Bed, but always without the company of any other;
and at the making of Circles and Conjurations, none of that craft will permit
any others to behold; when the Devil and his subjects are thus close, and
secret in their Actions, it cannot be imagined that he will use all means to
discover his most special and trustiest subjects, and though Mr. Perkins tells
us, Cap. 7. Sect. 2.
that by virtue of the precontract, the Devil is cock-sure of his instruments;
yet within a few lines he changes his note, and says, though he have good
hope of them, yet he is not certain of their continuance, because some by the
Mercy of God have bin reclaimed, and freed from his Covenant. Besides he
confesses, the Devil suffers some to live long undisclosed, that they may
Exercise the greater measure of his Malice in the World. It remains that if
the two true Proofs of Mr. Perkins, which are the Witches Confession, or
sufficient witnesses fail, we have not warrant, as he says, in the word to
put such an one to Death.

I conclude this Point in the words of Mr. Perkins; I advise all Jurors that as
they be diligent in the zeal of Gods Glory, so they would be careful what they
do, and not condemn any party suspected upon bare presumptions, without sound
and sufficient proofs, that they be not guilty through their own rashness of
shedding innocent Blood.

Of the Hebrew Witch.
IN Deuteronomy. 18. The Witch is named with diverse other sorts of such as used the
like unlawful Arts, as the Diviner, the Observer of times, an Inchanter, a
Charmer, a Consulter with a familiar Spirit, a Wisard, or a Necromancer. The
Text adds, all that do these things are an abomination to the Lord, and
because of these abominations, the Lord thy God does drive them [the Nations]
out from before thee. If we desire to know what those abominations of the
Nations were, we are told in general in the 14. Verse of the same Chapter.
These Nations harkned unto observers of times and unto Diviners: There is no
other crime in this Chapter laid to the charge of all, or any of these
practisers of such unlawful Arts, but of lying Prophecies; and therefore the
Text adds, the Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midest
of thee of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him shall ye harken, and not to the
Diviners, Wisards, Charmers, etc.

Setting aside the case of Job (wherein God gave a special and extraordinary
Commission) I do not find in Scripture that the Devil, or Witch, or any
other had power ordinarily permitted them, either to kill or hurt any Man, or
to meddle with the Goods of any: for though for the trial of the hearts of men,
God does permit the Devil ordinarily to tempt them; yet he has no Commission
to destroy the Lives or Goods of Men, it is little less then blasphemy to say
any such thing of the admirable Providence of God, whereby he preserves all his
Creatures.

It was crime sufficient for all those practicers of unlawful Arts to delude
the people, with false and lying Prophecies, thereby to make them forget to
depend upon God, and to have their Souls turn after such as have Familiar
Spirits, and after Wisards, to go a whoring after them, as the Lord says,
Levit. 20. 6. This spiritual whoredom is flat Idolatry in the common phrase
of the Old Testament; and those that be entisers to it, thereby endeavor to
destroy the Souls of the People, and are by many degrees more worthy of death,
then those that only destroy the Bodies or Goods of Men.

If there were a Law that every one should be put to Death, or punished that
should advisedly endeavor to persuade Men that they are skillful in those
forbidden Arts, or in foretelling of things to come, or that they have
contracted with the Devil, and can thereby Murder or destroy Men's Goods, I
should never deny such a Law to be most consonant, and agreeing with the Law of
Moses.

But because I may be thought by some a favourer of these forbidden Arts,
through want of understanding the Scripture, about the quality of them; I have
made choice of a Man who is no friend to Witches, and whose learning in this
point will not be denied. In his own words I shall set down, what either out
of the Hebrew Names of those prohibited Arts, or out of the exposition of the
Jewish Doctors can be gathered, for the understanding of them.

A Diviner in Hebrew, Ainsworth upon Deuteronomy. 18.
a Foreseer, or Presager, a Foreteller of things to come, as does a Prophet --
the Hebrews take a Diviner to be one that does things whereby he may foretell
things to come, and say, such a thing shall be, or not be, or say, It is good
to do Such a thing -- the means of Divining; some doing it with Sand, some
with Stones, some by lying down on the Ground, some with Iron, some with a
Staff -- he that asked of a Diviner, is chastised with stripes.

2. An observer of times, or Soothsayer, an Observer of the Clouds, a
Planetary, or an observer of the flying of Fowls, an Augur. As the Diviners
were carried much by inward, and Spiritual Motions, so these by outward
Observations in the Creatures. The Hebrews say, they were such as did set times
for the doing of things, saying, Such a day is good, and such a day is naught.

3. An Observer of Fortunes, one that curiously searches signs of good or
evil luck, which are learned by Experience: the Hebrew is to find out by
Experience; Whereupon the word here used is one that too curiously observes,
and abuses things that do fall out as lucky, or unlucky. The Hebrews describe
it thus, as if one should say, because the morsel of Bread is fallen out of my
mouth, or my Staff out of my hand, I will not go to such a place: because a
Fox passed by on my right hand, I will not go out of my House this day. Our new
translation renders this word an Inchanter.

4. A Witch a Sorcerer, such as do bewitch the senses, or minds of Men, by
changing the forms of things to another hew. The Hebrew word for a Witch
properly signifies a Jugler, and is derived from a word which signifies
changing or turning. and Moses teaches Exodus 7. that Witches wrought by
Enchantments, that is, by secret Sleights Juglings, Close conveyance, or of
Glistering like the flame of Fire, or a Sword wherewith Men's Eyes were dazzled.

5. A Charmer, or one that conjureth Conjurations, the Hebrew signifies
conjoyning or consociating -- the Charmer is said to be he, that speaks
words of a strange Language, and without sense; that if one say, so or so unto
a Serpent, it cannot hurt him; he that whispereth over a wound, or that
reads over an Infant, that it may not be frighted, or lays the Bible upon a
Child that it may sleep.

6. A Wisard, or cunning Man in Hebrew named of his knowledge, or cunning --
the Hebrews describe him thus, that he put in his mouth a bone of a Bird, and
burned incense, and did other things until he fell down with shame, and
spoke with his mouth things that were to come to pass.

7. A Necromancer, one that seeks unto the Dead: of him they say, he made
himself hungry, and went and lodged among the Graves, that the dead might come
unto him in a Dream, and make known unto him that which he asked of him, and
others there were that clad themselves with Clothes for that purpose, and spoke
certain words, and burned Incense, and slept by themselves, that such a dead
person might come and talk with them in a Dream.

8. Lastly, The Consulter with Familiar Spirits, in Hebrew a Consulter with Ob,
applied here to Magitians, who possessed with an evil Spirit, spoke with a
hollow voice, as out of a Bottle. -- The Hebrews explain it thus, that he
which had a Familiar spirit stood and burned Incense, and held a rod of
Mirtle-tree in his hand, and waved it, and spoke certain words in secret,
until he that enquired did hear one speak unto him, and answer him touching
that he enquired with words from under the Earth, with a very low voice, etc.
Likewise one took a dead Man's Skull, and burnt Incense thereto, and enchanted
thereby till he heard a very low voice, etc. This Text in our English
translation being expounded a Familiar Spirit, and seconded by the History of
the Woman of Endor, may seem a strong evidence that the Devil covenanted with
Witches; But if all be granted that can be desired, that this Familiar Spirit
signifies a Devil, yet it comes not home to prove the maine point, for it is
no proof that the Familiar Spirit entered upon Covenant, or had or could give
power to others to kill the persons, or destroy the Goods of others, Kings
James confesses, the Devil can make some to be possessed, and so become very
Demoniaques, and that she who had the spirit of Python in Acts 16. Whereby she
conquested such gain to her Master that spirit was not of her own raising, or
commanding as she pleased to appoint but spoke by her Tongue as well privately
as publicly. We do not find the Pythonesse condemned or reproved, but the
unclean Spirit commanded in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. The
Child which was too young to make a Covenant with the Devil was possessed with
a dumb and deaf Spirit, and the Devil charged to come out, and enter no more
into him Mark 9. A Daughter of Abraham (that is, of the Faith of Abraham) was
troubled with a spirit of infirmity 18 years, and bowed together, that she
could not lift her self up. Luke 13. 10. 16.

It is observable that in Deuteronomy. 18. where all the unlawful Arts are reckoned
up, and most fully prohibited, the crime of them is charged upon the practisers
of those Arts, but the crime of having a Familiar Spirit is not there
condemned, but the Consulter of a Familiar Spirit, so in Levit. 19. 31. the
prohibition is, Regard not them that have Familiar Spirits, and so in Levit.
20. 6. The Soul that turns after such as have Familiar Spirits, so that it
was not the having, but the consulting was condemned.

If we draw nearer to the words of the Text, it will be found that these words
a Consulter with a Familiar Spirit are no other then a Consulter with Ob. Where
the question will be what Ob signifies. Expositors agree that originally Ob
signifies a Bottle, and they say is applied here to one possessed with an
evil Spirit, and speaks with a hollow voice as out of a Bottle; but for this
I find no proof, they bring out of Scripture that says, or expounds that
Ob signifies one possessed with a Familiar Spirit in the Belly; the only
proof is that the Greek Interpreters of the Bible Translate it Engastromuthi,
which is, speaking in the Belly, and the word anciently, and long before the
time of the Septuagint Translators was properly used for one that had the
cunning or slight to shut his mouth, and seem to speak with his Belly, which
that it can be done without the help of a Familiar Spirit, experience of this
Age shows in an Irishman; We do not find it said that the Woman of Endo did
foretell any thing to Saul, by the hollow voice of a Familiar Spirit in her
Belly; neither did Saul require, nor the Woman promise so to answer him, but
he required, bring me him up who I shall name unto thee, and she undertook to
do it; which argues a desire in Saul to consult with the dead, which is called
Necromancy, or consulting with the dead.

But it has been said, she raised the Devil in Samuels likeness, yet there
is no such thing said in the Text: when the Woman went about her work, the
first thing noted is, that when she saw Samuel, she cried out with a loud
voice: an Argument she was frighted with seeing something she did not expect
to see; it is not said that when she knew Saul, but when she saw Samuel, She
cried out with a loud voice: when she knew Saul she had no reason to be
afraid, but rather comforted, for that she had his Oath for her security.

It may well be that if either she had a Familiar Spirit, or the Art of
hollow-speaking, her intention was to deceive Saul and by her secret voice to
have made him believe that Samuel in another room had answered him; for it
appears that Saul was not in the place where she made a show of raising
Samuel, for when she cried out with a loud voice, Saul comforted her, and bid
her not be afraid, and asked her what she saw? and what form is he of? which
questions need not have been if Saul had been in the Chamber with the Witch.
King James confesses that Saul was in another chalmer at the conjuration, and
it is likely the Woman had told Saul she had seen some fearful sight, which
made him ask her what she saw? and her answer was, She saw Gods ascending out
of the Earth, and it may be understood that Angels waited upon Samuel, who was
raised by God, and not any Puppets, or Devils that she conjured up: otherwise
the words may be translated as Deodat in the Margent of his Italian Bible has
it, She saw a Man of Majesty, or Divine Authority ascend, un' huomo di Majesta
e d' Authorita Divina, which well answers the question of what form is he of?
which is in the singular, not in the plural number.

We find it said in Esaias 29. 4. thou shall be brought down, and shall speak
out of the ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice
shall be as one that has a Familiar Spirit out of the ground and thy speech
shall whisper out of the Earth; which argues the voice of Ob was out of the
Earth, rather then out of the Belly, and so the Hebrew Exposition which I cited
before affirms; some learned have been of Opinion that a natural reason may
be given why in some places certain exhalations out of the earth may give to
some a prophetical spirit. Add hereunto that some of the Heathen Oracles were
said to speak out of the Earth: and among those five sorts of Necromancy,
mentioned by Doctor Reynolds in his 76 Lecture of his censure of the
Apocryphals, not any of them is said to have any Spirit in their Belly. The
Ronanists who are all great affirmers of the power of Witches agree, that the
soul of Samuel was sent by God to the Woman of Endor: to this not only
Delrio, but Bellarmin before him agrees. That true Samuel did appear as sent by
God, as he sent Elias to Ochosias King of Israel. who being sick sent to
consult with Beelzebub the God of Echron, may appear, for that Samuel is so
true, and certain in his prediction to Saul, which no Witch, no Devil could
ever have told; for though the Wisdom, and Experience of the Devil do enable
him to conjecture probably of many events, yet positively to say, to morrow
thou and thy Sons shall die, is more then naturally the Devil could know.

Mr. Perkins confesses the Devil could not foretell the exact time of Saul's
death; and therefore he answers that God revealed to the Devil as his
instrument Saul's overthrow, by which means, and no other the Devil was
enabled to foretell the death of Saul. Here Mr. Perkins proves not, that Satan
was appointed by God to work Saul's overthrow, or that it was made known to
him, when it should be done.

As the rest of the Speech of Samuel is true, so these words of his, Why have
thou disquieted me to bring me up? may be also true, which cannot be if it be
spoken by the Devil; or why should the Devil tell truths in all other things
else, and lie only in this, I know no reason. Doctor Reynolds presses these
words against the appearing of Samuel thus, If Samuel I had said to them he had
lied, but Samuel could not lie, for Samuel could not be disquieted, nor raised
by Saul. It is true God only raised Samuel effectually, but occasionally Saul
might raise him. But says Doctor Reynolds though Saul was the occasion, yet
Samuel could not truly say that Saul had disquieted him, for blessed are they
that die in the Lord says the spirit, because they rest from their labors;
and Samuel was no more to be disquieted (if he were sent by God) then Moses aad
Elias were when they appeared to show the Glory of Christ. Mat. 17. Answer, it
did not displease Samuel to be employed in the Office of an Angel, but he
obeyed God gladly; yet since the occasion of his appearing displeased God, it
might for that cause displease also Samuel. Besides we need not understand
the disquieting of Samuels mind, but of his body by not suffering it to rest in
peace after death, according to the common, and usual condition of Mankind,
this sense the Original will well bear. Again, it cannot be believed that
the Devil would ever have preached so Divine and excellent a Sermon to Saul,
which was able to have converted, and brought him to Repentance, this was not
the way for the Devil to bring either Saul, or the Woman to renounce God.
Lastly, the Text does not say that the Woman raised Samuel, yet it calls him
Samuel, and says that Saul perceived, or understood that it was Samuel.

Mr. Perkins and many others esteem Balam to have been a Witch, or Conjurer,
but I find no such thing in the Text; when he was required to curse the
people of Israel, his answer was, I will bring you word as the Lord shall speak
unto me. Numb 22. 8. and God came unto Balaam in v. 9. and in v. 13. Balaam
says, the Lord refuses to give me leave, and when Balak sent a second time,
his answer was, if Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold I
cannot go beyond the Word of the Lord my God to do less or more, in v. the
20. God comes to Balaam, and said, if the Men come to call thee, go, but yet
the words which I shall say unto thee, that shall thou do. And when Balaam came
before Balak he said, v. 38. Lo I am come unto thee, have I now any power at
all to say any thing? the Word which God puts into my mouth, that shall I
speak: and in the 23 Chap. v. 18. Balaam says, how shall I curse whom God
has not cursed? and in v. 12. he says, must I not take heed to speak that
which the Lord has put into my Mouth? These places laid together prove Balaam
to have been a true Prophet of the Lord, and he prophesied nothing contrary
to the Lords command, therefore St. Peter calls him a Prophet.

Nevertheless it is true that Balaam finned notoriously, though not by being a
Witch or Conjurer, or a false Prophet, his faults were, that when God had told
him he should not go to Balak, yet in his covetous heart he desired to go,
being tempted with the rewards of Divination, and promise of promotion; so that
upon a second Message from Balak he stayed the Messengers to see if God would
suffer him to go, wherefore the Lord in his anger sent Balam. Also when God had
told Balam that he would bless Israel, yet Balam did strive to tempt God, and
by several Altars and Sacrifices to change the mind of God. Again when Balam
saw God immutable in blessing Israel, he taught Balak to lay a stumbling block
before the Sons of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
Fornication. Rev. 2. 4. Whereas it is said that Balaam went not up as other
times to seek for Enchantments, Number. 24 2. the Original is to meet
Divinations, that is, he did not go seek the Lord by Sacrifices, as he did,
Numb. 23. 3. 15.

An exact difference between all those Arts prohibited in Deuteronomy. no Man I
think can give, that in some they did agree, and in others differed, seems
probable. That they were all lying and false Prophets, though in several
ways, I think none can deny; That they differed in their degrees of
punishments is possible, there are but three sorts that can be proved were to
be put to death, viz. the Witch, the Familiar Spirit, the Wisard. As for the
Witch there has been some doubt made of it. The Hebrew Doctors that were
skild in the Laws of Moses, observe that wheresoever one was to die by their
Law, the Law always did run in an affirmative precept; as, the the Man shall
be stoned, shall die, shall be put to death, or the like; but in this Text, and
no where else in Scripture the sentence is only a Prohibition negative, Thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live, and not Thou shall put her to death, or stone
her or the like. Hence some have been of Opinion that not to suffer a Witch to
live, was meant not to relieve or maintain her by running after her, and
rewarding her. The Hebrews seem to have two sorts of Witches, some that did
hurt, others that did hold the Eyes, that is, by juggling and sleights deceived
Men's senses. The first they say, was to be stoned, the other which according to
the proper notation of the word, was the true Witch, was only to be beaten.

The Septuagent have translated a Witch, an Apothecary, a Druggister, one that
compounds poisons, and so the Latin word for a Witch is venefica, a maker of
poisons: if any such there ever were, or be that by the help of the Devil do
poison, such a one is to be put to death, though there be no Covenant with the
Devil, because she is an Actor, and principal her self, not by any wonder
wrought by the Devil, but by the natural, or occult property of the Poison.

For the time of Christ, says Mr. Perkins, though there be no particular
mention made of any such Witch, yet thence it follows not that there were
none, for all things that then happened are not Recorded, and I would feign
know of the chief Patrons of them, whether those persons possessed with the
Devil, and troubled with strange Diseases, whom Christ healed, were not
bewitched with some such people as our Witches are? if they say no, let them if
they can prove the contrary.

Here it may be thought that Mr. Perkins puts his Adversaries to a great pinch;
but it does not prove so, for the Question being only, whether those that were
possessed in our Saviors Time were bewitched. The Opposers of Mr. Perkins, say
they, were not bewitched, but if he or any other say they were, the Proof
will rest wholly on him, or them to make good their Affirmative; it cannot in
reason be expected that his Adversaries should prove the Negative, it is
against the Rules of Disputation to require it.

FINIS.

