FESTERED CONSCIENCES New launced: OR TITH-PAYING DEFENDED Against WILLIAM
WESTVP and THOMAS PVCKLE.

Penned By way of an Epistle to every one, who had rather disburden his Purse
then burden his Conscience.

By HIEROPHILVS, a young Fencer.

Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?

Romans 2.22. Alexander the Copper smith did me much evil, the Lord reward him
according to his works.

Of whom be thou ware also; for he has greatly withstood our words.

At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me:

J pray God that it may not be laid to their charge,

2 Timothy 4.14, 15, 16. Now J beseech you Brethren, mark them which cause
divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine, which ye have learned, and
avoid them,

Romans 16.17. LONDON, Printed for W. WEEKLEY, and are to be sold at Ipswich.
1650.

Festered Consciences New-launced.
COURTEOUS READER:
MY task requires not much pains to perform, nor brains to understand, it
have been always my desire with heart and hand to embrace the true Ministers
of the Gospel; and therefore as a wel-wisher to them, it shall be mine
endeavor in some measure to maintain their maintenance: The times we live in
do discover daily the malignity of Spirit that is in many men against them,
insomuch that though they can not (blessed be God) occidere Presbyteros, yet
their aim is occidere Presbyterium, though their malice have not an
opportunity to lay hands on their persons; yet they would fain finger their
maintenance, which being once taken away, it is no question but the Office will
fall too; They would deal by the Ministers, as the Devil did by Job, he
first robbed him of all his goods, before he touched his skin, they would plume
their feathers first, and then they should soon make them despicable to the
eyes of all, Envy on the one side causes them to pine at the eminency of
honor, and competency of livelihood that the Ministers have, and Covetousness
on the other side makes them Preach this saving doctrine: The truth of it is,
this distemper have too much broken forth at the lips in public places; J hope
mine eyes shall never live to see English air infected with it; for my own
part my Conscience prompts me to pray for the Ministers as Moses did for Levi,
Deuteronomy. 33.11. Bless Lord their substance, and accept the work of their hands,
smite through the loins of them that rise against them, and of them that hate
them, that they rise not again. Former times have but half-cloathed some
Ministers, not much unlike unto David's servants, whom the King of Ammon ill
handled; but this generation intends to rob them of all, and in this sense to
discover their nakedness to the Kingdoms, when they have made them the
Almes-men in the Commonwealth.

The chief occasion that induced me to set Pen to Paper, wa upon the sight of
a certain Pamphlet published against the maintenance of Gospell-Ministers; the
work, J suppose, of a Legion, (though it needed not so many heads to compose
it) yet owned by Two, whose character, J fear the Apostle in his Epistle to
Timothy has plainly set down, foretelling the nature of those men, that
should make the last days perilous, 2 Timothy 3.6. Of this sort are those that
creep into houses, etc. J am sure by their Callings they were never appointed
to that work they take upon them: God never liked the strange fire of
Preposterous zeal, nor the over-officiousnesse of Vzzah: When the material
Temple was a setting up, God commanded that no Smiths tools should be heard
in it, 1 Kings 6.7. And J read but once of Axes and Hammers in the Temple, but
it was for an ill work, not to repair it but to deface it, Psalm. 74.6. And J
may justly fear by the actions of some men, it will prove too true in the
Spiritual temple, which J pray God in mercy timely to prevent?

It is not mine intent to fight it out with these Champions of error, but only
to send them and their followers to school to two learned Divines, that have
lately writ upon this subject, Carlton and Sclator, who have confuted better
arguments then these men have brought against Tithes; J suppose their want of
reading made them so Presumptuous, to appear for that which was long ago
foiled, when it had other manner of men to stand up for it; These days have
brought forth no such new lights, but what the Devil had before kindled, though
truth have hitherto prevailed against them. There are sparks in the world that
fly from the anvill of Hell, yet they have been heretofore quenched by water
that came down from Heaven, and until J see these forementioned Books well
answered, J shall not trouble my self much with the smell of an old Sore, or
unite my Conscience and Purse so near together, as they have done! yet give me
leave to strike a little whilst the iron is hot, to view the print of their
black thumbes, and if a little rubbing will do any good. J shall be glad to
bestow that on them, that so others may not be defiled by them, in prosecution
whereof, J shall not endeavor so much to strengthen the subject J treat on, as
to weaken their arguments.

The title of their Book does state their question, viz. Gentile-Congregations
no Tith-payers; or if you will in words equivalent, Heathen Synagogues no Tith
payers, 1. Cor. 5.1. Certainly these men have something forgot that new name
which the Disciples took upon them at Antioch, Acts 11.26. They ceased to be
named Jews, or Gentiles, and were called Christians; yet J may Apologize for
them, they having denied and renounced their Baptism (as J am informed) they
may very well call themselves Heathens or Gentiles.

In this question the subject of it is as uncertain and indefinite, as they
would have Ministers maintenance; for whether by Gentile-Congregations they
mean Turks and Infidels, or Gentiles, that have taken upon them a new name
(Christians) may be questionable by their words: But because they, being
conscious to themselves of their own inability; have desired me not to judge
according to appearance, J shall rather look upon their meaning, which J
suppose may be this: That it is unlawful for Christians to pay Tithes, or
more properly as some of their Arguments do manifest, to yield any certain
maintenance unto Gospel Ministers.

This Position they have backed with many Arguments, which their own tribe, as
it seems in their Epistle, being as ignorant as themselves have judged worthy
to be committed to the Press.

But in the first place let me tell them, that their work is not so well cut
out, as Masters of their trade should do.

Secondly, J shall draw their material Arguments into Syllogismes, that J may
the better sind out, where the shoe pincheth.

And Courteous reader. J must needs reinforce my request to you, that you
should not expect, that J should decide the Controversy of Tithes, to what Law
they do belong, whether Moral, Ceremonial or Judicial, J know it is the
trick of all errors and their maintainers ^ever to look back to that which
is written against them, but to bring (...) their own opinions as new lights,
that were never heard of before, when they have been before extinguished, and
buried is the grave of silence; this makes me to desire, these new Doctors to
lay aside once more the Awle and Hammer, and to take upon them to answer those
two Authors aforementioned, that so J may receive conviction from them, in
that which their own reasons leave me wholly unsatisfied, in regard of their
proofelesse denyals and affirmations, as J doubt not but with Gods assistance
to demonstrate to any rational man or Consciences either, that are not already
seared with an hot iron.

Their first Argument runs thus.

Whatsoever was appointed by God for the maintenance of the Leviticall
Priesthood only, is wholly unlawful to be paid by any, for the maintenance
of Gospell-Ministers.

But Tithes were appointed of God for the maintenance of the Leviticall
Priesthood only.

Therefore, it is unlawful to pay them to Gospell-Ministers.

Their first or major Proposition they prove out of Hebrews 7.12. and Heb.
10.8. Which though it be but ill proved, yet J may grant that without giving
them an inch in their dispute.

Their Assumption they prove out of Deuteronomy: 14.22. to the end of the Chapter,
which in my mind do not at all prove their assertion, and they might have
brought other places more suitable to their purpose; they that wade in the
waters of the Temple ought to have their feet better shod with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace: for in all those verses there is no particular command
of God for the payment of Tithes to the Levites; nay the party himself is
enjoined to bring his Tithes to the place that God shall choose to set his name
in, either in kind, or else in money, if distance of place should make the
paying in kind too tedious, and there to bestow it for whatsoever his soul
desires, and to rejoice with his household and also the Levite, and in the
latter end of the chapter, he gave a command not only to call in the Levite,
but the stranger, and the fatherless and the widow, that they may also eat
and be satisfied; and how this proves their Position, that Tithes were
appointed to the maintenance of the Leviticall Priesthood only, J leave it to
the world to judge, and more judicial expositors to determine: yet J will
grant them that Tithes were assigned to the Leviticall Priesthood, saving this
one-ly out, for it was the practice of Godly men, before Levy ever was borne or
the Leviticall Priesthood under which the people received the law, Heb. 7.11
(that they plead to be abolished) was appointed for Levy, paid tithes in the
loins of Abraham, Heb. 7.9. and if it was the practice of Abraham, who is the
father of the Faithful, and without doubt did do nothing but what was of
Faith, their Consciences need not to be troubled with such a qualme, nor their
purses with such a gift of Continency, as they plead for: But further, J would
be willing they would clear that place in the forementioned chapter to the
Hebrews and the eight verse, where the Apostle seems to distinguish betwixt
the Leviticall assignation of Tithes, and the perpetuity of them, as due to one
that lives, in these words, and here men that dye receive tithes, but there he
receives them of whom it is witnessed that he lives; you may see it further
applied in Carleton.

The second argument why these Gentiles or Heathens cannot pay tithes may be
framed into a syllogism after this manner.

All types and shadows of Christ the truth and substance ought to be
abolished.

But tithes are a tipe and shadow of Christ the truth and substance.

Therefore Tithes ought to be abolished.

Both propositions of this Syllogism may be denied, and therefore their
consequence is altogether invalid, yet they will not want Scripture to cite,
though not to prove, the Devil could quote that; yet nothing to the purpose;
all their places not one whit mentioning Tithes, but carnal rites and
ordinances, Heb. 9.10. And thus far J agree with them, that such tipes and
Shadows ought not to be used ^n the service of God, longer then the time of
reformation; yet J think those things that were Tipes may he used in a civil
use; because the Arc was a tipe, shall we therefore have no Shipping? Because
the sleying of Bulls and Goats were tipes, shall the Butchers ^ade therefore
fall? But to speak to their Assumption, they say tithes ^re a tipe of Christ,
but they tell us, not what they signfie; The Author to the Hebrews argues more
rationally in the two Chapters ^o the Hebrews cited by them; and if Tithes be
a pattern of heaven^y things they must needs figure something; this kind of
arguing ^uts me in mind of limming in its infancy, Pictures then having so
little form or fiigure of the Creatures they should represent, that they were
forced to write underneath them, this is a Dog, this is a Lion: even so do
they, tell us Tithes are a tipe of Christ, but in what or how we may go seek.

Having thus laid down their argument they leave it with an expostulation, and
here they show the seame both in the inside and outside, the malice of their
hearts now breaks forth, and though they have gone down to the Philistimes,
to grind their tools, yet they are not so sharp, but they may be blunted:
They now bring us in a distinction by head and shoulders, when as they have
nothing at all treated of one member before, to wit; the judicial Law, which if
thou acknowledge Tithing to have its power, it Battereth down all their
arguments, unless they will give no power to the Magistrate in matters
judicial; but J conceive this absurdity arises either from the Printing, or
else their Ignorance, for (Judaicall) was the word they meant.

But they would know of the Ministers, why they call themselves the tribe of
Levi? May they not as well quarrel with the Apostle for calling Believers the
seed of Abraham! Romans 4.12, 17. It follows not therefore that they were Jews
or circumcised, no more do their argument hold, that Ministers are really the
tribe of Levi: Christ calls himself a Door, a Vine, his body Bread, his blood
real Wine? Is he therefore a real door, and a real vine, or his body real
bread, and his blood real wine? they argue well for the Papists to prove
Transubstantiation, that will not allow of an Allegory or Metaphorical
expression. In the next place they stumble upon the Church, which they have not
much troubled a long time, and because they understand not the original, they
are puzzled what name to give it: they wanted the knowledge a Metonimy, to have
cleared this to them, that the continent is often put for the thing contained
and so e contra: J would wish them to study Rhetoric before they make any
further progress in Divinity.

But being come to the Church they are much disturbed with a writing upon the
wall; Belteshazzar was so when he was guilty o^ the same sin, that these men
are, to wit, Sacrilege, in drinking in the vessels that did belong unto the
Temple; this writing upon the wal^ meeting with his guilty Conscience did make
his joints to tremble as well it might do, it being a robbing of God: But they
further blame the Ministers for citing that place in Mal. 8.8, 9, 10. Where God
expostulates with his people for robbing him of his Tithes, so that it is
clear God ownes them for his, and if so there had need be a dispensation from
his own mouth before they be taken away, and that a more particular one then
they have yet shown: but yet they should not have needed so much to cavil
about it, if they had observed what the Apostle says 2. Tim. 3.16. All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness; J hope ye do
not deny Malachy to be Scripture, why then let me make it profitable for
reproof to you: Was God so urgent for the maintenance of his Priests under the
Law, and do ye think he is less urgent for his Ministers of the Gospel: do
ye think it is his intention to whom he commands there should be double honor
given, 1 Timothy 5.17. To allow them less maintenance? Shall the Levites that fed
the people with shadows have the substance, and the Ministers that feed them
with the substance have nothing but shadows to live on, the charity of people?
Certainly as their office is more noble, in that they bring the joyful tidings
of salvation, they ought to have the best entertainment.

But though these men will not allow any arguing from the Leviticall law for
the maintenance of Gospel Ministers, yet the Apostle does in the next verse to
the last recited, place in Timothy, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the corn; and therefore God surely had an eye to the
maintenance of his Gospell-Ministers even in the Leviticall law: But if all
that they drive at was there merely for the abolishing of Tithes, this fester
of Consciences might be easily cured by letting out their purses, the Ministers
will not require the just tenths, which they say is a Shadow, so as they will
add more substance, and J suppose that cannot be any scruple, seeing it is
warranted by practice in the Apostles times, Acts 4.35. But it is my fear that
their disease is rather in a Pravity of their wills then in their Consciences:
they may by the same argument make all things Tipes, and it is probable enough
in process of time they will neither pay their Free Will offerings they speak
of in their Third reason, because they were commanded under the leviticall law,
Levit. 22.18. Levit. 23.38. And so at last, out of Conscience they dare not
give the Minister any thing.

But now J come to their third Reason, where they have hit the nail on the
head, and their maine aim in their Book appears, before they gave one knock
upon the Hoope the other upon the Barrel, but now the hammer sounds high if
this noise produces their wished effect, many Farmers, will think to cast off
their shoes before they be half worn, the tenth part will serve to buy new;
For now the Ministers maintenance that in their conceit is justly due, is what
every one will freely give them, or to term it according to the Leviticall law
Free Will offerings, which were over and above the Tithes, and J suppose
Ministers may well have this maintenance too if the people will give it them
for all their other; But if they shall have only that, J do not think there
will be so many shoes worn out with carrying of so many gifts of benevolence
that they had need to be nailed, to make them more lasting; Most of the world
being too much addicted unto Covetousness will be but as friends at a Sneeze,
the most you can get of them is God bless you, like unto those great
benefactors the Apostle James speaks of, Iam. 2.15.16. That only say to a
naked brother or sister, depart in peace, be ye clothed and be ye warmed: J
shall presume to speak more particularly to these men: J pray do not ye
intend to be such benefactors? Your tongues shall not need to speak louder,
then ye have already spoken in that respect. J suppose ye would prefer them
to be Mendicant-Friers, for if such as ye are shall be at their choice to allow
them maintenance, they had need vow Poverty and Chastity too, for your covetous
gift of Continency is not to be questioned.

But it may be rather, ye would have them trencher-Chaplaines (it is most
probable that that is your mind, by the place ye cite, Luke. 10.8.) and so
consequently Men pleasers, that must make the bread of life to be pleasant to
every pallat, as the Jews fabulize their Manna was, they must be afraid to
open their mouths against sin, for fear the people shut their purses upon it;
me thinks ye look too much toward Rome, and begin to usher in the Popes
Authority, if Heaven comes once to be sold for money, and Ignorance spread in
all parts of this Jsle for lack of maintenance for Ministers; for it is not to
be supposed that these Free Will offerings will cover the face of this Nation
from D^n to Beersheba, we must needs conceive the Jesuiticall policy, will
soon undermine the Gospel: further: J am verily persuaded there is one of
your opinion, though his name be not to your Book, that will give his verdict
in the affirmative for this Doctrine, even the Prince of this world, who ruling
in the hearts of the children of Disobedience, will rule in their purses too
and keep them close enough to Gospell-Ministers, but leaving this Proloque let
me come to your argument, which may be framed into this Syllogism.

If the Lord Jesus Christ have appointed a new maintenance for
Gospell-Ministers; which is only a free Contributien; then the other of tithes
is to be abolished.

But, the Lord Jesus Christ have appointed a new maintenance for
Gospell-Ministers which is only a free contribution.

Therefore, the other of Tithes ought to be abolished.

J did expect in this argument, it being their Masterpiece, a pair of
Right-ups, but for all their under-laying they will tread awry: J shall not
meddle, with their major Proposition, but come to their minor, in which their
strength consists, which they would prove out of Luke 10.8. It is my desire to
be very cautelous in the exposition of Scripture and to submit my self to
better judgments, J know J am not infallible as the Apostles were; yet give me
leave to show how those who atribute to themselves the same infallibility of
Spirit, that the Apostles had, do wrest Scripture as being unlearned to prove
their own phancies and perverse opinions. For first, how can this place of
Scripture be alleged for abolishing of Tithes, when as Christ after that
approves of them, Luke 11.42. And if Tithes are Moral, as they have not as yet
disproved, certanely, it was not the intention of Christ now to appoint a
mintenance for his Ministers, but to leave Tithes rather after the veil of the
Temple should be rent in twain, as a due maintenance to them; for Tithes being
assigned by God for a time to the Levitical Priesthood, the Lord Christ, who
came to establish the Law, would not before the expiration of their term take
them from them.

But secondly, why do they not as well argue in respect of Apparel, that
Ministers ought to wear no Scrip or shoe? That chapter will as strongly prove
that, as what they would prove out of it; but they, J s^e; are loath trading
should fail in that respect, their own interest being too much concerned in
it, J am sure if they may have their wills, the Ministers shall have neither
Scrip or shoe or any thing else.

But 3. was it the intention of the Lord Christ, that all his Ministers should
be altogether Peripatotickes travailing from City to city, without any abiding
place, living wholly at other men's tables? Surely J think not, be pleased to
look into Titus 1.5. And ye may see, that Elders were to be ordained in every
City; God will have fixed stars in his Church; and every Bishop must be such
an one as rules his own house well, 1 Timothy 3.4. Therefore surely he may have
an house of his own.

And J pray resolve me another question: if such a free contribution be only
the maintenance that a Bishop ought to have, how can he be given to
hospitality? Or, where is any maintenance at all appointed by our Savior
Christ in that 10 of Luke. For his wife and children? Was it his intent they
should be starved? It is lawful enough for him to marry, 1 Timothy 3.2. J pray
consider these things, here are two chargeable duties imposed upon a Minister,
the one is that he be given to Hospitality, which never any Almes-man could
well be, the other is, that he provide for his Family, unless ye will have him
worse then an Infidel; These things may be done with the peoples free
contribution, when mine eyes see it, J shall believe it; Let me but instance in
the poor man's case, which God ownes for his, to whom he have commanded Charity
to be enlarged, yet how is the Magistrate often enforced to wring out of many
men's purses diminutive livelihood for him and his family, and do ye then think
it will come in so freely to the Ministers? Surely ye are mistaken.

Let me compare one Scripture more with your afore-cited place and see how they
agree: 1 Cor. 9.14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel; Certainly if ye mark well, these words
(even so) have no reference to your recited place, from whence ye should draw
your way of maintaining Ministers; J take it otherwise and that this (so) have
not an unlimitted exposition, but declares, a certainty of maintenance that the
Lord have appointed and ordained for his Gospell-Ministers: Do but consult
with the context, and ye shall see how the Apostle proves a certain
maintenance to be due to Gospell-Ministers from a similitude, his meaning is
evident to be this, as they that Ministered about holy things, and served at the
Altar had certain maintenance, even so God have ordained that Ministers of the
Gospel should have a certain maintenance.

Now J pray did the Priests and Levites live upon the free contribution of the
people? Your arguments prove their allotted portion; then certainly it ought
to be so with the Ministers for God have ordained it so; and therefore it is no
sin, for the Magistrate to ordain it so; J remember the Pope was once very
bountiful to the King of France and did give England to him, but for all that
he was to conquer it before he could have it: do ye think God gives his
Ministers their maintenance thus? ye would make his Gift, which he have made
absolute to be conditional, that God have ordained a maintenance for
Ministers, yet it must be always provided that ye will pay it them. J conceive
the ordinances of God are more valid then to depend upon the wills of men, for
what he commands, it is your duty to pay, and the Magistrate to enforce.

They further proceed, having thus granted their own argument without proof,
to raise an Objection: But some may say, how if the people will contribute
nothing? And they answer it as wisely; that it signify to them, that their
Ministry and Doctrine is much to be questioned, that it works no better
effects and fruits: This is full of reason, but it is to prove the Church of
Rome the true Church, where are sufficient effects this way of its Ministry;
all Seducers may well argue thus, because commonly they have most followers;
Aarons golden Calfe wanted nothing that the people could afford, Exodus 32.3.
But it is otherwise rather with the true Ministers of Christ, though the
Corinthians, were the seal of Paul's Apostleship; yet he did not find this
effect of his Ministry amongst them, 1 Cor. 9. and 4. Peter did catch many
Fish, but J read but of one that came up with money in its mouth, the
entertainment that the world gives to the Ministers proves neither Pro nor con,
CHRIST tells his Disciples that he sent them out as Lambs amongst Wolves, but
by your argument, if ye see a Lamb worried by a Wolf, ye will therefore
judge it is no Lamb, new-vaumped Errors had need be better stitched.

Further to illustrate this, they say, Christ made no question but that where
his Doctrine was received, his Ministers should have maintenance; nor do J
neither, for J suppose if Morality teaches men to allow maintenance to the
Minister, Divinity much more: But to answer their answer more fully, all this
time they take no notice, of tha^ effect the Ministry have wrought upon this
Commonwealth, in tha^ our Parliaments (which are the Body representative of
the Republic and in whose Acts by our Law every one is and ought to be a
party) have with an unanimous suffrage given freely to them of their Carnals,
that administer to them of their Spirituals; ye will allow the Magistrate to
raise maintenance for other uses, and why not for this the more pious the use,
is it the more to be condemned? J hope y^^ have not taken measure of John of
Leydons foot, who called himself King of Sion; but it may be feared ye will
be as high in the in-step as other Anabaptists have been before you.

Your next aim as J conceive, is to prove the quite annulling of a Duty,
because it was dispensed with by the Apostle Paul and others in times of
Persecution and in the infancy of the Church, that there might be no scandal:
So that by your consequence ye would have the Ministers at all times alike;
though the Commonwealth make a feast, neither Nathan the Prophet, nor Abinadab
the Priest shall be invited to it, mean apparel and slender diet shall serve
them when ye wallow in Luxury: Because the Apostles were hungry, thirsty,
naked, buffetted and had no certain dwelling place, 1 Cor. 4. Therefore all
Ministers ought to be so; because they were made the off-scowring of all things
and as the filth of the world, therefore all Ministers ought to be so too: Is
this the double honor that CHRIST have appointed for his Ministers? Is this
the clothing, diet, and habitation, that the Ministers of Christ are to have
in all times and places? It is your desire to see the Ministers conformable to
their head in all sufferings, and ought not the people to be so too! Do not
your Argument hold as well for People as Ministers? God in his old Law would
have a proportionable portion for his Levite, and he came in with a blessing
to the People, but ye would have the Ministers of the Gospel to be at what
you please Sr.

But ye instance that the Apostle Paul rather then he would be chargeable did
work with his hands, and counsels the Elders of Ephesus so to do, urging a
sentence of our Lord Christ, That it is better to give, then to receive; and
without doubt so it is, but none ^an give before he first receive: But let me
argue with you a little, ^^e ye account of the Ministry of CHRIST as such a
slight matter, ^^at a man may work of his Trade, and follow that too? God
nee^ed no bellows to blow the fire upon his Altar, for that never went ^ut:
Ministers, as one says well, ought to be always either Prea^hing or
studying, either with Peter and Andrew a Fishing, or else with James and John
a-mending their Nets, Moses and Aaron departed not from the Tabernacle;
Ministers are Ambassadors, and ought (...) be either delivering their message,
or else taking Instructions from their Lord that sends them; like the
Orenge-tree they are to bear ^^rth fruit all the year long: It is a sign ye
know not what be^^ngs to the discharging of that Office, ye think it so easily
done: He that rightly understands Paul's charge to Timothy, will think
himself foot-loose from all other employments, and count his course well
finished, if he can by any means perform that only, 2 Timothy 4.1. etc. (Me
thinks this should make their ears to tingle, that ^ookes so meanly upon this
high Office appointed by Jesus Christ) and the Apostle enforces this his
Charge with a strong Argument, for else he tells him he will be rejected, for
the people having itch^ng ears will heap up unto themselves Teachers, so that
they shall ^^ve teachers by heaps, more then a good many, that shall Preach
^^lse Doctrine, and he fortifieth this argument in the 14. verse with his own
experience; Alexander the Copper-smith withstood his words, and it is probable
enough he called his Ministry into question, as some of his fellow Tradesmen
do our Ministers in these times, Paul's hand was not free from a Viper; and
well may our Ministers expect the same. The Apostle in his other Epistle to
Timothy, commands him to be attendant to reading, exhortation and Doctrine, and
to give himself wholly to these things, 1 Timothy 4.13. and Act. 6. chap. to the
end, Then there is surely no part of him left for other employments; and J
conceive J should not be much erroneous, if J should affirm, that though the
Apostle by reading here meant chiefly the Scriptures so called for their
excellency; yet he did also intend other Books of Learning; J am sure it was
his own practice in one sense to bring the uncircumsed into the Temple of God
to convince false Teachers, that subvert whole houses, whose mouths ought to be
stopped, we may read a verse out of Epimenides an heathenish Author ^ited in
one of his Epistles.

(...).

J shall not need to English it, the Apostolical gifts which J suppose ye
attribute to your selves will reach higher then so.

Give me leave a little more to expostulate with you: Do ye think the waters
of a Smiths-forge and of the Temple are of the same depth? Ezekiel declares the
contrary, Ezekiel. 47. They are too deep for every shallow-brain'd Sciolist to
wade in, nor is the measure thereof ordinary, it must be a straight Reed of a
certain length, Ezekiel. 40. which every Tradesman have not in his shop: The law
of God and his testimonies are the rule, not the crooked and perverse fancies
of men: Ministers are called Over-seer, and they do truly over-see that follow
other employments, whilst the Shepherd is a mending of his Boots, his sheep
may well straggle; they are laborers in the Lords vineyard, and by the way be
pleased to look into Cant. 8.12. And ye shall see that the keepers of the
Vineyard ought to have something: the work of the Ministry is a laborious
work, 1 Timothy 5.17. They labor in the word and doctrine, and no man need to
take upon him any more laborious employments then one.

But ye say is it not evident the Apostles did otherwise?

J answer with the Apostle Paul, are all Apostles, 1 Cor. 12.29. because Elisha
caused the iron to swim, 2 Kings 6.6. Can ye therefore do it? Where are your
Apostolical gifts? Is the spirit powered upon you in that measure it was upon
them? It appears not in your Book: Nay did not God make them as the Sun, and
are not our Ministers rather as stars, that give light, but by way of
reflecting that light, they receive from them? Deny this if ye can, unless ye
will make their Epistles and words of none effect; bold is the presumption of
some men in the world, that if they have but a voluble Tongue and a little
braine-knowledge, they are then gifted, they think for the Ministry, though
their judgment is altogether erroneous; which falsely glossing upon the
Scripture do make the Spirit of God which is unity it self, a Spirit of
Contradiction; when as he that speaks, ought to speak as the oracles of God,
1 Pet. 4.11. Or else let him hold his tongue: But further they tell us, that
Apostle had a liberty to receive, and so have J if they will offer any thing to
me, and no more had the Apostle by their Argument, so that J (though J am not a
Minister) have the same power to demand maintenance from the people as the
Ministers have: the Apostle declares, that he had a power to enforce
maintenance, 1 Cor. 9.2. These. 3.9. Though for diverse ends he did forbear to
use it: And what power J pray was this? A passive power, ye answer, to take it,
if the people will offer it; the same power have the Sea in a full measure, ye
may throw all your wares into it, there is a power to receive them; but
assuredly this power imployes an Authority and Dignity too, If they please to
view the original; and so the Apostle manifests to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2.6. And he tells the Corinthians, J robbed other Churches taking wages
of them to do you service; he calls it robbery, and yet wages; declaring his
Authority that even there, where at that time he did not administer of his
Spirituals, he used a kind of force as I may say, according to the
signification of the word ((...)) to cause them to give him of their Carnals.

I shall not multiply any more words concerning this, but come to the
Conclusion of their argument: Then say they, if there be any that will not be
content with this free contribution of the people, and work with their hands
as the Apostles and all the Ministers in the Scripture did (which they have not
prooved, See the falsity of this assertion, 1. Cor. 9.6. Nor if they could, do
it argue any thing against a precept) they then desire them to leave their
places for such able men as are (but it is as they say without any proof)
fitted both to teach the Gospel, and also to work with their hands, and shall
be contented with what the people will give them: It is observable what a
plausible way Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing have to win upon the affections of
men, especially such who make gain their godliness; the Devil will play at
small game, rather then stand out; and give me leave according to an Italian
proverb, to pause at a good pennyworth, for it is most probable either the
commodity is naught or else ill got, or there is some other plot in it; There
is no wise man, but will question his skill that will work for nothing,
especially in any office that requires more then ordinary knowledge, J do not
think, but J may pattern, though not in the same kind these free worke-men
they speak of in Jsay. 44.12. etc. The Smith with the tongs both works in
the coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and works it with the strength of
his arms, yea he is hungry and his strength fails, he drinks no water and
is faint; and wherefore is all this work of this poor man, merely to make a
graven jmage, to do the Devils journy-worke.

J am affrayd that these free laborers in the Lords vineyard have some ill
work too it may be if once let in, they will stub it up: J am verily of the
mind they feed the people with that, that cost them nothing, no great Study,
for they are extemporary Preachers, but J think they can scarce preach, so
well, as those they would turn out, their book if they be the men, makes them
worke-men that ought to be ashamed, if their extemporary Preaching do excel
their Book, J must needs apply that proverb to them, which many attribute to
women, they are wise upon the sudden, but fools upon premeditation.

Howsoever they affirm that these men they speak of are fitted by the Lord
CHRIST to be contented, if Trading fail. I confess they may be fitted for a
free contribution, but how they are fitted for the Ministry they have not told
me, if they speak of an Imediate Call they must manifest, the same measure of
the spirit and gifts that were in the Apostles, though CHRIST did call
Fishermen, yet he marks them out with a sign from heaven, so that all the
City took notice of it, Acts. 2. And certainly if God had called these men
Immediately out of the Shop into the Pulpit, it would have been with the
rushing of a mighty wind, all should have known it; but whereas J know they
will object that they have an inward Call, and are gifted for it; yet J may
tell them, there shall be many at the day of Judgment that have far exceeded
them, and yet CHRIST will not own them, Math. 7.22.23. Therefore that can be
no proof of their Ministry without some other call, there are false Apostles,
2 Cor. 11.13. J read of a sad judgment upon some Jews (and it may be a warning
for Gentiles) who without any Call, would take upon them (to do as Paul did)
but the evil Spirit, prevailed against them, Acts. 19.15.16. J fear where the
Minister have no call, the Devil prevails both against Preacher and hearers:
But do they think in earnest that a man may now both work with his hands and
perform the work of the Ministry too, because the Apostle Paul did so; J
suppose they mean themselves, I desire they would resolve me in these
Questions; were they brought up at the feet of Gamaliel? Are they instructed in
Learning as he was? Why then do they presume to compare themselves to him, as
ably to perform the work of the Ministry and to work with their hands as he
could? And observe by the way, though their followers cry down Learning
because they have it not, yet all the Apostles, had it either miraculously
infused, or else by industry obtained, and God did so approove of it in Paul, as
that he made him his chosen Vessel to bear his name before the Gentiles, and
to suffer great things for his name, Acts. 9.15. 2 Cor. 11. And are not his
works and Epistles upon eternal record more then any one Apostles else
besides? Did not God, by this imply that his Ministers ought to have some other
gifts then they have? Paul argues with the Gentiles out of their own Books
to convince them, therefore he was well read in them, Acts 17.28, 29. (...),
but our days have brought forth teachers, that know more of divinity, then
they do of morality and good manners, and think themselves fit to teach
others, that which they do not know themselves; Let me entreat such men to put
off their shoes, for the place they stand on is holy ground, the lights upon
the candlestickes in the Temple were not made of Shoemakers wax, it is not for
every one that can clinch a nail to turn Minister. As for their contented
disposition, J cannot much admire at it, he that comes in at the window, and
not at the door may be contented whether he have any thing or nothing; his bold
action making him rather liable to punishment.

But seeing they have compared themselves with the Apostle Paul, J am of the
mind, if their argument be well sifted, we shall find it to be in the
comparative degree and that their arguing does prove themselves better gifted
then he was; (J hope they will not blame me, that J apply their own words to
themselves, their manner of life does too much verify who are the Ministers
they mean) Let us but consider the Apostle Paul's condition and we shall find
him a single man 1 Cor. 7.7. Yet he found the work of the Ministry so great,
that he could scarce spare time for his hands to Minister to his own
necessities 1 Cor. 4.11. J think the Apostle does signify in the said Epistle,
cap. 9. verse. 5.6. that those Apostles that had a wife and family, did not
follow handicraft trades nor work with their hands, nor should he needed
himself to have wrought with his, it was his free will offering, and therefore
shall it be, enjoined as necessary for an example to all Ministers? The Apostle
was day and night employed in the Ministry Acts 20.31. Yet let me speak it to
the honor of these men, they can provide for themselves and their family, and
yet do the Lords work well enough: J cannot say too much Learning have made
them mad, but too much Ignorance have made them presumptuous to take upon them
to do that the Apostle could not well do: Howsoever they should persuade the
Ministers to leave their places for them and such as they are; indeed they
should then prove themselves not the Ministers of Christ, to lay down their
Ministry at the entreaty of men, these men would feign step into their places,
having made themselves wandering Planets, they are very desirous to be fixed
Stars: but let me tell them; that as Ministers have their mission from
CHRIST, so they must have their dismiss too only from CHRIST; see what a
charge the Apostle gives to the Elders of Ephesus, When Wolves were entering
into the flock, and men speaking perverse things should draw disciples after
them, Acts 20.28, 29.30.

Ministers are overseers of the flock, and though the Wolf come they are not
to leave them, and if his teeth ought not to force them away, their words will
scarce persuade them.

J come now to their fourth Reason, which have its dependence upon their two
first; and therefore for want of proof that Tithes were only appointed by the
Jewish law taken in a strict sense, it is of no consequence, for without doubt,
it was not the intention of the Apostles Elders, and Brethren in that decree
to treat upon the Moral law, then it were lawful for the Churches of the
Gentiles to lie, murder, and steal, because they are not mentioned in that
decree: It is an easy thing for a man to draw a conclusion when he grants this
premises; J think Ministers of the Gospel ought to be better disputants.

I proceed to their fifth Reason, I must needs desire brevity for I have been
over-shoes and over boots already. They tell us it is unlawful to pay Tithes,
because the Apostle did never draw any argument from the law of Tithes to
enforce a Gospel maintenance for Ministers; I know not the strength of this
argument: yet I think they did something over-see, nor can I judge their
applauders as noble as them of B^rea who searched the Scriptures daily (and I
know not what Scriptures are there meant unless it be the old Law; therefore
take notice, that is still to be searched whether those things were so, Acts
17.11. Their customers rather then Disciples take all things upon trust, as
though they had no bad ware in their shops; J desire them to take a review of
that Chapter which they cite, 1 Cor. 9. And tell me the meaning of the 13 and
14 verses, from whence the Apostle draws his argument: Were not Tithes and
appointed maintenance for them that did Minister about holy things, and did
wait at the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained etc. The spirit of God had
need to write more plain for their understanding, a Periphrasis is something
too high for their learning, that can find out nothing unless it be nominally
and expressly set down.

But give me leave to view, how they turn the current of the Apostles other
arguments contrary to his intention, the Apostle did not intend to tell them
who was to pay the Soldier, but from that, which is, so evident unto this
whole Nation, the certainty of soldiers pay, he draws an argument for the
certainty of Ministers maintenance, and seeing that pay is so justly due unto
the Soldier, maintenance to the Ministers is as justly due too: But what they
mean by them they war against, J scarce well understand: J know all
Christians fight with them, that would willingly give them nothing but cuts and
wounds, Ephesians. 6.12. There is no maintenance to be expected for Ministers from
them, but yet flesh and blood may pay them maintenance, for they do not fight
with that: but give me leave to guess at their meaning; J suppose they look
upon them, that are none of their flock as them, they war against; J know no
other construction; therefore let me drive this nail a little homer with my
hammer; for Warriors though they take no pay of them they war against, yet
when they have conquered them, commonly they claim all, let them therefore
that admit themselves into their flock, look to their whole fleece, J am of
the mind they will be Apostolical, and require all to be laid at their feet.

In the next argument of the Apostles from the Vine-keeper they expostulate; by
what right can any eat of the fruit that he planted not, without he pay for
it, or it be freely given him! This question they have need to answer to try
their title to that they take upon them; this Nation is a vineyard planted by
the Ministers thereof, and therefore for these men to offer to meddle with the
fruit thereof, or to blast it, what is it but high impiety? From the next
argument of the Apostles taken from a Shepherd they question thus: by what
right can a man eat of the milk of the flock he feeds not? Suppose a
company of straggling wandering sheep will not keep pasture, but break hedge
and ditch to feed by themselves, shall therefore the right Shephard loose all
his profit? Sometimes he may want a Dog to fetch them to their fellows.

In their next expostulation concerning the Apostles argument taken out of the
Leviticall law, that the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn should
not be muzzled, J can scarce find out their meaning, but J conceive by all
their quaeries, like some kind of cattle that will give no milk to others,
they draw wholly to themselves, for J fear, they having robbed Gods vineyard,
seduced his flock and plowed ground they have nothing to do with, they would
prove a maintenance due to them: yet J may fail in their scope, and therefore
they are my remembrancers of the Devils oracles, which commonly speak so
doubtfully that they might be taken in several senses, and such arguments do
rather dim truth then extinguish it.

In the next place they fall out with the Magistrate, for taking by force
maintenance for Ministers, from such as would willingly have saved their
purses, and do as much as tell them flatly, that they know no power or warrant
out of Scripture for the Magistrate to do it.

To answer this, let them consider what title Psalmist gives unto Magistrates,
Psalm. 82.6. They are called Gods, but too too many in respect of Gods worship
or any dues belonging unto him would make them idol gods, that they should
have eyes and see not, mouths and speak not, ears and hear not, and hands
and act not; to whom should the Minister appeal but to Gods vicegerent, who
is and ought to do according to all the law, that God have commanded? Josh.
1.7, 8. He bears not the sword in vain but is to be a terror to evil
doers, to do justice to every one, to give to every man his due, for this
cause pay we tribute, Romans 13.6. And certainly if they that are called Gods
and are Gods deputies upon earth, shall neglect his commands the account of
their stewardship will be but a sad one at the tribunal of Jesus Christ?

When our Savior CHRIST sent out his disciples, Luke. 10.10, 11. he tells
them, That into whatsoever City they enter and they receiu^ them not, that then
they should wipe the dust of the City that cleaves on them against that City.

Now I would feign know of them, when a City is reputed to receive an
Ambassador, for the Ministers are the Ambassadors of CHRIST, 2 Cor. 5.20.
Certainly it is not when one or two in a City do give them entertainment, but
when the Magistrates do respectfully use them, and provide for them, so it is
with a Nation; and therefore that Nation cannot be said to receive the
Ministers of Jesus Christ, whose magistracy makes no provision for them nor the
Gospel neither; for the words of Christ do express his Ministers in the
first place, and they receive you not, etc. It is no act of particular persons
that can be meant in that place, for the word City is a word collective, and
the Magistracy is chiefly included in it: when Lidia was converted she and her
household were baptized, Acts 16.14, 15. And was this all? no then she besought
the Apostles, that if they had judged her faithful, to come into her house and
abide there; and the text says, she constrained them; a Nation is but a great
family, Ier. 10.25. And without doubt where God have opened the hearts of the
Magistrate they will endeavor to make all under their Jurisdiction of the
household of faith (their superiority is rather higher then a masters of a
famity) and with Lidia constrain the Ministers to abide with them, and compel
too those under them to minister unto them, as it is no question but Lidia did,
if they did not freely and willingly.

But to proceed, it is not mine intention to take notice of their extraordinary
patience and silence that they mention, comparing themselves to Christ, who was
more obedient to Authority then they are; this their Pamphlet and former
ignominies, that they and their followers have cast upon the Ministers are
sufficiently known to all that know them: But they object, (which is too true)
that it is their fault (or rather perverseness) that they are not fed with the
Flock: but they plead an excuse, that they have been drawn away by being
pushed in the shoulder (alas poor men! J suppose it is out of joint, and
because ye cannot follow your Trades ye would find another way of living) and
ruled with rigor and made to eat the trampled pasture (that is the reason ye
seek a new way to Heaven, the old way is too much beaten for you to follow) and
to drink pudled waters: J know not well what they mean by this pushing in the
shoulder and ruling with rigor, unless the Ministers did perform: their duty
as the Apostle commanded Titus, by rebuking them sharply, that they may be
sound in the Faith, Tit. 1.19. Their teachy Consciences could not suffer a word
of reproof; and therefore with a Choleric man they fly the room, and will
come no more there: Such ruling with rigor becomes the Ministers of Christ;
especially when they meet with perverse dispositions.

They go on with other Metaphorical expressions, calling the Doctrine of our
Ministers trampled Pasture and pudled water: This is no railing, nor do they
prove what they say: howsoever J cannot but applaud the ability of their parts,
who are scarce Scholars in Divinity, to judge so peremptory of their Teachers
doctrine, and of them that are set over them, Yet let me tell them it is not
false Doctrine; because they say so: If J could prevail with them, J would
persuade them to leave those broken Cisternes, that they have made for
themselves, and to come to the Fountain of living waters, J suppose their
pallates were out of taste, or some ill sparks had blinded their eyesight;
they were with Hagar near the Well, but did not see it, J wish them to come
once again and try upon my word, it may be the Angel will move the waters,
that they may go in and be healed.

These new Doctors having thus writ a large discourse to little purpose,
unless a man will grant what they grant without proof; like two grave Judges,
that never heard what the other party could say for himself, they proceed to
judgment, and judge it wholly unlawful; for believers, being Gentiles to pay
Tithes, though the Ministry of England can be proved the Ministry of CHRIST,
which they much question, though they cannot disprove; for if they could their
Book had been more enlarged, for they are not so shame-fac't as to go back
from their word, if they can but have any color for it. Howsoever let me tell
them that which they take no notice of with thankfulness, as they ought, how
it have pleased God to make the Ministry of this Land a great blessing to it,
if it were but in the Translating of the Bible, whereby they communicate daily
of Spirituals even to them, and to others; to whom the word of God might have
been as a Book sealed up, if our Ministers had had no other Gifts then these
men have, and by the way, J desire them to bless God for Learning, which
though they contemn, he have made it the Conduit to conveigh water of life to
most Nations; a means to propagate the Gospel to enlarge the kingdom of
CHRIST, to bring light unto them that are in darkness, and life to them that
sit in the shadow of death, so that many Nations that speak in several
Dialects, can say of the Ministers of CHRIST in general, as the Multitude, in
the 2. chapter of the Acts, did affirm of the Apostles in particular, That
they hear them speak in the tongues, wherein they were borne, the wonderful
works of God.

In the next place they put their Question by way of Supposition, supposing
Tithes lawful, yet they would prove that it is unlawful for them to do so
lawful an act, as to pay Tithes. Their two first Reasons tend to one and the
same effect; and therefore, one answer may serve for both: Let them be pleased
to peruse that Romans 14. Chapter that they cite once more, and they shall see
the Apostle did not intend to make the Moral law a matter of Conscience, which
they have not disproved Tithes to be, but he speaks of things indifferent,
which neither Gods law, nor the Ordinances of the Magistrates have made
absolutely lawful; For certainly it was not his intention, who in the
foregoing Chapter commands them to obey every Ordinance of man for Conscience
sake, to give them a dispensation from any, that is not contrary unto the word
of God, because of Conscience: he shows only our Christian liberty in things
of their own nature indifferent, and did not intend to enlarge it to
licentiousness, as they would have it.

Their third Reason, takes away their Supposition, treads over at the heel,
and steps back to their first question, to prove that: Learned disputants!
that know not how to keep themselves to their subject in hand.

They reason after this manner, that it is unlawful to pay Tithes, because
there is no word of God, nor example in Scripture, that ever it was required of
Gentiles or paid by them.

J answer to this, that Moral law binds both Jews and Gentiles, and in Exodus
and Numbers we may see, that one Law was to be to the stranger, and to him
that was borne in the land, Exodus 12.49. Number. 9.14. And therefore Tithes were
requried of Gentiles, of howsoever may not they as well plead concerning
obedience to Magistrates, that they know no word of God that ever it was
required of Englishmen or performed by them; therefore the ought not to obey
Magistrates? They must have every Nation distinctly set down in the word, as
though Gods commands were not universal.

In other matters they do not so much search the Word, for J know no command
in the word or example either, that any Tradesman should enter into the
Ministry without an Immediate call by name from Christ himself, and that such
an one as makes others, take notice of, as well as themselves; And whereas they
urge whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. J answer, it is very true not only in
respect of Tithes, but all other moral Duties, obedience to Parents and
Magistrates, if it be not of Faith it is sin, shall it therefore not be
enjoined? There is no one act or moral virtue that wants this grace, but it is
sinful, for without faith it is impossible tn please God.

J shall not trouble my self with their tautologies, nor perplexe my pen in
manifesting the folly of their arguing in their other reasons; J may well grant
them all, and yet no whit advantage them.

J shall speak but one word more concerning this subject of Tithes, which by
no strength of their arguments is the least shaken: the Apostle commands that
Teachers should be pertakers in all the good things of him, that is taught,
Gal. 6.6. And why then may they not have the tenth part, as well as any other?
J think there can be no better rule of equity, then what God himself did set
out; surely there was no uniustice in his proceedings: And further, J think
our law does look upon Tithes, as that which neither the purchaser does buy or
the lessor does let, but in all conveyances are in the Law excepted and
therefore what they would not pay out of Conscience, it none o^ their own to
keep, but is in law a due debt belonging to the Incumbent of the place, and
therefore great injustice for them to detain it nor do J think farmers will
fare ever the better, incase Ministers maintenance should be at free, as they
would have it; for most Landlords wll; make their tenants pay that in gross to
them for rent, tha^ their Consciences do so much scruple to pay by it self to
their Ministers.

J had now made an end, had not their close made such melodious music, as to
force me a little to listen after it, their words are very flattering, but J
suppose it is because they durst do no otherwise: they re-itterate the word
Conscience; alas tender creatures! that drust not pay the tenth part to the
Minister out of Conscience, the Magistrate shall do very well to injoyne them
to pay the ninth, and then the world shall see, whether it be Covetousness, or
some worse root of impiety from whence this their book have belched forth;
yet let me take notice a little of their Spirit; they tell the Magistrate that
it is his duty not to require any thing of theirs till they be satisfied in
Conscience of the lawfulness of what they do: If the offenders Conscience
must first be convinced, before justice be executed, the Magistrate shall have
work enough, and it will prove the greatest delatory plea of any: Give me
leave a little too to take notice of their envious and covetous disposition,
though they profess the contrary, it is evident enough to all that know them,
that they pay not so much to the Ministers, as to afford them cause to boast of
it, and J much question whether they pay any thing or no, or whether they ever
sustained such damage as they speak of; were the matter well examined this
cause of Conscience would be found none of their own, but rather a
Purse-scruple of some of their followers, who would more-freely

Contribute to them, were but once Ministerial maintenance abolished; and
therefore the weapon they speak of, is in effect to save their own purses: J
could wish them that if ever they take this weapon into their hands again that
they manage it better, and not to turn Master-fencers upon the publik Theater,
when they know not how to guard themselves, other edgetooles are more suitable
for their calling.

A word or two to their Postscript, and then J shall desire to try my gift in
Poetry; their Apology seems to me to be as needless, as their former
Arguments are proofelesse, Ignorance dictating to them, that they had done
amiss, when as they had honored the Ministers more then they were aware of,
they speak evil of those things they know not, Jude 10. Had they had any
skill in the Etymology of words, they would have saved so much Paper as their
Postscript does contain, the word Priest being nothing else but Presbyter
contracted; and therefore without any disparagement to that reverend Function,
may this word be assumed by them; or if they take the word as signifying
((...)) then let them be pleased to take notice, that our Savior Christ took
this title upon him, Heb. 7:24, 26. It is also attributed to all the Faithful,
1 Pet. 2.5.9. Revel. 1.6. And well therefore may the Ministers be called so,
in regard of the excellency of their Office, which is a lively representation
of them that served at the Altar. J must needs desire these men not to trouble
themselves with words, until they know the derivation, and true meaning of
them; and J could wish them, to leave these Controversies to more understanding
men, neither they nor J are fit to profess our selves disputants, had truth no
better Champions, it would soon fall; J shall therefore entreat them, as J
intend to do my self, and which is the Apostles counsel too, 1 Cor. 7.10. To
abide in the same calling wherein they are called; let not the Shoemaker go
beyond his last, nor the Smith go from his anvill, and without doubt, the
Church of God will have more quiet, and this Nation be the sooner freed of
those many Distractions it is involved in.

Thus courteous Reader, have J perused this grave piece of Divinity, and the
more I consider of it, the more I admire, where the pride of these men's hearts
should find materials to build up a window of Self-conceit, for them to climb
in at, to the Office of the Ministry; J had not taken upon me to answer this
Book, but that I saw so many deluded by it. I hope your ingenuitie will pardon
what J have done amiss, and be my Compurgatour in so clear a Truth, as these
men chiefly endeavor to extinguish; J doubt not, but if my Scriptures be
compared with theirs, my Arguments will prove most weighty in the balance of
the Sanctuary, J appeal to yourselfe as my Judge; for my own part, as J look
upon the Ministers as the Chariots and horsemen of our Nation, so without Envy
can I allow them golden furniture, from whom this Land receives so much
safety: If by this my labor I shall unmaske Error, clear the Truth, knock
off those yron-shackles, wherewith too many are captivated, I shall account my
time well spent and my pains well rewarded.

I shall only crave leave now, according to my Promise, to wind up my
discourse in a few Verses, the more to encourage those young Poets to enlarge
their gift that way.

RAre, most rare Phansies, whose Poetic straynes
In Nature's Cell do run through Jron veins:
What need our Varsities wits to refine?
The Blacksmith's-Coales do more inflame then Wine.
What need our Schoolmen Quest'ons to decide?
The Awle knows better how to part the Hide.
The Muses work with hands, APOLLO'S fire
Our Tradesmen's-braines with Raptures does inspire:
It was some Revelat'on sure, that thus
VULCAN proves another PROMETHEUS.
Go on, Wit's Champ'ons, J should find no fault,
Were but your Muse once freed from the String-hault,
Which makes her tread too short, yet let no blame
Discourage you, VULCAN himself was lame.
Your Rimes like Brains and Stayres make melody,
(Tithe) and (Grieve) do sound forth your Malady,
Though not with equal Noise, yet here is the Cry,
And doleful tune of a Purse-sympathy.
But to be short, let me excuse their quill,
These were their first, School-boyes have made us ill.
FINIS.

