THE NECESSITY OF The Absolute Power of all KINGS: And in particular, OF THE
KING OF ENGLAND.

printer's or publisher's device

At LONDON, Printed in the year, 1648.

THE NECESSITY OF The Absolute Power of all KINGS: AND In particular, of the
KING of ENGLAND.
TO Majesty or Sovereignty belongs an Absolute Power not subject to any Law.
It behooves him that is a Sovereign, not to be in any sort subject to the
command of another; whose office is to give Laws unto his subjects, to
abrogate Laws unprofitable, and in their stead to establish other, which he
cannot do, that is himself subject to Laws; or to others which have command
over him: And that is it for which the Law says, that The Prince is acquitted
from the Power of the Laws.

The Laws, Ordinances, Letters Patents, Privileges, and Grants of Princes,
have no force but during their life; if they be not ratified by the express
consent, or at least by sufferance of the Prince following, who had knowledge
thereof.

If the Sovereign Prince be exempted from the Laws of his Predecessors, much
less shall he be bound unto the Laws he makes himself; for a man may well
receive a Law from another man, but impossible it is in Nature for to give a
Law unto himself, no more then it is to command a man's self in a matter
depending of his own will; There can be no Obligation which takes State from
the mere will of him that promises the same; which is a necessary reason to
prove evidently that a King cannot bind his own hands, albeit that he would: We
see also in the end of all Laws these words, Because it has so pleased us. To
give us to understand, that the Laws of a Sovereign Prince although they be
grounded upon reason, yet depend upon nothing but his mere and frank good will.
But as for the Laws of God, all Princes and people are unto them subject;
neither is it in their power to impugn them, if they will not be guilty of High
Treason against God; under the greatness of whom, all Monarchs of the world
ought to bow their heads in all fear and Reverence.

Question may be, Whether a Prince be subject to the Laws of his Country that
he has sworn to keep or not? If a Sovereign Prince promise by Oath to his
subjects to keep the Laws, he is bound to keep them; not for that a Prince is
bound to keep his Laws, or by his Predecessors, but to the just Conventions
and promises which he has made; be it by Oath, or without any Oath at all, as
should a private man be; and for the same causes that a private man may be
relieved from his unjust and unreasonable promise, as for that it was so
grievous, or for that he was by deceit or fraud circumvented, or induced
thereunto by error, or force, or just fear, or by some great hurt: Even for
the same causes the Prince may be restored in that which touches the
diminishing of his Majesty: And so our Maxim rests, that the Prince is not
subject to his Laws, nor to the Laws of his Predecessors, but well to his
own just and reasonable Conventions.

The Sovereign Prince may derogate unto the Laws that he has promised and
sworn to keep, if the equity thereof cease, and that of himself, without
consent of his subjects; which his subjects cannot do among themselves, if they
be not by the Prince relieved.

The foreign Princes well advised, will never take Oath to keep the Laws of
their Predecessors, for otherwise they are not Sovereigns.

Notwithstanding all Oaths, the Prince may derogate from the Laws, or
frustrate or disanul the same, the Reason and equity of them ceasing.

There is not any bond for the Sovereign Prince to keep the Laws, more then so
far as Right and Justice requires.

Neither is it to be found that the Ancient Kings of the Hebrews took any
Oaths, no not they which were anointed by Samuel, Elias, and others.

As for General and particular, which concern the Right of men in private,
they have not used to be otherwise changed, but after General assembly of the
three estates in France; not for that it is necessary for the King to rest on
their advice, or that he may not do the contrary to that they demand, if
natural Reason and Justice so require. And in that the greatness and Majesty
of a true Sovereign Prince is to be known, when the estates of all the people
assembled together in all humility, present their requests and supplications to
their Prince, without having any Power in any thing to command, or determine,
or to give voice, but that that which it pleases the King to like or dislike,
to command or forbid, is holden for Law. Wherein they which have written of the
duty of Magistrates, have deceived themselves, in maintaining that the Power of
the people is greater then the Prince; a thing which often times causes the true
Subjects to revolt from the obedience which they owe unto their Sovereign
Prince, and ministers matter of great troubles in Commonwealths; of which
their opinion, there is neither reason nor ground.

If the King should be subject unto the assemblies and decrees of the people,
he should neither be King nor Sovereign, and the Commonwealth neither Realm
nor Monarchy; but a mere Aristocracie of many Lords in Power equal, where the
greater part commands the less; and whereon the Laws are not to be
published in the name of him that rules, but in the name and Authority of the
estates, as in an Aristocraticall Seignory; where he that is chief has no
Power, but owes obeisance to the Seignory; unto whom yet they every one of
them feign themselves to owe their Faith and obedience, which are all things so
absurd, as hard it is which is furthest from Reason.

When Charles 8, the French King, then but fourteen years old, held a
Parliament at Towrs, although the Power of the Parliament was never before nor
after so great as in those times; yet Relli then the Speaker for the People
turning himself to the King, thus begins: Most High, most Mighty, and most
Christian King; our Natural and only Lord: We poor, humble, and obedient
Subjects, etc. which are come hither by your Command, in all Humility,
Reverence, and Subjection; present our selves before you, etc. And have given
me in charge from all this Noble Assembly to declare unto You, the good will
and hearty desire they have, with a most fervent resolution, to serve, obey,
and aid You in all Your affairs, Commandments, and pleasures: All this speech
is nothing else but a Declaration of their good will toward the King, and of
their humble Obedience and Loyalty.

The like speech was used in the Parliament at Oreans to Charles 9. when he was
scarce eleven years old.

Neither are the Parliaments in Spain otherwise holden, but that even a
greater Obedience of all the people is given to the King, as is to be seen in
the Acts of the Parliament at Toledo by King Philip, 1552. when he yet was
scarce twenty five years old: The answers also of the King of Spain unto the
Requests and humble Supplications of his people, are given in these words; We
will, or else, We Decree or Ordain; yea, the Subsidies that the Subjects pay
unto the King of Spain, they call Service.

In the Parliaments of England, which have commonly been holden every third
year, the estates seem to have a great liberty, (as the Northern people almost
all breath thereafter) yet so it is, that in effect they proceed not but by way
of supplications and requests to the King. As in the Parliament holden in
October: 1566. when the States by a common Consent had resolved (as they gave the
Queen to understand) not to entreat of any thing, until She had first
appointed who should succeed Her in the Crown; She gave them no other answer,
but that they were not to make her grave before She were dead: All whose
resolutions were to no purpose without her good liking, neither did She in
that, any thing that they required.

Albeit by the sufferance of the King of England, Controversies between the
King and His people are sometimes determined by the High Court of Parliament;
yet all the estates remain in full subjection to the King, who is no way bound
to follow their advice, neither to consent to their Requests.

The estates of England are never otherwise assembled, no more then they are in
France or Spain, then by Parliament writs and express commandments
proceeding from the King: which shows very well that the estates have no
Power of themselves to Determine, Command, or Decree any thing, seeing they
cannot so much as assemble themselves, neither being assembled depart without
express Commandment from the King.

Yet this may seem one special thing, that the Laws made by the King of
England, at the request of the Estates, cannot be again repealed, but by
calling a Parliament; which is much used and done as I have understood by Mr
Dale the English Ambassador, an honorable Gentleman, and a man of good
understanding, who yet assured me the King received or rejected the Law, as
seemed best to Himself; and stuck not to dispose thereof at His Pleasure, and
contrary to the will of the Estates, as we see Hen. 8. to have always used his
Sovereign Power, and with his only word, to have disanulled the Decrees of
Parliament.

We conclude the Majesty of a Prince to be nothing altered or diminished by the
calling together or presence of the Estates: But to the contrary, His Majesty
thereby to be much the greater and the more Honorable, seeing all His people
to acknowledge Him for their Sovereign.

We see the Principal point of Sovereign Majesty and absolute Power to consist
principally in giving Laws unto the Subjects without their consent: It
behooves that the Sovereign Prince should have the Laws in his Power, to
change and amend them according as the case shall require.

In a Monarchy every one in particular must swear to the Observation of the
Laws, and their Allegiance to one Sovereign Monarch; who, next unto God, (of
whom he holds his Scepter and Power) is bound to no man: For an Oath carries
always with it Reverence unto whom, and in whose name it is made, as still
given to a Superior, and therefore the vassal gives such Oath unto his Lord,
but receives none from him again, though they be mutually bound, the one of
them to the other.

Trajan swore to keep the Laws, although he in the name of a Sovereign Prince
were exempted; but never any of the Emperors before him so swear; therefore
Pliny the younger in a Panagyricall Oration speaking of the Oath of Trojan,
gives out a great novelty, says he, and never before heard of, He swears by
whom we swear.

Of two things, the one must be, to wit, the Prince that swears to keep the
Laws of his Country, must either not have the Sovereignty, or else become a
perjured man, if he should but abrogate but one Law contrary to his Oath,
whereas it is not only ptofitable that a Prince should sometimes abrogate some
such Laws, but also necessary for him to alter or correct them, as the infinite
variety of places, times and Persons, shall require: Or if we shall say the
Prince to be still a Sovereign, and yet nevertheless with such condition as
that he can make no Law without the advice of his Council or people; he must
also be dispensed with by his subjects for the Oath which he has made for the
observation of the Laws, and the subjects again which are obliged to the
Laws, have also need to be dispensed with all by their Prince, for fear they
should be perjured: So shall it come to pass, that the Majesty of the
Commonweal enclining now to this side, now to that side; sometimes the
Prince, sometimes the People bearing sway, shall have no certainty to rest
upon, which are notable absurdities, and altogether incompatible with the
Majesty of absolute Sovereignty, and contrary both to Law and Reason: And yet
we see many men that think they see more in the matter then others, will
maintain it to be most necessary that Princes should be bound by Oath to keep
the Laws and Customs of their Countries; In which doing, they weaken and
overthrow all the Rights of Sovereign Majesty, which ought to be most Sacred
and Holy, and confound the Sovereignty of one Sovereign Monarch with an
Aristocracy or Democracie.

Publication or Approbation of Laws, in the Assembly of the Estates or
Parliament, is with us of great importance for the keeping of the Laws, not
that the Prince is bound to any such approbation, or cannot of himself make a
Law, without the consent of the Estates or people; yet it is a courteous part to
do it by the good liking of the Senate.

What if a Prince by Law, forbid to kill or steal, is he not bound to obey his
own Laws? I say, that this Law is not his, but the Law of God, whereunto all
Princes are more straightly bound then their Subjects; God takes a stricter
account of Princes then others, as Solomon a King has said, whereto agrees
Marcus Aurelius, saying, The Magistrates are Judges over private men, Princes
judge the Magistrates, and God the Princes.

It is not only a Law of Nature, but also oftentimes repeated among the Laws
of God, that we should be obedient unto the Laws of such Princes as it has
pleased God to set to Rule and Reign over us; if their Laws be not directly
repugnant unto the Laws of God, whereunto all Princes are as well bound as
their subjects: For as the Vassal owes his Oath of fidelity unto his Lord,
toward, and against all men, except his Sovereign Prince: So the subject owes
his Obedience to his Sovereign Prince, toward, and against all, the Majesty of
God excepted, who is the absolute Sovereign of all the Princes in the world.

To confound the state of Monarchy, with the Popular or Aristocraticall estate,
is a thing impossible, and in effect incompatible, and such as cannot be
imagined: For Sovereignty being of it self indivisible, how can it at one and
the same time be divided betwixt one Prince, the Nobility, and the people in
common? The first mark of Sovereign Majesty is, to be of Power to give Laws,
and to command over them unto the subjects; and who should those subjects be
that should yield their obedience to the Law, if they should have also Power to
make the Laws? who should he be that could give the Law, being himself
constrained to receive it of them, unto whom he himself gave it? so that of
necessity we must conclude, that as no one in particular has the Power to make
the Law in such a state, that there the state must needs be popular.

Never any Commonwealth has been made of an Aristocracy and Popular Estate,
much less of the three Estates of a Commonwealth.

Such States wherein the Right of Sovereignty are divided, are not rightly to
be called Commonweals, but rather the corruption of Commonweals; as
Herodotus has most briefly, but truly written.

Commonweals which change their State, the Sovereign Right and Power of them
being divided, find no rest from Civil wars.

If the Prince be an absolute Sovereign, as are the true Monarchs of France, of
Spain, of England, Scotland, Turkey, Muscovy, Tartary, Persia, Aethiopia,
India, and almost of all the Kingdoms of Africa and Asia; where the Kings
themselves have the Sovereignty without all doubt or question, not divided with
their subjects: In this case it is not lawful for any one of the subjects in
particular, or all of them in general, to attempt any thing either by way of
fact or of justice, against the Honor, Life, or Dignity of the Sovereign;
albeit he had committed all the wickedness, impiety, and cruelty that could be
spoke. For as to proceed against him by way of justice, the subject has not
such jurisdiction over his Sovereign Prince, of whom depends all Power to
Command, and who may not only revoke all the Power of his Magistrates; but
even in whose presence the Power of all Magistrates, Corporations, Estates and
Communities cease.

Now if it be not lawful for the Subject by the way of justice to proceed
against a King, how should it then be lawful to proceed against him by way of
fact or Force? for question is not here what men are able to do by strength and
Force, but what they ought of Right to do; as not whether the subject have
power and strength, but whether they have lawful power to condemn their
Sovereign Prince.

The subject is not only guilty of Treason in the highest Degree who has
slain his Sovereign Prince, but even he also which has attempted the same, who
has given Counsel or consent thereto; yea, if he have concealed the same, or
but so much as thought it: Which fact the Laws have in such detestation, as
that when a man guilty of any offense or Crime, dies before he be condemned
thereof, he is deemed to have dyed in whole and perfect Estate, except he have
conspired against the Life and Dignity of his Sovereign Prince: This only
thing they have thought to be such, as that for which he may worthily seem to
have been now already judged and condemned, yea even before he was thereof
accused. And albeit the Laws inflict no punishment upon the evil thoughts of
men, but on those only which by word or deed break out into some Enormity; yet
if any man shall so much as conceit a thought for the Violating of the Person
of his Sovereign Prince, although he have attempted nothing, they have yet
judged this same thought worthy of death; notwithstanding what repentance
soever he have had thereof.

Lest any men should think [Kings or Princes] themselves to have been the
Authors of these Laws, so the more straightly to provide for their own safety
and Honor, let us see the Laws and examples of holy Scripture.

Nabuchodonosor King of Assyria, with fire and sword destroyed all the Country
of Palestina, besieged Jerusalem, took it, robbed and rased it down to the
ground, burns the Temple, and defiles the Sanctuary of God, slew the King,
with the greatest part of the people, carrying away the rest into Captivity
into Babylon, caused the image of himself made in gold to be set up in public
place, commanding all men to adore and worship the same upon pain of being
burnt alive, and caused them that refused so to do, to be cast into a burning
Furnace. And yet for all that, the holy Prophets [ Baruch 1. Jeremy 29.]
directing their letters unto their brethren the Jews, then in Captivity in
Babylon, will them to pray unto God for the good and happy life of
Nabuchodonosor and his children, and that they might so long Rule and Reign
over them as the Heavens should endure: Yea even God Himself doubted not to
call Nabuchodonosor his servant, saying, that he would make him the most Mighty
Prince of the world, and yet was there never a more detestable Tyrant then he;
who not contended to be himself worshipped, but caused his Image also to be
adored, and that upon pain of being burnt quick.

We have another rare example of Saul, who possessed with an evil Spirit,
caused the Priests of the Lord to be without just cause sl^ine, for that one of
them had received David flying from him, and did what in his power was to kill
or cause to be killed the same David, a most innocent Prince; by whom he had
got so many victories, at which time he fell twice himself into David's hands,
who blamed of his Soldiers for that he would not suffer his so mortal Enemy
then in his power to be slain; being in assured hope to have enjoyed the
Kingdom after his death, he detested their Counsel, saying, God forbid that I
should suffer the Person of a King, the Lords Anointed to be violated. Yea, he
himself defended the same King persecuting of him, whenas he commanded the
Soldiers of his guard overcome by wine and sleep to be wakened.

And at such time as Saul was slain, and that a Soldier thinking to do David
a pleasure, presented him with Readiness head, David caused the same Soldier to
be slain which had brought him the head, saying, Go thou wicked, how durst
thou lay thy impure hands upon the Lords Anointed? thou shall surely die
therefore.

And afterward, without all dissimulation mourned himself for the dead King:
All which is worth good consideration, for David was by Saul prosecuted to
death, and yet wanted not Power to have revenged himself, being become
stronger then the King; besides, he was the chosen of God, and anointed by
Samuel to be King, and had married the Kings Daughter: And yet for all that, he
abhorred to take upon him the title of a King; and much more to attempt any
thing against the Life or Honor of Saul, or to Rebel against him; but chose
rather to banish himself out of the Realm, then in any sort so seek the Kings
destruction.

We doubt not, but David a King and a Prophet, led by the Spirit of God, had
always before his eyes the Law of God, Ex. 22.28. Thou shall not speak evil
of thy Prince, nor detract the Magistrate; neither is there any thing more
Common in Holy Scripture, then the forbidding not only to kill or attempt the
Life or Honor of a Prince, but even for the very Magistrates, although says
the Scripture, they be wicked and naught.

The Protestant Princes of Germany, before they entered into Arms against Charles
the Emperor, demanded of Martin Luther if it were lawful for them so to do or
not; who frankly told them, that it were not Lawful whatsoever Tyranny or
impiety were pretended, yet was he not therein by them believed; so thereof
ensued a deadly and most lamentable war, the end whereof was most miserable;
drawing with it, the Ruin of many great and noble houses of Germany, with
exceeding slaughter of the Subjects.

The Prince, whom you may justly call the Father of the Country, ought to be to
every man dearer and more Reverend then any Father, as one Ordained and sent
unto us by God. The subject is never to be suffered to attempt any thing
against the Prince, how naughty and cruel soever he be; lawful it is, not to
obey him in things contrary to the Laws of God, to fly and hide our selves
from him, but yet to suffer stripes, yea, and death also, rather then to
attempt any thing against his life and Honor. O how many Tyrants should there
be, if it should be Lawful for subjects to kill Tyrants? How many good and
innocent Princes should as Tyrants perish by the Conspiracy of their subjects
against them? he that should of his subjects but exact subsidies, should be
then, as the vulgar people esteem him, a Tyrant: He that should rule and
command contrary to the good liking of the people, should be a Tyrant: He that
should keep strong guards and Garrisons for the safety of his Person, should be
a Tyrant: He that should put to death Traitors and Conspirators against his
State, should be also counted a Tyrant. How should good Princes be assured of
their lives, if under color of Tyranny they might be slain by their subjects,
by whom they ought to be defended?

In a well ordered State, the Sovereign Power must remain in one only,
without communicating any part thereof unto the State, (for in that case it
should be a popular Government, and no Monarchy) wise Politicians,
Philosophers, Divines, and Historiographers, have highly commended a Monarchy
above all other Commonweals, it is not to please the Prince, that they hold
this opinion; but for the safety and happiness of the subjects. And
contrariwise, when as they shall limit and restrain the Sovereign Power of a
Monarch, to subject him to the general Estates, or to the Council; the
Sovereignty has no firm Foundation, but they frame a popular confusion, or a
miserable Anarchy, which is the Plague of all Estates and Commonweals: The
which must be duly considered, not giving credit to their goodly discourses,
which persuade subjects that it is necessary to subject Monarchs, and to
prescribe their Prince a Law; for that is not only the Ruin of the Monarch,
but also of the subjects. It is yet more strange that many hold opinion, that
the Prince is subject to his Laws, that is to say, subject to his will, whereon
the Laws which he has made depend, a thing unpossible in Nature. And under
this color, and ill digested opinion, they make a mixture and confusion of
Civil Laws, with the Laws of Nature and of Cod.

A pure absolute Monarchy is the surest Commonweal, and without Comparison,
the best of all. Wherein many are abused, which maintain that an Optimacy is
the best kind of Government, for that many Commanders have more Judgment,
Wisdom, and Council then one alone. But there is a great difference betwixt
Council and Commandment.

The Council of many wise men, may be better then of one; but to Resolve,
Determine, and to Command, one will always perform it better then many: He
which has advisedly digested all their opinions, will soon resolve without
contention; the which many cannot easily perform: it is necessary to have a
Sovereign Prince, which may have Power to Resolve and Determine of the opinions
of his Council.

The End.

