A FIGHT IN THE NORTH At the Dales in Richmondshire; BETWIXT The Forces of His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax (under command of Major General Lambert) and the
Clubmen and Inhabitants of the said County.

With the manner of the Fight, and how the said Forces were put to retreat, and
forced to betake themselves to Churches for safeguard. With the proceedings of
the Major General thereupon.

LONDON: Printed for R. Woodas, Anno Dom. 1647.

A Great FIGHT IN THE NORTH Betwixt the Forces of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, under command of Major Genesis Lambert, and the inhabitants of
Richmondshire, in the Dales.
UPon Monday we received intelligence from the North, of a late Fight betwixt
the Forces under command of Major Genesis Lambert, and the Inhabitants of
Richmondshire, the occasion and reason whereof, I shall here impart, viz. Major
General Lambert, and and the rest of the Officers of the Northern
association, having called a Council of war at Wakefield, who after some
consultation and debate, touching the safety and preservation of those parts,
and to ease the Country of their heavy oppressures, by reason of the long and
tedious quartering of the Soldiery, resolved (with one unanimous consent) to
remove more Northwards, with their army, and thereupon quarters were designed
for every respective Regiment, Col. Thornton with his Regiment being appointed
to quarter in Richmondshire, where they met with the greatest opposition, for
the Inhabitants thereof having notice of their design, immediately armed
themselves, and in the Dales resolved to meet them, where Major Copperthwait
resolving to try their courage, advanced into the said Dales with about two
hundred Foot, but were resisted in a very resolute manner by many hundred of
the inhabitants, insomuch, that there began a hot engagement, and many fierce
and vehement blows were exchanged, for the space of two hours, but at the
last our men were first to retreat, and to betake themselves to a Church for
safeguard: after which, another party rose against Captain Dinelies Company,
and endeavored to keep them out of South Dale, which accordingly they did; but
before they lost ground they cooled the fiery spirits of some of the Dalonians,
and had they not been over-powred, they had put them to the retreat, and caused
them to have sang the sad Dittie of the Dorsetshire Clubmen. But at the last,
the said Captain were also forced to change ground, and retreated also to a
place of safety, who immediately dispatched a Messenger to the Major-Generall
for relief; the Major General has used all mean to persuade them to it, but
if that prevail not, some other course will be taken. There was not much hurt
done in either of these Conflicts, only two or three of our men bruised with
stones, and other weapons; but it is supposed many of them are fore hurt. What
the issue of this will be, it cannot as yet be understood, only this I can
assure you, they are far more suitable to the disposirion of the Soldiery then
formerly.

By Letter from the North this day came thus. Major General Lambert has
written several times to the Lord Mayor of York for the admitting of Major
Ca^ther Governor of Cliffords Tower and his Company (or 60 thereof) to be
there, but the Major of York seems unwilling, stauding uyon other authority.
Yesterday several rules and Orders agreed upon at a Council of War at
Wakefield for equallity of quartering and regulating the Army into Quarters,
which the Major General thought not sit to put in execution wit out first
acquainting the Committee theretwith, such fatenesse and civility, and
moderation does he use, moving equallity to all according to justice. and
endeavoring (how the sword is sheathed) to win and overcome by love, he
endeavored to reencise diffierences betwixt party and party. The Clargy are
vero importunate with him for the assistance of Soldiers to give them
possession of Tithes, but he rather takes tee trauble upon him self by fair
means to work Reconciliation, A man so completely composed for such an
employment, (Rebus sic stantibus) could not have been pitched upon befides.

The two Northumberland Troops onder Major Shafto and Caytain Shafto that
engaged with their Officers for Ireland, pretending they have bin wronged by
theie Officers in paint of yay relinquisht their service and left their
Officers, they are mow appointed to quarter in Forthumberland, and with their
modey they stould hrve had at their taansportation, they are stortly to be
disbanded, the Major General I will go in person into that county to disband
them Nevertheless, Major Shesfto resolves to the s^rvice, and about eighteen
of his troop remain with him, and within six weeks he intends to complete a
full troop, quarters are appointed for them, and all encouragement given for
that service.

A Message from the Lord Mayer of York, to the General, concerning the present
affairs of the North.
THe Right Honorable the Lord Major of York having received a Letter from
Major Genesis Lambert, for making Major Carter Governor of Cliffords tower, his
Lordship returned this answer, That he desired there might be a fair
correspondancy and right understanding, concerning the resigning up of
Cliffords tower, to the power and protection of the said Major, and therefore
invited the Major General to a Dinner; But his answer was, to the first he
desired the same, and did nothing therein but in prosecution of his duty and
trust. To the second, That he would wait on his Lordship in the morning, but
the great affairs he had in hand for the public service would not permit him
to accept it.

The said Major General deports himself very excellently in the trust reposed
in him, and gains the love of all people wheresoever he goes, keeping his
Soldiery in excellent order and Discipline.

FINIS.

