William Fenner, Rector of Rochford, B: D: sometimes fellow of Pembrooke Hall,
Aetatis, 45 Ao, 1649.
W: Hollar fec:
John Stafford excudit.
portrait of William Fenner

THE SACRIFICE OF THE FAITHFUL.

OR, A TREATISE showing the nature, property, and efficacy of Zealous Prayer;
together with some Motives to Prayer, and Helps against discouragements in
Prayer.

To which is added seven profitable Sermons.
1. The misery of the Creature by the sin of man, on Romans 8. 22. 2. The
Christians imitation of Christ, on 1 Ioh. 2. 6. 3. The enmity of the wicked to
the light of the Gospel, on John 3. 20 4. Gods impartiality, on Esaias 42. 24. 5.
The great Dignity of the Saints, on Heb. 11. 28. 6. The time of Gods grace is
limited, on Genesis 6. 3. 7. A Sermon for spiritual Mortification, on Col. 3. 5.
By William Fenner, Minister of the Gospel Fellow of Pembrok Hall in Cambridge,
and Lecturer of Rochford in Essex.

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his House over
against Brides Church in Fleet Street, 1649.

To the Christian Reader.
HAving been informed upon very good grounds, that the former Sermons of Mr
William Fenner, have found good acceptance, both in regard of the worthiness
of the Author, and also in regard of the usefulness of the Sermons; I could
not but give my approbation to these ensuing Sermons of the same Author, and
desire that they may find the like acceptance with all Godly wise Christians,
and that they may become profitable to the Church of God.

Imprimatur,

EDM. CALAMY.

The CONTENTS of the first Treatise on Lament. 3. 5. 7.
THE opening of the words in which are three properties of effectual Prayer.
page 1. 1. The unsatiablenesse of it till it be heard. 2. The sensiblenesse of
it whether it be heard or no. 3. The supply it has against danger, and
discouragement. p. 2. 1. Doct: An effectual prayer is an unsatiable prayer. p.
3. Quest. Must a man always pray? Ans. A man must give over the act of prayer
for other duties, but he must never give over the suit of Prayer. p. 5. Rules
to know whether our Prayers be unsatiable or no. 1. It is an earnest begging
Prayer. p. 6. 2. It is constant Prayer. p. 8. A godly man's Prayer is not out of
his heart, till the grace he prayed for be in. p. 9. 3. It is a Prayer that is
ever a beginning. ib. 4. It is a proceeding Prayer, it winds up the heart
higher, and higher. ibid. 5. It is a Prayer that purifieth the heart. p. 10. It
is more and more fervent. p. 11. And more and more frequent. p. 12. It will
take time from lawful recreations, and from the lawful duties of our calling.
p. 13. And it will add^ humiliation and fasting to Prayer. p. 14. Use. To
condemn those who pray for grace, and yet sit down before grace is obtained.
p. 15. Such Prayers are. 1. Endless. p. 16. 2. Fruitless. p. 17. 2. Doct: A
godly soul is sensible of Gods hearing or not hearing his Prayer. p. 19.
Quest: How can the soul know whether it speed in Prayer or no? Answ. 1. When
God gives a soul further and further ability to pray, it is a sign that God
hears it. p. 20. But if the soul have no heart to continue its suit, it is a
sign that God never means to hear that man's Prayer. p. 21. 2. The
preparedness of the heart to Prayer, is a sign that God means to hear. p.
21. 3. Gods gracious look is a sign that he will hear; for sometimes God
answers his people by a cast of his countenance. p. 22. 4. The conscience of a
man will answer him, whether God hears his Prayer or no. p. 26. But a man's
conscience may be misinformed. p. 27. A wicked man may have a truce, though no
true peace in his conscience. p. 28. 5. The getting of the grace that a man
prays for, is a sign that God hears his Prayer. p. 29. But God may give many
temporal blessings, and common graces, yet not inlove, but in wrath. ibid. 6.
If a man have Faith given him to believe, it is a sign that God hears him. p.
30. Good works are good signs of Faith, but they are but rotten grounds of
Faith. p. 31. Object: Every Promise runs with a condition. ibid. Ans. 1. The
Promise is the ground of Faith, and the way to get the Condition. p. 32. 2.
Faith is the enabling cause to keep the Condition. p. 33. Two things do much
hurt in Prayer. 1. Groundless encouragement. 2. Needless discouragement. p.
36. 3. Doct. God would not have any Christian soul to be discouraged in
Prayer. p. 39. A definition of discouragement. ibid. 4. Reasons. 1. Because
discouragement hinders the soul in prayer. p. 42. 2. Discouragement takes away
the strength of the soul in Prayer. p. 43. 3. If we have fearful
apprehensions of our sins, so as to think they will never be forgiven, we can
never pray aright. p. 45. 4. If we have any secret despair, we can never pray
to purpose. p. 46. There is a double desperation. 1. Of infirmity, which draws
the soul from God. 2. Of extremity, which puts life into a man's Prayers and
endeavors p. 47. A man never prays well till he feels himself undone. p.
49. We should take heed of discouragements; for 1. Discouragements breed
melancholinesse in the soul. p. 53. 2. They breed hard thoughts of God. p. 54.
3. They will cause a man to think that God hates him. p. 56. 4. They will
bring a man to despair. p. 57. Ministers should not preach the pure Law
without the Gospel. p. 58. Secret discouragements in the heart 1. They take
away the Spirit in the use of the means. p. 62. 2. They drive us from the use
of means. p. 63. 3. They make a man continually to pore on his sins, so as he
shall never be able to get out of them. p. 64. 4. They breed nothing but
sorrow. p. 66. 5. They leave the soul in a maze, that it knows not whether to
turn it self. p. 67. 6. They whisper into a man a sentence of Death, and an
impossibility of escaping. p. 68. The conclusion of the whole. p. 69.
The Contents of that Sermon R O M. 8. 22.
Every creature has a threefold goodness in it 1. A goodness of end. p. 70.
2. A goodness of nature. p. 71. 3. A goodness of use. ibid. There be four
evils under which every Creature groaneth. p. 73. 1. The continual labor that
the creature is put unto. ibid. 2. The creature sometimes partakes of the
plagues of the ungodly. ib. 3. The Creature has an instinctive fellowfeeleing
of man's wretchedness. p. 74. 4. Because they are rent and torn from their
proper Masters. ibid. Doct. Every Creature groaneth under the slavery of sin.
p. 75. Not only under the slavery of sinful men, but so far as they minister
to the flesh of the Saints, they groan under them. ibid. Object. Did ever any
man hear any unreasonable creature groan under sin? Answ. It is spoken
Hyperbolically, to declare the great misery the creatures are into serve
sinful man. p. 76. 2. Analogically in regard of a natural instinct of blind
reason, that is in all the creatures. ibid. 3. It is spoken by way of
supposition, if they had reason they would groan. p. 77. 4. Intelligently,
because a man cannot wrong the creature, but he wrongs God in the creature. p.
78. 5. Specifically, because the Godly come before God in the behalf of all
the creatures, and mourn for the abuse of the creatures. p. 79. Four Reasons
why the creatures groan. 1. Because they are distracted in their service. p.
80. 2. Because of the unprofitablenesse of their service. p. 82. 3. Because of
the uncessantnesse of their service. p. 83. 4. Because of that misery and woe
the creatures lie under. p. 84. Every creature has. 1. A specificall end. p.
85. 2. An ultimate end. ibid. A wicked man has no true right unto the
creature. p. 86. But he has 1. A civil right. ibid. 2. A providentiall right.
ibid. 3. A vindicative right. p. 87. 4. A Creatures right, as he is a creature.
ib. But he has no filial right, no son-like right in Christ. p. 89. Use. To
show that wicked men have little cause to be merry at any time, because there
is nothing near them, but groaneth under them. p. 90. All creatures groan to
God for vengeance to be powered upon the wicked. p. 92. And these groans are 1.
Upbraiding groans. p. 95. 2. Witnessing groans. p. 96. 3. Accusing groans.
p. 100. 4. Judging and condemning groans. ibid. Use. For exhortation. 1. To
take heed how we do abuse the Creatures of God. p. 101. 2. Take heed of
sinning against God by the Creatures. ibid. 3. Take heed of setting thy heart
upon the Creature. p. 102. 4. Use all the Creatures in humility and
thankfulness. p. 102. 5. Use the Creatures as so many Ladders to help thee to
climb up toward Heaven. p. 103.
The Contents of that Sermon 1 JOHN. 2. 6.
THE opening of the words in four particulars. p. 108. Doct. A true Christian
walks as Christ walked. p. 109. A man must first be in Christ, before he can
walk as Christ walked. p. 110. Object. Can any man walk as Christ walked? p.
111. Answ. None can walk as Christ walked in regard of equality; but in regard
of similitude they may. p. 111. The life of Christ should be the Example of our
life. p. 112. Christ came into the World to redeem us for our justification,
and to be an example of life unto us for our sanctification. p. 114. This
Question answered. viz. What it is to walk as Christ walked. p. 116. Four
Reasons of the point. 1. Because as Christ came into the World to justify the
ungodly, so he came to conform them to his image. p. 117. 2. Because in vain
we are called Christians, if we be not imitators of Christ, and live as he
lived. p. 119. 3. Because all that are in Christ, are Members of his body,
therefore they must have the same life, and be quickened by the same Spirit. p.
121. 4. Because of that near relation that is betwixt Christ and every one of
his Members. p. 123. 1. Use. To show that all men that live not the life of
Christ, do blaspheme the name of Christ. p. 127. Of all sins under Heaven,
God cannot endure the sins of them that take the name of Christ upon them. p.
198. Doct: Every Minister is bound to preach home to men in particulars. p.
132. 3. Reas. 1. Particulars are most operative. p. 133. 2. Particulars are
most distinct, and most powerful. p. 135. 3. Particulars are most sensible. p.
137. Doct: Every Minister is bound to preach so, as to make a difference
betwixt the precious and the vile. p. 138. Reas. 1. Because, otherwise a
Minister prophanes the holy things of God. p. 139. 2. Otherwise he cannot be
the Minister of Christ. p. 141. 3. Otherwise he is like to do no good by his
Ministry. ibid.
The Contents of that Sermon on JOHN 3. 20.
THE Context opened in four particulars. 1. What man's natural estate, and
condition is without Christ. p. 145. 2. Gods gracious provision for man's
salvation. p. 146. 3. The condition required, viz. Faith. ibid. 4. The
reprobation of the World if they do not believe. ibid. But Christ is neither
the efficient, nor deficient cause thereof. ibid. But the cause of their
damnation is from themselves proved 1 By their own conscience. p. 147. 2 By
experience. p. 148. 3. By Reason. p. 149. In the words are two parts. 1. The
wickeds rejection of the word of grace. ibid. 2. The cause of that rejection.
ib. viz. 1. First, from the qualification of their persons. 2. From the
disposition of their nature. ib. Doct: A wicked man hates the word of Gods
grace, yea grace it self. p. 150. This hatred is 1. An actual hatred. ibid.
2. It is a passion of the heart. p. 151. 3. It causes the heart to rise up
against an union with the word. p. 153. This union of the word is set in
opposition 1. To general preaching. p. 154. 2. To merciful preaching. p. 155.
3. To now and then preaching. p. 156. to p. 160. If the World do not hate a
righteous man, it is either 1. Because he is a great man. p. 160. 2. Because he
is a man of admirable wit, and knowledge. i^id* 3. Or because God gives him
favor in the eyes of the World. ib. 4. This hatred causes the heart to ris e
against that which is repugnant to its lusts. p. 162. A wicked man may love 3
kinds of preaching. 1. Eloquent preaching, that savours more of humanity then
of Divinity. ib. 2. Impertinent preaching. p. 163. 3. Now and then some
preaching, to satisfy the cravings of his conscience. p. 164. Reas: 1. A
wicked man hates the word, because he hates all truth, even the very being of
the word. p. 165. 2. Because he hates the very nature of the word. p. 167. 3.
Because he cannot endure the knowledge of the word. p. 169. All natural men
hate the word. 1. Because no entreaties, no beseeches can possibly reconcile
them. p. 171. 2. Because neither money, nor price can make them friends. p. 175.
3. Because all the love in the World cannot unite them together. p. 176. 4.
Because neither the love of God, nor the blood of Christ will soder them
together. p. 177. Every natural man had rather be damned then leave his
sins, rather go to Hell then be a new creature. p. 178.
The contents of that Sermon on ESAIAS. 42. 24.
THE words contain five things. 1. The Author of the destruction. p. 185. 2.
The causes of it. ibid. 3. The judgment it self. p. 186. 4. The people on
whom it was inflicted. ibid. 5. The effects of it. p. 187. 1. Doct. God is the
Author of all judgment that befalls a Nation. ibid. 1. Use For comfort to Gods
children, seeing God is the Orderer of all events. p. 119. 2. Use For terror
to the wicked that God whom they hate shall be their judge. p. 190. 3. Use. To
learn in all calamities to look up unto God. p. 191. 2. Doct. Sin and
disobedience against the Law of God, is that which brings down punishments,
and judgments, upon a Nation, Church, or People. ibid. Use. 1. To discover the
weakness of our Land, in what a poor condition it is by reason of sin. p.
193. 2. To show who be the greatest Traitors to a Kingdom. p. 194. 3. To teach
all of us to set hand and heart, Prayers and tears a work against sin. p.
195. Especially it concerns those that are in places of Authority. p. 197. 3.
Doct. The Lord often times brings fearful, and unavoydable judgments, and
punishments, upon his own professing people. p. 200. Four signs of Judgment
a coming. 1. When the Ministers of God with one voice, foretell judgments to
come. p. 202. 2. When sins of all sorts do abound. ib. 3. When the Devil
and wicked men cast in bones of dissension. p. 203. 4. When all men's hearts
begin to fail. p. 204 Three Directions, what is to be done in such times. 1.
Let us shake off the love of all things here below. p. 206. 2. Let us lay our
heads upon the block, and be willing that God should do what he will with us.
p. 208. 3. Let us pray and cry mightily to God, before we dye, even all the
time we have to live, for mercy, peace, and truth. ibid. The Church of England
like the ship of Jonah. p. 209. The Authors Admonition to the People. ib. and
p. 210. etc. More then ordinary Faith requisite for these times of danger. p.
211. 212. etc.
A DISCOURSE OF the nature of prevalent Prayer, together with some helps
against discouragements in Prayer.
LAMENT. 3. VER. 57. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee,
thou said fear not.
THis Book of the Lamentations does plainly show what miseries and distresses
sin is the cause of. Now this people of the Jews, because of their
Idolatries, their contempt of Gods Ordinances, their slighting and misusing the
Prophets, etc. Their Cities were taken, the Temple burned, their liberties
confiscated, themselves banished out of their country, and deprived of the
ordinances of their God, and the signs of his presence; before they were
rebellious: but now they sought God a long time; they prayed, but God would not
hear, In so much that many poor souls amongst them were discouraged, and
almost ready to despair; That had not the Lord put in some incklings of hope,
they had utterly fainted. Now whilst these poor souls were praying and
crying, and groaning, and now ready to give over for discouragement that God
will not hear them, presently the Lord flings in comfort, and beckens to their
hearts not to be discouraged, but to pray on and fear not. Thou drewest near
in the day that I called upon thee, thou said fear not; the words contain
in them three properties of effectual prayer.

First, the unsatiablenesse of it till it be

Secondly, the sensiblenesse of it whether

Thirdly, the supplies it has from

First the unsatiablenesse of it* All the thousands of supplications and
prayers as one suite; never had they done their prayers till God did hear them.

Secondly the sensiblenesse of it, where

Thirdly, the supplies it has against

That an effectual prayer is an unsatiable prayer, A man that prays
effectually, sets down this in himself as his first conclusion never to cease,
nor to give over praying till he speed: This is the first and prime thing that
a godly heart looks at, as David in his prayers: He begins in this manner,
Hear my cry O God, attend unto my prayer. Psalm. 61. 1. So, Give ear unto my
prayer O God, and hide not thy self from my supplications, Psalm. 55. 1. Hear
my voice O God in my prayer, Psalm. 64. 1. As if he should say, Lord, now I come
to call upon thee: now that I come to thee, to beg these and these graces
that my soul wants, I beseech thee to hear me: for I am resolved never to
give over my suit, never to give thee rest, but for to continue my prayers and
supplications, till thou give a gracious answer to my soul and hear me.

This is the first and prime thing that the soul looks after, it being the
very end of prayer to be heard; it is not with prayer as with Oratory; the end
of oratory is not to persuade, but to speak perswasively; for a man may use
all the persuasions that may be, and use all the persuasive arguments that the
wit of man can invent, and speak as cuttingly, as perswasively as may be, and
yet the heart may be so intractable as not to be persuaded; it is not so with
prayer.

The end of prayer is to prevail with God. Beloved, there is difference
between the end and office of prayer; the office of prayer is to pray, the end
of prayer is to prevail. There is many a man that does the office of prayer,
and yet never gets the end of prayer. A man has never gotten the end of his
prayers, till he has gotten that he prayed for. It is not with prayer as with
a Physician, that may give the best physic under heaven, and yet the Patient
may die under his hands; and therefore one gives counsel that a Physician
never meddle with a desperate man.

But if the soul be an effectual suitor with God, it can never fail of its
suite, because it is an unsatiable Suitor, that never leaves his prayer till it
terminates the end of it. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me
out of his holy hill. Selah. Jerome translates it for ever. Psalm. 3. 4. never
does a child of God pray, but he prays so as that his prayer and Gods ear
may be joined together; I cried unto the Lord, and the Lord heard me: This also
shows how the Prophet cried and prayed, namely so as his crying and Gods
hearing were coupled together. But some may object, How can a

A man must give over the words and and begs, but none hears him; now he being
a poor man, has something else to do, and therefore he sits down or stands
and knits or patches, and then he begs or knocks, and then to his work again;
though he do not always continue knocking or begging, yet he always continues
his suite: O that my suite might be granted me, or that I might have an alms
here; so when the soul is begging of any grace, though it does not always
continue the words of prayer, yet it always continues the suite of prayer.
David he would dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. Psalm. 23. 6. A wicked
man it may be will turn into Gods house and say a prayer, etc. but the Prophet
would (and so all godly men must) dwell there for ever; his soul lies always
at the throne of grace begging for grace. A wicked man he prays as the cock
croweth; the cock crows and cease, and crows again and cease again; and
thinks not of crowing til he crows again: so a wicked man prays and cease,
prays and cease again; his mind is never busied to think whether his
prayers speed or no; he thinks it is good Religion for him to pray, and
therefore he takes that for granted that his prayers speed, though in very
deed God never hears his prayers, nor no more respects it, then he respects
the lowing of Oxen, or the gruntling of hoggs: he is found in his prayers as
the wild Ass in her months: Jer. 2. The wild Ass in ^egard of her
swiftness cannot be taken but in her months, she has a sleepy month, and all
that while she is so sleepy and dumpish that any man may take her; in her
months you shall find her; so a wicked man has his prayer months, his prayer
fits: it may be in the morning, or in the evening, or day of his affliction and
misery you shall have him at his prayers, at his prayer fits then you shall
find him at it, but otherwise his mind is about other matters. But the child
of God what ever he ailes, he goes with his petition presently to the throne of
grace, and there he never removes till he has it granted him, as here we see
the prayers of the Church consisting of many years, yet are counted but one
suite; try therefore and examine whether thy prayers be unsatiable prayers yea
or no; and for help herein take these marks; first if thy prayers be
unsatiable man eats as if he had never eat before, so the unsatiable soul
prays as if he had never prayed before, till he has obtained that he has
prayed for; but a wicked man he prays not thus. Job speaking of carnal
professors, Job 27. 10. Will he call upon God at all times? see thou a wicked
man go to a good duty, go to prayer, do you think that he will hold out always?
he will never do it; for a wicked man he reasons with himself, I have called
upon God thus and thus long, I hope I need not pray any more for this thing,
and so he gives over.

But a godly man he will be always calling upon God. Beloved, there is a
beginning to an action, and a beginning of an action; thou never beginnest to
lift up a weight till thou stirrest it from ground; indeed thou may begin
toward the action by pulling at it, by reaching at it; but thou never
beginnest the lifting up of the weight til thou stir it from its place: thou
may give a pull at prayer, and ^ugge at a grace, but thou have not so much as
begun that duty, till thou see God begin to hear thee, till thou see the
grace a coming; therefore the Prophet David when he prayed and had not that he
prayed for, his prayers returned into his own bosom, Psalm. 35. 13. there to
lie to be a continual suite unto God. A wicked man prays, and he leaves his
prayer behind him in his pew, or in his hal, or chamber; but a godly man prays
and his prayer is in his heart, his prayer is not out til the grace be in.

Secondly an unsatiable prayer, it is evermore a proceeding prayer; you would
think that these are two contraries and one opposite to the other, but they are
not, only they are two several things: as it is ever a beginning prayer,
because in his own thoughts he reckons or thinks that he has nothing till he
speedes; so the soul that is unsatiable in prayer, he proceeds, he gets near
to God, he gains something, he winds up his heart higher, or something or other
he gets: As a child that sees the mother have an apple in her hand, and it
would feign have it, it will come and pull at the mothers hand for it: now she
lets go one finger and yet she holds it, and then he pulls again, and then she
lets go another finger and yet she keeps it, and then the child pulls again,
and will never leave pulling and crying till it has got it from his mother: So
a child of God seeing all graces to be in God, he draws near to the throne of
grace begging for it, and by his earnest and faithful prayers, he opens the
hands of God to him: God dealing as parents to their children, holds them off
for a while, not that he is unwilling to give, but to make them more earnest
with God: to draw them the nearer to himself; a wicked man prays and his
prayers tumble down upon him again; and his heart is as dead as ever it was
before, as sensual as ever, as carnal and earthly as ever, as hard, as
impenitent and secure as ever.

A godly man when he prays, though he have not gotten the thing total that he
desired, yet he is nearer God then he was before; his heart grows every day
better then other by his prayers; he obtaines still something, as the Prophet
Hoseah speaks of knowledge Hos. 6. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to
know the Lord: so I may say of prayer, and of al other good duties, then we
pray if we proceed on-wards in prayer.

A man may know and know, and yet never know the Lord, till he go on in
knowledge; so a man may pray and pray, yet if he go not on-wards in his
prayers, his prayers are nothing. A godly man prays as a builder builds; now a
builder he first lays a foundation, and because he cannot finish in one day,
he comes the second day, and finds the frame standing that he made the first
day, and then he adds a second days work, and then he comes a third day and
finds his two former days work standing; then he proceeds to a third days
work, and makes walls to it, and so he goes on till his building be finished.
So prayer it is the building of the soul till it reach up to heaven; therefore
a godly heart prays and reaches higher and higher in prayer, till at last his
prayers reach up to God.

It is a sign of a wicked man to pray and to let his prayers fall down again
upon him. And here I appeal to the consciences of wicked men, if it be not so
with them; they pray and pray, but their hearts are as dead and deceitful, as
proud and vain, as ignorant, blockish and rebellious, as if they had never
prayed.

Thirdly, it is more and more a fervent

As a man in winding up of a bucket, if two or three windings will not fetch it
up, he will wind it up higher and higher, till it comes up; for if he should
only wind up once or twice and no more, but hold it just at the same pin, the
bucket would never come up; So if a man prays and prays, and winds not up
his heart higher, but holds it just at the same pegge it was, prays in the
same fashion he did, grace will never come up. Mark then how thou prayest,
examine thy heart; do thou pray to day as yesterday, with no more zeal, nor
feeling affection, nor sencible desire? thou praiest not unsatiably.

No, thou restrainest thy praying from growing, an excellent description of an
hypocrite, Job 14. 4. though falsely applied to Job. Thou restrainest prayer
before God; in some translations it is Thou keep thy prayers from growing,
thou restrainest thy prayers as a dwarffe is restrained from growing, so thou
restrainest thy prayers from being more and more earnest and effectual and
fervent, unsatiable prayer is growing in zeal and affection.

Fourthly it is a more and more frequent he will pray three times a day. Psalm.
55. 17. and if that will not prevail, he will pray seven times a day. Psalm.
119. 164. and when that is not enough, he will be even ever a praying, hardly
broken off day or night. Psalm. 88. 1. he cares not how often he prays; it may
be that thou have been a suitor for strength and grace against corruptions, and
have put up many prayers to the same purpose: If now thou stickest at any
prayers, thy prayers are not unsatiable; an unsatiable soul never rests,
though it have made ten thousand prayers, till it have gotten the grace; it is
so with other things, and therefore we need not wonder at it; when a man does
his work one day, he will do it another, and so on as long as he lives till
his work be done; so must we do for heaven and for grace.

Fifthly it is ever more and more a backed house, the other some back room or
stable, if he can, he will save both; but if he see that by spending his time
on quenching the fire on the stable, that his great mansion house will burn
down, he will then neglect the other* and let it burn if it will, and employ
himself about his house; So when the soul is in misery under the want of
grace, that it cannot live under, but must perish eternally if it have it not,
then the soul being better then the body, rather then that the soul miscarry,
we will neglect the body sometime. And if this will not serve, abstain from
meat and drink, fast it out; thus the people of God are feign to do many
times; their lust and corruptions being even as the devil himself, which
cannot be cast out but by prayer and fasting; there is an excellent place:
Joel: 2. 12. Therefore now turn unto the Lord with fasting, weeping and
mourning, rent your hearts, etc. Therefore now, now your sins are so
divelish, now your sins are so deeply rooted in your souls, now your
corruptions are come to be such plague soars within you, do you not think
that your ordinary repentance, and ordinary prayers and humiliations will serve
the turn, but now back them with fasting and mourning. Here now thou may
examine thy soul whether it have prayed effectually, unsatiably yea or no;
has it ever a begging prayer, that thou praiest as if thou had never prayed
before? is it evermore a proceeding prayer, that thou do every day draw
nearer to God then other? is it more and more a backed prayer, a fervent and
frequent prayer? have thou taken from thy recreations, from thy calling to give
to it* yea from thy belly and back, and used all means for a prevailing with
God? then are thy prayers effectual and unsatiable.

This then condemns the prayers of most be it so before he have it* and so
every wicked man prays, and he is come to his Amen before the grace is given;
let all such men know that such prayers first they are endless, secondly they
are fruitless.

First they are endless: The Philosopher said that that for which a thing is,
that is the end of the thing: now prayer is for the speeding with God: and
therefore he whose prayers speed not with God, his prayers are endless: thou
have prayed against thy pride, but art as proud still: thou have prayed
against thy choler and art as teachy still: thou have prayed against earthlines
and worldlines, and art earthly and worldly still: thou have prayed against
security and deadnes of heart, and lukewarmenesse in Gods service, and art
lukewarm, dead hearted and secure still: to what end are all thy prayers, when
thou enjoyest not the end of thy prayers? to what end is plowing of thy ground
if it be not fallow? when thy plowing is done, to what end is the work of thy
servant, if thy business be not done, and dispatched when all is done? As good
never pray as pray to no end, as good that thou never had begun to pray, as
to cease, and to give over thy prayers before thou have obtained the grace thou
prayest for: The prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto the Lord, but
the prayer of the upright is his delight: Prove. 15. 8. that is, the prayers of
a wicked man that continues in his wickedness, when his prayers are done, his
prayers are an abomination to the Lord: but the prayers of the upright though
he were before he prayed never so wicked, yet if it be the prayer of an upright
and godly man, when his prayers are done, that his prayers rid him of his sin,
and make him an upright man, his prayers are Gods delight.

Beloved, many pray against distrust in Gods providence, Infidelity in Gods
promises, Impatiency under Gods corrections, etc. and yet have never the more
trust and affiance in God, never the more patience under the hand of God, all
these prayers are endless.

Secondly, thy prayers are fruitless: to John 9. that God hears not sinners,
we know it: Why may some say, how do you know that God hears not sinners? why,
we know it by ezperience, by examples.

A drunkard prays to God to cure him of his drunkenness, and yet he does not
leave his ill company; all the world may see that God hears not the drunkards
prayer because he cures him not, but lets him go on in his sin; and so for all
other sins: see thou a man go on in his sins? thou may see that God
hears not his prayers. if a man should be sick on his death bed, and send
for the Physicians and Apothecaries in the Country, and send for his Father,
Mother, and for all his friends to come to him to minister to him: yet I know
he is not cured by them so long as I see his deadly disease remains upon him;
so if I see a man's pride, hypocrisy, security, deadness of heart, his lust,
anger, etc. lie upon him: notwithstanding all his prayers, I know God hears
not his prayers; he prays to be cleansed from his sins, and to be purged
from his lust, and to be redeemed from his vain conversation: if now God let
his sins continue in him, and lets him go on in them, we see plainly God
hears not him. O what a pitiful and miserable case are such men in, that
pray and pray, and yet all their prayers are endless and fruitless! is not
that man in a pitiful case, that all physic, all cost and charges is lost
upon him; when his eating and drinking, his sleeping, and winding and turning
from this side to that side do him no good; do we not say of him that he is
dead man? so if a man's prayers and supplications to God be endless and
fruitless: that man must needs be a dead and a damned man so long as he goes
on in that case.

Now we come to the second part of the Text, the sensiblenesse of the godly
soul. whether it speed or no, the soul that prays aright, that prays
unsatiably: it is able to say the Lord does hear me, the Lord does grant me
the thing that I prayed to him for; Thus says Jonah, I cried unto the Lord and
he heard me; out of the belly of Hell cried I, and thou heardst my voice, Jonah
2. 2. How could Jonah say God heard his voice, if he had not known it?
therefore he knew it. But against this some may object,

How can this be? how can the soul Obje^^ ^
know that God hears it? we have no Angels, nor voices from Heaven now to tell
men, as the Angel told Cornelius that his prayers were accepted, and come up
before God; or to say as Christ to the woman in the Gospel, Be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee; I know God hears me with his All-hearing
ear, and therefore I have a good belief in God: but how shall I know that God
hears my prayers in mercy, so as to grant that I pray for?

There be fix ways to know whether

The first is, the having of a Spirit of further and further praying. When God
gives the soul a further and further ability to pray, when God opens a way for
the soul to the Throne of grace, and gives him a free access to the gate of
mercy, and a spirit to hold out in prayer: It is a sign that God means to
hear it. When a Petitioner has access to the King, and presents his Petition,
If the King imbolden him in his speech, and let him speak all that he would
speak, it is a sign that the King means to grant that man his petition,
because otherwise the King would never have endured to have heard him so long,
but would have commanded him to be gone. So it is with the soul at the Throne
of grace; if it come with a petition and prayer to God; if God dispatch the
soul out of his presence, so that the soul has no heart to pray, nor to
continue its suite; but prays deadly and dully, and is glad when he has said
his prayers, and has done: it is a fearful sign that God never means to
hear that man's prayers: but if thou praiest and praiest, and have not done in
thy prayers, but God by casting in a spirit of prayer and zeal, and fervency
in prayer, imboldens thy heart in its petitions, it is a sign that God will
hear thee, and grant thee thy prayers.

Blessed be God says the Prophet, that has not turned away my prayer, nor his
mercy from me; How could the Prophet say that the Lord did not turn away his
mercy from him? How! because he turned not away his prayer from him. Many
Expositors expound it of not turning away his prayer from his heart; as if he
should say, Lord, thou continuest my heart to pray, thou have not taken away my
prayer from my heart; therefore I know that thou continuest thy mercy unto me.

Secondly, the preparedness of the heart to pray, is a sign that God means to
hear. When the Merchant stretches his bag wider and wider, it is a sign
that he means to put something in it: so when God opens the heart of a poor
soul, it is a sign that he means to fill it; when God prepares the soul with
more hunger and thirst after grace, with more longings and breathings: it is a
sign that God has already prepared his ear to hear that prayer; it is a
sign that heart shall speed with God in prayer: Psalm. 10. 17. Lord thou have
heard the desire of the humble, thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause
thine ear to hear. First, God prepares the heart to pray, and then he bows
his ear to hear.

Examine thy soul then; art thou more and more prepared to pray? hath-God
spoken with a powerful voice to thy soul to open it self wide? it is a sign
that God means to fill thy soul with his graces. But if thou can rush into
Gods presence, and leave thy preparedness behind thee; leavest thy soul and
thy thoughts, and thy affections behind thee; and come with a straightned
heart in thy deadness and lukewarmenesse; this is a fearful sign that God
will not hear thee.

Thirdly, Gods gracious look, is a sign that he will hear thee: for
sometimes (beloved) God answers his people by a cast of his countenance, with a
gracious smile of his face. Psalm. 22. 24. he has not despised nor abhorred the
affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, but when he
cried unto him he heard. Hereby was the Prophet able to know that God did hear
his prayer, because he did not hide his face from him; when his poor soul saw
God smile on him, and set a favorable eye upon him, this made him say that God
heard his cry.

This is a riddle to the world.

If you should ask the men of the world what the meaning of Gods gracious
countenance is, or what they see of it* alas, they can say nothing of it; they
know not what it means; only the godly man understands, Psalm. 34. 15. The
eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry;
These two go together, their prayers enter into Gods ears, and they know it;
why? because they see it in his countenance upon them, as a Petitioner may read
his speeding with the King by his countenance toward him; so a poor soul may
see how prayers prevail by Gods countenance and look upon him.

If thou then art a stranger to Gods countenance, if God never admitted thee
into his presence to see his face and countenance; it is a sign that God
little regards thy prayers, and has no mind to hea^^ thee. A wicked man is
like a varlet that stands without doors and begges an alms, but is not
suffered to go into the Gentleman's presence, and therefore knows not how he
speeds, whether the Gentleman will give him an alms, or whether he be
providing a cudgel to beat him away: so a wicked man prays and puts up his
petitions to God, but he is not able to come before God: he cannot see whether
God look as if he meant to hear his prayers, yea or no; he knows not but that
God may be providing a curse and plague for him in stead of a blessing. But a
child of God comes within the list of Gods countenance; he can tell when God
smiles on him: and when he takes another look: he is able to come into Gods
presence, Job 13. 16. He also (says Job) shall be my salvation: for an
hypocrite shall not come before him. A strange verse. Job says, God is his
salvation: and he gives this reason why he was able to say so: for an hypocrite
shall not come before him. One would think that this were no reason: but yet it
is an undeniable reason, as if Job had said, I come into his presence, and he
looks like a Savior, a Redeemer upon me; but an hypocrite shall not come
before him: he stands like a rogue and begs without the gate.

Indeed a wicked man comes into Gods presence, in regard of Gods Omnipresence:
but this is not enough: thy Ox, and thine Ass stands in Gods presence: yea
so, the very Devils themselves are in Gods presence. But if thou come not into
Gods presence of grace, if God do not admit thy soul into the list of his
Throne: it is a sign that God hears thee not. Men should therefore examine
their consciences, what face or presence of God they come into or see: when
they pray in their prayers, whether they come before God, yea or no.

Beloved, no wicked man under heaven can come before God: this is made the
mark of a godly man only, Psalm. 140. 13. The upright shall dwell in thy
presence, (mark here) dwelling in Gods presence is only determined to the
righteous: the upright shall dwell in thy presence: And here I appeal again
to the hearts and consciences of wicked men, what presence of God do they
find in their prayers? they see their Pews, and the walls or hangings, etc.
before them: they see the heavens and the clouds above them: they are like
rogues that know nothing within doors. Do they see Gods presence and
countenance? no: it is the upright man only that dwells in Gods presence: He
sees how God looks on him, how his face smiles on him: and therefore, it is
not a wicked man's coming to Church, and falling on his knees, and uttering the
words of prayer that is a coming into Gods presence: then, this would be a
false saying of the Prophet. For a wicked man may go to Church and fall upon
his knees, etc. but never come before God.

This presence, is, to see the face of God. the conscience of a man does
answer him whether God hear him yea or no. As it was with the high Priest,
whenever the high Priest came into Gods presence to inquire of him, though
God did not appear visibly unto him, yet he might read Gods answer in his
Vrim and Thummim; he might there know Gods mind: so a man's conscience is his
Urim and Thummim. When he comes before God, his own cons^ience gives him an
inckling whether he speed or no* 1 Ioh. 3. 20, 21. If our hearts condemn us,
God is greater then our hearts and knows al things. Belived, if our hearts
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. If a man's conscience tell
a man that his prayers are rotten, that his humiliation is rotten, that his
heart is not upright, that yet he is not purged from his sins, that his
seeking of God is fained and hypocritical; it is the very voice of God in his
soul: and if our consciences condemn us, God (says the Apostle) is greater
then our consciences.

There no is condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1. as if
he should say, those that are in Christ, God does not condemn them they have
not that condemnation: nay their own conscience does not condemn them: so
that, that man whom any condemnation either from God, or from his own
conscience, condemns, that man is not in Christ; being not in Christ, he can
never be heard.

Indeed, a man's conscience may be misinformed by Satan under a temptation; as
you may see in the verse before my text: Thou have heard my voice: stop not
thine ear from my cry. Here the Church being examined, their consciences told
them they were heard in their pra^ers: but being under a temptation, their
consciences were afraid that God heard not. So many a poor soul: examine it,
and it cannot deny but that these and these tokens of grace and fruits of Gods
Spirit are in it; yet their consciences are afraid that the Lord will not give
them these and these other graces that they want: that the Lord will not hear
them for such and such blessings.

I mean not neither a truce of conscience: for there may be a truce of
conscience in wicked men. A truce may be between mortal enemies: but no peace
but amongst friends. Wicked men's consciences are like the Lion, 1. Kings 13.
who when he had killed the Prophet, stood by the Corpse, and by the Ass, and
did not eat the body, nor tear the Ass; so a wicked man's conscience, it is
as the devils band-dogge or roaring Lion: till it has slain the sinner, it
stands stone-still, and seems neither to meddle or make with him, but lies as
seared or dead in him. I mean not this conscience. But when God has sprinkled
the conscience with the blood of Christ, and made the conscience pure: this is
a sign that God hears his prayer.

I mean not the stammering of conscience, when it is dazelled, or overwhelmed:
but when it speaks down right as it means. A godly man's conscience sometimes
may judge otherwise then the thing is. But, examine what thy conscience tells
thee in sober sadness, deliberately, convincingly,: and then, know that the
Lord tells thee. If thy conscience says peremptorily that thy heart and ways
are rotten, and unsound; then know that the Lord tells thee so, and that the
Lord says so to thy soul.

Fifthly the getting of that grace that a man prays for, is a sign that God
hears his prayers. But this is not a true sign always but with distinction.

When the grace given, and the good will of God the giver, cannot be severed:
then it is a true sign. But when the gift and the good will of the giver may
be severed, then it is not a true sign.

Thou may pray unto God, and God may give thee many temporal blessings, and
many common graces of his Spirit; God may give thee good parts, a good memory:
he may give thee a good measure of knowledge and understanding, even in diverse
things; he may give thee some kind of humility, chastity, civility: thou
may be of a loving and flexible disposition: so he may give thee a good
estate in the world, houses, lands, wife and children etc. God may give thee
all these, and yet hate thee, and never hear one prayer thou make; thou
may pray for a thousand blessings, and have them: and yet never be heard, so
long as the good will of the giver is severed from them; all outward blessings
and common graces may be severed from Gods good pleasure to a man.

Therefore in temporal blessings, or in common graces, if thou would know
whether God hear thee or no: know whether God has given thee a sanctified use
of them or no. If God has given thee many common graces, or temporal
blessings, and a heart to use them to his Glory; then every blessing thou have
(there is not a drop of drink, nor a bit of bread that thou have, but) it is
a sign of Gods everlasting love to thee. Why? because this, and the good will
of the giver can never be severed. But on the contrary, if a man have not a
sanctified use of that he has, then it is the greatest severity of God, and
the most eminent plague and curse of God upon the soul to give it; for a man's
parts may be his b^ne, his civility may be his curse, and means of the final
hardness and impenitencie of his heart.

Sixthly faith; if a man have faith given to believe, it is a sign that God
hears him; be it to thee (says Christ to the man in the Gospel) according to
thy faith; so go thou to God, and be it to thee as thou beleevest. Do thou
pray for grace? according as thou beleevest, so shall thou receive.

I have no sign that God will hear me; I have so many corruptions of my heart
against me, and so many threatenings of Gods frowns against me; I have no sign
that God will hear me.

Would thou have a sign? An evil and an adulterous generation seeks a
sign: this is a tempting faith, to seek for signs to believe. Thomas, said
Christ, Joh. 20. 29. because thou have seen me, thou have believed: blessed are
they that have not seen and yet believe. That man that believes bacause he
feels grief in his heart, tears in his eyes, groans in his spirit, because he
prays long and earnestly, and sweats in his prayer, or mourns in his
humiliation, I suspect his humiliation, his tears, his grief, his prayers,
and all that he has. Why? these are good signs of faith: but rotten grounds
of faith: the Word and promise of God must be thy ground. But against this the
soul may object,

That every Promise runs with a Condition: Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. There is a Promise of
filling, but it is with a condition of hungering. Blessed are the meek, for
they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God, etc. If I have not the Condition annexed to the Promise, how dare or how
can I believe the Promise?

The Condition is not the way to get the Promise; the Promise is the ground of
faith, and the way to get the condition; because the promise is the Motive
cause that moves the soul to get the condition. Now, the Mover must be before
the Moved; then if belief of the Promise move thy soul to get the condition
of the promise, then belief of the promise must be before that the soul can
keep the condition of the promise.

Saul made a promise to David, 1 Samuel 18. that he should be his son in law in
one of his two daughters, upon condition that he should give him an hundred
foreskins of the Philistims. Now, David did first believe the promise; and
thereby he was allured to fight valiantly, to keep the condition, to get a
hundred fore-skins of the Philistims. So Psalm. 116. I believed and therefore
did I speak. He believed Gods promise, and then he spoke with condition. So,
we believe says the Apostle, and therefore do we speak. First, the soul
believes; and then every action of a Christian wherein it moves to the keeping
of the condition, springs from this root; nay beloved, a man cannot keep any
condition in the Bible without faith; he must believe.

Secondly, faith is the inabling cause to keep the condition. Do thou think
to get weeping, mourning, and humiliation for thy sins, and then thereby to
get the promise to thy self? then thou go in thy own strength; and then,
in Gods account, thou do just nothing, John 15. 5. Without me ye can do
nothing, says Christ; therefore first lay hold on me, believe in me, abide in
me.

What! do you first think to pray, to mourn, to lament and bewail your
sins, to do this and that in turning your selves, and sanctifying of your
selves? Indeed you may fumble about these things: but you can never do any of
them in deed and to the purpose: without me ye can do nothing. I had fainted
says the Prophet, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the land of the living, Psalm. 27. 13. where we may see three things.

First, the Promise that he should see the

Secondly, the Condition: if he do not Thirdly, the method the Prophet went
by.

First, he believed to see the goodness of

Beloved, it is true that the keeping of the Condition, is before the fruition
of the Promise: but not before believing the Promise* because the doing of the
Condition is effected by believing the Promise.

This is the cause that many fumble about grace, but never get it: they are
ever repenting, but never repent: ever learning, but never learn the knowledge
of the truth everlasting: ever striving, but never get power over their
corruptions, etc. because they fumble about it in their own strength; and take
it not in the right method.

Let the soul come with faith in Christ, and believe it shall speed and have
grace, and power from Christ his grace, and from Christ's power: and then it
shall speed; Christ has promised ( John 16.) that whatsoever we ask the
Father in his name, he will give it us. Christ (beloved) is an excellent
Surety. Indeed, our credit is cracked in Heaven: we may think to go and fetch
this and that grace in our own names, and miss of it: as the servant may go
to the Merchant for wares in his own name, but the Merchant will not deliver
them to him in his own name, unless he come in his Masters name and bring a
ticket from him: and then when the servant shows his Masters ticket, the
Merchant will deliver him what wares he asks for in his Masters name. So when
a soul goes to the Throne of grace with a ticket from Christ; if he can say
Lord, it is for the honor of Christ: I come for grace and holiness, and
strength against my corruptions: Lord, here is a ticket from Christ: most
certainly, he shall speed.

But, men must take heed that they foyst not the name of Christ: that they
foyst not a ticket to say that Christ sent them, when it is their own
self-love, and their own lust that sends them; it is not enough to pray and
at the end to say through Christ our Lord, Amen. No: for this may be a mere
foysting of the Name of Christ. But, can thou pray and show that Christ sent
thee, and say as the servant, I come from my Master, and he sent me? Lord, it
is for Christ that I come: it is not to satisfy my own lust, nor to ease and
deliver me from the galls of my conscience, nor to free me from hell; but for
Christ; Lord, I beg grace and holiness, that I may have power to glorify
Christ. It is for the honor of my Lord Christ that I come. When the soul comes
thus in Christ's name, believing it shall speed, then his prayer shall prevail.
Whatsoever (says Christ) ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it
you.

We come now to the third and last part of our Text: to wit, the supplies they
had against danger and discouragements. The Lord upheld their hearts from being
dismayed in prayer; thou said fear not.

There be two things that do much hurt in prayer.

First, groundless encouragements.

Secondly, needless discouragements.

First, I say, groundless encouragements; pray, hear the Word, and perform
many duties of religion; therefore they encourage themselves in the goodness
of their estates, judgeing themselves happy, though notwithstanding they go on
and continue in the hardness of their hearts and rebellions against God.

We have abundance of sayings amongst us, that if they were examined would
prove false and unsound; As, that the vipers die when they bring forth their
young; for (say they) the young eat out the old ones bowels; that bears shape
all their young by licking of them; that the Swanne sings sweetest at her
death; that the Adamant stone is softened by Goats blood, etc. These things are
not so, as may be shown out of ancient Writers.

So, beloved, there are abundance of sayings, that go up and down amongst men
concerning Divinity, which if they were examined, will prove to be rotten
sayings; as, he that made them, will save them. It is not so, says the
Prophet, Esal. 27. 11. He that made them, will not have mercy on them, and he
that formed them, will not pity them. It is commonly believed, if men come to
Church, hear the Word, and call upon God, that then presently they are good
Christians. Beloved, it is not so, Matthew. 7. 21. Not every one that says Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Men are ready when they can but call Lord have mercy on me; O sweet Savior,
pity me, most merciful Lord Jesus, have compassion on me: if they can pray in
their families, and pray at Church, etc. to think, now, all is well with them,
and Christ cannot but save them, and give them the Kingdom of Heaven: but our
Savior puts a not upon it, and says, not every one that says Lord, Lord: it
is not a Lord, a Lording of Christ with the tongne only: it is not a taking up
of an outward profession of Christ only, that is sufficient for a man that
shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven: no says Christ: but he that does the
will of my Father which is in Heaven. But, of this by the by.

Secondly, there are needless discouragements wouldings, and wracked desires
after grace and holiness, and yet is held by discouragements: yea, many a
Christian heart lies a long time under it wrestling and striving under its
wants, and yet, kept out from grace, and from growing in grace, because of
discouragements: yea the best and strongest of Gods Saints, have been kept off,
and have hung much on discouragements.

Fear not, says God to Abraham, Genes. 15. 1. So, fear not Joshua, says God
to Joshua, Josh. 1. 9. Intimating that both Abraham and Joshua were afraid of
discouragements: they were afraid that many evils would befall them, that they
should meet with many rubs and difficulties that would be too hard for them:
therefore the Lord calls to them, fear not, be not dismayed nor discouraged.
Thou said fear not. Hence observe,

That God would not have any Christian Doct. ^
soul to be discouraged in prayer. Thou said, fear not.

For our clearer proceeding herein, first, let me show you what discouragement
is: and secondly, how it comes to be dangerous and hurtful in prayer.

What is discouragement?

It is a base dismayment of spirit below or beneath the strength that is in a
man, under the apprehension of some evil, as if it were too hard for him to
grapple with it.

There be four things in this diffinition.

First, I say it is a base dismayment of spirit; Isay. 32. 11. Tremble ye
careless women that are at ease, be troubled ye careless ones: these
careless ones went on in their sins, and feared not. God calls to them and
bids them to be dismayed. But the dismayment and the discouragement I speak
of, it is a base dismayment of spirit; which is either when he is dismayed that
ought not: or he is dismayed at that whereat he ought not to fear: where no
cause of fear is.

As Vitello his man thought his Master had got skill in Optickes: he riding
along upon the high way, spying a man's shape, thought it was some Spirit: and
thereupon he sickened and died. So many a poor soul looking in the perfect Law
of God, and seeing his own ugliness and filthynesse, he is discouraged, and
thinks himself undone; his heart waxes cold within him, and he begins to
fear that he is but a dead and damned man.

Secondly, it is down beneath the strength that is in a man: that man is
properly said to be discouraged: not that he has no strength at all in him,
nor no courage at all (for such a one is an infeebled man, not a man
discouraged) but a discouraged man is a man put besides the courage that is in
him; when a man has strength enough to grapple with the evil before him, but
through dismayment of spirit he cannot put it forth.

Have not I commanded thee? says God to Joshua; Be strong and of a good
courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, Josh. 9. God had given Joshua
strength enough, whereby he was enabled to observe and do according to all that
Law which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded him; God had now doubled his
Spirit upon him: yet he commands him, be not afraid, neither dismayed: as if he
had said, Joshua, if thou be dismayed and discouraged, though thou have
strength and power to go through the business that I have called thee unto,
yet thou will not be able to use it, nor to put it forth if thou be
discouraged.

Thirdly, it is at the apprehension of some evil. I say not at the sight of
some evil: for a man may be dismayed at the apparition of good, as Mary when
she saw nothing but a good Angel, Luke 1. 29. she saw nothing but a glorious
Angel: nevertheless she was afraid, and discouraged. Why? because she had a
secret apprehension of some evil, either of some evil proceeded in the
salutation, or some unworthiness in her self to receive such a gracious
salutation: it cannot be the apprehension of any good that discourageth a man,
but the apprehension of some evil.

Fourthly, not of every evil neither; for if the evil be but small, courage
will stand it out; but it is of such an evil as he fears he is not able to
grapple withal. If the evil before him, be inferior to him, he scorns it as
the barking of a toothlesse Dog. If it be but an evil equal to his strength,
then he makes a tush at it, because he knows or thinks himself able to
encounter with it.

But if it be an evil above his strength, then his spirit melts and droops
before him. See this in Saul, 1 Samuel 17. 11. and his people. When they saw the
Champion of the Philistims coming against them, when they saw him so hugely
and mervelously armed, and heard him speak such big words, they thought they
were not able to stand and to encounter with him; and therefore says the Text,
when Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Philistim, they were dismayed
and greatly afraid.

Thus you see what discouragement is; such discouragements the Lord would not
have our hearts to be in when we pray unto him.

For first, God cannot give care to that man that is out of heart in his
prayers. Thou can never pray if thou be dismayed in prayer. When the soul
begins to fear and reason, O, I am so unworthy that God will not look at me;
I am so sinful, so blockish, so dead, and dull to all good, that God will
never regard me; thou can never pray, Romans 10. 14. How shall they call on him
in whom they have not believed? If thou do not believe that God will hear
thee, if thou do not believe that thou shall prevail, that God will deliver
thee out of these corruptions and that lust that thou praiest against; that God
will give thee this grace or that grace: if thou do not believe that God will
own thee: if thou have these doubtful discouragements, O, he will not grant
me, I shall never get this or that: how can thou call on him? thou may
call so and so: but never can thou call to any purpose, if thou do not
believe in him.

A beggar though he be never so well able to beg, yet if when he comes to the
Housekeepers door, he be persuaded that he shall not speed, that let him beg
as long as he will, he shall get nothing: this blunts his begging, and makes
him give over his suite without any great importunity: So, it is impossible
that ever a soul should hold out and pray that is discouraged in prayer.

Secondly, thou can not pray unless thou use all thy strength in prayer; If
thou be discouraged, thou can not use thy strength.

A discouraged man, his strength melts into fear; and whatsoever strength he
has, he cannot put it forth. How came Jacob to prevail and to have power with
God? Why, he used all his strength with God, and so prevailed, Hosea 12. 3.
Thou can never prevail with God by thy prayers, unless thou put forth
all thy strength in prayer.

If Jacob had reasoned I am but dust and ashes; how can I strive with God? I am
sinful and evil, how can I contend with my Maker? and so have been
discouraged in his wrestling, he could not have used all his strength with God,
and so had never prevailed with God. No, Jacob he gathers all the arguments
that he could make; he gathers together all the promises he could find in Gods
Book, or that he could hear off; he displaies all the wants that he could
show; he petitions all the graces that he could name; he used all his strength,
and by his strength he had power with God.

If thy confession of thy sins be strengthlesse; if thy petitions, and
thankesgiving for grace, be strengthlesse; if thou use not all thy strength in
prayer, thou can never prevail, nor have any power with God. For how can
that man prevail and have power with God that has no power with himself?

Thirdly, thou can never pray, and have a fearful apprehension of evil in
prayer; thou can not. It is good to have a deep apprehension of thy sins:
apprehend them to be as many hells as thou can, thou can never apprehend
them deeply enough: but if thou have a fearful apprehension of them, thou
can never pray.

When the Apostle would exhort the Philipians to continue in one Spirit, and in
one mind, fighting together through the faith of the Gospel, he exhorts them
that in nothing they fear, Phil. 1. 27, 28. For if a man be terrified with his
adversary, with the power of his adversary, and fears he shall never be able
to withstand him but must fall before him through his subtilty, that he can
never be wary enough for him: Alas, he can never strive with hope and courage
against him. So, beloved, if we have a fearful and discouraged kind of
apprehension of evil, we can never pray so as to prevail.

Apprehend thy sins to be as hellish, and as damnable as thou can: Feel
even the fire of hell in every one of them: but take heed of a fearful
apprehension of them, so to apprehend the evil of them, as to think with thy
self that because thou art guilty of these and these sins, that thou shall
never get in with God again, God will never be reconciled to thee: these will
eat out thine heart in prayer.

Fourthly, we can never pray if we have any secret despair that there is any
difficulty too hard for us to grapple withal, or to get through in our
prayers. Howsoever a man prays, yet if he have any spice of these fears in
him, to think now I have taken a great deal of pains, but am never the
better; I have prayed and prayed, but have got no good: I may go on and do
thus and thus, but shall never prevail or speed; all my labors, all my
prayers and endeavors will be lost; this takes away the very spirit and life
of a man's prayers.

Judas after he had betrayed the Lord Jesus, he was discouraged from ever
praying for mercy. Why? because he thought it was impossible for him to get it;
I have betrayed innocent blood, says he. Matthew. 27. as if he should say, I
shall never out-wrastle this sin; this sin is my death: I have brought the
blood of the Son of God on me, I shall never claw off this sin: now Judas
thus despayring, we never read one letter of any prayer that he made to God to
get out of it; no, he thought it too hard for him to get mercy. Despair drives
a man from that he did hope for; because now he thinks there is an
impossibility in getting of it.

Beloved, mistake me not; there is a double desperation.

First, there is a desperation of infidelity;

Secondly, there is a desperation of extremity; must come with desperation of
extremity. desperation puts life into a man's prayers and endeavors.

As, a Soldier when he sees nothing but to kill or be killed, that he sees
his state desperate; why, this will compel a very coward to fight; this will
make a coward fight ( as if he would kill the Devil, says the Proverb) it
will make him fight like a spirit; he will be afraid of nothing. Take a
Soldier that fights desperately for his life, with a kill or be killed; he
fears nothing; neither Pike, nor Sword, nor Gun; why? he fights for his life.
Therefore one notes that sometimes it is the nearest way to victory to be
desperate in attempts and in fight. Therefore when William the Conqueror came
first into England,, at Hasting, he sent back his Ships again, that so the
Soldiers might have no hope of saving themselves by flying back. And so at
Battle, at one encounter, a little Army of the English slew a great Army of the
French. Why? they grew desperate.

So, could men pray desperately, could they pray with a pray or be damned: beg
with a beg or be damned; seek to God for grace that you want with a speed or
be damned; then would their prayers be more earnest and powerful to get grace.
O, did men pray thus, they would pray otherwise then they do.

Men pray, but they pray deadly, coldly, and lazily, as if they had no need of
prayer, or as if they had no need of the grace, they pray for; they pray for
grace, but get it not; they pray for zeal, but have it not; for repentance and
holiness, but obtain it not.

Beloved, either get zeal and holiness, or else there is no mercy: either get
grace and repentance, or else there is no mercy for thee. Pray then when thou
prayest for grace, with a speed or be damned; say unto thy soul, either we
must speed and get grace Soul, or else we must go to hell. If men would pray
thus, with a speed or be damned, we should never see, nor God should never
hear so many cold and dead prayers as now we pray.

Despair makes a man a Munke says the Papist: but this despair makes a man a
good Christian I say: never does a man pray indeed till he feels himself in
extremity, hopeles and desperate in regard of himself; so that he sees no
remedy at all but get Christ: get grace or be damned for ever. Get power and
strength over these corruptions: otherwise they will destroy and damn thee;
this would make a man pray for life. Men pray coldly and faintly: why? because
though they see they have no grace, no zeal, no holiness, no repentance, no
evidence of Christ: yet they hope to be saved notwithstanding. O beloved, the
devil has blinded these men to the intent they may be damned.

But, if men would pray desperate prayers with a pray or be damned, seek with
a find or be damned: men would then pray other prayers then they do. Such
prayers did David pray Psalm. 130. 1. Out of the deep places have I called unto
thee O Lord, Lord hear my prayer: as if he should say, Lord, I am even in the
depth of misery, plunged over head and ears, so that now I sink and perish
if thou help not: Lord, hear my prayer. This desperation a Christian must
have, this quickens up his Spirits, and puts life into him: but, take heed of
the desperation of Infidelity: Saint Austen says it is the murderer of the
soul: the spice of it will eat out the heart of a man, and kill the strength
of all his endeavors.

I should now come to apply this doctrine; but I fear me there be many amongst
us, that never come so far toward heaven, as to know what these
discouragements mean. This is lamentable.

It is true, discouragements are hideous cases in prayer, and a man may perish
and go to hell that has them: but yet, they are somewhat profitable signs
that a man does at the least look a little toward God, or else he could not
know what they are. But there are abundance that never have attained so far
in religion, as to understand what they mean: but go on in drinking, whoring,
carding and dicing, hating and malicing, fretting and chasing, mocking and
coveting; swearing and blaspheming, in security, in hardness of heart and
impenitencie: they are more careful for their dogs, for their potts, and for
their tables, and for their shops, then they are of their souls: And which is
enough to astonish any that is godly, these men scarce find any
discouragements in prayer: O, they have a good courage to pray at all times: O,
say they, God forbid that any man should be discouraged in prayer. I thank God
I have a good hope in God; God has given me a good heart of grace to call upon
him, and I make no question but that God hears me: God would never bid us to
pray if he did not mean to hear us.

Beloved, these men that are so bold in the goodness of their hearts to call
upon God, they never as yet prayed in all their lives: all the prayers of the
wicked are indeed no prayers.

Daniel confessing the sins of wicked Judah, says, though all this evil be
come upon us, yet made we not our prayer to turn from our wicked ways. Dan.
9. 13. all the time of those seventy years, Daniel says they never made
prayer to God; yet they fasted every year, and prayed every day, twice every
day at the least, which would amount in that time to 50000 and 100 prayers: how
then could Daniel say they never made one prayer? I answer, (and pray mark it)
because they never did quite turn from their evil ways. Though thou make
never so many prayers, though thou boastest of the goodness of thy condition,
and snatchest at the Promises of God: yet if thou turnest not from thine
iniquities, thou never as yet made any prayer by the Judgment of God
himself. Paul made many thousand prayers before his conversion, he could not
have been a Pharise else; but they were never accounted prayers to him:
therefore as soon as ever he was converted, behold says God he prays Acts 9.

A wicked man, a carnal Christian, though he have the righteousness of Saint
Paul before his conversion, of living blamlesse, unreproveable in respect of
the outward righteousness of the Law: yet he can never make an acceptable
prayer till he be truly converted; his prayers are no better then howling of
dogs, or lowing of Oxen, yea the Lord abhorrs them. O what poor encouragements
can thou have, seeing the Lord never tallies down any of thy prayers? wicked
men are like ulysses, who wept more for the death of his dog, then of his
wife; so wicked men weep and mourn for the loss of their corn and their
cattle, hawks and hounds, cards and dice: but never for the loss of their
prayers. So long as thou continuest in thy profaneness and impenitency, thou
losest all thy prayers: there is not one of them that God tallies down, or
reckons for a prayer. Here we might have a great deal of matter, if time would
suffer me. But it will not, only let me tell you, I speak only to those
whose hearts God has awakened out of their sins, but who are often
discouraged: take heed of these discouragements.

For, first, they will drive thee to melancholy silly dove without a heart,
Prove. 7. 11. A dove is a melancholy creature, that has no heart to any thing;
so Ephraim has no heart to call upon God, no heart to return unto God: and
this is the cause that men and women go whineing and mourning under the burden
of sin, and are not able to come out, because of discouragements: all the
policy of hell is less then this policy of the devil, in driving men to
despair or discouragements: this does more hurt then all the rest of hell besides

Secondly, if you do not take heed of I have prayed, but the Lord will not
hear me: I have called, and the Lord will not answer, but has turned away his
ears from me. Now, thou speak against God. Number. 21. 4, 5. The soul of the
people was much discouraged, and the people spoke against God, and against
Moses, saying, Wherefore have you brought us out of Egypt, to die in the
wilderness? for here is neither bread, nor water, and our soul loatheth this
light bread. So, beloved, if we suffer our souls to be discouraged, we shall
soon come to murmr against God: wherefore has he brought me up to this
strictnes, and preciseness? when I was a drunkard, a worldling, when I
followed the lust of my flesh and liberty, then I enjoyed onnions, garlic,
and the fleshpots of Egypt: pleasures and delights for my soul: then I had a
good hope in God, and a good persuasion that my soul should go to heaven: and
then Preachers told me that if I would give over such and such sins, and
look after Heaven a little more, and do such and such things, O then I should
come to a Land flowing with milk and honey, then I should not miss of glory
and salvation; But alas, I see nothing but Giants and Anakims; I am in a
wilderness; now, now I see a man may have a great deal of repentance, and yet
be a castaway; A man may have a great deal of faith and yet be but a
reprobate; A man may give over a great many sins, and yet perish in hell; now I
see a man may live civilly and well, and have and do a great many good things,
and yet be damned when he has done all: A man may even go to Heaven Gates,
and yet the gates be shut against him, and he turned into hell. Alas! my poor
soul is in a wilderness; now I know not which way to go; I am ready to lose
my self, I see nothing here now but huge Giants, the sons of Anack, strong
corruptions, inclining and forcing me to evil: most fearful and violent
suggestions and temptations of the Devil, ready to thrust me into the gulf of
wickedness and despair.

And now, the soul begins to think that it is good for it to return again
into Egypt, to fall to its old courses again: for certainly God looks for no
such matter, he requires no such strictness and preciseness: And so it falls
a whining and repining at the Word and Ministers of God that have called men to
it, and laid it upon them: and has no heart now to do thus and thus any
longer. And thus it falls into discouragements because of the way, and into a
thousand quandaries whether it may not go back again or no. And all these
murmurings and repinings, are because men suffer themselves to be discouraged.

Thirdly, discouragements will cause thee to think that God hates thee. When
the Baals Priests, has been crying from morning to noone; ten, twenty, thirty
years, it may be, and yet has no answer: now, it will begin to think if God
did love me, then he would grant me my petitions. Then hereupon comes into a
man's secret thoughts and fears that God hardly loves his soul. So was it with
Israel; when they were discouraged, they said, because the Lord hated us,
therefore he brought us out of the Land of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 1. 27. Because that
they were discouraged, and because that their Brethren that went for spies, had
disheartened them; therefore they were apt to say the Lord hated them.

Beloved, it is a miserable thing when the soul calls the love of God into
question. Consider that as thou can not have a friend if thou be
suspicious and jealous of his love to thee: So, thou can never have the love
of God settled on thy heart so long as thou art jealous of his love to thee.

Fourthly, If thou root them not out, it is to be feared that they will bring
thee to despair. M^lancholy thoughts and fears, and discouragements, drive
the soul to despair. For when the soul sees it self still disappointed of
its hopes, at the last it grows hopeless: If it have waited one day and the
next day too: if it have prayed this week, this month, this year, and yet
still it sees it self held off and disappointed: it will at last grow
hopeless. Take heed therefore, I beseech you, of all needless
discouragements; to fear be ause that thou find not that that thou wishedst
or prayedst for, to day or to morrow, in thine own time, that therefore thou
shall never get it, that now thou should for ever despair of the grace and
love of God, and think that now God will never hear thee, that thou shall
never get grace and power over thy corruptions.

Men think that the preaching of the Word of God brings men to despair, the
preaching of such strict points, and the urging such precise doctrines makes
men despair: men are loath to be at the pains to root out their
discouragements: It is rather a cold or dead preaching of the Word that is the
cause of this: for when the soul is instructed by holiness, humbled by
holiness, converted by holiness, at the last when it comes to be thoroughly
awakened, when it sees that this and this is required in a true conversion of
the soul to God, that herein true repentance must declare and demonstrate it
self by these and these fruits, or else it is but false and rotten: Why now,
the soul must needs be brought to despair, because it sees that though it
have been thus and thus humbled, though it have prayed, fasted and mourned in
this and this manner: yet it sees it has not a soundness of grace.

There is such a grace in it, such a work and such a fruit of Gods Spirit in
it, that yet he could never find in himself: this makes the soul to
despair. Indeed Preachers may be too blame if they speak and preach only the
terrors and condemnations of the Law without the promises of the Gospel: for
these should be so tempered that every poor broken soul may see mercy and
redemption for him upon his sound and unfeined repentance and humiliation. But
if men do despair, they may thank themselves for it, their own sins for
it, their own discouragements for it, because they suffer these to continue in
them.

Cain his heart grew sad, his countenance fell, he was wroth and disqui^ted in
his mind, and heavily discouraged; why? Genesis 4. Sin lay at the door, (what
door?) the door of his conscience rapping and beating upon his heart.

Beloved, when the soul lets sin lie at the door: drunkenesse, pride and
worldliness, security, hardness and deadnes of heart lie at the door: when a
man lets his ne gligent and fruitless hearing of the word lie at the door,
when a man lets his vain and dead praying, his temporizing and fashionary
serving of God lie at the door of conscience, to tell him that all his hearing
of the word of God profits him nothing, that his prayers are dead and vain,
that his mourning, fasting, and all his humiliation is counterfe^t and rotten,
and that he has no soundness of grace in him, but that for all this he may
fall into hell: when sin lies thus at the door, thus rapping at the
conscience it is no wonder if the soul fall into desperation.

Cain let his sin lie at the door, there it lay rapping and beating, and told
him that his carelesenesse and negligent sacrificing to God was not accepted:
and therefore no marvel if Cain be so cast down in his countenance, and that
he fall to despair.

O beloved, when sin lies bouncing and beating at the door of thy heart,
when thy sin (whatsoever it is, search thy heart and find it out) lies
knocking and rapping at the door of thy conscience day by day, and month by
month, and thou art content to let it lie, and art unwilling to use means to
remove it, and art loath to take the pains to get the blood of Christ to wash
thy soul from it, or the Spirit of Christ to cleanse thee from it; then thy
soul will despair, either in this world, or in the world to come. But let us
take heed then, that our conscience condemn us not in any thing or course
that we allow in our selves: for if that do, then much more will God who is
greater then our consciences, and knows all things.

The Apostle has an excellent Phrase: Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus etc. As if he should say, there is not one
condemnation; there is none in Heaven, God does not condemn them; there is
none in earth, their own heart and conscience does not condemn them; he that
is in Christ Jesus, that walks not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, there
is none, no not one condemnation to him; none, neither in Heaven nor in earth:
no word, no commandment, no threatening condemns him. But if thy conscience
condemn thee, and tell thee thou let sin lie at the door, rapping at thy
conscience day after day, and month after month, telling thee that yet thou art
without Christ, that yet thou never had any true faith in the Lord Jesus,
that yet thou have not truly repented, and turned from thy sins: this will
at last drive thy soul into heavy discouragements, if not into final
despair.

O beloved, religion and piety, and the power of godliness, go down the
wind every where. What is the reason of it, but because of these
discouragements that men live and go in? Men pray and pray, and their prayers
profit them not: men run up and down and come to the Church and hear the
Word, and receive the Sacraments, and use the means of grace, but to no end:
they are unprofitable to them: they remain in their sins still: the
ordinances of God bring them not out of their lusts and corruptions: hereby
they disgrace and discredit the ordinances of God in the eyes and account of
the men of the world, making them think as if there were no more power nor
force in the Ordinances of God then these men manifest.

There is no life in many Christians, men's spirits are discouraged; these
secret discouragements in their hearts take away their spirits in the use of
the means, that though they use the means, yet it drives them to despair of
reaping good or profit by them.

Beloved, I could here tell you enough to

First, all your complaints they are hut wind, Job 6. 26. do you imagine to
reprove words, and the speeches of one that is desperate which are as wind?
Jobs friends taking Job to be a man of despair, they accounted all his words
but as wind.

Do thou nestle any discouragement in thy heart? thou may complain of
sin as much as thou can: yet all thy complainings are but as wind: thou
may cry out against thy corruptions, with weeping and tears, and pray and
fight against them: and yet all thy weeping, mourning and praying is but as the
wind: thou may beg grace, thou may seek after God, thou may hear the
Word, receive the Sacraments, and yet all will be to thee as wind: all will
vanish, be unprofitable, not regarded.

Secondly, discouragements drive us from the use of the means. If ever we
mean to come out of our sins, if ever we mean to get grace and faith, and
assurance, and zeal: we must constantly use the means, 1 Samuel 27. 1. David
says, there is nothing better for me then that I should speedily escape into
the Land of the Philistims, and Saul shall despair of me to seek me any more.
David thought in himself, if I can make him out of hope of finding me,
certainly he will give over seeking of me. So when the soul has any secret
despair of finding the Lord, that soul will quickly be drawn from seeking of
the Lord in the use of the means.

What ever you do then, O be not discouraged, lest you be driven from the use
of the means: if you be driven from the use of the means, woe is to you, you
will never find God then. Be not driven from prayer, nor driven from holy
conference, nor driven from the Word, nor driven from the Sacrament, nor from
meditation, nor from the diligent and strict examination of thy self, of thy
heart and of all thy ways: for these are the ways of finding the Lord. If you
nourish any thoughts and fears of despair in you, if you be discouraged, you
will be driven from the use of the means, which is a lamentable thing;
therefore be not discouraged.

Thirdly, discouragements will make you thus I should have done, and that I
should have done, woe is me that I did it not* it will make a man stand poaring
on his sins, but never able to get out of them. So it was like to be with
them in the Ship with Paul, Acts 27. 20. In the tempest at Sea, they were
utterly discouraged from any hope of safety: now indeed Paul told them what
they should have done if they had been wise: Sirs, you should have hearkened to
me, and not have loosed, ver. 21. as if he had said, you should have done thus
and thus: but now do not stand poaring too much on that, you should have
hearkened to me, and not have launched forth, etc. but that cannot be helped,
now: therefore I exhort you to be of good cheer, etc.

So beloved, when the soul is discouraged upon these thoughts, I should have
prayed better, I should have heard the Word of God better, and with more
profit; I should have repented better, I should have performed this and that
religious and good duty better; but ah wretch that I am, I have sinned thus
and thus; it is always looking on this sin and that sin, this imperfection
and that failing: when now I say the soul is discouraged, it will be always
poaring upon sin, but it will never come out of its sin; always poaring
upon its deadness, and unprofitablenesse, but never able to come out of it. O
beloved, be of good cheer, and be not discouraged; it is true you should have
prayed better; you should have heard the Word of God better heretofore, you
should have been more careful and circumspect of your ways then you were; but
now you cannot help it; these things and times are gone and cannot be
recalled: such a one has been a drunkard, a swearer, a worldling, etc. but he
cannot help it now. True, he might have helped it, and because he did not, his
heart shall bleed for it, if he belong to God: but do not stand poaring too
much upon it, but consider now what you have to do, now you are to humble your
self, now you are to strive with God in all manner of prayer for more grace,
and more power of obedience and assurance, and be not discouraged.

Fourthly, if the soul be discouraged, it will breed nothing but sorrow. What
is the reason that many Christians are always weeping, and mourning, and
sighing, and sobbing, from day to day, all their life time, and will not be
comforted? because of these discouragements, 1 These. 4. 13. Sorrow not (says
the Apostle) as those that have no hope, as if he had said, sorrow if you will;
but do not sorrow as they that have no hope.

How is that? it is a sorrow with nothing but sorrow, from which they have no
hope of enlargement or freedom.

O then my brethren, suppose you have dead hearts, suppose you want zeal, you
want assurance; suppose it be so, yet labor to attain these graces; sorrow
and spare not; weep and mourn, and power out whole buckets of tears for your
sins, if you can: but, sorrow not with nothing but sorrow: be not
discouraged: suppose that thou have a dead heart, that thou art an hypocrite,
that thou have a rotten heart; it is a heavy thing, and a fearful case
indeed, for which thou have great cause of humiliation and sorrow; but yet
sorrow not desperately as men without hope: be not wholly discouraged, but as
you sorrow for your sins, so also labor with encouragement to get out and be
rid of your sins.

Fifthly, discouragements breed and procure a total perplexity. They leave the
soul in a maze, that it knows not whether to turn it self. When men come to
be discouraged, Oh what shall I do says one, I am utterly undone says
another: I know not what will become of me, says a third: Oh I am utterly
lost, I shall perish one day, one day God will discover me, and be avenged on
me for this and that sin: I were as good go to hell at the first as at the
last, for that will be the end of me: I have gone to Prayer, but that does not
help me: I have gone to Sacraments, but I find no help: still my soul lies
under the power of sin; still my sins are as strong in me as ever: Thus the
soul is discouraged and cries out, Oh, what shall I do? I know not what to
do. What shall I do say thou?

Alas, thou have things enough to do, if thou were not discouraged. Utterly
undone ^ No, man, thou might see that thou art not utterly undone, but that
thou art discouraged. Do thou not know what will become of th^e? yea, poor
soul, there is mercy, grace and peace for thee, if thou will not be
discouraged.

Sixthly, discouragements whisper within a man a sentence of death, and an
impossibility of escaping. As far as the discouragement of life goes, so far
goes the sentence of death. We despaired of life, and had the sentence of
death in our selves, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 8. 9. he despaired of life in
himself, and therefore had the sentence of death in himself; this was good,
but he did not despair of life in God; for then he should have had likewise
the sentence of death from God in his conscience.

If you despair in the Lord, you have the sentence of death and damnation from
God in your conscience; take heed of this my beloved; be not discouraged in
God: do not despair in the Lord: that will work a miserable effect in your
souls: it will secretly whisper a sentence of damnation in your souls.

It is strange to consider how many poor souls rub on with these whispering
sentences in their bosoms, suffering their consciences day by day to tell them
that they are rotten, to tell them that they were never yet converted, to tell
them that they are yet in the state of damnation, and yet they will not root
out these discouragements.

O go to the Throne of grace, beg for grace and for mercy, and for power
against sin, and be not discouraged. What? will thou carry thy own sentence
of death in thy breast? if thou will not rouse up thy soul, and pray with more
affection and confidence, and shake off discouragements, take heed lest thou
carry the sentence of thy own death and damnation in thy bowels. O therefore
once more let me beseech you to take heed of these discouragements, and now
hearken to the voice of God which calls upon you, fear not. Thou drewest
nigh in the day that I called upon thee, thou said fear not.

FINIS.
THE MISERY OF THE Creatures by the sin of Man.
ROMAN. 8. VER. 22. For we know that every creature groaneth with us also, and
travelleth in pain together unto this present.
THe Heavens and the Earth and every creature in both, have a threefold
goodness created in them by God.

First, they have a goodness of end; God made every creature for his own
glory, for the setting forth of his own praise; the Lord has made all things
for himself, Prove. 16. 4. that is, that himself might be honored and
glorified by all.

Secondly, a goodness of nature; as God God saw every thing that he made, and
behold it was very good, Genesis 1. 31. very good for that end, and fit for that
purpose for which he made it.

Thirdly, a goodness of use: as God created men to use them to that end, to
have dominion over them, Genesis 1. 38. that is, take them for thy use and
employment: and according as I have made them to set forth my glory, and made
them set forth that end; So, see thou use them to that end. God has appointed
man that he should be the creatures mouth, and their heart, and their reason,
to praise and magnify the Lord in them, and by them, and with them, and for
them, that man being set in a course to serve God, should have the use of all
the creatures as under-helps unto him: as, the Sun to shine on him, the air
to breath in, the (...) to refresh him, the earth to bear him, the trees to
feed him, the whole world for to be Gods Looking-glass for him, wherein he
might see the in^^sible things of God. But, behold, man rebels against God his
Maker, and brings a curse upon himself, Genesis 3. 19. and upon all his
posterity, ver. 16. and upon all the creatures, verse. 17. and this curse lies
so heavily upon them, that they all groan unto this day under the burden;
namely, because man has violently wrested them from the goodness of their
end, Jerome said concerning Arrianisme, the whole world groaneth under it. Yea,
says S. Paul, it travels in pain till it be delivered, for so the word
signifies, as much as a distressed woman in travel. It is a figure (which we
call Prosopopeia) whereby a Person is feigned to the creature, as though it had
will, desire, sorrow, groaning. It is a Metaphorical speech, for we know that
the whole creation groaneth with us, and travelleth in pain unto this present.

The words now read contain in them these four particulars.

First, the agony of the creature under the slavery of sin; the whole
creation groaneth.

Secondly, here is the agony of the Saints:

Thirdly, here is the continuance of both:

Fourthly, here is the certainty of the thing:

There be four several evils says Peter Martyr; under which every creature
groaneth under the hand of man.

First, the continual labor the creature is put too: you see the creature is
put to a continual labor: the Sun is ever shining, the earth is ever bearing,
the fire is ever burning, etc. therefore as the Isralites groaned under the
hard task of Pharaoh, so the creatures groan under the continual toil they
are put to by sinful man.

Secondly, it groans in that it does sometimes partake of the plagues of the
ungodly: in the destruction of wicked men the creatures have their share; as in
the deluge of the old world, it drowned all the world, saving only some few
that were with Noah in the Arc: in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorr^^ the
creatures were destroyed by fire and brimstone from Heaven. In the destruction
of Egypt the Vengeance of God came upon their cattle, and many other
creatures. Therefore as a child groans under his fathers rod, so does the
creature under Gods plagues.

Thirdly, the creatures have a sympathy and instinctive fellow feeling of man's
wretchedness: therefore as a tender heart would screech to see another man
break his neck: so the creatures compassionately groan under our evils.

Fourthly, because they are distorted, rent and torn from their proper Master;
the creatures were made to set forth Gods Power, the wisdom, the truth, the
goodness, and the glory of God; when therefore they art distorted and carried
another way, the creatures groan.

When the creatures are forced to give their service to the wicked desires, and
lusts of the ungodly; as the Sun to give his light, the earth her fruits, the
air its breathing: therefore, as a good son would groan that another should
violently compel his hand to stabbe his own father: so do the creatures
groan together with us, and travel in pain unto this present.

Hence observe, That ^uery creature groaneth under the slavery of sin: not
only under the slavery of sinful man, but under the slavery of sin: so that
they groan under the Saints of God so as the Saints groan with them. So far
as they minister to the flesh of Gods people, so far they groan under them:
the creature groaneth under the slavery of sin.

Are men swearers? because of swearing the Land mourns. Jer. 23. 10. Do men
lie, steal, commit adultery? for this cause the Land mourns. Hos. 4. 2, 3.
Are women proud, and do they brave it out in their apparel? the very gates
shall lament and mourn for it. Isay 3. 16. Do men covet an evil
coveteousnes, coveting more the gain of the world then the glory of God? The
stone out of the wall shall cry and the beam out of the timber shall answer
it. Hab. 2. 11. Are men wrathful, and choleric, with Moab? then Moab groans
against Moab. Isay. 16. 7. The grounds and dwellings of Moab, groan under the
hands of Moab; the walls of Moab, against the men of Moab.

But it may be demanded, did ever any or the earth to groan, or the trees, or
any such like creatures groan? how do the creatures groan?

They may be said to groan five ways.

First, this is spoken hyperbolically, to declare Chrysostom, does the Prophet
bring in the vines groaning, the roof of the temple and the very highways
groaning upon men's sins, to signify the exceeding great desire that each of
the creatures have to be redeemed from such a thraldom.

Secondly, this is spoken Analogically, in under heaven cannot find a
straighter line then it will to fall down by; so every creature, it has such
an obedientiall instinct to glorify God, as if it had reason to obey by;
wherefore it is said to groan to serve sin; the Land shall mourn, every
family a part: Zachar. 12. 12. As men mourn with reason at the crucifying of
the Lord of life, so the Land it self mournes Analogically at the same.

Thirdly, this is spoken supposedly or by way of supposition. Every creature
groaneth: that is, if they had reason, they would groan to be so misused.

Beloved, the liquor that the drunkard abuses, if it had reason as well as a
man to know how shamefully it is abused and spoiled, it would groan in the
barrells against him: it would groan in the cup against him, it would groan
in his throat and belly against him; it would fly in his face, if it could
speak, and cry out drunkard, out.

So if God should open the mouth of the creatures, as he did open the mouth of
Balaans Ass: then, the proud man's garments on his back would groan against
him; there is never a creature but if it had reason to know how it is abused,
till a man is converted, it would groan against man.

If the creature were conscious of man's abuse of it, then the Land would groan
to bear us, the Air would groan to give us breathing, our houses would
groan to lodge us, our beds would groan to ease us, our food to feed us,
our clothes to cover us, and every creature would groan against us to give us
any help or comfort, so long as we live in sin against God.

Fourthly, intelligently, there is an intellective Paul wronged and persecuted
the Church, Christ calls out from heaven to him, Why persecutest thou me? Acts.
9. 4. Why? because he persecuted the Church, which was Christ his Church. As
Christ is the head of his Church, so God has made him the heir of all the
creatures; all the creatures are delivered up to Christ, and they are his: so
that a man cannot wrong the creatures but he wrongeth Christ, and Christ
groans in the creatures, against the drunkard, Drunkard, why abusest thou me?
When the covetous man is coveting for the world, Christ cries in his barn, he
cries in his Chest: Christ cries in his goods, Wretch, Wretch, why wrongest
thou me? Does a man abuse his apparel to pride? Christ groans against him,
Wretch, Wretch, why abusest thou me? all the creatures are so inlivened,
quickened, preserved by God, that a man cannot meddle nor lay his hand on the
creature, but he meddles with God himself.

Fifthly, this is spoken specifically: not of Origin would have it, nor of men
in general as Austin would have it, because man is a little world, and all
creatures meet in him: But specifically, every creature groaneth: that is,
says Gregory and Hugo, and others, the goaly groaneth: and it is therefore
said every creature groaneth, because the godly groan; every creature
groaneth in the bowels of the Saints; they take the part of every creature,
and come before God in the behalf of the creatures, in their prayers,
confessions, and humiliations, confessing how horribly and fearfully the
creatures are abused, groaning and mourning in their hearts for it.

Thus you see how the creatures may be said to groan under the slavery of
sin; Come we to the reasons why the creatures are said to groan under the
slavery of sin.

First, because it is distracted in its service: Psalm. 119. 9. that is, they
minister to his praise, they serve for the setting forth of his glory, they all
conspire to Gods own end and purpose: all the creatures are Gods servants,
the flesh and wicked men are Gods enemies; the creatures were made to serve
God. Oh then how distracted are they, when they are made to serve the flesh and
corruption? the earth was made to honor God, and therefore it must needs
groan to carry one that is a rebel against God: meat and drink were made
for Gods glory, and therefore they must needs groan to feed a rebel: the Sun
and Moon were made to declare Gods praise, and therefore they must groan to
give light to a rebel: they will see nothing by it but to dishonor God. Gold
and silver, goods and cattle, corn and grass, were made for Gods praise, and
therefore they must needs groan to maintain a rebel; tongues were made to
bless God, therefore they must needs groan to be in the mouths of swearing
and lying rebels: eyes were made for Gods praise, to see the Word and Works
of God withal, therefore they must needs groan to be in the heads of lustful
wantons, that behold nothing but vain and sinful objects by it.

Needs must the creatures groan that is distracted in its service. God would
have one thing, and the wicked another. When a wicked man thinks of a
creature, or meddle with a creature, or uses a creature not to that end God
has appointed it for, the creature is distracted in its service, it knows not
which way to go, our Savior tells us Matthew. 6. 14. and No man can serve two
Masters; If a servant should be compelled to have two Masters: the one bids him
go one way, do such a thing; the other commands the clean contrary of him,
and that upon life and death: how miserably should such a one be distracted,
and how would it make him sigh and groan under such a slavery: so it is with
the creatures: When God the true and proper Master of them commands and
appoints one thing, and one end for them, and wicked men, usurping tyrants,
shall forcibly carry them to another: needs must the creat^res groan in such
distraction; the creatures continually gasp to set forth the praise of God:
they are continually ministering of new occasions to glorify God.

Secondly, they groan because of the unprofitablenesse (...).
of their service; they serve, and serve, and get nothing by it. Should a
servant do never so hard a task, toil and moyle himself never so much: yet
if he should have good pay for his labor, it would not vex him; there would be
some comfort in it ^ but when a servant has toyled and labored; if then he
should have nothing but stripes for wages, and blows for quarteridge, it would
even break his heart, and it would make him to groan to live under such a
servitude. Thus is it with the poor creatures: they serve wicked men and have
nothing but labor for their pains: nothing but woes, and curses, and the
plagues of God upon them for their pains, Genesis 3.

Beloved, what are all those heaths, parched grounds, barren lands, etc.
amongst us, but the groanings of the creatures under our sins? What are the
tempests, inundations of waters, strange snowes, earthquakes, but the groanings
and quakings of the creatures under our sins? What are all murraines,
glanders, plagues and pestilences, but the groanings of the creatures under our
sins? What are those strange unnatural births, and misshapen monsters that
are brought f^^th daily, but the groanings of the creatures under our hands? it
is loath to serve us.

Look upon the Husbandman, the earth is loath to give him a harvest, he is
feign to dung it and dress it, and by his Plough to rent and tear up the very
heart of it and sow and harrow it, etc. Its loath to serve such a hard Master.
Look on all the creatures, and see how backward, how dull and untoward they
are to yield service to man, because they have such hard pay for their labor.

Thirdly, because of the uncessantnesse of its service. It is ever toyling and
laboring without intermission. Beloved, we were not able to live, unless the
creatures were still in action, unless the Sea were always in motion, the
earth always bearing, the fire always heating, and all other things doing
their part. What servant is there, but that sometime or other has his holy
day, his day of recreation? but the creatures are never at rest. By watering he
wearieth the thick clouds, Job. 37. 11.

Is not the Sun in the Firmament wearied by poasting up and down from East to
West? is it not strange to think what toil it has in its continual
circuits, when it runs in one hour two thousand thousand miles. Those that
have no knowledge in the working of the creatures may think it strange, but
they that have learning and knowledge, know it to be as true as the Sun
shines. But when it has gone thus far, what good does come from it? one
sees to drink, swear and swagger; another see to Dice and Card by it;
another sees to Hunt and Hawk by it, another sees to trade and chaffer: but
few see to glorify God by it. Is it not a miserable thing that when the
creature has been at all this labor and toil, yet it shall do it for base
sinful man, that will not see to glorify God by it?

Fourthly, in regard of the misery and woe that the creatures lie under, so
that it had been good for the creatures that they never had had a being: but
that God means to deliver them. As it was said of Judas that betrayed Christ,
good it had been for him if he had never been borne; So beloved, were it not
that God keeps the creature until the day of redemption of the Sons of God,
then to free them from bondage and misery, it had been good for the creatures
that they had had no being. Better it were the creature were annihilated to its
old nothing, then that wicked men should thus cast an eye upon the creature,
tread upon the creature, breath in the creature, live of the creature; better
were it for the creature to be turned to its old nothing.

I will make it plain;

Every creature has a double end, a specificall, and an ultimate end. pray
mark it.

First, a special or intermediate end, and as, the specificall end of fire is
to burn, of the Sun to shine, of the water to moisten.

Secondly, the ultimate and last end of the

The ultimate end of a creature, as it is a creature, namely to set forth Gods
glory, is more essential to it, then its own specificall end, because it has
this specificall end only in reference to the ultimate end.

Therefore, if the creature be robbed of its last end, it is robbed of its
being. The soul and heart of the creature is killed, and it is undone, when as
it is taken from his ultimate end. It were as good that the world were no
world, as that God have no glory by it: as good no earth, no corn, no cattle,
as that God be not honored by by it: A man no man, if he do not honor God: a
creature no creature, if it do not honor God: it is as much as if the
creature were annihilated to its first nothing, yea worse: for, there is no
evil in nothing, all evil is founded out of some good.

Hence it follows, that a wicked man groans when it is not in his proper
place.

I desire not to be misconstrued in this hard point: wicked men have a fivefold
right to the creatures, which is as good as nothing without the sixth.

First, they have a civil right: so Nabals Sam. 25. 4. And he was a thief
that should have stolen them from him. A man is a thief before God and man
that robs a wicked man.

Secondly, a providentiall right: that is, Jer. 27. 5. God that made the
Heavens and the earth with all creatures he distributes and disposes of them
according to his own will.

Thirdly, a vindicative right from Gods Nebuchadnezzar was a wicked man, yet
when the Lord would have him to execute his revenge upon Judah for Judahs
sins and rebellions against God, to this end the Lord delivered up all the
Cattle, and all the Lands of Judah into the King of Babylons hand, though in
the end he vomits them up again.

Fourthly, a wicked man may have a creatures right: a wicked man as he is a
creature, so he has a creatures right to the creatures. For one creature
depends on another, and helps one another, and all join to maintain the life
of man. God has commanded man that he shall not murder; and therefore he is
not to murder himself. Wherefore when he is hungry he must not starve
himself, but must eat: when he is dry he must not choke himself, but he
must drink, be he never so wicked.

Fifthly and lastly, they have a filial right to them, for God will have his
grace and the Gospel of his Son Christ to be offered unto them: he will have
the wicked invited to faith and repentance; now this cannot be unless they
should live: they cannot be invited to faith unless they a natural life: and
a natural life they cannot have, if they should have no natural helps to
uphold them therein, Psalm. 115. 16. The Heavens aae the Lords, but the earth
has he given to the children of men. Chrysostom says, he has given all the
creatures to men in common, I have given them my creatures here below, that
they might trust in me above: that they may enter into the kingdom of Heaven at
the last. This is a filial right, when he that is not may be a Son of God:
therefore God will have the Gospel preached to the wicked. Now, if the wicked
might not have the creatures, how could they come to Church? Alas, you were not
able to sit in your Pews and to hear the Gospel preached, if you might not
have the creatures.

But beloved, all these rights are nothing without another right. The creatures
may groan in their hands: these make their doom and damnation the greater,
and the bondage and misery of the creature the greater, that the creature
should help man to come to Christ, and then he will not have him: that the
creature has fed and nourished such a one that he might repent, but he will
not: that the creature has given him life, light and strength to lead him to
faith, but he will no^ believe: O, then, the creature fetches such a groan as
that it makes all the world to ring with it, and God hears the groans.

A wicked man has no filial right to the creatures, they have no Son-like
right in Christ: they have a filiable right, because they are invited to be his
Sons and daughters; but as long as they live in their sins they are none of
his sons, neither have they any filial right.

Beloved, man's first Charter is out of doubt lost, by reason of sin; all the
creatures are fallen by lapse into the hands of God the owner again. Now
Christ is our chief Lord, he is made the Heir of all things, Hebrews 1. And
the wicked that are not new creatures in Christ, in regard of filial right,
they are but incroachers; and therefore every creature groans in their
fingers, and every thing that they have, groans to be theirs; their very meat
groans in their bellies, their sleep groans in their heads, their breath
groans in their lungs: yea, the very blood groans in their veins, and woe is
them that they have not ears to hear these groans.

Though God give them Tables, and fill them with abundance, yet he raines his
fierce wrath and vengeance upon their meat while they are eating, Job 20. 23.
God will make them restore every creature they have; they shall make
restitution as oppressors of the poor creatures, verse. 18. and their meat
shall be turned into the gall of Aspes, verse. 14. for the very creatures shall
rise up in judgment against them, and condemn them: we know that every
creature groaneth.

Secondly, this may teach us that the wicked have little cause to be merry at
any time, because there is nothing about them, nor in them, nor before them,
but groaneth against them. Every creature that they have groans because it is
possessed by them: not some kind of creatures, but every creature, as
Theophylact observes, every creature groaneth against them.

Do thou live in thy sins, and yet art merry? thou art mad. Do thou
live in thy carnal estate and condition, and yet can rejoice? thou art
surely besides thy self. For who can be merry in the midst of thousand
thousands of groans? Thy Apparel groans, thy Laces, thy Silks, and thy
Braveries groan, till either thou be a new creature, or else be in hell.
Thy house and thy stuff, thy barn and thy store do groan, till either thou
be a Convert or in Tophet. Every penny in thy purse, every ragge on thy back,
yea thy flesh and thy bones, yea thine own soul and thy spirits as they are
Gods creatures, and take his part, they all groan against thee till thou be
cut off.

Not only all thy sins, all thy oaths, lies, vain speeches; not only
every absence from Church, every idle thought, every unprofitable word, every
Sermon that thou have heard without profit, every exhortation thou have heard
without benefit, every sickness thou have had without reformation, every day
of patience thou have enjoyed without repentance, not only all these do
groan against thee: but also every creature in heaven and in earth, they do
all groan and travel in pain to be delivered out of thy slavery. Whatsoever
thou do, the creatures groan and complain against thee. How then can
thou rejoyee, or have merry day? I have said of this joy it is mad: and do
thou rejoice? thy rejoicing shall be short. Job. 20. 5.

Beloved, needs must a wicked man have wrath and vengeance powered down upon
him; for all creatures groan to God for his vengeance and destruction. The
creatures cry unto God, Lord, plague this man: Lord, shower down thy curses
on him: he has abused and wronged me: Lord, let not such a rebel as that man
is, escape, but in thy justice be avenged on him for his abuse of us.

Weep and howl rather then thou secure and impenitent person; let this be a
Corasime to thy pleasantest lust, and as an Arrow shot into thy heart to let
out the life and blood of all thy sins and corruptions, to think of this.
And in the fear of God take heed, how thou go on in thy sins, in thy
abuse of Gods creatures, least thereby thou forcing the creatures to groan for
vengroane, they pull down the wrath and plagues of God upon thy head.

Oh what a terror is this to the wicked; every creature groans: not in
compassion for thee, nor in fellow-feeling with thee, as with the godly, but in
indignation against thee.

The horses, and the bridles, they should have written upon them holiness in
the Lord Zach. 14. 20. this is a Prophecy of the Churches holiness under
Christ, not as Theoderit adplies it to Hellena, who adorned her horse-trappings
with the nails of Christ his cross. Hierome refuits that; but, to show that
Christ he will have even the horses and bridles, and all and every thing for a
holy use; so the silly horses and even the bridles do groan and pronounce woe
unto the ungodly riders that fear not God.

Every pot in Judah, and every bowl in Jerusalem shall be holy unto the Lord,
ver. 12. The drinking pots and bowls do groan, woe be unto him that drinks,
and lives not a godly life: yea the very highways shall be called the ways of
holiness, I say 35. 8. the ways and the paths groan under all that go on them
and are not holy.

There is no creature above or beneath as Porsper speaks, which does profess
the praise of God, and therefore every creature contesteth against thee that
praysest not God. The Angels and all the Host of Heaven praise God. Psalm. 148.
the Sun, the Moon and the stars praise God, the heavens and the waters
that be above the heavens praise God: the earth, the dragons, and all the
deepes, fire and hail etc. Kings of the earth, etc. all these sing forth the
praises of God. And therefore they all groan against him that prayseth him not.

Better were it for thee to have all the devils in hell against thee, then to
have the groans of Gods creatures against thee. I would rather have all the
devils in hell, and all the wicked in the world against me, then the least
worm or dust of the earth to groan in the ears of the Lord against me. A
thousand worlds cannot do me so much good, as the least groan of the meanest
of all Gods creatures can do me hurt. Oh then how shall the wicked ever hope
to escape the doom to come, that have so many millions of creatures groaning
against them.

But what kind of groans are these?

upbraiding groans. witnessing groans. accusing groans. They are judgeing
and condemning
First, they are upbraiding groans, Give ear Oh ye heavens, and I will
speak, and hear Oh earth the words of my lips. Dent. 32. 1. as if God had
said, mark O ye heavens, and let all the whole world hear what I testify
against this people: as if the heavens and the earth did upbraide them of their
unthankfullnesse. God commands the Sun to shine and it shines: the earth to
fructify and it obeys: But this wicked people he commands to repent and to
forsake their sins, and they will not.

Chrysostom says, wicked men although they have natural reason in them, are
more senseless then senseless creatures: the rocks, and the flints, the fly
and the gnats may upbraide them; the rocks rent in sunder, but this people will
not rent their hearts; swarms of flies were hist for to come, and they yielded
obedience; and the livelesse creatures groan under the slavery of sin: but
they will not obey, they will not be brought to groan for their sins. How do
all the creatures upbraide man! Do ye thus requite the Lord O ye foolish
people and unwise.

Beloved, how do the heavens and the earth upbraide thee for unthankfullnesse;
were thou ever in sickness, and God did not deliver thee? were thou ever in
misery, and God did not comfort thee? were thou ever in any straight, and God
did not direct thee? in sickness who was life unto thee? in poverty who
supplied thee? in danger who delivered thee? was it not God that has done all
for thee? And shall the Lord command thee obedience, and will thou not grant it
him? does he command thee to part with thy lust, and crucify all thy
corruptions, and will thou not obey him? does the Lord command thee to be
meek, humble, patient, and do thou refuse? then, hear O heavens, and
hearken O earth.

Secondly, the groans of the creatures witnessing groans. I call heaven and
earth to record against you; know that you shall shortly perish, said Moses to
the Isralites. Dent. 4. 26. So beloved, let me say to you, I call heaven and
earth to record against you, that woe and damnation shall be to that man that
obeys not the commandments of God; Cursed be that man, that goes on still in
his wickedness. The heavens write his curse, and the whole earth do witness
his vengeance, that will not give over his lust at the commandment of the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

As Joshuah said unto all the people, Josh. 24. 27. Behold this stone shall be
a witness unto us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord, which he spoke
unto us; it shall be a witness etc. so may I say unto you, the walls of this
house shall cry, the timber of the Church shall answer, this Sermon that you
have heard, this doctrine that has been preached unto you, if you will not
repent, if you will not humble your selves and obey the voice of your God, all
these shall witness against you another day, that you had a time, that you had a
day to repent in, you had the word of God calling you to it, but you would not.

Do thou commit a sin? and none by, but the stonnes in the streets? even
they see thee, like Joshuahs stone with seven eyes, and they shall witness
against thee. Do thou pray thy lazy prayers unto God, thoughtlesse of God,
and none by but the walls of thy Clofet, or thy bed, or the hangings? they
shall witness against thee. Do thou swear, and blaspheme the King of Heaven?
though none were present, but the fowls of the air, they shall carry thy
voice and declare the matter. Eccles. 10. 20. If the creatures groan against
thee, then they are sensible in some sort, to witness against thee.

Beloved, men's hearts are so stubborn, that we the Ministers of God may do as
the Prophet did, 1 King. 13. 2. who cried O Altar, Altar, thus says the Lord.
What? was the Prophet sent unto the Altar? had the Altar cares? No, he was sent
unto Jeroboam, his message was to him; but he knew that he would not hear, nor
believe, nor obey; therefore he turned from the King, and spoke to the
senseless Altar. So may we say for all the hearing some will afford us; O
walls, walls, thus says the Lord, cursed is the man that obeys not. O House
of the Lord, witness against this rebellious generation.

So Jeremy, he cried out, O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord,
thus says the Lord, write this man a castaway, that shall never prosper, Jer.
22. 29. he meant wicked Jeconiah the King; but because he was a dea^e Adder, he
preaches to the dead earth, as being more likely to listen then he.

O fearful doom! When Jeconiah will not hear, God he roares so loud that he
makes the dead and senseless earth to hear.

Beloved, in the fear of God, take heed, if there be any dead worldly-hearted
Professor here, if there be any loose profane sinner here, any impenitent
wretch that has not repented, if after the Lord has sent his Ministers to
thee, his Word and Gospel to thee, and thou will not hear; take he^d lest the
Lord direct his speech to the dead earth, and say, O earth, earth, earth, hear
the Word of the Lord; write these men, men that shall never prosper: they will
still covet and lie, they will still fret and chafe, they will still content
themselves with forms of godliness, they will still be lukewarm or key-cold;
they do still pray as they did, rub on as they did seven years ago; no more
holy, no more zealous, no more heavenly, they will not be bettered; O earth,
earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord, write them a people that shall never
prosper, a people that shall never be converted; write them men damned for
ever; let them come and hear Sermon after Sermon, but write them men that
shall never prosper; let them pray, and let their prayers never prosper; let
them go on in their dead-hearted profession, but write them men that shall
never prosper.

Beloved, God forbid that it should so be written against you, but woe be to
you if ever it be! for if once the earth has wrote this eternal decree of God
upon thy soul, it can never be altered; I will warrant thee thy damnation sure.

Thirdly, they are accusing groans; they

Fourthly, these groans are judgeing and condemning groans. He shall call the
Heavens above, and the earth to judge his people, Psalm. 50. 4. The creatures
groan; why then do thou not groan? the creatures account themselves
oppressed and sore afflicted because they are constrained to serve sin? why
then do thou injury them?

If the King should build him a stately Palace, and one should willingly deface
it, or abuse it, or pull it down; would not the very Ravens judge him a
Traitor? The creatures are Gods Palace, and thou demolishest their beauty, by
making them the instruments, or abettors, or matter, or incentives of sin;
thou shall be adjudged of High Treason against the King of Kings, for we know
that every creature groaneth with us and travelleth in pain together until
now.

Now we come to an use

Of Exhortation; does the creature take heed then you do not abuse the
creatures of God. There is not any one of them but if it be abused to sin or
by sin, but it will presently make its complaint (like a little child to his
Father) with groans unto God.

Labor to be a true Convert unto God; otherwise, if thou be not regenerate
and a Convert, every creature that thou have, is in bondage under thy hands,
and it groans unto God against thee, till God recover it out of thy hands
again.

I will recover my wool and my flax says God, Hosea 2. 9. the creature
groaned under thraldom, because it was possessed by them that were carnal;
and therefore God says he would recover it.

Secondly, labor not to sin against God, against thee. When Jonah had sinned
against God, the Sea roared against Jonah, and he at last knew it well enough:
for when the Mariners asked what he was, I am an Hebrew says he, and I fear
God, the God of Heaven, which has made the Sea and the dry Land, Jonah 1. 9.
as if he should say, I fear the Lord, for now I see the Heavens are black
against me: and the clouds mourn at me: and the Sea groaneth under me, seeing
I am fled from the presence of the Lord.

Thirdly, labor never to set your hearts on any creature; for, then, you abuse
it to worldliness, and covetousness. What greater injury can we offer to the
creatures, then by making them occasions of turning from God, which were given
us the more to oblige us to God?

If you be covetous and earthly, the creature must needs groan under this
wrong. Covetousness is Idolatry, says Saint Paul, Colos 3. 5. thou turnest
the creature into an Idol: every creature is the workmanship of God, but an
Idol is a thing dedicated of Devils.

Fourthly, labor to use all the creatures in humility and thankfulness. There
is not a creature, but it has this Motto engraven upon it, it is the gift of
God. In every thing then give thanks, 1 These. 5. 18. A thing and a creature
are convertible terms: if in every thing, then for every creature must we give
thanks; why? because every thing that God does for us, or does bestow upon us,
it is a gift: and a gift groans under unthankfulness: there is never a
sickness that thou have been delivered from, but it groans against thee, if
thou have not had thine iniquity purged by it: never a blessing but it will
groan aganist thee, if thou serve not God the better by it: never an ordinance
of life and grace but it groans against thee if thou art not sanctified and
made holy by it.

Fifthly, use them all as so many Books, and as so many Ladders or Rises to
climb up with the soul of God. When thou see how kindly and favorably the
Sun shines on thee, think are Gods creatures so comfortable! how comfortable
is the light of Gods countenance? When thou tastest the sweetness of any
creature, think then, O what infinite sweetness is there in God himself!
still, from the creatures, wind up thy soul to the Creator: use all the
creatures as a rise to wind up thine heart to see and know to meditate and
conceive of some thing of God.

Saint Anthony being found fault withal for want of Books, answered, My Books
are Gods creatures, and in them I may read, as in the silent Oracles of God;
this is my Book, and it has three pages, and as many Letters: Heaven, Water,
Earth: they are the pages of this book: Stars, Fishes, Fowls, and all the
Terrestrial creatures, they are the letters of this book.

There are but three maine Books in the world to be read: all other books are
but Commentaries upon them.


Read but these three, and meditate of them, and thou shall have understanding
in the ways of God, to know God in all thy ways.

Beloved, this is rightly to use the creatures, and thus using them, thou shall
prevent their groanings against thee: to behold and see God present in them all.

It was the saying of an Ancient, that, that man is blind, deaf, senseless,
brutish, that knows not God. Thou can not see a creature, but thou may see
God: thou can not feel a creature, but thou may feel God: thou can not
smell, not taste, nor meddle with a creature, but thou may smell and taste
God in the creature: thou can not behold a creature, but thou may behold
God in the creature.

O says one, if I could see God as he appeared to the Fathers, then I should
obey him, and fear him, and trust in him, and love him.

I answer, God appears now as he did then. How did God appear to Abraham,
Isaac, etc. and to all the holy Patriarchs and Prophets? Did God appear to
them in his own Essence and nature? No, it is impossible that any should see
God and live. When God appeared to them and showed himself to them, he did it
in a creature: And I pray you, does not God appear thus amongst us now? God
having made man to behold by sense, by sight, hearing, smelling, tasting,
handling; that all the knowledge he has, he must have it by these; God makes
as it were an apparition of himself; he takes the likeness as it were of the
Sun, Moon, and stars, and therein appears; he takes the Cattle, plants,
etc. and therein appears: therein he shows something of himself: thou never
see any creature but it is the appearance of God to thoe: the whole world is
an apparition of God to thee; God appears in the heavens, in the earth, and in
every creature. If therefore when thou look on any of the creatures, thou
make not an holy use of them, beholding God in them, using them as a rise to
wind up thy heart and soul to God; then thou abusest the creatures, and
make them to groan against thee. For, we know that the whole creation
groaneth and travelleth in pain till this present.

FINIS.
THE CHRISTIAN HIS IMITATION of CHRIST.
1 JOHN 2. VER. 6. He that says he remains in him, ought even so to walk as
he has walked
THis our blessed Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter, does declare these
four things.

First, a general proposition for the sins of the world; if any man sin,
we have an Advocate, verse. 11. 12.

Secondly, nd actual application of this to all true believers, who may all
know that Christ is theirs, and that they are Christ's, ver. 5. And hereby we
know that we know him, if we keep his commandments. We know and are
acquainted with this principle, that Jesus Christ is the propitiation for our
sins, if we keep his commandments.

Thirdly, here is the fantastical presumption of many men that hope and think
and say that they are in Christ, when indeed they are not in Christ. ver. 4. He
that says I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him.

Fourthly, here is an universal direction to all men, whereby to try and
examine themselves whether they be in Christ yea or no. He that says he
abides in him, ought himself to walk as he walked.

These words branch themselves into a Thesis, and an Hypothesis.

The Thesis is this, He that abides in Christ, must walk as he has walked.

The Hypothesis is this, If any man be conceited of the subject, that he
abides in Christ, he must be assured of the predicate, that he walk himself
even as Christ walked. If he say he is in Christ, he must be sure to walk as
Christ walked.

To walk as Christ walked; there is a life of a Christian: if he walk not as
Christ walked, it is a plain demonstration that he is not in Christ. He that
says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk as he walked.

He that says; as if the Apostle had said, if there be any that says he
abides in Christ, he must walk as Christ walked.

Hence observe, That a true Christian he walks as Christ walked, if he be in
Christ.

Before we make entrance hereupon, let me expound to you two things, lest we
meet with rubs in the way.

First, the conditional, IF.

Secondly, the exemplary, AS.

First, for the conditional, if, it is not a condign preparation unto, or a
previall disposition for Christ: for a man cannot first walk as Christ walked,
and then be in Christ. A graf^ cannot live the life of the stock, and then be
inoculated into the stock. No: but it is a subsequent condition; if ever a man
be in Christ, Christ holds him to these terms, to live as he lived, to walk
as he walked.

The first act is before the latter act: life before the actions of life; so
walk as Christ walked, this notes the actions of life. Now, a man must first
be in Christ, before he can walk as Christ walked.

Indeed this condition is first quoad cogn^s^^, to our knowledge: but it is not
first quoad esse and in its own nature. So then, to walk as Christ walked,
being a necessary consequent of being in Christ: we cannot be said to be in
Christ, if we walk not as Christ walked: for, take away the necessary
consequent, and you take away the antecedent; take away the walking as Christ
walked, and you take away the abiding in Christ? This condition is put in by
our Savior. John 15. 10. If ye shall keep my commandments, ye shall abide in
my love, as I have kept my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love. This
was the walk of Christ, he kept his Fathers commandments, and abode in his
love. This must be your walk too, that look to abide in Christ's love. If ye
keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love. But if there be any
commandment of Christ in all the Gospel that you will not conform to, it is
an evident sign that ye abide not in Christ's love.

2 For the exemplary, As, even as he walked.

Can any man walk as Christ walked? with sin, can walk as he walked?

This word, as, has a twofold signification: as; either such an as, as imports
an equality: or secondly similitude.

As this as imports an equality, so it is impossible that any flesh can walk as
Christ walked: so purely, so unspottedly, so steadily, so effectually as he
lived. No, for our Savior Christ was filled with the Holy Ghost: and of his
fullness have we all received grace for grace. John. 1. 16. Mark, he does not
say that we receive his fullness: but, some of his fulness: so that none can
walk as Christ walked with an as of equality: but there is an as of similitude.

A scholar writes as his masters coppie directs him: he begins every line as
his master begins, he ends as he ends, he sets himself to frame every letter
as his master framed it, to join letters and syllables together as his master
joined them together. Though there be no equality, he cannot write one stroke
or dash with his pen so well as his master: yet he does write as his master
sets his coppie: his hand follows his masters hand. So it is said of all that
are in Christ. Revel. 14. 4. that they follow the Lamb whether soever he
goes: they follow Christ in all duties, in all holiness, in all his
commandments: they tracke Christ in all his stepps, though they cannot walk
with such long strides, so steadily, so purely, so constantly as Christ: yet
they labor to tracke him with this as of similitude.

Do all that are in Christ, walk as Christ walked? yea Beloved: this is a
clause of the covenant of grace, so that a man cannot be in Christ, unless he
walk as Christ walked. For, thus runs the tenor of the covenant of grace:
Math. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall
find rest unto your souls. Mark, there is no rest to the soul, no grace to
the conscience, no assurance of the pardon of sin: Christ gives no comfort to
the heart, unless the heart will learn of Christ, follow Christ his copy, be
holy as he is holy, pure as he is pure, walk as he walked.

This will the better appear, if we consider that Christ his life must be the
example for our life, according to which we must live. Now, the exemplatum must
be conformable to the exemplary, says Aquinas; the draught must be according
to the copy; so if Christ's life be the pattern of our life, then our life must
be conformable to his life; and therefore Christ declares his ways unto us, as
our samplers; Christ was humble, and serviceable to all in the days of his
flesh, with this Motto, John 13. 15. I have given you an example that you
should do as I have done.

Thou art of thy master the devil, and his copy thou followest, if thou
account it an indignity to stoop, a disgrace to condescend to thy brother.
Christ was willing to suffer disgrace with this Motto, 1 Pet. 2. 21 Leaving us
an example that we should follow his steps.

Art thou loath to practice Religion for fear of the cross? loath to reproove
sin for fear of a flout, or of the displeasure of a great man: least thou
should procure his ill will? it is evident that thou follow^st not Christ,
because he has left us an example, that as he suffered, so also should we:
Christ was obedient to the death of the cross, not looking to his own things
so much as the things of others: so the Apostle warns us, Let the same mind
be in you that was in Christ Jesus, 1 John. 2. 5. you that be in Christ, must
have the same mind that Christ had. 1 John. 3. 3. He that has this hope,
purges himself even as he is pure. Howsoever the world nicknames and
reproaches purity, yet if any have this hope (indeed he may have other hopes,
he may have vain, rotten, dead hopes, and never seek after purity) but he
that has this hope, a true saving hope to be redeemed by Christ, he purifyeth
himself even as he is pure.

Thou then which art not pure, but make a mock of pureness and of
conscience of every sin: thou can have no true sound faith in the Lord
Jesus. Thou must be righteous even as he is righteous.

Thou happily say thou art righteous, thou do this and that
righteousness, this and that good action: take thou heed says the Apostle,
that thou deceive not thy self, thou must be righteous as Christ is righteous.

In a word, love is the fullfilling of the law, and Gualter carries it along
through all the law which Christ walked in: Christ loved us, and gave himself
for us with this injunction, a new commandment give I unto you, that you love
one another as I have loved you, John. 13. 34.

This was one of the maine reasons of Christ's coming into the world, to redeem
us for our justification; and then to be an example of life to us for our
sanctification, says Saint Basil. Christ was set for a sign to all nations.
Isay. 11. 10. A land-marke to all people, to take their aim, how to think,
how to speak, how to walk, how to live.

As men ^t Sea, if they see a Landmark, or the Pole Star, thereby know how to
guide the Ship; so Christ he is a sign to all Nations, a sign of zeal in
prayer, a sign of reverence in the Temple, of perseverance in holiness, of
piety in life. and of unspotted purity; and constancy in death.

Yea, to wind it up a little higher, to walk a^ Christ walked, is an As of
participation. We must not only walk as Christ walked with an as of
proportion; for so the beasts may walk; every creature, the Sun, the Moon,
etc. walk according to their rule wherein God has set them, as Christ did
walk in his course that God set him in: but this is not enough; he that is in
Christ, must walk as Christ walked, with an As of participation; he must
partake of the same life with Christ, and be led by the same Spirit of Christ,
guided by the same grace of Christ.

Even as less white is like more white, though not alike in the same degree,
yet in the same nature; there is the same nature in the lesser that there is in
the bigger; So we must have the same life, obey the same commandments, be
guided by the same rule, swayed by the same motions, led by the same Spirit
that was in Christ. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none
of his, says the Apostle, Romans 8. 9.

What, says one, can there be any man Psalm. 50. 10. and does he say that there
are some men that are none of his?

Yea, says the Apostle, If any man be not led by the Spirit of Christ's, the
same is none of his. Indeed he is Christ's as the beasts are his, by creation
and preservation, etc. but thou art none of Christ's by grace and redemption,
unless thou have the same Spirit that was in Christ to live in thee.

What is it to walk as Christ walked? it is to contemn the same gain and
pleasures and vanities of the world that he contemned; to yield to the same
precepts that he obeyed; to yield to the same reproaches, hatred and
persecutions that he endured; to take up the same duties, to preach the same
truths, to live in the same rule, and in all to be led by the same Spirit.

Thus you see the explanation of the doctrine; come we now to the Reasons,
which are principally these four.

The first reason is taken from the scope and end for which the Lord did send
his Son into the world; as to justify the ungodly, so also to conform all
those that are justified to the image of Christ.

You may read that this was Gods purpose, that he laid down in himself from
all eternity before the foundation of the world was laid; when he predestined
that his Son should come into the world, he predestined that all that should
be redeemed by him, should be conformable to the image of his Son, Romans 8. 29.
whomsoever he did foreknow with the foreknowledge of Love and predestination,
them he did predestinate to be made like unto Christ; that look what Christ
was by nature, they might be by grace.

If this be the end of Gods predestination; then it is impossible that any man
should be in Christ, and not have the image of Christ; Chrysostom says, that
as Christ was holy by nature: so those that are predestinate, should be holy by
grace.

God shall never be frustrated of his end and purpose. If God have purposed it,
who shall frustrate it? Man indeed may be frustrated of his end, because of his
weakness and inability to accomplish by himself what he purposes; some other
person or thing prevents him of his end. But God as he has a purpose in
himself, so he is powerful and able to bring his purpose to pass.

We may conclude that that man that prays for mercy, and wishes Oh that I
might have redemption by Christ, Oh that I meght go to Heaven, and yet lives
in his sins and slavery to his lusts: he prays to have benefit by Christ,
and to go to Heaven in spite of God, against the will and purpose of God.

God has predestined that all that shall have life and glory, shall be made
conformable to his Son; that they shall be holy, pure, and ^ighteous as Christ
was; that they shall be lowly, humble, and mecke as Christ was.

Our own consciences may tell us, that God cannot be frustrated of his end and
purpose: but that thus we must be made conformable to Christ, or else we shall
never have benefitt or salvation by him: or else Gods purpose would be
frustrated and in vain.

That thing must be frustrated, and in vain, that attaines not its end: if
this be the end that God has purposed in himself, in the giving of Christ for
life and salvation to the world, that all that are redeemed and saved by him,
should be made conformable to him: either all such as are not conformable to
the Image of Christ, shall never be saved, but shall perish for ever without
Christ: or else Gods purpose must be frustrated and in vain.

The second reason, is taken from the practice of Christianity (says Leo) in
vain are we called Christians, if we be not Imitators of Christ, and live as
he lived. The Disciples, are called Christians, Acts. 11. 26. The very name
tells us that we must be followers of Christ, or else, we are not in Christ: if
any man be in Christ, he must really be a Christian.

As a man if he be of a trade, he must set up that trade, all his layings out
and travel and pains must be in that trade: why? it is his profession: so, if
a man be in Christ, all his conversation must be Christian, his labors and
endeavors must be in the trade of Christianity, he must walk as Christ
walked. He must be a Christian in all his courses, in all his ways, or else he
is not in Christ.

As the Platonists are denominated from Plato, so are Christians from Christ.
The Franciscans from Francis, the Dominicans from Dominicke; these were bound
to follow the rules of their order, or else superstition would not suffer them
to be of that Order: much less can thou be of the Order of Christ, if thou
observe not his rules, if thou live not as he lived.

Christ has given thee a law for thy mind, for to govern thy thoughts: Thou will not busy thy thoughts with holy meditations: thy heart is not christian.
Christ has given a law to thy affections: thou will be fret^ull and impatient,
malicious, proud, and ambitious, and carnal; thy passions are not christian.
Christ has given a law to thy life, that thy life may be holy; therefore if
thy life be not according to the Gospel of Christ, thy life is not christian,
neither will Christ own thee for his, but will slay thee with curses, as an
enemy of his cross, and not as a follower of his death; these mine enemies
that will not that I should reign over them, says Christ: Luke. 19. 27. Bring
them hither and slay them before me.

Thou can not look for a Savior to have mercy on thee, if thou will not be
ruled as a Disciple of Christ, but thou shall be damned in the presence of
Christ. Slay them before me, says Christ; Christ Jesus which is the Savior of
the world, will damme thee, and see thee confounded before his face; he
himself will see thee in hell: thou may cry for mercy, and for the blood of
Christ; yet if thou will not live as Christ lived, but wilt rebel and sin
against Christ, Christ will see thee in hell, and though he look on thee, yet
he will destroy thee without mercy.

If ever thou be in Christ, thou must walk as Christ walked; thou must be a
Christian like to that good Martyr, who to all demands answered that he was a
Christian. When they asked him what his name was, he answered it was Christian;
his thoughts were Christian, his words and actions Christian; his country, his
hopes, his aim, all that ever he did, they could get nothing out of him, but
all was Christian, and so he gave testimony to the Lord Jesus. So I tell thee,
thou must be a Christian all over, a Christian in thy thoughts, in thy words, a
Christian in thy calling, and in all thy employments, being swayed by the
Gospel of Christ, or else thou art not in Christ.

The third reason is taken from the essential or rather from the integrall
union that is between Christ and all these that are in Christ; they are all
members of his most gracious body. Ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular, 1 Cor. 12. 27. now, we know that all the members have the same
life, and are quickened by the same soul: the soul is whole in the whole
body, and whole in every member of the body: so if Christ be our head, we are
his members, and the christian life of Christ must be diffused thorough us, so
that one man cannot be a drunkard, another a worldling, another an Epicure,
another a swearer, another a whoremaster, another a liar, another a
lukewarmeling, another a mocker, another a vain Jester, another a man-pleaser,
and yet be a member of Christ. All the members of Christ must have one life.

As in a man's body, there be veins, arteries, and nerves, that are the
channells to convey life, and motion and sense to every member, that all the
members may have the same life dispersed through the body. So it is in the body
of Christ: every member of Christ has faith for his veins, to convey the same
life, and the same spirits, and the same gracious motions to all the body, that
it is not now the member that lives, but Christ that lives in it. Gal. 2. I
live not, says the Apostle, but Christ lives in me. As in the body, it is not
the eye that sees, if we speak properly, but the man that sees with the eye:
so it is not the knife that cuts, but the man that cuts with the knife; it is
not the ear that hears, but the man that hears with the ear: so in the
body of Christ, it is no more the man that speaks, but the truth of Christ
speaking in him. We have the mind of Christ, says the Apostle: 1 Cor. 2. 16.
if we be in Christ, Christ thinks in us, Christ speaks in us, Christ walks in
us, Christ does all in us: As in the same body, the soul rules and quickens
every member. The body of Christ cannot be a monster, like those Locusts spoken
off Revel. 9. 7. that had shapes like horses, heads as it were like Crowns of
gold, and their faces like the faces of a man, and had hair like women, and
teeth like Lions; this is a monster, and not a simple body: such a one cannot
the body of Christ be; a mocker for one member, an ignorant sot for another, an
hypocrite for another, a carnal gospeller for another, a covetous worldling
for another.

As in the body of a man, every member in this man's body, must be this man's
member, and not the member of another man: As for example, Peter must have
Peter's legs, and not Simon Magus his legs: Peter must have Peter's eyes, and not
Alexanders eyes: Peter must have Peter's hands, and not Judas hands: you cannot
take the eye of an Horse, the leg of a Dog, and the paw of a Bear, and put
them together, and say here is a man: no, this would be a monster: every perfect
body must have its own members.

So it is in the body of Christ: every member in Christ his Body, must have
Christ his Members: every member in a man's body acts with reason, so every
member of Christ acts with direction of Christ it is informed by Christ, his
mind is quickened by Christ his life: so that a man cannot be a member of
Christ, but he must walk as Christ walked.

I know, the best Christian may fall seven times a day, though he be in Christ:
it does not therefore follow that every particular action savours of Christ:
but, as every member in the body lives the life of the whole body, or else it
is a dead member: so thou must live the life of Christ, or else thou can
never be saved.

You know that all the actions of a man are guided by reason: yet there are
some particular actions that he does, and not by reason: as it may be he shakes
his head, or moves his hand, and jogs his foot, and considers not what he
does: they are the actions of a reasonable man, though not reasonable actions:
so, there may be many actions that are the actions of Christians, though not
Christian actions. The sins of the godly, they are the actions of a
Christian, but they are not Christian actions: there may be stoppings in the
body: though the same life and quickening runs through the whole body: yet
through the stopping of the liver and the pipes, distempers and ill humors may
be raised in the body; so it may be in the body of Christ: and so many a
Christian may fall through infirmity; but, the course of a Christian, the life
of a Christian, the ordinary trade of a Christian, the walk of a Christian is
to live with the same spirit that lived in Christ, to walk in the same way
that Christ walked in.

The last reason, is taken from the near relation that is to be between
Christ and every member of Christ. They are not only the Servants and
Disciples of Christ, but they are the children of Christ, by his begetting of
them. If all that are in Christ, are the children of Christ, they must needs
walk as Christ walked. Like begets the like. Indeed a godly man may beget a
wicked child, a graceless son; the reason is, because he begets his son
not as he is a godly man, but as he is a man corrupt by nature with sin: but
Christ begets as he is God, and therefore as he is without sin in himself,
so he never begets any but by an eternal spirit, and therefore they cannot but
be like him. Be ye followers of God as dear Children. Ephesians. 5. 1. The Apostle
grounds his exhortation upon a necessity in grace. Consider, if you be the
children of God, it can be no otherwise but you must be followers of Christ as
dear children. The begetter communicates himself to the begotten: if the
begetter be flesh, he begets flesh: so Adam begot a son after his own
likeness: that that is borne of the flesh, is flesh. John. 3. and is of a
fleshly nature. That that is borne of the spirit is spirit. If we are begotten
again by the Spirit of God, then are we spiritualized of God; so that a man
cannot be in Christ, unless he be the child of Christ, and walk as Christ
walked. Christ was perfect, Christ was merciful; be you so, says Christ,
Math. 5. Be you perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect; as if he should
say, you cannot be the children of your Heavenly Father, unless you be perfect
as he is perfect, merciful as he is merciful, holy as he is holy, righteous
as he is righteous, walk as he walked.

Is it so that all that are in Christ, walk

These blaspheme the holy and sacred name of Christ. Oh says one, I hope I am
a Christian: yet the man is a drunkard, or a whoremaster, or a gamester, or a
worldling, a proud man, a covetous man. What? was Christ a drunkard? was Christ
a whoremaster? was Christ a gamester, a worldling, proud, covetous? it were
blasphemy for any to say so of Christ: and it is also blasphemy for thee who
walk not after the Gospel, to say thou art a Christian. As I am a
Christian, says another: yet the man is a filthy speaker. Was Christ such a
one? a swearer, etc.? Thou blasphemest the name of Christ. I hope we are all
Christians, says a third; and yet they are men that live in security and
profaneness. What? was there security in Christ? was profaneness in Christ? Oh,
what blasphemy is it for thee to style thy self by the Name of Christ, to say
thou art in Christ? Revel. 2. 9. says Christ, I know the blasphemy of them
that say they are Jews and are not: that say they are the children of Abraham,
but do not the works of Abraham. If a man did blaspheme God to style himself
a Jew, or a child of Abraham, that did not the works of Abraham: what
blasphemy then is it for thee to say thou art a Christian, and yet do not the
works of Christ? could not a man take the name of Abraham, but he did
blaspheme, unless he did the works of of Abraham? how then durst thou take
the name of Christ upon thee, and not do the works of Christ, not walk as
Christ walked?

Beloved, is any man a Christian? he has holiness engraven in his forehead to
the Lord, in his heart, in his thoughts, in his words, and in all his ways: he
is one that gaspeth after holiness.

Art thou a Christian? of all sins under Heaven God cannot endure the sins
of a Christian that has the name of Christ put upon him. When Gods material
temple was defiled by buyers and sellers, Christ whippes them out, and after
told them that the days would come wherein there should not be left of it one
stone upon another. God would not endure the Temple because it was dedicated to
his Name, called his house, when it was made a den of thieves. Does God care so
much for stocks and stones, that are dedicated to his name? will he not endure
an unholy stone, and will he endure an unholy Christian? Thou that art
dedicated unto God, and unto his service, thou that art dedicated to prayer, to
hearing, thou that art dedicated to an holy conversation, thou that art called
the Temple of God, and the House of God, will thou make it a den of thieves,
a den of vain thoughts, a den of wicked words, of dead and ungodly works?
will thou defile the Temple of the Lord? then know, the Lord will not let one
stone lie upon another, but will cast thee down and damn thee body and soul
in hell for ever.

Thou say thou art a Christian; how so? thou say thou wast christened:
thy condemnation is the heavier, if thou say thou have been baptized into
the Name of Christ, and have not put on Christ. Examine thy self: have thou
put on Christ? otherwise it is no matter for thy baptism.

Can I say that man has put on his cloths, that has not a ragge on his back,
nor a shoe on his foot, nor a hatte to his head, nor a ring on his finger? so,
when there is never a Christ in thy thoughts, never a Christ in thy speech and
conference, never a Christ in thy walk, never a Christ in thy calling, in thy
buying and selling, never a Christ shining forth in thy life and conversation,
can thou say thou have put on the Lord Christ?

Can any man say that a beggar has put on Royal robes, when he has nothing
but rags and patches* upon him? so, if I see a man with ragged thoughts of
the world, with ragged speeches of the flesh, and a ragged course and
conversation, according to the course and conversation of the world, I can
never say that such a one has put on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Do thou say thou have put on Christ? why then, show me the signs of Christ
in thee. Shall I see it by thine apparel? it may be that is garish. Shall I
see it by thy speech and conference? it may be that is earthly and carnal.
Shall I see it by thy thoughts? it may be they are vain, sinful, and worldly.
Shall I see it by thy company? it may be they are wicked and graceless. Shall
I see it in thy course and conversation? it may be that is loose and profane.
How can thou then demonstrate that thou art a Christian? it may be now and
then thou will give a prayer unto Christ, turn up the white of thine eye to
Christ, it may be thou will look into the Temple of Christ, and lend an ear
to Christ. Is this to be in Christ? if thou be in Christ, then thou must live
the life of Christ in all thy ways.

The life of a man is a continued thing. A man is not alive at his dinner, and
dead when he has done: alive at his work, and dead when his work is done; so
it is not enough for thee to prove that thou art in Christ, that thou art alive
at prayer, or at preaching: life is a continued thing: thou must be alive after
prayer as well as before, alive after the Sermon as well as whilst thou art at
it, if thou have the life of Christ in thee; it is a standing life: it will not
make thee alive at prayer, and dead when thou have done: it will not make thee
holy and spiritual at a Sermon, and leave thee dead and carnal when it is
done: not holy and heavenly in a discourse and conference, and worldly and
profane when it is done: not to be holy and lively etc. in a good mood, and
leave thee deadhearted, secure and loose afterward; this is not be in Christ.
no; the life of Christ is a standing and a continuing life: it will make thee
alive after all thy services; after every duty as thou wast before or in the
duty.

He that says he abides in him, etc.

In this word He, there are three uses.


First Indignation. The Apostle does as point at a certain man in his
congregation, as if that there had been some man that he knew was not in
Christ. What man soever, whether in this pewe, or in that pewe, whether on this
form, or on that form, if he abide in Christ, he ought to walk as Christ
walked.

Hence observe, That a Minister is bound De^t. 1.
to preach home in particular, so that he may summon this man and that man in
the Church, as the Apostle does here; ( he that says) if there be any one
amongst the whole multitude, that says he abides in Christ, he ought also
himself to walk as he walked. And this commission God gives unto all his
Ministers: Mark. 16. 15. Go, preach the Gospel to every creature: he does
not say preach the Gospel before every creature so they may do, and preach in
general: but to every creature, that every creature may feel the Gospel
beating on his heart, that every creature may see his sins, that so the Gospel
may be applied to his heart.

All the names given to Ministers, show thus much. They are called Seeds-men:
now, a Seeds-man does not take a whole coppe, or a whole bushel of corn and
throw it in a heap in his field; but he takes it and scatters it abroad, that
every place may receive some.

So, they are called Builders; now, a builder does not only frame the whole
building, but he lays every particular brick, and every particular stone in
his building.

So, they are called Shepherds; a Shepherd does not only look to his flock
in general, but to every Ram, and to every Lamb in his flock.

So, Preachers must not only preach the word of God in general, but they must
preach in particular.

The ground of this will appear, if we consider three things in particular.

First, particulars are most operative; it is will humble a man: it is not
repentance in general that will turn a man: it is not faith in general that
will save a man: but, this sin and that sin: this repentance and that
repentance: this faith and that faith.

All actions they are of singulars. A universal man cannot reason, a
universal man cannot dispute, a universal man cannot see, nor hear. No, it
is this man, and that man that sees and hears, and disputes. Particulars are
most operative: preaching to men in particular, is powerful preaching: that
works upon men's consciences. How came the Prophet to preach powerfully to the
people? He declared to Jacob his sin, and to Jsraell his transgression:
Micha. 3. 8. I am full of power, by the* Spirit of the Lord, says the Prophet;
here was the way whereby the Prophet preached powerfully; so that the Spirit
went and rent men's hearts and consciences, and made them tremble; how? why he
made every soul see his sins: so, that Minister that would preach powerfully
to the consciences of his people, he must make every one of them to see their
sins against God, and his commandments, so that they may confess I see I
have been a grievous sinner, and I am in the state of damnation: and I must
repent, or else I shall be damned.

Secondly, particulars are most distinct; says one: and yet the man is
grossly ignorant of God. Ask him any particulars, how he can prove his love
to God, and the man cannot show any. So, I serve God with all my heart: but go
to particulars, and bid him manifest what he speaks; so, I fear God, I
worship God: but bring them to the particular w^orkes of these graces, and they
are gone presently, they are lost, and know not what to answer.

Thus the people in Malachies time, they thought they had much knowledge while
the Priest preached thus overly to them; but when the Prophet came to preach
home, and to come with particulars to them, they thought the Prophet was mad,
they knew not what he meant. You have despised the Lord, says the Prophet;
wherein? say they: Malac. 1. 6. You have profaned the worship of God, You
have polluted the table of the Lord, says the Prophet: ver. 7. wherein? said
they. You have wearied the Lord with your words, said the Prophet. Chapt. 2.
ver. 17. wherein? said they. You have robbed God. Chapt. 3. ver. 8. wherein?
said they. See, your words have been stout against the Lord, said the
Prophet; yet they said what have we spoken? ver. 13. they could not tell
wherein, till the Prophet told them, herein have you robbed God, herein have
you despised the Lord, herein you have profaned the worship of God etc.

So, should the Minister of God come to men, and tell them in particular, thou
art an enemy to Gods grace, thou have abused Gods patience; wherein? say
thou. Thou art one that scornest the word of God, and thou defilest all the
Ordinances of God. Wherein? say thou. Thou art one that putst far from
thee the evil day, wherein? say thou.

Now, when the Minister of God can come to particulars, and show men wherein;
then they cry out against them, and think they tell them lies, and preach
false things to them: but the Ministers of God are bound to preach so as they
may discover men's particular sins, not so as people may point one at another,
but so as every conscience may feel its own sins.

Thirdly particulars are most sensible. If particular, there is not a false
heart then in the congregation, but he will find it out; if he preach in
particular, he will discover every man's corruption, ^ling wilde-fire in every
wicked man's face, and throw balm of comfort into every godly troubled spirit.

As King James said well of a reverend Prelate of this Land, Me thinks this
man preaches of death as if^ death were at my back; so should Ministers
preach as if Heaven were at men's backs, or as if hell were at men's backs.
When he preaches of men's sins and corruptions: he must preach so that their
consciences may see that the word of God looks into the very thoughts and
hearts; when he preaches of the wrath of God, and of condemnation etc. he must
preach so, that the conscience may feel even the fire of hell flaming in it;
this is the way to teach the people the good knowledge of the Lord, as it is
called: 2 Chronicles. 30. 22. every Minister may teach the knowledge of the Lord,
but not the good knowledge of the Lord.

There is great difference between teaching of the knowledge, and of the good
knowledge of the Lord. Men may know God and his word, and their sins: but if
they go on in their sins, it is not good knowledge: then indeed a Minister
teaches good knowledge, when he makes his people so to know sin, as to loath
it, and to come out of it; so to know repentance as to repent indeed.

Secondly, Discrimination. As if he should in him, and some that are not in
him: if any man say he abides in him, he ought himself to walk even as he
walked: so that here the Apostle would put a difference between the sound and
the rotten-hearted in his congregation.

Hence observe this point, That every Minister is bound to preach so, as to
make a difference between the precious and the vile.

Saint John preached so as that his hearers might say, the Spirit of. Christ is
in me: or, the Spirit of Christ is not in me: that themselves might know
whether indeed they were true members of Christ, or but hypocrites. This is
the duty of Ministers: Ezekiel. 44. 23. They shall teach my people the difference
between the holy and profane, and cause men to discern between the clean
and unclean.

Here is two things.

First, they shall teach them the difference

Secondly, they shall not only show it they shall cause them to see it; that
is, they must beat it into them, and rub it into their consciences; it may
be when men may see, they will not: then, he must make them to see. If there be
any profane person, any lukewarm or dead-hearted professor, or close
hypocrite in the congregation, the Minister must make him see his profaneness,
his deadnes, and hypocrisy in Gods worship: or if there be any godly soul,
or broken heart, the Minister must make them to see that they have a broken
heart.

First reason, because else, a man defiles the pulpit, and prophanes the holy
things of God. Ezech. 22. 26. Her Priests have violated my law, and profaned
my holy things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane,
neither have they showed difference between the clean and unclean. Those
Ministers profane the holy place of God, when they make not men's consciences
know which is holy and profane; when profane persons may come and go from
Church, and have not their profaneness discovered to them: a drunkard, a
swearer etc: and has not his sins laid open to him. Is there any profane
person here, that has not an arrow shot into his heart, but he can go away
and not take any comfort from the Sermon? these men profane the holy things of
God.

When God gave Benhadad into the hands of Ahab, and Ahab spared him, and let
him go. 1 King. 20. the Prophet tells Ahab ver. 42: Thus says the Lord,
because thou have let go a man whom I appointed to utter destruction,
therefore thy life shall go for his life, etc: so, if there be any Minister
over any congregation, in which there is any drunkard, any swearer, or
whoremaster, or worldling, or lukewarmeling, or any other that lives in such
sins, which God has appointed and decreed to eternal destruction in hell;
if we tell them not their sins, and make their consciences feel them, then our
life shall go for their life, our soul for their soul: for we might have
given them such a wound as might have been a means to have cured their soul.

Secondly, We are not the Ministers of Christ, if we preach not so as that men
may know that they are not converted, if they are not etc. God says to the
Prophet Jeremiah, if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be
as my mouth: Jer. 15. 19. Jeremiah could not be Gods mouth to the people,
unless he would divide between the precious and the vile. Unless Ministers
preach so as to make the consciences of their hearers feel in what state they
live in, they may be Ministers of Satan, Idol shepherds, but they are not
the Ministers of Christ.

Thirdly, because otherwise they can do no good: Ezekiel. 34. 17. and as for you
O my flock, thus says the Lord God, behold I will judge between cattle and
cattle, etc. as if he should say, woe unto the shepherds; will they not
preach so as to make a difference between cattle and cattle? woe unto the
Priests: will they not preach so as to feed my flock? I will require my
flock at their hands: and now says God, will not the shepherds of my people
do it? I will now do it my self, I will convert those that are to be
converted etc. I will feed and provide for my flock my self.

Austin notes, that after that Peter had smote off Malchus his ear, Peter came
to be a shepherd, and an Apostle of Christ; after Paul had persecuted the
Church, he came to be a Preacher, and an Apostle of Christ: so after Moses had
killed the Egyptian, God made him the Captain and Deliverer of his people.
Austin observes from this, that God appoints none for his Ministers but
Smiters, such as be men of blows, men that will smite men home to the heart,
men that will wound the consciences of their hearers.

This I speak that you may not be offended at the Ministers of Christ, when
they apply the word of God to your several consciences: and whenever you
have the truth of Christ preached to your souls, let your hearts make use of
it: for if thou apply not the word of God to thy soul as it is preached, thou
art guilty of thine own blood. If you apply not the word, you put off the word
of God: and then, what says the Apostle? Acts. 13. 46. It was necessary that
the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but, seeing you put it
far from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life etc.

Yo^ that have heard the word of God, apply it to your souls, it is a blessed
plaster: let it lie on your souls: go home, and say, Lord, I have been told
of this and that sin, of my pride, hypocrisy, deadnes, and distraction in
thy worship and service, etc. I see they are against thy will, and thou
command me to come out of them, and to leave them; Lord, I beseech thee
enable me to leave them all; so, Lord, I have been told this day of such and
such graces, which thou have commanded me for to have, of such and such duties
that thou would have me to take up and perform; Lord, subject my heart to
the power of grace, and to every commandment of thy word.

Take heed, if thou do put off the word of God or any tittle of the word,
and wilt not walk according to the same, thou put off eternal life from
thy self. Do therefore as Gods people did, who when Moses had preached the
Law and Will of God to them, it is said, Exodus 12. 50. Thus did all the
Children of Israel as the Lord commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they. So do
you go home and apply the word to your souls, it was spoken for your good,
make use of it, and the Lord be with you.

Thirdly, Scrutiny, it is not only an outward word, but a word of the heart:
if any man say, that is, if any man think, that he is in Christ, he ought to
walk as Christ did. Hence we might observe, That a Minister is bound to preach
to men's thoughts. But time cuts us off.

FINIS.
THE ENMITY OF The Wicked, to the light of the GOSPEL.
JOHN 3. VER. 20. For every man that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes he to the light least his deeds should be reproved.
THis is part of Christ his parley with Nicodemus concerning regeneration:
wherein our Savior does declare four main points.

The first is, Man's natural estate and condition without Christ. It is
impossible that ever he should be saved, that ever he should get grace or come
within the list of eternal life. Christ says it, and binds it with an oath:
ver. 3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God: much less inherit it.

Secondly, here is Gods gracious provision which he has taken with the world,
that though man were in a way of damnation, invincibly; yet now he is put in a
way of probability of salvation: ver. 16. though he were unsalvable by nature,
yet now he is salvable by Christ.

Thirdly, here is a general proclamation upon the condition of faith, that
this salvability may be attained if a man believe. In the same verse, God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, etc. It is a condition of faith, put to all, none excepted.
Whosoever he be that believes in Christ, he shall be saved.

Fourthly, here is the reprobation of the world; he that believes not, is
condemned already. The cause whereof cannot be cast on Christ, for, God has
not sent his Son to condemn the world, but that the world thorough him might
be saved: It was Christ's primary purpose, and the first end of his coming, to
save the world: it is an accidental end or rather an event of his coming, that
the world is condemned. Christ is not the cause of it: he is not the efficient
cause, for he is a Savior: nor the deficient cause, for he is a sufficient
Savior.

That the cause of their condemnation, is from themselves, and not from Christ:
is proved by three arguments.

First, from their own consciences: he that Chrysostom observes, he means
the condemnation of their own consciences; he that believes not, his
conscience tells him that it is his fault that he believes not: though it be
not in his power to believe, yet God has gone so far, he has so far
strugled with men's consciences, that there is no default on his part: They
cannot excuse themselves, saying, I have no power to believe: their own
consciences will tell them that God has knocked at their hearts, and offered
them power to believe, but they rejected it They cannot say I know not how to
believe; his own conscience will tell him that God has offered instruction to
him, whereby he might have been taught, but that he refused it: so that he
that believes not, is condemned already; his own conscience rises within him,
and tells him that it is his own fault that he does not.

Secondly, it is proved by experience; experience This is the conde^ nation
that light is come into the world, but men loved darkness rather then light;
the meaning of it, is this, This is the cause of condemnation to the world; not
Gods predestination, not their fatal destiny, not their breach of the first
covenant, nor any other impiety, but this sin of Infidelity.

If the world stood guilty of never so many sins: yet, if it did believe in
the Lord. Jesus, it should be saved. So that it is not all the other sins
that a man commits, that damnes him: but his infidelity that that lays all his
former sins that ever he committed upon him; here is condemnation, that
though light be come into the world, to pull men out of their darkness, and
sins; yea though Christ, though grace come to them, yet they will not come
out of their sins: men will not have Christ, men will not have grace, men
love darkness rather then light.

Thirdly, It is proved by reason, ver. 6. every man that does evil, hates the
light: neither comes to the light, least his deeds should be reproved.

It is a strong argument to prove that if men be damned, themselves are the
cause of it: for if light come into the world to instruct men, if Christ come
into the world to pluck men out of their sins, if Christ come with his blood
and spirit to cleanse and sanctify men, and men will not be sanctified: Then,
if they perish in their sins, they are justly guilty of their own
condemnation.

The words comprehend in them two things.

First, the wickeds rejection of the word of grace: which is set forth both
positively, he hates the light: and then privatively or rather negatively,
neither comes to the light.

Secondly, the cause of the wickeds rejection of the word of grace: which is
twofold.

First, the qualification of his person, he does evil.

Secondly, the disposition of his malepartnesse, that cannot endure to be
reproved.

From the first of these, we observe this.

That a wicked man hates the word of Gods grace, yea he does not only hate the
word of Gods grace, but he hates grace it self: he does not only hate the
Lanthorue that bears the light, but he hates the light it self.

I choose not to stand to show you how the word is called a light: but that
which I take to be more necessary for this place, I will first show you what
this hatred of the word of grace and of grace it self is, and I thus define it.

It is an actual affection of the heart, whereby ^
a man rises up against an union with that which seems to be opposite and
contrary to his lust.

So that there be four things in a wicked man's hatred of the word.

First, it is an actual hatred: for there is an habitual hatred of the word,
even in them that never heard the word; they do not actually hate it, because
they never had it; but they would hate it if they had it; as sore eyes hate the
light of the Sun even when it is down; for if they had it, they would
twinckle at it. Thus all wicked men hate the word, and may be condemned for
despisers of the word, though they do not actually hate it, because they have
it not; yet habitually they hate it; they would hate it if they had it. I
speak not of this hatred, but of that which is actual hatred, whereby though
they have the word, yet they hate to be controled, and reformed by the word:
Prove. 1. 22. O ye fools, how long will ye hate knowledge?

Secondly, it is a passion of the heart, and Psalm. 119. 70. Their heart is as
fat as grease, but my delight is in thy law; as if he should say, my heart is a
lean heart, an hungry heart, my soul delights and rejoices in and loves
thy word: I have nothing else to fill it but thy word, and the comforts I have
from it: but their hearts are as fat as grease, their hearts are fat hearts,
fat with the world, fat with lust, they hate the word.

As a full stomach loatheth meat and cannot digest it: so wicked men hate the
word, it will not go down with them, it will not fetch up their lusts.

If thou partest not with thy sins, thy heart hates the word: yet thou
think thou love the word: thou fayest thou love to hear the word, and
thou love good Ministers, and good discourses, etc. it may be that this is
nothing but the assent of thine understanding, and the approbation of thy
conscience, and so a man may love the word in his understanding and conscience,
and yet be a hater of the word of God.

The Devils have attained to so much divinity as this, they like the word in
their understandings, and assent to the truth of it in their consciences; but
though their understandings and consciences tell them that it is a good word:
yet they hate it. This is a damnable and a most unnatural hatred.

Indeed if a man's mind and conscience were against the word, it were natural
for him to hate it: it is natural for a man to hate that which is against his
mind: but when thy conscience shall tell thee, this is the word and the will of
the Eternal God; and thy conscience shall tell thee, that it is a most true
word, a righteous, a just, an holy commandment that commands thee to serve thy
God only, and so to part with all thy sins; if yet thou will not obey, but
go contrary to his word, thy hatred it is unnatural and diveli^^^ As it was
said of (...) his dog, he had a devil lied to his collar: of another that he
had a devil signed on his swords pummell* so I may say to every one that hates
the word and to be ruled by it, and yet knows it in his own understanding and
conscience to be ^ ^^^e and good word; I may say it is a (...) Hatred, and he
has a devil tied to his heart, a devil in his heart.

Thirdly, this hatred is that whereby the heart rises up against an union with
the word: hatred is a shunning of an union with a thing. A man does not hate
any evil naturally, but he hates an union with it. A man does not hate poison
it self, he hates no poison in a toade: let it be there as much as it will, he
cares not; so the shepherd, he hates not the wolf in the Forest, but in the
Flock. A wicked man hates not the word so long as it keeps within it self;
he loves Epistles and Gospells, the first and second lesson: so long as the
word keeps in the Scriptures, he likes it; but if the word begin to take union
with him, if the word begin to pluck sin from him, to pull his cupps from
him, to pluck his pleasures and delights from him, and his lusts from him,
then he hates the word, when it comes in this union to his heart.

I put this union of the word in opposition to four things.

First against general preaching; a wicked thy sin, and thou must to hell
for it, if thou give it not over: this has been an old lust of thine which
will be thy bane if thou repent not: This thy old corruption, it will be thy
breake-necke if thou part not with it: if the word come in this union with his
soul, then he hates it.

So long as John Baptist took his text, and dwelt on the reasons, and went no
further, Herod heard him gladly: but when John came to his use to apply it, and
told him in particular, this reproves thee Herod, and all the evils that ever
thou have done, and in particular for thine unlawful marriage with thy brother
Philips wife: when John came thus, then Herod claps him up in prison; before he
heard him with joy and gladness: but when he comes close to his conscience,
and tells him that his marriage would condemn him, and his other sins would
damme him, if he repented not; Herod cannot endure this preaching any longer.

Secondly, in opposition to merciful Preaing.

Ahab he loved his four hundred mealemouthed merciful Preachers well enough;
but when Micaiah came to him, O, I hate him, for he never Prophesies good unto
me but evil, he is always upon hell-strings, he is always preaching
judgment unto me: I cannot claw off one of his Sermons in a month scarce, I
cannot catch hold on any of his Points to comfort my heart; there is not one
sentence in all his Sermons to refresh my conscience, he never prophesies good
unto me but evil; I hate him.

When a Minister comes to the conscience of a man, and tells him this is the
truth of God, and this is thy sin and damnation, and makes his Sermons stick
as a burre on his conscience, and as an arrow shot into his bowels, his heart
risith against it, and he cannot endure it.

Thirdly, in opposition to Preaching when the Minister is dead. A wicked man
loves the word when he that preaches it is dead. Why? then there is none to
urge a union of the Word with his conscience. A wicked man loves to read Saint
Paul, Saint Peter, and Saint John, etc. why? these men are not alive to urge a
union of the word with their consciences; but if Saint Paul, or Saint Peter,
etc. were alive to tell them, if this be the word of God, then thou art a
damned man, if thou do not obey it: if this be a grace, then thou art a
cursed man, if thou have it not: if these men were alive now, their Sermons
would cut to the quick. So when the Ministers are dead, men love to buy their
books, and to read their Sermons.

Now Master Perkins is dead, all the world honors him, and men buy up his
books; but when he was alive, the drunkards made ballads of him, and profane
Belials would make songs of him: why? they could not endure this union of the
word. If the Minister be by, he cannot be drunk, but the Minister will preach
condemnation to him for it, if he repent not; he cannot swear, or lie, or
deceive, but the Minister will tell him that this will be a core to his
conscience another day. Men cannot endure this. Saint Paul and Saint Peter,
etc, being dead they like well enough; but if they were alive, they would hate
them: why? they cannot endure an union with the word.

This was the religion of the Scribes and Pharisees: Math. 23. 29, 30. they
built the tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the
righteous, and said if they had lived in the days of their fathers, they would
not have bin partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. You are the
children of those men that killed the Prophets, says Christ: ver. 31. Are not
you the children of those men? do not you do those sins which the Prophets
cried out against, and for which the Prophets denounced such fearful
judgments upon them? I tell you if the Prophets were now alive, they would
cry hell and damnation, to you: if the Prophets were now alive, and did see
those sins you commit, they would denounce woe and vengeance to you as they
did to their fathers.

Oh says one, if I had lived in the Jews time, I would never have opposed
Christ and his Apostles, I would have kissed the very ground that they trod on;
then, wretch why do thou not do that which these men preached? look in the
writings of these holy men, of Paul, of Peter, etc. Do thou do that which
Paul and Peter have wrote thou should do? do thou look in their
writings, and not obey what they have wrote? I tell thee, if Peter and Paul
were alive, they would tell thee thou should be damned, if thou repentest
not. if John and James were alive, they would tell thee that the wrath of God
will take hold on thee, if thou yield not obedience to that word they preached
to thee.

If Paul were alive, he should have many a Tertullus to oppose him: if John
were alive, he should have many a Herod to imprison him: if Amos were alive, he
should have many an Amaziah to banish him, and to silence him; but now they are
dead, men can like them well enough.

A righteous man in the way, is an abomination to the wicked. Prove. 29. 27. he
does not say an upright man when he is dead, ^s an abomination to the wicked:
for when he is dead, they may praise him, and love him, and love to have his
picture amongst them: then they will speak well of him, and commend him. I
speak that, because I would not be misconstrued.

Let a man be a godly man indeed, a Saint indeed, as long as he lives, the men
of the world will hate him. I have chosen you out of the world, says Christ,
and therefore the world hates you, etc.

It has been an old haunt and custom of the world to hate and malign the
righteous, to reproach them, to call them Puritans, etc: though very heathens
have acknowledged that there is no religion without purity. Cicero, Horace and
others describing a man that is religious, say that he is an entire man, a man
pure from sin.

If any man will not believe it, let him try it: let him be holy and gracious,
and show forth the power of religion in his life, let him contemn the world,
etc. and see whether wicked men will not hate him, reproach and disgrace him
what they can: not as if a godly man could not be godly and religious, unless
he be hated and reproached by the world: for it may be.

First, when a man that is truly religious and godly is a great man, and all
the Country are loath to lose his favor, or to purchase his ili will* then he
may be free from hate and reproach.

Secondly, when he is a man of admirable wit and knowledge, that the world
admires him for his learning, and for his understanding, and for his parts:
such a one men will rather admire then revile.

Thirdly, it may so be that God may give a godly man favor in the eyes of the
world: howsoever the world would hate, and reproach them, yet God may so strike
their consciences that they cannot do it. Otherwise, a godly man, especially
if he be such a one by whose godliness and purity a wicked man is judged and
condemned in his conscience for his ungodliness and profaneness, the wicked
will hate him.

Lastly, I put it in opposition to now and then preaching: a wicked man loves
preaching, though never so sharp and terrible, so it come but now and then: if
the Minister preach never so powerfully, never so terribly, if it give him a
reproof and away: so it does not stand digging in his conscience, and galling
his heart day by day; let the Minister enter a reproof into his hear^ again,
so it be but once or twice, he cares not. Why? he thinks he can recover
himself again from it: b^^ let the word of God come into him, and galle his
conscience continually, that every Sabbath he is convicted for a condemned man
if he live not otherwise* every* Serm^n the Minister finds him out in his
(...) and dearest sins; he can never go to Church, but he hears the Minister
reprooving him for some some or other, telling him that he must to hell for
them unless he repent; and lead a new life; thus when the word follows him
every Sabbath that he has no breathing time to recover his lust; this makes
him to hate the word.

Amos 7. The Prophet preaching the word of the Lord, and denouncing the
Judgments of God to the people for their sins, Amaziah opposes him: ver.
^2. and says unto Amos, O thou Seen, go fly thee away into the Land of
Judah, and there eat bread, and prophecy there, but prophecy not again any
more at Bethell, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. He
could like it well enough that Amo^ should prophecy once or twice* but if he
did prophecy any more, he should spoil all their mirth, he should gall all
their consciences go, says he, prophecy in Judah, and eat thy bread there.
Amos should prophecy where he would, so it were not there; he might eat his
bread where he would, so it were not there.

Lastly, as it is an actual affection of the heart, whereby the heart rises
up against an union: so in the last place, it is against that that is dissonant
and repugnant to his lust. For, as love is the consonancy of the affection to a
thing that has agreement therewith: so hatred must needs be dissonancy of
affection to a thing that is repugnant and contrary to it. So, a wicked man he
hates the word, because it disagrees and jarres with his lust. Indeed a wicked
man may love the word so long as it opposes not against his lust. Therefore a
wicked man may love three kinds of preaching.

First, Quaint preaching that savours more of humanity then of divinity. As
long as the Minister comes with dainty phrases, acute stories, eloquent
allusions, and fine transitions, they will like it well enough: it jarres not
with their lust: and therefore you shall hear them when they come from Church,
commend him, O he was a fine spokes-man, a witty scholar: what a learned and
excellent Sermon did he make to day? so far as the word opposes not his
lust, a man may love preaching.

The people they did love to hear Ezekiell preach, they did love to hear his
pleasant words.

The Babylonians they did love to hear David's songs: it was fine melody to
them, though they hated the sense; so the Philistines they did love to hear
Sampson speak, they knew he was a witty man, and could speak fine riddles to
them, but they hated his religion: so the people, they did love to hear Christ
preach, and would flock after him, they did wonder at his authority, etc. yet
they hated his doctrine, for they cried crucify him, crucify him; so if a
Minister speak only of wit, learning and memory, etc. a wicked man will
love it, it opposes not his lust.

Secondly, they may love Impertinent preaching: when though it be never so
pertinent to some in the Church, yet if it be not pertinent to him, he loves
that. As the drunkard, loves to hear the Minister preach against hypocrisy,
though never so sharply; The prodigal person loves to hear the Minister
preach against covetousness. But if the word come to strike him under his
fifth ribbe, to discover his corruptions, and the plagues of God due to him for
his sins, then he hates it.

Thirdly, he may love preaching in tanto, though not in ^oto* he mav love so,
or so much preaching, but not preaching altogether. A wicked man's conscience
tells him that he must have some religion, that he must perform some service
to God: and therefore so long as the Minister only calls for some preaching,
some hearing, and some serving of God, why, his conscience calls for so much.

The vilest drunkard, and blasphemer, and swearer that is, will be content to
hear of calling upon the Lord Jesus at his death: the vilest whoremaster, and
profane person, the earthly worldling, etc. will yield to some preaching, and
to some hearing, and to some reading: why, otherwise their consciences would
not be at quiet, but would be as the devils band-dogge, bawling and houting at
him. But if the Minister call for more religion then his lust will suffer; for
more religion then will subsist with his security, deadness, lukewarmenesse,
hypocrisy, worldliness, that he cannot yield to, and retain them: then he
thinks there is too much of it, then he hates it, and cannot endure it.

Thus you see, that wicked men hate the word of God. I set it forth by three
instances: Romans 1. 30. Haters of God. They did not hate his being and essence,
his goodness and mercy, but they hated him as he was a Lawgiver. The devils
hate not God as he is God and has a being, but they hate him as he is a
Lawgiver and as he is their Judge, they cannot endure to be called by this God,
to be controuled and judged by him. Thus was it with the Colossians, before
they were converted: they were enemies to God Col. 1. 21. Our Savior takes
away the whole doubt, and speaks it peremptorily and generally of all the
world, they hated me; the whole world so long as they live in their sins,
hate Christ, and hate his word.

First, a wicked man hates the word, because he hates the truth and the being
of the word: he is sorry that the word of God is true; he would be glad that
the Scripture might prove false: that things may not be as the word of God
says they are; he hates the being of the word. A man loves the being of that
which he loves, and he hates the being of that which he hates, and were it in
his power, he would destroy it. Now, though a wicked man cannot destory the
Bible from being in it self, yet he will destroy the Bible from being in his
life.

For, beloved, the word of God, should not only be in the Bible, but the Bible
should be in a man's life. A man's life should be a walking Bible: but a wicked
man destroys the Bible from being in his life. A civil man would be glad that
Aristotle's Ethics were the Bible. A worldly man would be glad that the Book
of Statutes were the Bible; he is sorry that that is the Bible which indeed is
the Bible.

The young man that came to Christ; though he loved eternal life, and said
that he loved the Commandments of God, yet when our Savior told him one thing
is wanting, go and sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor, says
the text of him, he went away sorrowful; as if he should say he was sorry that
there was any such truth in the Scripture: he would have been glad that there
had been no such text in the word of God.

The Prophets prophecy falsely, and my people love to have it so. Jer. 5. 31.
they hated to have it so as the word would have it. But when the false Prophets
told them it was otherwise, O, they loved that.

Beloved, the men of the world would be glad that God would make another Bible,
that drunkards and whoremasters might be saved: another Bible, that earthwormes
and worldlings and proud persons might be saved. If God would rain down a new
Bible, another Bible, I fear there are many thousands amongst us, that now say
they love the Bible, yet would love to hear of it, and come from all places to
seek after it, after another Bible that would show the way to heaven a little
wider; men are loath to hear of so much holiness, so much preciseness: they
love not to be beaten on that string, a sign that they hate it.

Can a man that is nothing but flesh and blood, love the text of Saint Paul
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God 1 Cor. 15. 50? Can an
old filthy sinner love that text of Isaiah, an old sinner though he be an
hundred years old shall be accursed. Isai* 65. 20? Can a Usurour love the 15
Psalm? Can a lukewarmeling love Rev. 3. 16? no, he would be glad that there
were no such truth in the word, and therefore he hates it. Romans 8. 7. A wicked
man is such an enemy to the word, that all the Ministers in England cannot
reconcile him to it.

Secondly, wicked men hate the word, because they do hate the nature of the
word. If men did love the word of God, they would will what the word of God
wills, and nill what the word of God nills. It is a good proverb amongst us,
It is the property of lovers to will and nill the same things.

If men did love the word, then look what the word says, they would do: what
the word commands them, they would obey. If men did love the word, they would
conform their hearts and lives to the rules of the word. But the carnal mind
is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed
can be. Romans 8. 7.

A wicked man hates the law of God; why? the heart of a wicked man conceives
the word of God to be against him: he can not think a thought but the word is
against it: he cannot speak a word, but the word of God is against it; he
cannot pray his dead hearted prayers, but the word of God is against him etc.
And as the word of God is against him, so his heart is against the word: he is
of one mind, the word of another: he is of one mind, and the word of the
clean contrary mind against him.

Lastly, as a wicked man hates the being of the word, and the nature of the
word in it self, so he hates the being of it in his understanding; he (...) o^
(...) the knowledge of the word: therefore they say unto God, depart from us,
we desire ^o^ the knowledge of thy waves. Jab. 21. 14.

A wicked man would ^aine keep this and that lust ^^ he is loath to depart with
his old corruptions, his old sins* he has liv^d ^^ them so long, that he is
loath to part with his old friends; he would feign go^ on in his lust and
therefore he hates the knowledge of the word that would strippe him of his
lust, says Aquinas. Now he cannot be free for his sins, and be curbed by the
knowledge of the word.

I will tell you, once it was my hap to preach a Sermon two or three hundred
miles from this place, and when Sermon was done, I heard a man say, O what a
beast was I to come to this Sermon; what a beast was I to come to it!

When the word of God comes to men, and tells them that their state is damnable
if they live in their sins: when the word of God comes to the heart, many are
sorry that they ever heard the word of God, that ever the word made such a
thing known to them.

The drunkard, the wanton, the Usurer, and the worldling, how glad would they
be that the Minister could prove by the word of God, that these sins were
lawful, that usury were lawful; that covetousness were lawful? etc. But
when the word goes flat against them; then they cannot endure that word: why?
their conscience begins to pen them in, it puts their hearts in the stocks
as it were, they cannot have freedom in the pursuit of their lusts and
sins: an evident sign that men hate the word.

Austin says of a wicked man, He loves the truth shining, but he hates the
truth reproving. As much of the word as you will, to make him skillfull in
knowing: but he hates the word every dram of it, checking and rebuking,
girding and controuling him for his sins.

Beloved, what is all our preaching? does it not show that men hate the word?
need any go to the field and exhort the Husbandman to plough and sow his
ground? need we go to your houses to persuade men to feed, to eat and
drink, and to cloth themselves? need we go to the Alehouse and persuade the
drunkard to drink, the swearer to swear, the gamester to play? no; men love
their backs, and their bellies, men love their profits and their pleasures;
men love their lusts and sins. But they must be exhorted and entreated, and
commanded to obey, and to love the word of God, and all little enough.

Hence then is a reproof to all the wicked Plato says, He loves that has a
similitude of that he loves: but we have not a similitude and a likeness of
the light, and therefore we do not love it.

Beloved, let me come a little nearer, and convince all that hear me of this
point.

They must needs be said to hate one another whom no intreati^s nor beseeches
can possibly reconcile. That is irreconcilable hatred which cannot be taken
off by all the entreaties of the world. Herod hated Tyr^s and Sidon, but his
hatred was taken off by Blastus his entreaty. Acts. 12. 20. but that hatred is
irreconcilable hatred that no entreaties can ^^ke off.

Oh, how often have Gods Ministers entreated you and beseeched you to give over
your sins, and yet you will not! how often have they besought you to be
zealous, and meek, and holy, and you will not; thou art tichie and revengefull
in speeches, how often have thou been sought to leave it? thou art proud and
stout-hearted, how often have thou been sought for to be humble? thou art
carnal and worldly, how often have thou been besought to be spiritual and
heavenly?

Thou have no assurance of Christ in thy soul: how often have thou been
besought for to get him? Ministers beseech thee every Sabbath, Ministers
entreat thee every week: They break their brains, and break their sleep,
and spend their lungs, and all to invent and speak acceptable words to
prevail with your souls: with heart-cutting entreaties they beseech you; if
notwithstanding all this, you will not be entreated to part with your sins,
rhen it is evident you hate reformation.

If we did not hate a thing, we would do it, though we were never besought to
do it; if thou did not hate a reformation of thy sins, thou would have
been reformed without these beseeches: but if beseeches and entreaties cannot
woe thee, thou hate it indeed: that is hatred indeed which beseeches cannot
reconcile.

The Lord Jesus sent his Ministers in his Name; we are Gods Ambassadors in
Christ his stead, we pray you to be reconciled to God.

We have besought you by the blood of Christ, we have entreated you by the
Bowels of Gods mercies to become new men: we beseech you in the Bowels of the
Lord Jesus Christ to give over your sins. We beseech you as you love your
souls, give over your sins: we beseech you as; you are men, as you know what
is what, give over your sins: we beseech you, let the drunkard give over his
drunkenness, the swearer his oaths and blasphemies, the Idolater his Idolatry
and wilworship, let the idle talker give over his fruitless communication, the
covetous person give over his covetousness, the secure Christian and lukewarm
professor and deadhearted server of God come out of his security and
dead-heartednesse, etc. I beseech you by the mercies of God says Saint Paul,
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy etc. Romans 12. 1. Sacrifice your
tongues unto God we beseech you, and speak holy conference, sacrifice your
hearts we beseech you, and use holy meditations; sacrifice your hares unto God,
and suffer not idle language to be spoken in your hearing: we beseech you do
this; yea by all the mercies of Christ, we beseech you as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ his stead; and will you not yet?
Certainly, you hate the light, if all these beseeches cannot reconcile you; we
have besought you that there be no disorders in any of your families, and yet
there are: we have besought you that there be no loss of time in your
meetings, that there be no root of bitterness in your hearts, and yet there
is: we have besought you to mende your repentance, and to better your
obedience, and to repent of your rotten formality, and to come out of your
sandy and quagmire bottomes, and not to content your selves with this beggarly
form of religion only, but as ever you love your souls and would be loved, to
get the power of grace: and a thousand more things have we besought you. Is it
done? no, God knows: all the beseeches and entreaties under heaven have not
yet done it. Now therefore you must needs stand convinced in your consciences,
that you hate the light, if all these beseeches cannot bring you to it.

They must needs be said to hate one another, when neither money nor price nor
any thing can make friends. That is inveterate cankerous hatred which can never
be outbought, which can never be hired to cease. I make no question but that
the Damsels Master at the first did hate that his Maid should be possessed
with a devil: but when he saw that it brought him in great gain, he took off
his hatred: he would then be content that the devil might have stayed in his
house, so he might have gained by it: and therefore we read that he was angry
at the Apostle for dispossesing the devil out of her; Act.. 16. 19. It must be
a grievous hatred that profit cannot mollify.

Brethren, you know that God offers you pardon of your sins: he offers you
mercy, he offers you a Kingdom, if you will come out of your sins. If thou
would rather lose father, mother, wife and children, houses and lands, goods
and livings, rather then shake hands with such a one as thou art fallen out
with, I am sure thou hate him with a witness: and if thou would rather
hazard thy own mercy, hazard the love and favor of God, hazard the Kingdom
of heaven, lot Christ go, and mercy go, and heaven go, ^^ther then let thy
sins g^^* surely thou hate to be reformed. I will give you a kingdom says
God, if you will be new men: I will give thee a Kingdom, if thou will take up
Christ his Croffe and be pl^^^ I will give thee a Kingdom, if thou will walk
precisely and circumspectly. But you will not, though you might have a kingdom
for it. Repent faith Christ, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand: Math. 3. 2.
Repent, and here is a Kingdom a^ hand for thee. Down with thine old lu^t*
thou know what I mean, and here is a Kingdom at hand for thee. Repent of
your formal repentance, repent of your fashionary prayers, repent of your
overly performances of holy duties, and behold here is a Kingdom for you. Will thou hazard the very Kingdom of grace, and of glory, rather then thou will
step out of thy old wont? thou hate repentance if a Kingdom cannot hire
thee to love it.

They must be said to hate one another, whom all the dearest love in the world
can never ^nite and soder together. Love is able to burst all the hatred in the
world if the devil be not in it: love is more forcible then hatred; and
therefore that hatred is most cankerous that love cannot overcome. What is so
pleasing or delightful to the ^lesh of a man but love may command it? the love
of God has given thee the blood of his own Son: if thou will part with thy
corruptions, thou may have it. That is hatred indeed which the blood of thy
own Savior cannot dissuade thee from.

The Apostle Peter thought he had used an excellent argument to persuade men to
holiness, when he sets forth the love of God to us. 1 Pet. 18. 19. For
as much as you know, that you were not redeemed with corruptible things as
silver and gold from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your
fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb undefiled and
without spotte. What does Christ give his blood to thee, to redeem thee, from
thy vain conversation? has he given his blood for thee, that thou should
part with thy sins, with thy drunkenness, with thy oaths, thy pride,
security, luke warmenesse, earthlinesse, profaneness, from thy vain thoughts,
thy vain words, and thy vain lusts, and will thou not? if God had redeemed us
with silver, and gold, that were but dross: no, he has redeemed us with the
blood of his Son: if now thou will part with the blood of Christ, rather then
with thy sins that the word of God commands thee to part with, how great is
thy hatred of the word?

Blood it is necessary to the life of every living creature. I am sure the
Blood of Christ is necessary to the life of a Christian; without it, a man can
never be washed, nor never be sanctified, nor made acceptable to God. That man
that will rather part with his blood, rather then lay down his hatred of such
a one whom he hates, he hates him for ever, he hates him to the death. Thou
that rather then thou will part with thy evil courses, from those sins that
Gods word would have thee to give over and forsake, wilt part with the blood of
Christ, I say thou hate the word, and thou hate a reformation of thy ways
for ever, with an everlasting and damnable hatred.

That man that had rather be damned then leave his sins, that had rather go
to hell, then be a new creature, he hates the parting with his sins, he hates
to be a new creature.

It is truth, man is a reasonable creature, and therefore cannot reason so in
express words, as to say I had rather be damned then to give over my
drunkenness, my lying, my swearing, my lust; I had rather go to hell; then be
so pure, and so holy etc.

But every wicked man is so unreasonable in very deed* for the word of God
tells that wicked men that live and dye in such sins, and such sins, shall
be damned; yet, they will not give over their sins.

Does not your own conscience tell you, that as long as you pray no better, as
long as you walk no better in your profession, God abhors you, and all that
you do, and will damn you? does not thy conscience tell thee, that yet thou
have no assurance of salvation, that as yet Jesus Christ was never given to
thee, that as yet you never had the Spirit of Christ to kill sin in you? if
that thou will go on in thy sins, and not get Christ and his Spirit into thy
heart, as the word of God commands thee, and thy own conscience persuades
thee: I say if yet thou will go on in thy sins, then thou choosest to be
damned rather then to part with sin.

Do we not say such a rogue will be hanged, that such a hasty furious man will
undo himself? do we not say of a rebellious child that he will be
disinherited? not that any man reasons so in words, I will do thus and thus
and undo my self, I will steal and be hanged, I will be a rebellious child
and be disinherited, I will go on in my sins, let the world say what it
will, and be damned. But, when a man knows that the wages of sin is death,
that the end of drunkenness, of swearing, of lying, of pride, security,
hypocrisy, formality in religion etc. is death; When a man knows that the end
of that sin which he lives in is damnation, and yet will go on in those
sins, he wills to be damned. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Turn you, turn you, why will you
dye O ye house of Israel? why? were any so mad as to be willing to dye, to
perish for ever? yet says the Prophet, why will you dye, as if he should say
why will you sin? that man that wills to sin, he wills to be damned; that man
that will be damned rather then part with his sin, that man loves sin for
ever, and so hates the light.

Beloved, be ashamed to carry so many plague tokens upon your hearts, so many
sins in your souls, so many oppositions and rebellions against the word.
That man that hates and rebels against the word, can never be saved by the
word. You that have had the preaching of the word, look that you give way to
it; take heed that you withstand not the breath of it.

I could tell you one thing, and I pray God to send it home to your hearts:
commonly when God sends his word to a people, those that are wrought upon, for
the most part are wrought upon at the beginning: generally it is so, I will
give you a convincing place for it: Acts. 13. 48. And when the Gentiles heard
this, they glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed. Paul and Barnabas were come to Antioch, and had
preached one Sabbath day, and now had preached another: The Gentiles glorified
the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed;
as if he had said, all that were ordained to eternal life, believed at those
Sermons; as if he should say again, all that believed not at these two
Sermons, were reprobates.

Those that did belong to God, they did believe, and hearkened to the preaching
of the word to them, on those two Sabboths; All that were ordained to life*
they believed at these two Sermons: the rest that believed not, are branded and
marked out for despisers and wonderers, Hear O despisers, and wonder and
perish, etc.

Agree with thine Adversary, whilst thou art in the way. Math. 5. Beloved, you
are now in the way of salvation: your Adversary is the Lord himself, till he
be reconciled unto you; you are in the way while you are under the preaching of
the word: you know not how soon God may take you out of the way: you know not
how soon God may take his word away: or, if that continue, yet he may withdraw
his Spirit* and then, if God once take away his Spirit, then you may seek to
be converted, but shall never find it; you may seek for grace, but shall
never get it: you may seek for Christ, but never obtain him; if men stand out
against the Word and Spirit of Christ, while it is beating upon their hearts,
and offering them grace, then Christ will be a swift witness against them.
Malach. 3. 5. Does Christ come to thee? now obey, now believe, now give over
thy sins. Does he bid thee now repent? etc. O give way to the Words of
Christ, give way to the Spirit of Christ; otherwise, Christ will come swiftly:
I will be a swift witness.

I tell you, the Covenant of grace will not stay long: God is about to put up
his wares. When no Customers come, the Merchant puts up his wares; so God will
even close up all his graces; then Preachers may preach, but none shall be
converted: People may hear, but none shall be converted: People may hear, but
never be turned; which the Lord deny from ever being amongst us; therefore,
while it is called to day, hearken, and the Fear of God be with you.

FINIS.
GODS IMPARTIALITY.
ESAIAS 42. 24. Who gave Jacob to the spoil and Israel to the Robbers? Did not I
the Lord.
THE Lord in this Chapter by the Prophet Isaiah does foretell heavy things
against the people; and by the way mark the Lords dealings, he ever gives
warning before he sends any plagues: he lightens before he thunders; that the
people might not say they did not hear of it, and and that the wicked might be
the more inexcusable, and that the godly might make an Arc to save themselves
in.

These words contain in them five several things.

First, the Author of this destruction or judgment. Secondly, the Causes of
it. Thirdly, the Judgment it self. Fourthly, Who they were on whom this
Judgment was inflicted. Fifthly, The effects of it.
Now by Gods permission I will open these words in order unto you. And for the
first, the Author of it.

It is laid down by question and answer.

Question, Who gave Jacob to the spoil, and Israel to the robbers?

Answer, Did not I the Lord? was it not I the mighty God, which am able to
order every thing according to my own will.

But indeed we are ready to ascribe things to chance and fortune and lot; to
prevent this says God, who did these and these things? did not I the Lord?

Now, by Jacob and Israel is meant the people of the Jews, which were called
by the name of Jacob. For, his peculiar people, when they sinned, he gave them
over. God ^ais, who gave this people of mine to the enemies? did not I the
Lord? therefore God he is the Author of all punishment.

Secondly, the Cause why the Lord did this: for, some might say, why did the
Lord overthrow this people, whom he did so tenderly respect for his, which were
as the apple of his eye, and the strength of his right arm? because they
sinned against the Lord, and would not walk in his ways.

He sets down the Causes.

First, in general, they have sinned.

Secondly, in particular, they would not walk in his way, nor be obedient to
his Laws.

Thirdly, here is the Judgment it self, therefore has he powered upon them
the fierceness of his anger, the strength of the Battle and fire round about
them. He calls it the anger of the Lord: not of a King, or of a great man,
but the anger of the Lord, the fury of his anger: showing the extremity of it
he does not say that God does drop down his anger; but, he poures out the fury
of his indignation. Moreover he says, the strength of battle; the Lord
comes like an armed man to fight against them, and to destroy them, as men in
wars do when they s^ay both young and old, and make no bones of it, and are
glad when they have done it; And, as an armed man to slay them; so likewise, he
has set a fire round about them* the Lord has enclosed them in with
indignation, so that they could see no way to get out of it, or to escape it.
So then this shows the unavo^dablenesse of Gods Judgments.

Fourthly, who were these that were destroyed? Jacob and Israel, a praying and
a professing and a fasting people.

Fifthly, the effect of all this, how it did work upon them. Yet, says the
Lord, they know it not, neither lay it to heart. Oh Lord, what monstrous
stupidity is this! though God did do it; in his anger too; yet this poor
Nation saw it not, neither regarded it, till the plague came; and when it came,
they never laid it to heart, neither were they humbled by it, but did bear the
plague, and afterward went down into hell, and never minded it.

Even so, beloved, stands the case with us; The Lord plagues us, and we see it
not: his anger burns round about us, and the fierceness of his wrath
sustaineth to battle: and yet we perceive it not.

From the first of these observe: namely,

That God is the author of all plagues and judgments that befall a Nation. It
was he that drowned the old world, and delivered the Children of Israel to the
spoylers. Shall there be any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it?
says Amos in his third chap. and 6 verse. From whence, observe this, That God
ordaines all punishments before they come. Acts. 4. 28. for to do whatsoever
thy hand and counsel determined before to be done. And as God ordains all
things before they come; so he orders them and the time when they shall come;
and they cannot come one moment of time before the Lord would have them. The
Jews could not lay hold on our Savior, because his hour was not yet come.
John. 8. 50. The wicked cannot pull down punishments upon a Nation when they
will; As its he ordains them: and the time when; so thirdly, he does appoint
them how long they shall lie upon men. Revel. 2. 10. There the Lord had
appointed the Church of Smyrna ten days tribulation; and there is measured how
much God appointes us. The devil could go no further then his commission in
afflicting Job. As he does order all, so he does order all for the good of his
people, and for the confusion of his enemies; all things work for the good of
those that fear God, and for the hardening and overthrowing of the enemies of
the Church that are incorrigible.

This may stay and comfort the hearts of

Is God the orderer and disposer of all? then this may comfort thy soul O thou
poor child of God; I say comfort thy soul with this, that the Lord is the
temperer of all things, and the Physician that stands by and sees how many
drammes the Apothecary puts in. The devil indeed may afflict thee, and
wicked men may punish thee; but thou shall have no more then the Lord sees good
for thee. Therefore though thine enemies take thee and kill thee, and Rabshekah
rail on thee, and Bonner burn thee, yet the Lord is a sweet loving Father,
and orders all things, and cannot find in his heart to hurt thee. Though
they be the Instruments, yet God he is the Author, and has appointed how long
and how much and for what they shall afflict thee. Therefore though the sword
find thee, and faggot come: yea though thou be banished or sawne asunder,
yet the Lord orders all things: and though he correct thee, yet he cannot
find in his heart to hurt thee. Therefore he says to the sword and to the
plague as David said to Jacob, have a care of my dear son: only subdue the
rebel* but do not hurt my son. So says God, use my servants kindly for my
sake: only bring under their proud hearts, but do not hurt them. Therefore
have an eye to Gods love, and let faith in him overruled thy heart in spite of
all that can come against thee.

This may terrify the hearts of all wicked men that are out of Gods favor.

Is God the Author of all punishments* then this may make their hair to stand
upright upon their heads. That God whom thou hate, is the punisher of thee:
even he whose-Sonne thou despiest, and whose Sabbaths thou prophanest; He is
able if his wrath be kindled, to consume thee in a moment. Oh, if thou had
not an adamant heart, this would daunt it, and dissolve it into tears of
blood. God will infinitely punish thee, who is a consuming fire: but if thou will not be daunted, there is nothing but fearful looking for of fire and
brimstone for ever in hell. When God punishes his children, it is in mercy:
but to the wicked his wrath is punishments, and his Judgments is anger and
great wrath: and therefore when he punishes thee, thou may say a just Judge
brandeth me in the hand.

Is it so? Then when Calamities come, men, or upon the help of them: but let
us look to God as David did: it may be the Lord sent Shimei to rail on me;
and so did Job, the Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away. The Caldeans did
it: but they were Gods Instruments. We should not do as dogs that gnaw the
stones that are thrown at them. God takes stones as it were, and throws them
upon men's heads: and sometimes whips them by wicked men. Now, the wicked are
but Gods rod, and when he has scourged thee, he will cast the rod into the
fire. Therefore go unto the Lord, make peace with him, and he will remove it.
The wicked I confess are in fault, but God is the Author of all: and he will
deliver you in his good time.

Secondly, wherefore will God deal thus with Israel, because they have sinned
with a rebellious spirit, not by infirmity but in disobedience? Whence you may
learn this point of Instruction, That sin and disobedience against Gods Law
is that which brings down punishments and judgments upon a Nation or a people
or Church. Sin is the brooder and hatcher of all judgments, and the very
spawne of all punishments. Ah, this sin and disobedience, and wilful
rebellion against God, it will bring sw^rd and famine amongst us, and let in
the enemy, and send out God from amongst us, and stop the mouths of his
Ministers, and break off the Parliament.

Another cause why God sends punishments amongst us, is this, because Kings
will not be subject to the Laws of God, and Queens will do what they list:
when Bishops and all people will have elbow room to do that which seems good
in their own eyes: as giving toleration for the profanation of Gods Sabb^ths,
that the people may dishonor the Lord, and run headlong to hell: this and
such like, sets up wickedness, and brings the wrath of God upon us, and his
vengeance upon our Land and Kingdom, when thus sin gets the upper hand and
day of the word, for which I cannot choose but pity our poor Land, neither
could you do less if your hearts were not as hard as an adamant, and your
eyes glued together. Ah poor Nation, now thou lie a bleeding and drawing to
an end, and the bell now tolls for this Nation, and the Lord is a going from
this Land: and her punishments and judgments are coming on apace, so that all
Nations may say, Wherefore has the Lord done this unto this Land, what means
the heat of his anger? then shall men say, they have forsaken the Covenant of
the Lord God of their Fathers, and served other Gods. Judges. 4. 2. When they
forgatte the Lord their God, then he sold them into the hand of Jabin King of
Canaan: this was the ground why the Lord drowned the old world. Genes. 6. 12.
because they had corrupted all their ways; this was the cause why the Lord
burned S^dome and Gomorrah with wildfire from heaven: this was the cause the
Lord destroyed Jerusalem forty years after Christ, because they would have
none of the offers of Christ, and of grace and mercy. And thus much for proof.

Good Lord, what a poor weak Land

We are sick from the Crown of the head to the soale of the feet, there is
no soundness in us: we are sick in head, sick in heart, sick in stomach;
we have had peace, and that has surfeited us: and now we have gotten the
plurisie, and nothing but letting of blood will cure us. God grant the Lord let
us blood in our hearts also: God must purge and physic us, and fetch out the
dross which we have gathered by our disobedience. If sin and rebellion will
do it, we have given God cause enough so to plague us.

Is it so? Then we see who are the greatest traitors in the Kingdom, and what
they are that pull down punishments upon a Kingdom; they are disobedient
rebels and traitors, full of sin.

I protest the greatest traitors King Charles has this day, are the prophaners
of Gods Sabboths, and such as do give liberty to profane them, and to swear
and be drunk: these are the plague sores of this Kingdom, and bring down
heavy judgments upon us; yea, of what place or dignity soever they be. It is
not only poor drunkards, but silver and velvet Coat drunkards, even the
Lordly men of this Kingdom, who give liberty to sin: for the greater the
men are, the greater are their sins, and they are the most dangerous, even as
great Cut-purses do more harm then little ones; for as Haman was hanged
before the Jews saw good days, and the seven sons of Saul were slain
before they could have any peace in Israel: So while these rebels be not
hanged, what peace can be expected? while Jonah was in the ship, there could be
no qu^etnesse: so whilst these rebels and vile wretches live and have favor,
and are respected, and go on still unpunished, they are in the Land, as Jonah
was in the ship: and so long there can be no quietness in the Land.

One Achan did plague a whole Land* but here are many Achans in this Land. Oh
poor Land; thou art wonderfully laden by every ungodly person, both in
Country and City. O let us beg of God that these may be hanged and
dispatched, or that God would turn their hearts.

Is it so, that sin is the brooder of all Jonas was in the ship, the
Mariners, came about him and asked him, from whence come thou? So if ever we
would see good days, we must join our prayers and all our powers against our
sins and the sins of others.

When the Philistines saw that the Arc was the cause of the punishments that
befell them, then they never rested till they had sent it away; so let us ship
and pack away our sins, if ever we would have our punishments removed from
us. Say, Oh mine enemy, have I found thee, thou art the enemy of King, and
Country, and Parliament, and Gospel, and, thou art he that brake the last
Parliament, thou art he that lost the day at the Isle of Ree, thou art he that
sent so many poor Rochellers to the grave with famine, and thou art he that
makes division between Kings and Commons. The Lord give us power and courage:
for if ever we had need, now we have; and let us bestirre our selves, and pray
that God would be pleased to stir up the heart of the King and other
Magistrates against these sins. O that Magistrates in their places, would set
their hearts and hands against all these sins; but light execution is done,
and most Magistrates stand for ciphers in their places, and only take up a
room, and do nothing. We cannot draw them with all the arguments we can use
to punish these sins. We have cause to mourn: for they stand like
scare-Crowes, with a piece in their hands, but never shoot: and the birds may
pick the straws from their heads; so that Magistrates do nothing.

But to you I speak that are Chief in Towns, and chief Officers: you should
all join hand in hand and heart in heart to pull down these al^houses,
hell-houses, and nurseries of the devil, and to supplant wickedness. We must
not be one for them, and another against them: for in so doing, we shall never
see good days.

And you Gentlemen, where are your hearts and hands against them? when did you
ever speak or write against them? when did you ever set foot in striving to
have them suppressed? men stand with their fingers in their mouths, and their
hands in their pockets, and dare not stand for God and good causes. The Lord be
merciful unto us: we do not join our forces, prayers and powers that we can
make for Gods glory. Oh that the Lord would be pleased to put his Spirit into
our hearts, that we may be all of one mind. So you Gentlemen, in your places,
and we Ministers in our places, and all of us, we are with all the strength and
courage and mettle that the Lord hatth put into us, to cry, and pray, and
preach down sin. And all you Masters and Dames, you are to reform your
Families: for these sins bring down punishments upon the Land. Therefore
labor to find out the wickedness of your Families, and admonish them, and
reprove them plainly, and show them from Gods word the punishments that are
due to them. If you would do these things, then there might be something done:
and if reproof and admonishment will not serve the turn, then expel them and
banish them, as Abraham did Hagar and Ismael. You Christians, mourn for your
sins, and join your hearts and prayers against the sins of the place where
you live.

If any house be on fire, others will come with water to quench it as if it
were their own: so here is a flame of fire kindled in this Kingdom of
England, and the wrath of God is like wild fire coming down upon us from
heaven: therefore let every one of us bring some water or other to quench this
fire that is round about us in every place, and almost upon all hearts.

Let every man sweep his own door, and the streets will be clean; so if
every one would purge his own heart, what reformation would there be in every
place? then God and Christ and Gospel might be here still, and the enemies
might be kept out still: which if we do not, who knows how soon the enemy
may rush in upon us? but alas, we harbor these traitors in our bosoms.

I protest against every man that harbors sin in his own house or soul,
that he is a traitor to the Kingdom, whatsoever he be; if I knew the man, I
would fasten mine eyes on him* and tell him, Oh thou vile Achan, do thou
harbor these sins, and traitors, and keep these sins, and then cry out
of the dangerousnesse of the times?

If a man did know certainly, that the dog that he keeps in his house,
would one day pull out his throat, would he keep him fat that he might the
better do it? no sure, he would rather hang him. Or if a man did know that the
fire that burns upon the hearth, would burn him, would he blow it? or if a
man did know that the knife which he has, would one day cu^^e his throat,
would he sharpen it? no surely.

Beloved, this is the case of all us poor wretches that live in sin: they
will be the cause of all the punishments that God sends upon us all. Now
therefore, I charge you all, men and women, and every one of you, to make a
Covenant and enter into an Oath and a curse, to search out every sin, and
find them out in your families, wife and children and servants; and do what
you can to quench them. These Towns and Countries are on fire, O that the Lord
would be pleased to send his word home to every one of your hearts: you I mean
that I love as well as mine own soul, my dear people. I would spend and be
spent for you, if God would give me strength: and though I speak plain, it is
for your everlasting good.

What are those punishments that he threatened to pour upon them in the fury
of his wrath? He pours full battails, and the strength of battails; all this
was upon his own dear people Israel; even those people the Lord so severely
threatens.

Hence, observe this Doctrine, That the Lord often times brings fearful and
unavoydable judgments and punishments, even upon his own professing people:
even they that offer sacrifice, and that pray, and call him Father, and fast
and pray: even upon these people, he does often times bring these punishments.
Amos 3. 2. You only have I known among all the Nations of the earth:
therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.

See the whole current of Gods word: did not the Lord punish the Children of
Israel in the time of their Judges? they had many sore enemies, as Eglon and
Sisera. The ten Tribes they sinned, and were carried into captivity: and these
were Gods professing people. And afterward the other two Tribes, Judah and
Benjamine, were carried away captive into Babylon, and there they were seventy
years.

Forty years after Christ, the Romans came against them, and burnt all their
Cities. And these were Gods own professing people.

The Churches of Asia were famous Churches, but now they are overthrown with
Turks. Now, our sins give God just cause to make him come against us, with
punishments and judgments upon this Land.

If a man lie sick, and they see death in his face, they call it the
foretelling sign: so the Ministers of God may foresee the death and
destruction of a Kingdom. I am sure we have better grounds, then the
Physicians can have. And therefore, why may not the Ministers which are Gods
Physicians, do it?

The signs of Gods punishments that are coming upon us, are these.

The first is of Gods Ministers which with one voice do foretell judgments to
come.

Then, this is a sign that God hasteneth to battle, Am^s. 3. 7. Surely the
Lord will do nothing but he reveals his secrets to his servants the
Prophets: but especially when they agree all in one thing; then the Kingdom is
dangerously gone* Luke. 1. 70. The Lord gives one mouth, as he spoke by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets.

I will say nothing in this, but let me appeal to your own consciences,
whether all good Ministers in the Church of England, have not declared by Gods
word that judgments are coming out against this Land and us for many years
together: And as our Savior says, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven.

Secondly, when sins of all sorts do abound frequently, and with a bold
face, and a whorish forehead. For when the harvest is ripe, then comes so
many sickles to cut it down: so when the sins of a Kingdom are ripe, then
it is time to cut that Kingdom down. Genesis 6. 12. The earth was filled with
violence, all flesh had corrupted their ways: therefore, make an Arc: for the
end of all flesh is come. God will wash away their filthienesse. Consider
whether it be not thus with England or no. Was ever drunkenness and
blasphemy, and scoffing at religion, and profaning Gods Sabboths, nay liberty
given so to do, was it ever come to that height that now it is? were ever great
ones, as Bishops and Ministers, so defiled, as now they are? our Land has
often been overcome: when men were grown desperately wicked, then they were
destroyed. Now, what sins, what blasphemies, what hating of God lies raging
in our times? I think there is none in this Congregation but sees and hears,
how City and Country are venomed and benumbed, and defiled with sins of all
sorts.

Thirdly, when the devil and wicked men cast bones of dissension, that is a
sign of ruin. When there was a disse^tion between Rehob^am and the people,
then God pulled away ten Tribes, and much blood was shed. So when King and
Commons, and all are divided, Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against
Ephraim, but both against Judab, then it is a fearful sign that that Nation
shall be destroyed.

I say, to apply this, if ever a Kingdom were divided, then this is; if we
could all accord, then we might expect something: but, now, our best blood is
gone, and our hearts are gone: the Lord in mercy raise us up from dead ashes.

O consider this, I beseech you, and lay it to heart. Will God deceive his
Ministers, and make them all blindefold? no no. When God puts his Spirit into
his Ministers, and makes them all with one mouth to call and cry desolation,
and when all manner of sins so fearfully abound, and when there is such
divisions in the State, then let us look for desolation.

Fourthly, the fourth sign of Gods anger on a Nation is, when all the hearts
of men fail then it is a sign that vengeance is at the door; when there is a
kind of Cowardice through the guilt of the conscience. Josh. 2. 11. It was a
certain sign of destruction when the peoples hearts failed them: thus it is
with every man almost amongst us: every man's heart is faint and sick. Judges
7. 13. When Gideon was to go against the Midianites, being a wonderful Army,
one dreamed that a cake of barley bread tumbled into the host, and overthrew
them: Then Gideon said, be of good courage: for I see that the Lord has given
them into our hands, because their hearts were fearful; so he took three
hundred men, and put a Trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers and
lamps, and they all cried, the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon; and in the
twelfth verse see what followed, All the host ran and cried and fled. Even
so it is with us* we faint upon every occasion, Gods Spirit is gone from
England.

While Sampson had the Spirit of God upon him, he was too hard for the
Philistines: but when the Spirit of God was gone from him, he had no heart, no
spirit, no courage; then every man was too hard for him, and then he was taken,
and had his eyes pulled out. So when the Spirit of God was with this Nation, we
had courage and got the day; but now alas, every slavish Nation is too hard for
us, and every bug* bear scares us. O poor England, heavy is thy case,
therefore we may expect nothing but misery one way or another.

Now I might set down a Comment or Theme with many tears for this cause,
that every one may read his own destruction from this point. I am not a
Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet: but from the word of the Lord I speak
this thing unto you, and upon these grounds I can say so; That where these
signs are, destruction and calamities follow at the heels of them. We having
all these signs in our State, certainly destruction is at our heels;
therefore let me give you some directions what to do in these dangerous* times.

First, let every man knock off the love of the world, of houses, of lands,
and corn, and flocks; they shortly shall leave thee, or thou them. O
therefore cast them quite out of thy heart. I would to God I could bring my
heart and yours to this pitch, that we could give wise and children and all as
lost. I confess it is hard so to do: but God will sire us out shortly from
these things, if we part not from them, in these our deepest afflictions. Jer.
45. 5. Baruch was so much glued to the world, that he began to feather his
nest: and therefore the Prophet said, seek thou great things for thy self?
seek them not; for behold I will bring evil upon all flesh. So let me say to
you as the Prophet said to Gehazi, is it now a time to build? Therefore at
night when thou go to bed, take thy leave of thy wife and children, and of
thy houses and all, and say, this house may be mine enemies before the morning,
or may be set on fire; this is not my wife: these are not my children: As
Doctor Tailor said when he was going to his execution, when he saw his wife and
children, he embraced them and blessed them in the name of the Lord, and set
them down again, and made no bones of them: and so do you, pluck away your
hearts from all these things here below, and give them all for lost: let thy
heart be contented that God should do with thee what he will, and submit thy
self to God in the hardest blows, and say, good Lord, if thou see no remedy
to purge this Land and Church, but by desolation, and the removing of the
Gospel, good Lord do what thou will; if thou will have my liberty, take it,
if thou will have my children spoiled by the enemy and pitched upon spears
points, do it: Lord, if there be no remedy to purge a sinful Land but by
taking the Gospel out of it, even I Lord submit my self unto it: good Lord,
sacrifice us, or burn our Cities; do what thou will with us, only save our
souls at the last.

I have known some could have no quietness at all, till they came to this
pitch, and then they had peace in their minds. When Isaac saw that he was to
be bound, then he yielded to it: and our Lord Christ did this in the garden
when he did bear the wrath of God, then he said if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me: and this he did three times: yet not my will but thy will
be done; if thou will have me to drink of the cup, I will suck off the
dregs and all.

Also come and lay thy head upon the block, and let God do what he will with
thee, Ezekiel. 16. 36. They shall loath themselves for all their abominations; and
this is the practice of an humble soul, and this will bear through all.

Thirdly, pray and cry mightily to God before thou dyest, even all the time
tho^ have to live, for mercy and for the peace of the Church of God, and for
the poor people and posterity. Esaias. 62. 16. I have set watchmen upon the
walls of Jerusalem, that never hold their peace day nor night. You that make
profession of the Lord, keep not silence; let not God rest till he help and
show mercy unto our poor Land, wives and children.

I am persuaded if dumb^ Zachary were here, he would open his mouth to pray and
cry for this miserable Land. But, alas, poor souls, many of you are so bound
in the chains of your sins, that you cannot find any leisure to pray; you
save your prayers and tears till you come to hell, and then they will do you
no good; Oh, thy Mother lies a dying, and will thou not mourn for her? O dead
and dry hearted wretches, me thinks the poor Church of England is like the
ship of Jonas, and he fast asleep in it; the Gospel and all are drawing
into a sea of troubles: and thou poor wretch art asleep and can not pray.
The Church is like a sick man upon his bed: and the Parliament is like a
College full of Physicians, they cast the State of the Kingdom, and then give
it over for lost. The Lord knows how soon the bell may ring out; and yet thou
can not pray nor weep. Ah, the Lord be merciful to the hardness of our
hearts. Have thou but one tear in thine eyes? but one prayer in thy heart?
then spend them now for the poor Church of God. Make all sound within, and get
sound faith in the blood of Jesus Christ, that may support* and hold you up as
the Arc did Noah in the flood*

O my dear people of this Parish, a fearful flood is come upon this Land:
therefore make you an Arc of Gopher, and pitch it within and without: get in
it, hang not about it; but, get into your Lord Christ, and shut up your selves
in him, as Noah did in the Arc, and never come out. This is your safeguard, if
you be in him, you shall be supported against all troubles, and so shall the
case go well with you. For as the Prophet said to Ahab, high thee hence, for
here is a sound of much rain: and there came a shower indeed. So say I, high
you away to Christ: for it may be you shall not hear many Sermons more: there
is a sound of many punishments and storms falling down upon us. Oh thrice
happy are we that have got Christ upon good terms and good grounds: if a flood
come, it does me good to see how safe I am: for the higher troubles arise, the
higher the Arc will arise, and the higher your faith and comfort will arise,
and you shall sit like Noah in the Cabin. Isai. 26. 20. Come my people and
enter into the chamber, and shut the doors about thee, and hide your selves as
it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.

What? would Noah have been hired to come out of the Arc? no by no means:
nothing would have got him out. I may even pity you my people, that have no
Faith. What will you do and whether will you fly? all you that have not
gotten into the Arc, and have not made sure work, if the flood should come to
morrow, you must certainly be drowned. If you look to God, he is your Enemy;
if you look within, there your Consciences dog you; and if thou look for
comfort to the Minister, there is none for thee in all Gods word; if thou hang
on a Minister, he must say as Samuel said to Saul, since the Lord has
forsaken thee, I can do thee no good. Oh think on this, and get all thy
friends into the Arc with thee, as Noah did. Let ^e beg this at your hands;
get a poor husband into the Arc with thee, with thy poor children, and shut
them all up into the Arc with thee. Would it not grieve thee when thou sit
in the Arc, to see a poor husband or a child a drowning in the flood, and
going to Hell? For the Lords sake, o my dear Brethren, spare no pains to do
them good.

Fifthly and lastly, get a more strong Faith then ordinary; deep dangers must
have a stronger Faith; a man cannot row upon the maine ocean in a pair of
scullers; but he must have a good ship well ballaced, and a good Pilot; so do
you think to row upon the maine ocean of Gods wrath in a pair of scullers?
therefore labor to strengthen your Faith, and to get a good ship well pitched
and ballasted, and substantial Faith; for the wind will try it whether it be
so or not; a Summers dublet will not serve the turn in a Winters frost; so a
little strength and comfort will not serve the turn in the storms that are
coming on us; but we must get winter garments; the East wind will try a man's
clothes. Though a weak Faith may carry thee to Heaven, yet not with so much
comfort as a stronger; especially if it be but a little before the downfall of
the Pope; for then there will be the greatest combustions that ever was or ever
shall be; and by all likelihoods, the time is now at hand. Then, thy Faith had
need to be greater then ever it was. As the Angel said to the Prophet, up and
eat, for thou have a great journey to go; so say I to thee, thou fainting
soul, make a good meal of Faith, strengthen thy Faith upon the promises, for
thou have a great work to do, and happily thou may go six months, and
not see the face of a good Minister, nor talk with a good Minister, when there
shall be no more Rogens, Hookers, Beadles and Cottons to talk with; and you
shall wander about in the woods; your faith to support you then, it will do
you some good. When all the people had lost David, Eleazer one of the Worthi^s,
arose and smote the Philistines, Sam. 2. chap. 11. ver. 23. So when all Gods
Ministers shall leave thee, and then to fight it out against thine own lusts,
and the Devil, and his temptations, will be hard. and this Faith thou have
need of, when thy books and all helps shall be taken from thee. What need have
thou of strong Faith, when thou must fight against half a score Papists and an
Army of temptations, and a world of Devils from Hell? then thou have need of a
stronger Faith then ordinary. When you shall take your leave of your children
and never see them more, then thou have need of Faith to invest thee into the
Promises. Hebr. 11. ver. 21. by Faith Jacob blessed both the sons of Joseph
when he was a dying; so when thou art to leave thy wife and children, and never
to see them more, what Faith have thou need of to invest them into the
Promises, and to say, I look to see you another day in Heaven? the Lord be
with you my dear wife and children, I shall never see you any more here, but I
believe that one day we shall meet together in a world of happiness, where we
shall be together in glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
The CONTENTS of that Sermon HEB. 11. 28.
THE Context opened in several particulars. p. 1. 2. Doct. It has been the
property of wicked men, and still is, to think that what ever the godly have
is too good for them. p. 3. Reas. 1. Because God has chosen the godly out of
the world. page 4. 2. Because the wicked know not the godly to be Gods
Children. ibid. 3. Because wicked men measure others by themselves. ibid. 4.
There ever was, and ever will be contrariety betwixt the seed of the woman,
and the seed of the Serpent. p. 5. Use. 1. To teach the godly not to be
discouraged when they are hardly dealt withal in this world. ibid. 2. Not to
render like for like. ibid. The Words of the Text opened. Doct. Gods children
are worthy persons. p. 6. All things in the world are little worth. 1. All
things in the world are very deceitful. p. 8. 2. They are very unprofitable.
ib. 3. They cannot further a man in the maine thing that he should aim at. p.
9. All riches in the world make not a man better either in respect, 1. Because
God regards not the rich more then the poor. ib. 2. They cannot assure a man
of the love of God. ib. of God. 3. They make a man not more mindful, but more
forgetful of God. ib. 4. They cannot make a man more thankful to God. ib. 5.
Neither can they draw a man nearer to God. p. 10. 1. All the things in the
world cannot enrich a man's soul. ib. or of our selves. 2. They cannot free a
man from any spiritual evil. ibid. 3. They cannot satisfy a man. p. 11. 4.
They are of no continuance. p. 12. All worldly men are little worth. 1. Because
of those contemptible names the Spirit of God gives them. p. 13. 2. Their best
actions are but glittering sins. ibid. Use. 1. To discover the madness, and
folly of men in these days who so much mind the world. p. 14. 2. To inform
our judgments concerning the things of this world, which for the most part are
given to the worst men. ib. 3. To take our hearts and affections from the
things of this life, because they are so little worth. p. 15. Doct. True
believers are persons of great worth. p. 16. Reas. 1. Inrespect of the worthy
names the Holy Ghost gives them. p. 17. 2. There is a great price paid for
them. ib. 3. Because the wicked do so hate them; for the grace that is in the
godly is the eyesore of the wicked. p. 18. 4. In respect of the Privileges
that God has been pleased to dignifie them withal. p. 18. as 1. Their Royal
descent. ib. 2. They are royally attended. p. 19 3. They have royal places.
ib. 4. They have royal fare. ib. 5. They have royal apparel, viz. the
righteousness of Christ. ib. 6. All their debts are paid. ib. 7. They may go
boldly unto the throne of grace. p. 20. 8. All things work for the best unto
them. ib 9. They are Gods beloved ones. ib. 10. They have the free use of all
Gods Creatures. ib. 11. The places where they live fare the better for them. p.
21. 12. In respect of the great things which are laid up for them* ib. 5. Uses.
1. For terror to wicked men that wrong the Children of God, they being persons
of so great worth. p. 22. 2. Hence learn to esteem godly men for their worth.
p. 23. 3. To teach us how to get a name of worth in the world. p. 24. 4. For
comfort to the godly, though they be disregarded here, yet God highly accounts
of them. ib. 5. We should labor to walk worthy of this high Honor that God
puts upon us. p. 25.
The Contents of that Sermon GENESIS 6. 3.
THe Text opened in several particulars. p. 27. 1. Doct. The Lord of Heaven
and earth, does strive mightily with a company of poor Rebels. p. 29. 2.
Doct. There is a time when God will strive with men no more, and that in this
life. ib. This point is proved by several Scriptures. p. 31. When the Lord
gives over to strive with a man for his good, these things follow. 1. He
repents him of all the good he has done unto him. p. 33. 2. The Lord gives him
over to the power and dominion of sin. ibid. 3. He blasts him in regard of
all his gifts and abilities, that formerly he had. p. 35. 4. The Lord hardens
him ib. 5. The Lord suffers him to build upon false Principles. p. 36. 6. The
Lord gives a Commission to all means never to do him good. p. 37. Who are they
the Lord gives over striving with? 1. Those that have lived long under the
means of grace, but are still unprofitable. p. 39. 2. Those that have had much
means of grace, and many secret workings of the Spirit in them; yet when
temptations come they yield unto them. p. 40. 3. Those that have much grieved
the Spirit of God, in sinning against the light of their Consciences. p. 41 4.
Such as have a contemptible esteem of the Gospel, and the Ministers thereof.
p. 42. 2 Reasons why the Lord does give men over in this life, and never strive
with them more. p. 43. 1. God being a just God will reject them that reject
him. ib. 2. God is a wise God, therefore he will not always bear with sinful
men. ib. 3 Objections against this truth are answered. p. 44, 45. 4 Uses. 1. To
teach us to bless God that he has not given over striving with us, as he has
done with others. p. 46. 2. For reproof of those who negleect the day of their
visitation. p. 47. 3. For terror to all wicked and ungodly men with whom the
Lord has given over striving. p. 48. The condition of such is miserable. 1.
Because if God forsakes them, then all comfort forsakes them. p. 50. 2. When
God goes, restraining grace goes. ib. 3. When God leaves us, then common
protection leaves us. p. 51. 4. T^ exhort us to redeem the time, and to yield
to the motions of Gods Spirit. p. 52. For this end consider, 1. The fearful
condition of such as are given over. page 53. 2. The great danger of deferring
repentance. ibid. 3. All the time of our life is little enough for this work.
ibid. 4. Our lives are but short. ibid.
The Contents of that Sermon COLOS. 3. 5.
THE Words of the text opened in three particulars. page 56. Sin may be
civilized five ways. 1. When it is laid asleep, not dead p. 57. 2. When the
heart is taken off one lust, by another coming in the room thereof. p. 60. 3.
When the sap of sin is taken away, and no contrary grace infused. p. 61. 4.
When it is overtwharted by an higer principle. page 62. 5. By Gods giving only
common graces, such as he gives to many wicked men. p. 63. Doct. If we look to
have any benefitte by our Interest in Christ, we must mortify all our sins.
ibid. 3 Reas. 1. Otherwise Christ will not be a Jesus, a Savior unto us. page
65. 2. It is impossible for sin and grace to live and subsist in one subject.
p. 67. 3. Otherwise we cannot possibly enter into heaven* page 69. A wicked man
could find no delight in heaven. ibid. When the devils had sinned: they could
not endure to stay any longer in heaven. p. 71. 3 Uses. 1. To condemn those
that go on in their sins, and never endeavor to mortify them. page 72. 2.
To teach us that it is not enough to let our sins dye in us, but we must
endeavor to mortify them. page 73. 3. To show that mortification is no easy
work. page 75. They that have begun, must persevere in this work of
mortification. page 77. 1. Because the very same sin that has been
mortifyed will live again unless it be continually mortifyed. page 78. 2.
Else, if not that Sin, yet another will arise in the room of it. ibid. 3.
Because in this life we can mortify Sin but in part. ibid. Marks to know
whether Sin be mortified or no. 1. They that have mortifyed their Sins live
in, and act the contrary graces. p. 80. As they give up all the ways of Sin,
so they take up all the ways of Grace. ibid. Grace takes not away a man's
affections, but qualifyes them aright. ibid. And it sets them upon right
Objects. p. 8. 2. He that is mortifyed aright, is dead unto every Sin. ibid.
So long as a man lives in Sin, he is altotogether incapable of Christ. p.
83.
THE GREAT DIGNITY OF THE SAINTS.
HEB. 11. 28. Of whom the World was not worthy.
COncerning the Author or Penman of this holy Epistle I will not now stand to
discuss. But this is certain who ever was the Scribe, the Spirit of God was
the Inditer, and all Scripture is given by Divine inspiration, 2 Timothy 3. 16.

For the Coherence; the Spirit of God having exhorted the Believers how to
continue in the Faith, and with patience to undergo those trials which
accompany the profession of it; and having backed it with Arguments, he comes
in this Chapter to press the same; And you shall find in this whole Chapter
he lays down Arguments to back the exhortations, which are taken from the
Excellency of Faith.

The Holy Ghost discovers it two ways. First, by a general description in the
three first verses; and after by the worthy examples of the faithful in the
Church of old.

First, the general description of Faith in Faith is the ground of things etc.
Faith makes things hoped for subsist to a Believer.

Secondly, he describes the essential properties of it; it makes Believers to
be well accounted off both of God and man, verse second.

Thirdly, he shows that Faith makes believers to understand and believe things
incredible to reason.

Secondly, he describes Faith by examples Moses and Abraham; and then from
verse 32 to the end of the chapter he sets down the example of the Saints
together; and that because the number of them was infinite, Ergo he dispatches
them, and passes by them with bare naming of them, as, what shall I make
mention of Gedeon etc? and so he shows what great things they did by Faith;
and then he brings in this verse, of whom the world was not worthy.

To come to the words, they are brought in by the holy Ghost to answer to a
secret Objection that the holy Ghost did foresee, that the wicked persecutors
of the Church would conceive against the godly;

viz. Why did they wander up and down?

Now the holy Ghost takes away this world is not worthy of them, they were and
are too good to live in the world.

But before I come to the maine, we will note something in general.

Viz. That it has been the property of wicked men, and is still, to think
whatsoever the godly have, is too good for them.

Ye shall be hated of all men, Matthew. 24. And have not the Saints of God found
it so? what a hard conceit had the Jews of Christ? He is not worthy to live.
So of Paul, Acts 22. They were accounted the offscouring of the world, 2 Cor.
4. 13. And as it was in the Apostles times, so it is now; and would you know
the reason?

First, because God has chosen them out Joh. 15. 19. For when Gods people were
as the world is, carnal and sensual etc. then the world gave them the right
hand of fellowship. But when a change appeared in the godly, then the world
changed too.

2. Because the wicked know not the godly. viz.) they know them not to be Gods
children; so says the Apostle, They speak evil of the things that they know
not, Jude 10. They know him as he is rich, or as he comes of such and such a
parentage; but as he is a child of God, they know him not. This world knows
you not, because it knows not God. 1 John 3. 1. And hence it is that Gods
children are called strangers, yea, and are used strangely; even because they
know not God, and Ergo, they know not the child.

3. Because wicked men measure others by themselves; and because they run not
into the same excess of riot, ergo they speak evil of them, 1 Pet. 3. 5.

4. Because there ever was, and ever will be, contrariety between the seed of
the woman, and the Serpent. Esau will deal very hardly with Jacob; they that
are born of the Devil, will hate them that are borne of God, 1 John 3. 12.

First, This should teach the godly when

Secondly, seeing the world deals so like for like; but pray ye unto God for
them to open their eyes.

Now we come to the words themselves.

Of whom the world was not worthy.

The holy Ghost in this place would discover two things*

First, the little worth of the world of wicked men, viz. how that they are not
worthy to come into the presence of the godly.

Secondly, the great worth of the godly;

Viz. They are too good for the world.

First, the world, ( viz.) the wicked in the world, are very little worth; not
worth one godly man or woman in it; whence observe, that

Gods children are worthy persons.

But before I handle this point, I will give the sense and meaning of the words.

This word World is diversely taken. Sometimes it is taken for the whole Fabric
of Heaven and earth, John 1. 10. He was in the world, and the world was made by
him, and the world knew him not. So Acts 17. 24. God that made the world, etc.

Sometimes it is taken for all mankind, good and bad. So Romans 5. 12. As by one
man sin entered into the world (viz.) sin entered into the men which are in the
world.

Sometimes it is taken for the elect only; so John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of
God which takes away the sin of the world, (viz,) the elect in the world.
Again, God so loved the world, etc. John 3* 16. (viz.) his elect in the world.
Again, we believe this is the Savior of the world, John 4. 42. (viz.) of the
elect in the world.

But why are the godly called the world?

I answer, first because the world was them, and it is continued yet for their
sakes.

Secondly, they may be called the world because they are scattered through the
world, and that not only among the Jews but even among the Gentiles also.

Thirdly they may be called the world, because in themselves they are a world
of people; but yet compare them with the Devils drove, they are few, even as
the shaking of the Olive tree, Esaias 17. 6. yet in themselves they are as the
Stars in number. Genesis 15. 5. And Balaam said, who can number the dust of
Jacob? Numb. 22. 10.

Sometimes it is taken for the reprobates in the world. so John 15. 19. If you
were of the world, the world would love its own. It is plain also in the
prayer of Christ; I pray not for the world. John 17. 9. And they may fitly be
called the world; First, because they are the worlds Citizens, they mind the
things of the world, they follow nothing but the world. Secondly, because they
are the greatest part of the world.

Sometimes the world is taken for the things in the world, those things
wherewith the Dev^ll uses to draw men from God; as the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the eyes, the pride of life. 1 John 5. 16. Sometimes for the happy
estate and condition the godly shall enjoy after this life. So Luke 20. 35.
They which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world etc.

Now whereas the Apostle says, of whom the world was not worthy; I take it he
means wicked men in the world, and those are they that are not worthy the
company of the godly. And because I intend to show the unworthiness of the
world, I will show first that the things in this world are little worth.
Secondly that the men in the world are little worth.

First I will show you, that the things in the world are little worth; as
Riches, Honors, pleasures etc. they are called deceitful riches; and Christ
calls them the Mammon of iniquitity. Luke 16. 9. trash. Luke 8. 14. Snares. 1 Timothy 6. 9. They are called uncertain riches. Now these base titles must needs
argue that they are little worth; for were they worth more, God would set
better titles on them. And Solomon who had best experience of them, yet he
terms them vanity. Eccles. 1. 2. and 11.

Secondly, they are little worth, because they are very unprofitable; they
cannot profit a man; It is plain by the speech of Samuel. 1 Samuel 12. 21. Vain
things which cannot profit etc.

Thirdly, they are little worth, because they cannot further a man in the maine
thing at which he should aim; they may further a man in some trifles, but not
in the maine thing. There is no true good comes to a man by all the riches in
the world; neither can they free a man from the evil day; neither can they
make you better either in respect of God or your selves.

First, in respect of God, they cannot make Job. 34. 19. He does not account of
a man according to his greatness, but according to his goodness. Prove. 20. 7,
8. Better is a poor man that walks in his integrity, then a King that is
perverse in his ways.

Secondly, they cannot better him in respect love of God.

Thirdly, they cannot make a man more mindful of God; nay they corrupt men's
hearts, they make a man more forgetful of God. It is thus with the greatest
part of men in the world that are worldly rich; it is with them as it was with
the Prodigal, who while he had money in his purse, never did he think on his
Father.

Fourthly, the things of this world cannot thankful to God, but rather the
contrary, ut supra.

Fifthly, the things of this world cannot draw a man nearer unto God. You see
that the more men have, the more negligent they are in Gods service.

Secondly, in respect of our selves; First, all grace; they cannot make him
humble, nor merciful, nor constant in the profession of godliness and good
duties; nay it rather makes them the more unmeet to any goodness; where there
is gain in the chest, there is loss in the Conscience; he that gets money
apace, may lose Faith and a good Conscience; and they that most covet for
abundance of the things of this life, are most backward in Grace; and this
argues that the things of this life are little worth, even in respect of a man's
self.

Secondly, they are not able to free a man from any spiritual evil; they may
promise Freedom* but when they come to the trial, they will be like a broken
staff; nay they cannot free thee so much as from an ague, much less will they
help in the day of the Lords wrath, when the rich man shall be called to an
account, and the Lord will recompense every man according to his ways. So
Prove. 11. 4. Riches profit not in the day of wrath. True it is they may be as a
wall of brass to keep of the evil of this world; yet when the hour of death
approaches, they cannot free from that; when you are affrighted with the
accusation of your own Consciences, and with the apprehension of Gods wrath,
when the Devil shall set upon you, and all your friends forsake you, shall the
things of this life then do you any pleasure? no, no. You will say to them
then as Job to his friends, miserable comforters are you all; this argues their
little worth: For God will not examine you how rich you have been, but he will
consider you as you have honored him, and as you have made good use of your
riches; if you have been faithful, you shall enter into your Masters joy. He
will not consider you as you are or have been in great Offices or places in the
world, but as you have been faithful in them; not as you had crouching and
bowing to you, but as you have faithfully and frequently bowed your knees unto
the Lord in Prayer; God will not account of you a straw the better for your
wealth, but he will pass sentence on you as you have used or abused your
talent.

Thirdly, they can give no content. He that

Eccles. 5. 9. O but, I desire but a competent

Sol. It is well done. A little spring running Sol.
from the head, runs shallow at the first, but at the last, many other
falling into it, it is become great; so you may say, you desire but a
competency; but the world comes on you, then there is craving and having till
your desires are as large as hell. Habba. 2. 5. riches make men sick of a
dogs disease; what is that? why dogs are always eating, but never satisfied:
so if a man immoderately love the things of this life, he shall not be
satisfied.

Lastly, the things of this world are nothing we have no assurance of them:
they are of no continuance, they either leave us, or we them: do you not see
that after a man has risen early, and late, eating the bread of carfulness,
and has gotten a little pelf, is he not thereof deprived in a moment of time?
Prove. 12. 27. The sloughfull man ( viz.) the worldly man, rosteth not that
which he took in hunting, ( viz.) after all his travail he is swept away, and
takes not the profit of them. Is not this then a worthless world? but suppose
it do stay with you, yet one day you must part with it. Psalm. 49. 6, 7. and
you must carry nothing with you; naked you came, and naked you must return;
even like unto a Sumpter-Horse which carries all the day abundance of Treasure,
but at night it is all taken from him, and he is put into a stable for his
labor; all the benefit he gets by the Treasure, is, he only feels the weight
of it. Even so many rich men are Sumpter-horses to carry the things of the
world, who either for ill-useing, or ill-getting them, are put into a filthy
stable, ( viz.) Hell, and their pay is everlasting torment. These things show
the little worth of this world.

Now you shall see that wordly men are little worth: First, it appears that
they are little worth, because of the names and titles that the Spirit of God
lays on them; it calls them Sons of Beliall. 1 Samuel 2. 12. Vile persons.
Psalm. 15. 4. Children of iniquity. Hosea 10. 9. 11. a Reprobate stock. John 8.
44. Children of wrath. Ephesians. 2. Now if there were any great worth in them,
think you that the Spirit of God would not better style them?

Secondly, they are little worth in respect of their actions; their best
actions are but glittering sins. Esaias 66. 3. If they pray, or hear etc. God
accounts of it no better then the sacrificeing of Swines flesh; they stink in
Gods nostrills. Esaias 1. 13.

If then the men of the world be little

Secondly, let this inform our Judgments false glass, or crooked rule that
men go by, who judge themselves men of worth if they be rich, and we use to
say there is a man of good credit; let us see our folly in thus judging. I will
discover it thus.

The things of the world are given to the worst men; wicked men have many times
the greatest share in them. Esau has four hundred at his heels, when Jacob
had but a few; The Scribes and the Pharisees sat in Moses chair, when as the
Disciples of Christ were carried before the Rulers; so for Riches, proud Dives
fared deliciously every day, when poor Lazarus was feign to snap at a crust;
so the false Prophets were fed at Jesabells table* when Elias was in commons
with the Ravens. Now if the things of this life were of such great worth,
think you that God would keep his children so sparingly with them? no, no;
they are but gifts of Gods left hand. Prove. 3. 16. Length of days are in his
right hand, and in his left hand riches and Honor.

Instruction, to teach us to take off our affection love the world, nor yet in
action too much seek the world; but when Heaven and earth are laid in the
balance, esteem earthly things as dung in respect of Christ, and show your
little esteem of earthly things, by your seeking them in the second place, and
Gods Kingdom in the first place; Let wicked men account the things of this
life as their summum bonum; but let us be crucified to the world, let us be as
dead men to the world, and the world as dead to us; not that I would have you
utterly to reject the things of this life, but not to set your affections on
them; we must use the things of this life as Travailers do their provision; if
they have too much, it will hinder them; so let us be content whether it be
much or little; it is best to lay up Treasure in Heaven, as Christ told his
Disciples. Thus of the first point; the second follows.

OF whom the world was not worthy; as if he should have said they are too good
to live in the world; hence observe; That true Believers are persons of very
great worth. The world is not worthy of them.

I need not spend much time to prove this; they are called excellent persons,
Psa. 16. 3. Again, the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor. Prove.
12. 26. again, they are called the glory of God, Esaias 4. 5. They are called a
chosen people, a Royal Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Now, wherein lies the worth of
a godly man? not in the outward man; for alas the outward man of a child of God
is the same with another man. Their chief worthiness lies in the inward man
which after God is created unto righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 4.
24. The Kings daughter is all glorious within. Psalm. 45. 13. Now Gods people
are worthy persons, and that in these respects.

First, in respect of the worthy names they have. Do they not says the
Apostle, blaspheme the worthy name by the which ye are called? Jam. 2. 7.
(viz.) the name of Christ.

Secondly, they are worthy, because there was a great price paid for them; it
adds much to the worth of a thing when there is a great price paid for it; so
this adds to the worth of all true believers that the price was great that was
paid for them; they were not bought with corruptible things; not with two
hundred fore-skinnes of the Philistines, as David bought Michal; nor with
thirty change of raiment, the reward of those that unfolded Samsons Riddle;
they were not bought with a great sum of Money, as the Roman Burgesseship
was; I say not with corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ; for in him we have redemption through his blood. Coloss. 1. 14.

Thirdly, they are worthy in respect of the Consciences of the wicked; for it
is for their worth, that they bear them malice; it is goodness that is
persecuted in good men. I appeal to the Consciences of wicked men, whether
their Consciences tell them not that there is worth in the godly for which they
bear them a secret grudge; but if their Consciences be sleepy; and tell them
not so much, yet I am sure their practices proclaim it. The grace that is in
the godly is the eye-soare of the wicked.

Fourthly, Gods people are personages respect of their Privileges which God
has been pleased to dignifie them withal, which are infinite if I should name
them all; wherefore as out of a garden where are diverse sorts of flowers, I
will gather some few.

The first Privilege wherein their worth their Royal descent; they are not
basely borne; No, they have Kings for their nursing Fathers, and Queens for
their nursing Mothers; they are sons and daughters of the King of Heaven, and
it is usual in the Scripture to call them the Children of God.

Secondly, as they are Royally descended, Royally attended. To speak
reverendly, God attends them, he keeps them as the apple of his eye; and Christ
is their Captain, he goes before them to conduct them; and under God and
Christ we have Angels, they pitch round about them that fear the Lord, Psalm.
34. 7.

Thirdly, they are worthy in respect of their places. They that trust in the
Lord shall be as Mount Zion, Psalm. 125. 1. which cannot be removed.

Fourthly, in respect of their fare; they Benjamin's Mess, which is five times
more then his brethren's; so the portion of Gods children is five thousand
times more then the wicked's; Heaven is their inheritance.

Fifthly, they are worthy in respect of their Royal apparel; as a worthy man
is richly apparrelled, so a godly man is clothed with the righteousness of
Christ. Revel. 3. 9.

Sixthly, in this respect also, because they are out of debt, they need not
fear any Sergeant to arrest them, no not death: for Christ has cancelled the
handwriting Colos. 2. 14.

Seventhly, in respect they may go boldly to the throne of grace, with
confidence that they shall be heard in prayer. For whatsoever we ask we
receive, etc. 1 John 3. 22.

Eighthly, all things work together still for them to the best. Romans 8. 28.

Ninthly, they are Gods beloved ones, his peculiar providence. True it is he
shows a general providence to all: but Gods people have a right in a more
peculiar manner; for God will dwell with them. John 14. 23. and he will keep
the feet of his Saints. 1 Samuel 2. 9.

Tenthly, they have the free use of all Gods creatures; the Chartar that was
given by the great Lord of all, was forfeited to him by the fall of our first
parents. They are the sower grape, and we their children our teeth are set on
edge. But Christ has renewed this charter for his: all others are but
usurpers: though a wicked man have never so much, and never so good a title in
regard of the law of man, yet in Christ he shall be condemned for an intruder.
Oh what a happy thing is this then for the godly? for whatsoever they have they
are the right owners of it: all things are theirs, and they are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods.

Eleventhly, they are persons of great in respect of their presence where* they
live, the places fare the better for them. Laban fared the better for Jacob,
and Potiphar fared the better for Joseph. While Lot was in Sodom, the Lord
could do nothing against the Sodomites: they keep the judgments from the
places where they live, they are the pillars of the Land.

Twelfthly, in respect of their actions: a true Abraham prayed for Abimelech,
and God heard him. Genesis 20. 17. and Moses prayed for Pharaoh, and God removed
the plagues, as you may see in Exodus.

Thirteenthly, in respect of the great things which are laid up and reserved of
God for them in the world to come, such as no eye has seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive.

But are they such men of worth? why,

First, know this: you that are godly, be

Secondly, If all should speak well of you, then woe be unto you.

Thirdly, Envy is evermore the companion

Fourthly, Know this in conclusion that part of your worth. For when all men
speak evil of you, then blessed are you.

This speaks terror to the wicked who wrong the children of God, either with
tongue or hands: either by themselves or by others: either by nick-naming them,
or by circumventing them; this I say speaks terrible things against them. Will
you offer to speak against personages of great worth? against the children of
a King? will the King endure that thou should speak against the blood
royal? no no, he will be revenged on them that do so; do thou now wrong a
godly man? thou shall one day smart for it; for God is able to punish thee, yea
and he will do it unless thou speedily repent. When Saul Acts 8. persecuted
the Church of Christ, Christ called from heaven and said, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? I speak to those that are wicked men, and I speak in the
bowels of Christ, if you did know them, you would not do it; for had they
known the Lord of life, they would not have crucified him. 1 Cor. 2. 8. so, if
such as do persecute Gods children, did but know their worth, and that they
were his children, they would not do it.

Let us esteem godly men and women as persons of great worth: the Saints of
God have always done so.

Saint Lawrence being demanded by his persecutors wherein the worth of the
Church lay; the story says he gathered a company of poor people together,
and pointed at them and said, there lies the worth of the Church: so, I have
read of an ancient King, who made a great feast, and invited a company of
poor people which were Christians, and he bade his Nobles also; now when the
Christians came, he had them up into the Presence Chamber; but when the Nobles
came, he set them in his hall. Being of the Nobles demanded the reason, he
answered, I do not this as I am their King here, for I respect you more then
them: but as I am a King of another world, I must needs honor these, because
God does most honor them, and then they shall be Kings and Princes with me:
so do you esteem of them according to their worth, and show it.

If they be persons of such great worth, you may be directed how to get a name
of worth in the world, to be honored of God. This is the way; labor to be
believers, serve God and close with the godly, be of one mind and of one heart
with them. Honor is the thing that all desire, according to that of Saul to
Samuel, Honor me before the Elders of my people: so we are all ready to say
oh that I could be honored in the heart of those that I converse with all: I
say then thou must labor to serve and honor God in thy heart, let that be
thine honor. It is a mere folly for men to think to get honor by swearing,
by lying, by cutting and slashing, and drunkenness etc. The sweet ointment of
a good name is not compounded of stinking ingredients.

This should serve to comfort the godly; they are of so great worth, what
though they be disgraced here, let this suffice thee, God that knows the true
worth of every thing, he accounts thee worthy: what though dogs bark and
cry out against thee for thy holiness? let them alone: and know thou this,
that the time will come when never a curre of them all but will wish oh that
mine end might be like his, and that they might go as thy dog to heaven with
thee, when they shall see thee sit at his right hand where are pleasures for
evermore.

Lastly, you that approve your selves to be of the number of the godly, labor
to walk worthy of the Lord. Colos. 1. 10. Does God thus advanced you? then
strive you to honor him with inward and outward worship. God has not done
these things for you that you may live as you list: no, you are a chosen
generation, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 19. Ergo you must show forth the virtue of him that
has called you. You that are parents of children, the more you do for them,
the more you look they should honor you: the more God has done for you, the
more you ought to fear him, God has drawn you out of darkness into a
mavelous light, and will you yet walk as vassalls of Satan? This was that
kept Joseph from committing adultery, even the favor of advancement, and how
then can I do this great wickedness says he? so thou art advanced to honor
from a child of the devil to be the son of God, how then can thou commit
wickedness? Consider I say how God has advanced thee from being a slave of
Satan to be his adopted son: and shall I now become a covetous person, shall I
be a companion of Gods enemies? when you are enticed by the devil or wicked
men to any sin, say, what shall such a man as I consent? shall I fly from my
coulors? what, a Kings son and fly? Consider this.

THE TIME OF GODS GRACE Is limited.
GENESIS 6. 3. The Lord, said my Spirit shall not always strive with man, because
he is but flesh, and his days shall be a hundred and twenty years.
IN this Chapter is continued the History of the decay of the World, wherein is
described Gods purpose of destroying mankind; in which are these two parts:

First, the meritorious deserving Cause, wherein God gives an account what he
does, how inexcusable the world is, and how just God is unto the 14. verse.

Secondly, a Direction unto Noah to make an Arc, where we may see that God in
his judgment remembers mercy.

The meritorious deserving cause, is described, quantity of those persons in
those evil days; a great many; verse. the first, men began to multiply in
places populous; where there are some good, there are many bad.

Secondly by the quality of those persons; Sons of God, when they saw the
daughters of men: the sons of God ( viz.) the posterity of them that
maintained Religion, they began to be careless and carnally confident, they
did look after the profits and pleasures of this life, and then it was high
time for God to enter into Judgment.

Thirdly, by the kind of sin; They lusted after unlawful Marriages etc. and
the root of this was original corruption; the Imaginations of man's heart, was
only evil and that continually. verse 5.

These words, are a Proclamation of Gods purpose, to bring it to an end; in
which are four things.

First, the Lords complaint in these words, the Lord said.

Secondly, the Proclamation it self in these words, my Spirit shall not
always strive with man.

Thirdly, the reason, because he is but flesh.

Fourthly, the limitation of the time, a hundred and twenty years, in which
time if they repent, I will repent; but if they will not, my Spirit shall not
always strive. As if the Lord had said, I have tried all conclusions and used
all means, partly by Mercies to allure them, partly by Judgments to terrify
them; partly by my word to recall them, and by all means possible to bring
them to my self; yet they remain incorrigible; I now am resolved to strive
with them no more.

From the words thus opened there will naturally arise these two points.

First, that the Lord of Heaven and earth does strive mightily with a company
of poor Rebels; and all to bring them unto himself, but on this I intend not
to insist.

The second is this, viz. that there is a time when God will strive with men no
more, and that in this life; The scope of this aims at the whole world; but
what is said in general, may also be said in particular. well then, there is a
time in this life, and not when we are dead and gone; for then it is certain
there is no more coming unto God; but, in this life there is a time when God
will strive with men no more, neither for their good here, nor for their
everlasting happiness hereafter. For, unto every thing there is an appointed
time. Eccles. 3. 1. Now the Lord calls lovingly to allure us; but there will
come a time of go ye cursed; the good Spirit of mine which thou have abused,
shall never come to thee more; this is a marvailous troublesome truth: yet most
true; for men now will have their wills, and God must be at their leisure, and
come (forsooth) when they please. They will live as they list, do as they
list, and God must show mercy on them as they list, and when they list etc. So
there is a time when God will strive; but when that time is gone, God will will
strive no more.

To make this plain I will lay down these six things.

First, I will let you see that it has been so, by Testimonies of Scripture.

Secondly, I will show in or after what manner God deals with a soul in
giving it over.

Thirdly, I will show who they be that God gives over.

Fourthly, I will show the grounds of it.

Fifthly, the objections against it.

And lastly, we will come to the uses.

For the first; Testimonies of Scripture, Saul, because thou have rejected the
word of the Lord, the Lord has also rejected thee from being King etc. 1 Samuel
15. 23. The Lord had striven with Saul many ways; by giving him profits and
Honor, in making him King; he had given him gifts of the Spirit, he was not
wanting unto him in any means; yet he not regarding all this, but neglecting
that which his Conscience told him should be done hereupon the Lord took away;
that good Spirit from Saul, and gave him an evil Spirit, as himself confessed
to the Witch of Endor. And as some Divines understand that saying of David,
Psalm. 51. 11. Cast me not out of thy sight or presence, is not to be understood
of Government, but of the Church of God; Cast me not out of thy presence as
thou did my Predecessor Saul; Ergo, it is evident that Saul was given over
even in this life.

Secondly, that of the Heb. 12. 16, 17, Let there not be a profane person
among you as Esau; mark that man is a profane man, that for one morsel of
profit or pleasure, will cast off the favor of the living God; let there not
be any such among you (says the Text.) The Apostle means not the outward
inheritance only, but that which is of the Sonship of God, which the
Birthright then was.

Thirdly, Luke 19. 41, 42. where our Jerusalem, Oh Jerusalem etc. oh that thou
had known in this thy day of visitation! etc. but now they are hid from
thine eyes. Why? because thou did not know thy time; God visits us from day
to day, either in Mercies, or Judgments; in mercy when he performs that which
he has promised; In Judgments when he brings on men those Judgments which
formerly he denounced; So our Savior tells them they had a day, oh that thou
had known in this thy day! etc. But now they are hid from thine eyes, and
thou shall see them no more: thus you see it is plainly proved by evidence of
Scripture.

Secondly, I will show you how the Lord deals with such rebellious and stubborn
creatures who after the Lord has tried al conclusions on them, yet cannot
bring them to amendment, but that still they will go on in their sins, then
the Lord changes his mind, and he repents him of the good he has done unto
them. And so he repented that he had made Saul King.

But how can God repent?

I answer, there may be a change of the thing, though not of the person. The
Lord repents that ever he set a Minister over a soul to convert it, if it
despise his Ministry: though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind
could not be toward them: The Lord then had a mind; he loved the young man in
the Gospel, that is he kindly invited him, but yet says the text, he went
away sorrowful, he would not sell all to follow Christ: so the Lord of heaven
and earth strives with men, he has a good mind to win them, he sends his
Ministers to them, and when will it be that that unclean lust of thine will be
reformed: The Lord calls the first, second and third time, and when he sees it
will not prevail, at last he gives thee over.

The Lord gives over that man to the power of that sin which he never did
before when he strove with him; we must either lose our sins or our souls:
and ergo if no means will serve to bring a man home, then the Lord gives him
over to commit his old sin; see Psalm. 82. 11. 12. the Lord tells there what
he had done for Israel, how he had brought them out of Egypt: but my people
says he would not hear: Israel would none of me, none of my holiness, none
of my pureness, none of my ways; but their own ways, wills and wits were
best: ergo says the Lord, I gave them up to their own hearts lust. He does
not say he gave them up unto the Syrians to plague them, nor to the enemies of
the Church to ride upon them; but to their own lusts. The incestuous person
received good by his excommunication: but when a man is given over unto
rebellion, it is hard for him to be recalled back; it had been better for
that man if he had never been borne. For as the skin of a Rabit comes well
off till it comes to the head, and then there is haling and pulling; so a man
can crucify many lusts, and perform many good duties; but when once he is
come to the head, to his dareling sin, to his Dali^ah, then there is tugging
and pulling, and the Lord will either break that man's neck or his heart: he
will either pull him from sin, or give him wholly over unto his sin. See
Psalm. 78. 30. they must have Quails, they had a dainty tooth and that must be
satisfied; well, I will give you Quails says God, yea and my displeasure with
it also.

Thirdly, as God gives a man over to the power of his lusts, so he does blast a
man in regard of all abilities and gifts that formerly he has had. Look into
the world, and you shall see this plain: great scholars, learned Doctors and
Preachers, their learning has been blasted: they were bright candels, yet in
the end they became snuffes, men of corrupt minds etc. Look upon other common
Christians, who have given hope of coming unto God, when they were in
sickness, or necessity etc. Yet at last it turns to nothing: He sent
leanesse into their souls. Psalm. 106. 15. He gave them their request. One
aims at honor: well, God gives it unto him: another will have profit; well,
says God, and thou shall have it: but my Spirit and the ^xcellency thereof
thou shall never have.

Fourthly, the Lord hardens that man: he he gives him up to the power of his
lusts: and blasts all his parts, so that he hardens up his heart; and look by
what means God sought to bring him unto him, those means harden him;
afflictions harden him, which should have been the means to have recalled
him. God braies a fool ten times in a mortar, and yet he is the harder, harder
and harder. Men live in the Sunneshine of the Gospel, yet many are hardened by
it. Those that have professed the Gospel, forsake their first-love, and are
become like the Smiths dog that lies at the Anvill and sleeps though the
sparkles fly about his ears: so let the sons of thunder say what they will,
yet it shall not trouble them.

Fifthly, The Lord lets that man build upon false bottomes, live by false
principles: that man which has been enlightened, must have somewhat to hold
upon; else he would be in a little hell, and ergo a man has his shifts. Saul
says I have performed the will of the Lord, I have done that which he
commanded me. Have you so says Samuel? What then means the lowing of the
oxen? Oh says he, it is to do^ sacrifice unto the Lord, etc. Some cunning
hypocrites will have heaven: but when a Samuel comes with a discerning spirit,
and tells them that grace and lust cannot stand together; yet they would feign
be saved. See Luke 15. 16. the young prodigal would feign have filled his
belly with the husks: the meaning is, every unregenerate man having lived
after his own lusts, his conscience being met withal and terrified with
Gods wrath, he would leave his sin, yet he would feign fill his belly with the
husks, (viz.) with his lusts: he intends to be drunk no more, to be profane no
more, to be loose no more: but now he will fast it out, pray it out: and yet
says the text he would feign fill his belly. There is never a natural man
but he would feign rest upon somewhat; but where the Lord has a mind to bring
a man home, he will not let him rest upon outward performances. One says he
has been counted a professor these twenty years, and ergo he says his case
is good. Another says he prays in his family, and does many good duties:
another says God has blessed him diverse ways, and ergo his case is good: but
those the Lord purposes to do good unto, he will not suffer them thus to
deceive themselves.

Sixthly and lastly, The Lord gives a commission to all means for merly used
that they shall never come to him more: the Lord bids those judgments and
mercies wherewith he sought to humble him before, never more to meddle with
him. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone, Hos. 4. 17. viz. his heart and
his sins are joined together. Isai. 5. 6. God speaks of his Vineyard,
saying, what could be done more? yet because it brought forth wild grapes,
when I looked it should bring forth good, ergo says the Lord, I will lay it
wast, I will take away my former protection, and I will command the clouds
that they rain no more upon it. viz. The means of grace and salvation shall
be offered no more unto it. I will hear such a man no more, I will take away my
Ministers from him. You know that Paul and Timothy would have gone into Asia,
but the Spirit suffered them not: this is a hard condition when the Spirit will
not suffer good to be done unto a man, a City or a Nation. And thus much for
the testimony of the Scriptures.

Thirdly, I will let you see what persons they are. I will not say this and
this particular person; but you shall see what the scripture and the word of
God says, They are four kind of persons, and you shall know them by these
four things.

First Those that have lived a good while under the means of grace, but are
still unprofitable, and no good is wrought upon them, it is likely such men are
given over. See Math. 23. or 13. and the last. And a man that hardens his neck
when he is rebuked, shall suddenly be destroyed, and cannot be cured Prove. 29.
1. Look unto this you that live under good Ministers, Fathers and Masters etc.
For if the Lord sees you will not come in, he gives you over. I limit no time:
yet what says the Spirit of God? Forty years was I greived. Heb. 3. 13. He
swore that they should not enter into his Rest. Forty years was a great time:
but what say you to three years? Luke 13. 7. These three years have I come
seeking fruit, and I have found none, cut it down etc. But what say you to one
year? Lord, let it alone this year etc. But what say you to forty days? yet
forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. But what say you to some few
hours? Math. 10. 14. Whosoever shall not receive you, etc. shake off the dust,
etc. You know what commission the Lord gave to his Messengers, how they should
preach the Gospel, and if the house be worthy, well: and if not, shake off the
dust etc. As if one should strive with you this day, but if you will not hear
nor obey, who can tell whether the Lord will strive any more or no? Cave ergo.

Secondly, Those that have much calling and means, and also many secret
workings of the Spirit on them, that when they have gone out of the House of
God, have determined never to be drunk more, never to swear, lie, nor steal
more etc. and yet these come to naught. He that has had many Proclamations, as
Ezekiel. 24. 13. Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, I tried thy
ways what might do thee good, and thou seemedst to be good, but thou wast not
good in earnest, ergo thou shall not be purged. Such a man who has lived under
the Gospel, and has had his heart shaken, yea and the world has good hopes
of him, but the devil sees it and tempts him, so that on the sudden this man
wanders away, and his hopes are vain. Heb. 10. If any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him. verse 38. He speaks of holding out in a
Christian course unto the end: look how it was with Lots wife. Genesis 19. she
looked back, as if she were loath to go from that pleasant garden, fine
houses, such and such gold in such a corner; what thinks she shall I leave all
this? ergo the Lord turned her into salt: ( viz.) He left such a remarkable
note upon her, that it remains unto this day. Now if he dealt so with her, how
will he deal with thee and others? some it may be have a good mind to come
home: but what say they, shall we leave all our pleasures and profits? will not
a little profession of Religion and a great deal of the world go together for
current? Take heed, the Lord may justly turn thee into salt.

Thirdly, Those that have much greived light of conscience, and the suggestions
of the good Spirit of God, as did the children of Israel, who resisted the good
Spirit of God, and ergo he swear etc. The Minister bids thee cut off thy long
hair, and the word says it is a shame for a man to wear long hair: yet for
all this say thou, I will not: what will the world say of me then? away with
these fashions, leave off cards and dice etc. says the Spirit of God, and
whatsoever is of evil report: yea but I will not, for what will Sir John and
my Lady say then? Turn you unto me says the Spirit of God; no I will not
says the stubborn walker. Put him on in a good course, yet he will not walk
therein; speak the truth says the Spirit of God, for all liars shall be
turned out: yea but not yet, I have got thus much wealth by lying, and I will
not yet leave it.

Fourthly, Such as have a common, base contemptible esteem of the Gospel and
Ministers thereof. They mocked the Ministers till the wrath of God broke out
against them, and there was no remedy. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. A Minister cannot be
plain but wicked men will abuse him in their hearts. I called and cried says
wisdom, but you set at naught all my counsel. Prove. 1. 24, 25. and going
away they make a tush at it. I, says one, Master Minister, you met with men's
hearts to day, but I believe yours is as bad as another, else how could you
have hitte them so right? see what the Spirit of God says of such Esaias 22. 21.
In that day did the Lord call to weeping etc. the text told them of a
judgment, and nothing to be expected but misery: but they make a tush of it,
and say, come, we shall all die, ergo let us eat and drink and be merry
while we may; the Minister tells us we shall all to hell, then let us have the
other pot and the other pipe, if it must needs be so. Oh my beloved, can the
God of heaven endure to be thus disgraced in his Gospel and Ministers? Another
says, care I what the Minister says? I will go and drink at every
Alehouse, and see whether these judgments will come or no.

Now I come to the fourth thing, which grounds of it, (viz.) Why the Lord in
this life does give men over, and strive with them no more. This truth is
troublesome, and cursed hearts cannot abide it.

The grounds of this point arise from these two Attributes of God, his justice
and his wisdom.

First, from the justice of God: God is a Jer. 7. 13. ergo etc. Now as it is
just with God to fulfill every word that he has spoken, and to fulfill all his
promises to the faithful, so is it just with God to bring judgment on them
that have slighted him.

Secondly, From the wisdom of God long suffering; and this is because his
compassions fail not: else, the first day of our sinning had been the first
day of our rejection: yea it is his goodness that we have any favor; but Oh
our God is a wise God. A man that knocks at the door, if he be wise, will not
always lie knocking, if none answer: so the Lord knocks at our hearts by
mercies to allure us, by judgments to terrify us: yet he can find no
entrance. Is it not wisdom then to be gone? Why should I smite you any more,
says God? Esaias. 1. 5. As if he should say it is to no purpose: for my life I
know not what to do with you: it is wisdom to give over, when there is no
good to be done on you: What could I have done more for my V^neyard etc? Esaias
5. There is no wise man that will always water a dry stake. And do you think
that God will always be sending Paul to plant, and Appollos to water? no, our
God is a wise God, and our merciful God is a just God: you that will have your
ways and wills, take them, and get you to hell and perish everlastingly.

Now in the fifth place we come to the

Some say, If we shall be damned, then we must be damned: if we shall be saved,
then we shall be saved; why then need we pray and keep such a quoile as the
Minister speaks off?

Secret things belong to the Lord, but Sol.
revealed things to us, and to our children. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. ergo do thou use
the means, and be thou humbled according to the word of God, and thou shall be
exalted according to the word of God: see what God has said to thee in his
word: for neither I nor thou, nor the Angels of heaven can tell what the will
of the Lord is concerning thee, if not revealed in the word.

Another says, Why do you limit God? Levi. The Lord says at what time soever
a sinner does repent, etc. yet will you limit God.

It Is true at what time soever a sinner does Sol.
repent: but thy heart may be given over as Romans 2. 4. 5. etc. and what if thou
then live twenty years or more, and have not a heart to repent?

Another says, but I hope my time is not past: for the Lord has given me a
tender heart.

Has he so, it is well, and will thou then Sol.
harden it? thou may repent when it is too late, and ergo I tell thee, that
good and holy desires are joined with honest endeavors: need makes the old
wife trot, as we say; so a soft heart will make thee use all good and honest
means.

Seeing that God strives with many, and gives over, go thou home, and bless
God that he has not dealt so with thee; it is enough that the Lord has
brought thee home to himself; many may say with Paul, I was a persecutor, I
was injurious, etc. 1 Timothy 1. 14. but, I received mercy; so thou may say,
the Lord knows what a deal ado he has had with me; this heart was as hard
as the nether millstone, but the Lord in some measure has mollified it; this
heart was as proud as the devil, but blessed be Gods name, he would let me see
it at the last; go home and say who am I and what is my Fathers house that the
Lord has brought me hither? Oh that God should thus stoop to man; the Lord
has stood and knocked thus many years, and he might have given over, but
blessed be his name, I have received mercy. I lived under the means, but that
prevailed not with me: the Lord sent such and such sickness, but that wrought
not on me: at the last I went to hear a Minister, and me thought that Minister
spoke nothing but what he spoke to me: and then the Lord set conscience on
work, and that affrighted me. Look to it: the Lord will either break thy
neck, or thy heart: do not think to go to heaven by good meanings: no, it
will cost thee somewhat more before thou come there. Another time the Lord set
on me, and then I set on good duties: I would have Christ to justify and
sanctify me, and blessed be his name he was not wanting unto me in any means;
the Lord make me thankful etc. I tell thee thou will be in deed, and God
shall have all: let the voluptuous man have his pleasures, etc. what is that to
thee so thou have Christ?

For the just reproof of all such as are gall of bitterness and in the bonds
of iniquity; there will come a time when God will strive with thee no more;
the old man thinks he has time enough to repent in, and the young man thinks
he need not so much as enter into a Parley with godliness. Esau went away when
he had eat and drunk, he esteemed not his birthright; I have heard some go
away with this resolution, when they are married then they will live thus and
thus. etc. suffer me first to go bury my Father etc. Master Minister, you
speak well, I like your counsel; but I have a rich Uncle, and he has no
child, and I am likely to be his heir; but he cannot abide a Puritan of all
the men in the world, and if I do not humor him I shall never have a foot of
his Land; let me bury him first; when Father and Friends are dead, then the
children must provide for themselves; and then they will seek after God and
repent; and by this time they grow old, and though they cannot make so good a
show as others, yet their hearts are as good as the best, but soft a while; all
is not gold that glisters; alas poor souls, they were given over many years
ago; this is also the sin of young men and women for the most part, and this
is the great sin of England, the sin of many Gentlemen and Gentlewomen; God
must pardon when they call, and that must not be till they be old, and then in
all post-haste send they to and for master Priest, and he must bring God to
them, or them to God; but the God of Heaven and earth cannot endure this
mockery.

For terror to all wicked and ungodly men;

Some are insensible and some sensible. The insensible are they who die like
stones as did Nabal; We have many King Harry Protestants. Others are sensible,
God has opened the eye of their souls, and has let them read the red letters
of the Gospel; It is a heavy thing for old friends to part, so Acts 20. 38.
They grieved most in that he said you shall see my face no more; so when soul
and body part, it is heavy; but when the soul and God part, it is
lamentable; when God takes his leave never to be seen more, then whether thou
look upward or downward, there is nothing but amazement, and astonishment. If
thou look upward, there is the anger of God; if downward, there is the
bottomless pit; if on the right hand, thou shall see all his mercies, which
could not allure thee; if on the left hand, all his Judgments which could not
terrify thee; if before thee, the black day; if behind thee, the Devils; this
will be fearful.

I remember a Story of an adulterate woman, her Conscience pricking her, she
determined to repent, but God in the mean time did visit her so sore that she
lay crying out, oh my time my time!

Another time, a covetous woman her House being on fire, she to save her goods,
left her child in the Cradle; but a neighbor of hers hearing it cry, took it
away; she afterward remembering her child, ran about crying oh my child, my
child, and would not be comforted.

So when the fire and indignation of the Lord breaks out, if not now, yet at
the last day it will, then the parties against whom it breaks, will cry oh my
soul, my soul, what will become of thee my soul? It had been better I had
never been born; for neither Mercies, Judgments, nor the Word could allure
me; oh woe is me.

Now the condition of such is miserable in three respects.

First, because if God forsake thee, then all forsakes thee; when thou lie a
dying, thou sendest for the Minister, and thou would feign have a word of
comfort from him; but alas if thou do not receive comfort from Heaven, how
can the Minister comfort thee? If thy outward Estate fail, Friends may help;
but if they fail, there is a God in Heaven and he will help; but if He go
away, then all help is gone.

Secondly, when God goes, restraining grace goes; this was Saul's case, and you
may observe that such as have been enlightn^d and fall away, fall into one of
these three sins; either into the hands of the world, and that is their
Master, or else into the sins of uncleanness, or into the spirit of Malice
to persecute them that are holy.

Thirdly, if God leave us, then common protection leaves us; we are left to the
clutches of all things both in Heaven and earth; Ergo, your houses are left
unto you desolate. Matthew. 23. 38. All the creatures are up in arms against us;
the styles we go over, look up to Heaven, and say, Master, shall we break his
neck? the Horse we ride on, says, Master shall I throw him down to
destruction? thou know that he hates thee and thine. So the air we breath
in, and all Creatures, are ready when the Lord gives the watchword to lay us
in the goal. Conscience will witness against us; then fight Dog, fight Bear
(as we use to say) oh what will become of such men? I will tell you, either the
world heales them up; or else some carnal companion says, you have been a
good neighbor, you have kept a good house amongst us etc. tush, tush, man, it
may prove a lie for all this: I but the Minister tells me so; pish, pish, as if
all were true the Minister speaks. I but the Scripture says it; Is all true
that is in the Scripture? the Lord have mercy upon us; and thus like fools
they build with untempered mortar. Ergo, I exhort all such as are yet in the
gall of bitterness, to listen to what I say.

Redeem the time, yield to the motions of The Authors Exhortation.
Gods Spirit, and bless God for Mercy offered unto you in the means, and if
any affliction be laid on you, entreat the Lord that he will do you good by
it. If thy Conscience speak, or the Spirit work, do as Joseph did, who got
him into a corner and there wept his belly full; so entreat the Lord that he
will break the Heavens and come down on thee to thy comfort; put not off till
thou art old. A gentleman will not always wait at the gate; neither say thou
as Felix to Paul, I will send for thee at another time, but say with Samuel,
speak Lord, for thy servant hears.

Means. Means.


First, consider the fearful condition of such as are given over; Suppose one
should come from Hell with the fire about his ears, you would ask what is the
news; the cry is, my time, my time. Oh my people says the Minister. Oh my
Minister says the People. The young man cries, oh my time. Do not make a tush
at this, lest thou say the word was preached but I scorned it; the Spirit said
this is the way, walk in it; the means of grace was sent unto me, but I
refused Mercy, and now for ever I am in Hell to be tormented.

Secondly, consider the great danger of putting off; If thy will be stubborn
to day, it will be worse to morrow.

Thirdly, consider the time, 1. Pet. 4. 3. Gentiles, let us live no longer in
sin, it is too much that you have resisted the Gospel so much; say then oh
that the Lord would break this heart of mine.

Fourthly and lastly, though God should be calling and egging you all the day
long; yet your lives are but short, and Ergo, cry out with David, teach me o
Lord to numbet my days that I may apply my heart unto wisdom; do not say it
is too late, as one did once say of Prayer, do you think that I can pray now,
which never prayed in all my life? I am sure it will be too late when God comes
to Judgment; for then the Devil will stand on tip toe, and say what do thou
now think to go to Heaven? the Lord did wait on thee until he was weary;
but here is a company of Drunkards, I did but hold up my finger, and they
presently followed me. Heaven came down to them, but they would none of it,
they could not hear of that ear, and would you now go to Heaven?

Ergo, go for now the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and when Mercy is offered,
refuse it not, but bless God for it.

A SERMON FOR Spiritual Mortification.
COLLOSS. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the earth,
Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
Covetousness which is Idolatry.
THE Apostle having in the Chapter foregoing showed that the Colossians were
buried together with Christ in his death, and that they were also risen with
him, makes two special uses thereof.

First in regard of the resurrection, if then ye be risen with Christ, seek
those things that are above;

The second is in regard of their burial with Christ, in these words; Mortify
therefore your members, etc.

There be many men that look for participation in Christ, yet notwithstanding
wortifie not themselves; they would feign live with Christ: yet are loath to dye
to sin; but we may say to these men as Paul to the Atheist, thou fool, that
which thou sowest is not quickened unless it first die: so unless the seed of
the word be sown upon thy heart, thou can not be quickened unless thou first
die.

The things to be mortified, are described two manner of ways; either in
general, the members; or else in particular, Fornication, uncleanness, evil
affections etc. or as in the tenth verse, all the fruits of the old man.

The words contain in them these three Parts.
parts, or truths.

First, He that ever means to have a therefore. As if he should say, if you
look to have benefit by the death of Christ, look to have a therefore with
it; for no man can have Christ without a Condition.

Secondly, this condition consists in mortification; mortify our earthly
members; this is the qualification of all those that partake of the death of
Christ, even mortification.

Thirdly, those that are made partakers of the death of Christ, are enabled
thereto; so as the Apostle may well put this exhortation unto them, mortify
therefore your members etc.

He does not say civilize your members; many there be that civilize their
earthly members; as from mortifying to purifying of them; they come out of
profaneness and enter into Civility, and a formal kind of profession; but
the Apostle says mortify, and not civilize your members; do not pare the
nails of your corruptions, but cut them quite off and give them their deaths
wound, that so your sins may breath out their last breath in you.

Sin may be civilized five ways.

First, when it is laid asleep. Pharaohs asleep, but not dead. Many men's
sins are asleep in them, though they seem to be dead in them for a time: A
man while he is asleep is like a dead man, yet he is alive, yea and his sins
are alive in him also; but when temptation comes to awaken him out of his
sleep, though before he seemed to be patient and meek, and hardly to be
provoked: yet let a temptation come and rouse him, then he will find his old
wrath, anger and impatiencie. So likewise for a covetous man, though he seem
to mortify that sin, yet it is but asleep in him; for let a temptation
come, and he will quickly find out his covetousness again* so that here
sin is not mortified; but it is with these men as it was with Sampson, all
the while he was laid to sleep, the coardes and fetters held him: but when
they said Sampson, the Philistines are upon thee, and awaked him out of his
sleep, the Pin and Web was not strong enough to hold him. Thus it is with
many men, when temptations are down, and they are not provoked, all this while
they seem to have their sins mortified; and thus the devil is of a good
temper when he is not stirred; so it is with many whom you would think to be
good Christians, while the winds are down, and the storms do not beat: but
let them hear with Sampson that the Philistines are coming upon them, that
there is such a gain, such a profitt and reputation to be had in the eves of
the world, then all the Pinnes and Webbs are broken, all their resolutions and
all the strong coards of their former purposes are but as fire and towe; they
break them all in pieces: so then they are but asleep not mortified.

Secondly, Sin may be said to be civilized when it is laid in a swound; a
man lying in a swound, is dead for a while, and you would think he could
hardly be recovered; for he can neither hear, nor see, nor go, nor speak;
and yet notwithstanding he is not dead; only his vital heat is gone from his
outward members, unto the inward powers of the heart. Even so a man's sins
seem to be dead, when the spirit of his lust is conveyed into a higher lust;
as for example, Suppose here is one that is a covetous worldling, this man
peradventure is very moderate and temperate; he is not given to gaming, dicing,
carding, wenching: he is not given to building or glorious apparel: but what
are these sins dead in him? no, but the strength of them is carried up into a
higher lust: for if he should follow whoring or gaming etc. the lust of his
covetousness would be curbed, and his gain would not come in with such a full
Carreere unto him. Now all these sins forenamed are but attendants and slaves
unto this one lust: so many men it may be will give over a thousand sins, yea
all except this one, yet all those thousand sins are not mortified: nay it
may be he scarcely thinks upon any of them. Why? because they are taken up
with a higher lust. Even so it is with many civil formal professors: they
will come to Church, miss never a Sermon that they can come unto; they will
talk of heaven, they will not omit any holy communication, they will read the
scriptures, pray in their families, neglect no holy duties. Why then what is
their sin? It is not the omitting of these things, but the careless practice
of them in their lives and conversation; for although these sins be in a
swound, the strength of them is gone up to maintain a higher lust; for suppose
he went not to Church, how should he maintain his profession? and if he could
not now and then speak of heaven, it were impossible he should have his depth
of selfe-deceipt; therefore we conclude these sins are not mortified, they
only are civilized.

Thirdly, Sin may be said to be civilized when the sap of sin is taken
away, and no contrary grace infused; as for example, Suppose a man give over
drunkenness, yet if this man be not filled with the Spirit, his drunkenness
is not mortified, though he live soberly afterward all the days of his life.
Again, suppose a man give over his intemperate anger, he is not touchy, nor
choleric, nor subject to passion; yet if he have not turned his anger against
himself for every one of his corruptions which break out against God, his
anger is not mortified. Suppose a man is not given over to worldly grief, but
has given it over; yet if his grief be not turned another way, as to greive
for his sins, his grief is not mortified. Again, suppose a man be not set
upon a merry pin, ever jesting or telling forth merry tales, but now he has
given them over; yet if he have not set his joys on the ways of God, and
learned truly to be merry in the Lord, it is impossible we can say his carnal
mirth is mortified. For as the schoolmen say there is nothing corrupted till
another thing be produced: there is no dissolution of wood until it be turned
into ashes: so sin is never taken away nor utterly dissolved, until there be
contrary grace brought into the heart instead thereof; so then unless therebe
contrary graces wrought in the heart, as the contraries of all those sins
foregoing, they are but only civilized, and not mortified.

Fourthly, Sin may be said to be civilized, when it is overwharted by a
higher principle: as when a man is sensible of the wrath of God, and has the
flashes of an accusing conscience flying daily into his face, lying under the
guilt of many horrible sins, it is impossible for him to go on with rest and
quietness in those his unholy courses wherein he uses to walk; he may
forsake them for a while, but yet he cannot mortify them: but as a schooleboy
that plays the trewant, while he is under the rod, he will confess his
fault, and promise to do so no more, and he verily thinks so at that time,
and desires heartily so to do: but it is a desire that he is provoked unto for
fear of the rod, and not for love of duty: for when once the rod is gone,
and the smart over, then he falls to his own old trewanting courses again. So
we read in the first of Jonah that when the Mariners were in peril of their
lives, then every one of them could call upon his God: but when the storm and
danger was over, they quickly left off, and cared not for calling on God any
longer.

Fifthly and lastly, Sin may be said by Gods giving of positive common grace,
which he gives unto wicked men, as in Mat. 25. God gave unto the unprofitable
servant a whole talent, which is supposed to be an hundred and sixty and odd
pounds; so the Lord gives unto wicked men many good graces, as softness of
disposition, lovingnesse or easy to be entreated; and hereupon they come to
Church, hear the word, and perform many other Christian duties: yet all these
be but common graces, which a man may have and yet his sins not mortified,
and therefore the Apostle says, Mortify your members etc. Whence observe,

That if we look to have any benefitte dead corpse the eyes are there, but
they cannot see: the feet are there also, but they want strength for to go:
it has all the members, but it has not life and power to set them on work:
so though sin be in you still, yet let it be like a dead corpse wanting life,
like a dead Tyrant that can no longer rage: and hence it is that the Apostle
says Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies: he does not say let it not
be, but let it not reign. Sin when it is mortified, is like a dead King that
can call no more Parliaments: but a man may do for him what he lists,
because his strength lies in the dust. If Christ be in you says the Apostle,
the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life for righteousness
sake. Romans 8. 9, 10. Again, if a man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of Christ's; now if Christ be in you, the body is dead, if you consider the
body as it has relation unto sin. Again, if you live after the flesh, you
shall die. verse 13. as if he should have said, if your flesh be alive in you,
if your pride live in you, and if your infidelity live in you, if your
hardness of heart live in you, if your wrath etc. live in you, and if you
walk after these, you shall surely die: he means not a temporal death; for
so they must do howsoever they live; but his meaning is they shall die
eternally; but if you mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, you shall
live; so then it is plain there is no life of Christ to be had so long as you
retain your sins, and therefore sin must be mortified.

First, because Christ is a Savior, and Math. 1. 21. for he shall save his
people from their sins; if therefore Christ do not save thee from thy
sins, and if by the power of Christ thou mortify not thy sins, and give
them a deadly blow, assure thy self he will never be a Jesus unto thee. It is
true indeed Christ dyed for sinners, but it was not to let them go on in
sin; and therefore if thou go on in sin, it is for thy damnation, and not
for thy salvation; for he will first save thee from thy sins, or else he will
never save thee from hell: so then consider if thy sins bear sway in thee;
if they do, then know thou art delivered up unto the power of thy sins, and
to everlasting darkness. For Christ is the true Physician of the soul: and
you know that a Physician does not bring a potion to put it unto deaths mouth
to kill death, and so to save the sick person alive: no, but he puts it
into the sick man's mouth to kill the ill humors that are in his body, that
so he might not fall into the hands of death: so Christ came not to quench the
flames of hell by his spiritual Physic, but to let his Physic fall upon
the heart and soul of man to save him from hell. Therefore unless the blood
of Christ do mortify thy sins, and crucify thy lusts, there is no hope
ever to get Christ to save thee from hell and everlasting damnation. This is a
true saying says the Apostle and worthy to be received, that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners. 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and
wicked men like it well indeed: For says the drunkard, I am a wicked man, yet
Christ came to save me. The whoremonger says I am an unclean person: yet
Christ came to save me. The swearer will say, Christ came to save sinners, and
therefore I hope he will save me to. No, no: Christ came to save sinners, that
is such as were sinners, but now are none: they have and do repent. Jesus
Christ came to save sinners (says the Apostle) whereof I am chief. I was a
blasphemer, and a persecuter, but now I am not. Hence then is the faithful
saying, Christ came to save sinners not still sinning. No, before, Paul was
injurious, a persecuter, and lived in ignorance, and unbeleife: but now the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ was wonderfully abundant through faith and love
toward him: so that the grace of God has appeared to draw men out of
blindness and ignorance: therefore to say that Christ came to save such as
live in their sins of drunkenness, profaneness or uncleanesse, is a rotten
saying: and this only is the faithful saying that Christ came into the world
to save sinners in whom the power of sin is broken: therefore if ever welooke
to have benefitte or interest by Christ we must mortify our earthly members.

Secondly, because it is impossible for 2. Reason.
sin and grace to live and subsist in one subject: it is impossible that they
should ever stand together, and be in a man at one and the same time: it cannot
be that one and the same creature can have the life of a swine and the life of
a man: for if he have the soul of a swine, he cannot have the soul of a man:
for they are two contrary distinct lives: and where the one is, the other
cannot be. It is like hot water and cold: if it be cold, it cannot be hot; if
it be hot; it cannot be cold. Even so, the life of sin, and the life of grace
are two contraries: and therefore they that walk in their sins, walk
contrary to God. Now the Lord says, if you walk contrary to me, I will walk
contrary unto you. Levit. 26. and two contraries we know cannot go together.
He that walks in sin, walks contrary unto God: but he that goes on in the
ways of grace, he walks toward God. Now, it is impossible to walk toward
Dover and toward London at one and the same time: for every step he goes
forward to the one, it carries him backward from the other: so then if ever we
will have the life of grace, we must forsake our sins; as it was with the
house of Saul and David, Saul's house grew weaker, and David's stronger; so must
it be with sin and grace, as grace grows stronger, so sin must grow
weaker: as grace goes up, so sin must go down; And as Saul told David he
would not give him Michal his daughter to wife, unless he brought unto him an
hundred fore* skins of the Philistines; Even so the Lord says that he will
not marry the Lord Jesus Christ unto any soul, unless he bring the
fore-skinne of every lust: he must circumcise the fore-skinne of his pride, of
his covetousness, of his profaneness: this must be the offering and condition
of marriage unto Christ; even the circumcision of the heart, and the
mortification of all the corruptions.

Thirdly, because else it is impossible to enter into heaven if we mortify not
our sins: a man can never be capable of glory hereafter, that does not
mortify his sins here in this life. Suppose a wicked man should enter into
heaven, it is impossible that he should delight in heaven, if he were there.
You will think this a strange point: but give me leave to explain it a
little; I say that a wicked man if he were in heaven, he could find no delight
there. As for example, take a beast, for so is every man by his own knowledge,
in regard of the life of grace, as says the Prophet Jeremy, though a man take
an Ox or an Ass, and bring him unto the Kings table, and set before him all
the delicates which appertain unto Kings: let him have a dinner before him
that cost an hundred pounds: yet he had rather be in the fields among his
fellows eating grass: or set a Crown of gold upon a beasts head, he will not
regard it, but cast it off into the mire: for so long as the beast is not
transformed and made capable of the honor that is in a man, he cannot conceive
of the pleasures and delights that do belong unto man: Even so let a wicked
man enjoy all the glory of heaven, and what will he say? We ^ay perceive a
little by bringing him to the Word and Ordinances of God: tie him to the
constant use of them, to meditate on heaven, and to walk circumspectly and
precisely in his whole course of life, and he will say, this is more then
needs: this he thinks is too precise, too austere a life for him, he cannot
away with such purity and strictness; but if he think this so strange which
is nothing in comparison, and is but a shadow or poor resemblance of the
holiness and purity that shall be; what think you would he do if he were in
heaven where there is nothing but continual praising and glorifying of God for
evermore, where there shall not be so much as one earthly thought or word
pertaining to the world or the affairs of this life, but a continual sounding
forth of the praises of God? there is nothing but grace and speaking of heaven,
all their words are heavenly, their joys are heavenly, and their whole delight
is nothing but sounding forth uncessant Halleluiahs unto God for evermore. Now
if a wicked man were there, what would he say? surely he would say they are all
Puritans, and would never endure it. Alas in this life there is but a little
praying, a little grace, a little holiness, in comparison of that which shall
be. Here we do but as it were peep into heaven: now then if this be so
tedious that wicked men cannot endure it, how will they like to be in a place
where there is perfection of all graces, where there shall be nothing but
praising God for ever and ever? Sure as I am the devil was once in heaven, and
he cast himself out from thence: God did not though he did deserve it, and God
would have done it, had he not been gone, as says the Apostle Jude verse 6.
They left their first habitation; the original says, they flung it from them,
that is as soon as they had sinned against God, and changed their natures,
away they went, heaven was no place for them, they thrust themselves out, and
could not endure to stay there any longer* for having changed their natures,
they changed their delights, and therefore to praise and yield glory unto God,
was death unto them, they being now corrupted through sin, and of an impure
nature, heaven became a hell unto them. Is any* man weary of grace and
holiness? weary of well doing? weary of praying and of hearing the word
preached? Is any man weary of good duties? of the worship and service of
God? Let him know then that he can never endure the Kingdom of Heaven; for if
he be weary of a little, what will he do when he shall come into a place where
there shall be nothing but continual praising of God?

Is it so that sin must be mortified if ever we mean to partake of Christ?
then this condemns all those that go on in their old courses, in deadness
and in security, in ignorance etc. taking hand over head vain hopes for true,
feeding themselves with persuasions of salvation.

But the Apostle tells us that the foundation of God stands sure, The Lord
knows who are his, and let every one that names the name of Christ depart
from iniquity. A wicked man cannot name the name of Christ till he depart from
iniquity* much less can he look for salvation, because he cannot be saved
without Christ: nay he cannot be saved by Christ unless he depart from
iniquity.

You say you hope to be saved; it is well; but God knows who are his: God
goes by his own rule; the foundation of God stands sure. But who then are
his? only those that name the name of Christ, and depart from iniquity; those
only will he save, and none other: he will be no baud to thy sins or lusts,
and wicked courses; for says the Apostle, If any man be in Christ, let him be
a new creature; as if the Apostle in more words had said: If any man hope he is
a Chri^^^an, let him see that he is a new creature; for there is no expectation
of being in Christ, unless he be a new creature. All old things are passed
away, and behold all things are become new; if thou be in Christ, all thy old
praying is gone, all thy old hearing is gone, all thy old receiving of the
Sacrament is passed away, and all things are become new with thee; thou must
hear a new, pray a new, receive a new, believe a new, thou must live after a
new sort; for all old things are passed away.

Instruction to teach us that it is not enough for us to let our sins dye in
us, but we must kill them; the Apostle does not say let your earthly members
die of themselves; but, mortify them; many there be that let their sins die
in them; as for example when one is an infant, the sins of his Infancy
naturally fall from him, when he is a child of more capacity; and when he is a
youth, the sins of his childhood naturally drop away from him; so when he is
a man, his youthful sins fall from him* and when he is old and dies, all
his sins naturally drop from him: But he must not let sin die in him, but
he must kill it. Austin says, if thou kill not sin till it dies* of it
self, sin has killed thee, and not thou thy sin. It is with sin as with
a beast; if an Ox fall into a pit and die of it self, it is good for nothing
(the hide only excepted;) but if it be killed, it is good meat, and becomes
profitable unto the owner; even so if sin die of its own accord, it will do
thee no good, it is worth nothing, it may lessen thy condemnation somewhat; but
if thou kill it, then it will be profitable unto thee.

In the fourth Chapter of Jeremy, we have a similitude taken from an
Husbandman, where the Lord says plough up the fallow ground of your hearts,
and sow not among thorns. Now, will a Husbandman say there are abundance of
thorns and bushes in my ground, but I will let them alone till they die of
themselves, sure I am that they will one day die? no, no; the Prophet gives
other counsel, plough up says he the fallow grounds and sow not among
thorns; if thou do not, they will grow up to that height and rankness that
they will spoil the whole harvest. Even so if thou kill not thy sins, but
suffer them to die of themselves, they will spoil all thy spiritual harvest,
and quite banish thee out of Heaven for evermore.

The third use may manifest unto us that mortify your members; now can a man
stab his own arm through with ease? can he cut off his Leg or any other
member without feeling any great pain? no more can a man kill his sins and
mortify his lusts with ease; it is called mortification to show that there is
a great deal of misery and pain in it. The Apostle says that those that are
Christians, have crucified the flesh etc. Gal. 5. 24. and therefore Repentance
is set out unto us by crucifying, which is the hardest of all kinds of
mortifying. Can a man set his flesh upon the Tenter, pierce his hands and feet
with nails, laying his whole weight upon the Tenter, and yet feel no pain?
Cicero a wise Heathen says, that crucifying was a torment that cruelty it
self had invented to put a man to death, it being the soarest kind of death
that could be devised. And the Apostle to set forth Repentance what it is,
shows it by crucifying. It is an easy matter to cut off the outward act of
sin, as of swearing or drunkenness etc. this is an easy matter; but to
crucify a man's lusts and to mortify daily the body of death* which he be^reth
about him; this is a hard thing indeed. A Father says it is the hardest Text
in all the Bible, and the hardest duty in all Christianity that we can go
about; they that do it^, an do all things; and therefore let a man resolve
with himself that unless he attain unto this, there is no Christ for him.
How shall we says the Apostle that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?
Romans 6. 2. The Apostle makes it a Paradox, and wonders that men should be so
unreasonable as to think that they are crucified with Christ, and yet live in
their sins; Is it possible that you can be dead with Christ and yet live in
your sins* no, no, it cannot be.

But some may object and say, what Colossians unto Mortification? were they not
already mortified? did he not say a little before that they were crucified and
buried together with Christ?

Yes it is true; but they that have mortified Sol.
their earthly members, must go on and persevere in this mortification, and
that for three Reasons;

First, because the very same sin that has been killed, will live again
unless it be continually mortified; for sin is stronghearted; it is not
every blow that will kill sin stone-dead; no, no we may say of sin as some
say of Catts, they have nine lives; kill sin once and it will revive again;
kill it the second time and it will yet live; kill it the third time, it will
yet have life; unless it be continually mortified, it will never be stark
dead; and therefore the work^ must be continued, as Christ said of his
Disciples, if you continue in my word, then are you my Disciples indeed: So if
we go on, in mortification, then verily are we Christ's Disciples.

Secondly, suppose the sin mortified do not rise again; yet if we go not
on in the way of mortification, there will arise another sin in the room of
it. Sin is like the Monster Hydra; cut off one head, and many will rise up in
its room; Even so it is in the body of sin; therefore thou must daily
mortify it, or else it will grow again. There is a History that speaks of a
Figtree that grew in a stone wall, and all means was used to kill it; they cut
off the branches and it grew again; they cut down the body and it grew
again; they cut it up by the root and still it lived, and grew, until they
pulled down the stone wall. Even so it is with sin; lopp off the branches,
it lives; cut down the body, it will not die: digg up the roots, and it will
still revive, and will never leave growing until God pull down the stone wall
of this our earthly Tabernacle, and lay it in the dust, and therefore we must
still be mortifying of it.

Thirdly, because as we mortify, so we mortify but in part; as says the
Apostle in another case, we know but in part etc. so may we say of this duty,
we mortify but in part; as we say of a man breathing out his last breath, he
is adying, but not quite dead; so we may say of sin, though it lie sprawling
upon the ground, yet it is not dead, the last gasp is not past. Nay, it may be
sin is more striving in the heart of a child of God converted, then it was
before conversion. As an Ox or an Ass when they have their deaths blow, will
lash and struggle more then, then they did in all their life time before; but
this is nothing but the panges of death, being giving up their last breath.
Hence it is that the Apostle says, that the flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh. Gal. 5. So that they could not do what they
would verse 17. as if he should say sin is so mortified that it has his
deaths wound in thee; else thou can not be the child of God; yea such a
deaths wound as it cannot possible recover again.

If a man that has received his de^ths wound, should send for all the
Physicians in the world, and take all the Physic he could, and use all the
means under Heaven, yet they can never recover him: So when a man is converted
unto God, as soon as ever the work is wrought in him, sin has his deaths
blow; and although the Devil come as Physician with all the Cordialls, Julips
and Balmes under Heaven, and use all the shifts and devises in the world, yet
he shall never be able to recover it again; all will not do, why? because it
has received its deaths blow; it may be with his industry and cost he may
make the face of sin look fresh and fair for a time, but it has it deaths
wound and it will down at the last.

Now that we may know whether we Marks.
have mortified our sins or no, let us observe these marks following.

First, they that have mortifyed their sins, live in the contrary graces.
Hence it is that the Psalmist says, that they work no iniquity, but walk in
thy paths, Psalm. 119. 3. First, they crucify all their sins, they do no
iniquity; Secondly as they do no iniquity, so they take up all the ways of
God, contrary to that iniquity as they give up all the ways of sin, so
they take up all the ways of Grace; they walk in all Gods ways. So that here
is the question, if a man giving over his Note.
sins, do take up all the graces contrary to those sins. This is a rule
in Divinity that Grace takes not away nature, that is, Grace comes not to take
away a man's affections, but to take them up.

Suppose a man be subject unto anger, when he is a little moved, Grace comes
not to take away his anger, but to take it up from a worldly thing, and to set
it against sin which is truly evil, that so he may be angry and not sin.
Grace comes to qualify his anger, and to take it from the ways of sin, and
to set it upon Gods ways.

Again, a man is subject to be merry; Grace comes to temper him, not to take
away his mirth, but to set it upon a right object, as to delight in God, to be
merry in Christ, to rejoice in his Word and Ordinances, in his children, and
in all the ways of grace.

Another is given to impatiency; Grace comes not to take away his impatiencie,
but to set his impatience against his sins; so that when he sees his sins,
he shall not be able to endure them, but his soul will groan for them, and
his heart will rise against them.

Another is given to revenge* now Grace comes and takes him away from being
revenged on his neighbor, to be revenged on his sins; so that with the
Apostle we may call revenge a piece of Repentance; therefore this is a true
trial whether our sins be mortified, if our affections be taken away from
the ways of sin, and fast set upon the ways of Grace and godliness.

Secondly, if a man be mortifyed indeed and in truth, then he is dead unto
every sin; if a man be killed, he is dead in every member; so if a man be
dead to sin, no sin can ever reign in him; not one lust nor bosom sin,
no not the sin of his trade, no corruption though never so dear, though it
be the sin of his right hand, or right eye, yet it can never have dominion
over him, if he be dead to sin; therefore if a man live in any one sin or
sweet lust whatsoever, he is a dead man and has not one jot of Grace; if there
be but one known iniquity in a man, that he lives and dies in without
Repentance, that one iniquity shall kill him to the pit of Hell* Ezech. 28.

The Schoolmen say that if a Sow do but wallow in one mirie or dirtie hole,
she is fil^hie; so if a soul wallow but in one sin, it is abominable. If a
man stab himself but with one knife so that he die, he is as truly killed as
was Julius Caesar who stabbed himself with three and twenty knives. So if a
man should be free from an hundred diseases, and should die of one, what would
it benefit him to be free from the rest in respect of his life? surely nothing
at all. That man that has his pride, his Covetousness, his usurie, hatred,
malice, deriding of Gods people, all these being dead in him; yet if self-love
and security etc. be not dead in him, these argue his case to be naught; he is
not yet qualified for Christ; for there is no mortification at all in him.

There be many sweet means to allure us unto mortification, but time will not
permit us to speak of them; but* this let every man take notice of, that so
long as he lives in sin, he is altogether incapable of Christ. The Apostle
says, we know that the Law is not given unto a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for the unholy and
profane, and whatsoever is contrary to wholesome Doctrine; the Law is for
such men: But the first Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, is, Repent of thy
sins, deny thine own ways, take up Christ's Cross, and follow the Lamb
wheresoever he goes. Here the Kingdom of Heaven is laid open to all the world;
Let men's miseries be what they can be, and although their sins be never so
great, Christ comes to redeem them; yea though they have a whole Hell of
sin in them, yet if they have a heart to entertain Christ, his Grace is so
rich and al sufficient, that it will save every man that entertaineth him.

There is a Proclamation openly made in the Market place, Hoe every one that
thirsts, come unto the waters, Esaias 55. 3. As if he should say, Hoe, every
one that has a mind to Christ, come and have him; every one that hungers and
thirsts after Christ, let his sins be never so great, and the number never
so many, here is hue and cry after him; Come unto the waters; He says not come
unto the water, but, waters; not a little low brook or stream, which is not
able to wash away all his sins, but there is an Ocean of waters indefinitely;
waters in the plural number, declaring the fullness and sufficiency to
cleanse the most leprous soul, be he never so much stained with corruption. It
is said by the Prophet Obadiah, that the Lord will send unto his People
Saviors, verse 21. not in the singular number, but Saviors in the plural
number; not that there were more Christ's then one; but to manifest the fullness
of Christ, he is a rich Christ, full of Salvation for all them that come unto
him; Therefore if there be any man that mournes and laments for his sins, let
him come; If there be any poor soul that is loaded with the weight of his
iniquities, let him come unto Christ and welcome; for there is a Fountain
laid open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in: but let him know upon what
terms he must come, if ever he mean to have Salvation by Christ; observe the
strict Conditions, and walk by the strait rule of Christ: he must resolve with
himself come what will come, to stand or to fall with Christ; delivering up
all his lusts and corruptions at his Command, whenever he calls for them; he
must not part stakes with Christ to delude him; but he must be true and
faithful unto him; he must wholly deny himself, and lie down before Christ to
let Christ do what he will with him, and these only are the terms he must
expect Heaven upon; and thus doing, he may have Salvation according to the
desire of his soul.

FINIS.

