Good News FROM SOMERSETSHIRE: Of the taking of Captain Digby son to the
Earl of Bristow, who had raised a troop of horse to come against the
Parliament. WITH The manner of his apprehending, and the staying of his horse
by the town of Sherburne, and himself staid, to be sent up to the House of
Parliament for his Censure. ALSO An Instruction from both Houses of Parliament
to all Justices of the Peace. Joh. Brown Cler. Parl.

Printed for Richard Thomson. 1642. August 12.

GOOD NEVVES FROM SOMERSETSHIRE. ALSO AN INSTRUCTION from both Houses of
Parliament to all Justices of the Peace.
SO has it pleased the omnipotent and wise providence of God, that hitherto
the evill-affected disturbers of this our Sion have been way-layed and taken in
their own devices, yet has the devil so far prevailed with his dear
children the Popes Brats, that they have sought the utter ruining of three
flourishing Kingdoms, and have left no plot unattempted for the dissolution
and very essence of Parliaments, and have wrought both beyond sea and in
England, to set His Majesty against this highest Court of Judicature, the Court
of Parliament, as may appear by the Lord Digbies and the rest of the Fugitives
escape, and desiring His Majesty to retire to some place of strength, where he
might attend His Majesty with His service, and now in defiance of justice made
His Majesty's Court a Sanctuary for all his designs and practices formerly by
him practiced, in his appearance in a warlike manner at Kingston upon Thames,
to the afrightment of the whole town, and preparing sadles and other engines
of war, which now his brother Captain Digby thought to have employed: and
having prepared a troup of horse ready to have gone for York, promising great
rewards to all that would attend him in his journey to York. But having raised
his troop ready to set forward, he was taken in Sherburne, the whole town
having intelligence of his coming that way, where himself and his followers
are in hold, till the censure of the high Court of Parliament.

A TRUE RELATION OF THE Plot intended against HVLL.
THe Cavaliers now about Hull make their approaches near the walls in the night,
but in the day time dare not come near for fear of pellets, not within two
miles of the town: they burnt two of the mills near the town, and in attempting
to burn the rest, were violently opposed by the shot of the Canon from the
town; insomuch as they returned swiftly. It is not certainly known how many of
the Cavaliers were killed; and the Earl of Newport was by the force of a Canon
shot dismounted and thrown into a ditch of water of a great depth, where
(after he had once sunk) he was caught hold on by the hair of his head, and
his life saved, which caused the Archbishop of York to give him his blessing,
saying, If he had been a Roundhead he he had been drowned, for there was no
hold on his head, and that the long-hair'd Cavaliers were the only saints. But
after their retreat the high ways were much besprinkled with blood. On tuesday
night last the plot was laid, and persons appointed to do the work, for
firing of the Town in four several places, the design for the doing it was
when they did discern a fire on Beverley Minster, it should be an assurance
unto them, that at the same time two thousand men should assault the walls
whilst the soldiers were a quenching the fire. But this plot was discovered a
few hours before, the plotters being of the alliance of Beck, with the Papist
who should formerly have betrayed the town, and is now the only favorite at
Court. It is certainly informed, that the King adhereth to the advice of the
Cavaliers, and totally deserts the counsel of his Lords, which makes them
ready to return to London, seeing themselves in a manner not worthy to be
hearkened unto, but rather the advice of such as seek and thirst after nothing
but blood, and the utter destruction of the three Kingdoms: which if it please
not God to prevent, we are like by their evil suggestions to undergo the
miseries of Germany and other neighboring countries, who have their hands
died in the scarlet blood of the saints, and nothing more sought after then the
destruction one of another. Therefore let us remember that a kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand, and seek, as far as in us lies, with tears and
supplications to the Almighty for the prevention thereof.

Die Mercurii.
Whereas several Commissions of Array have lately issued out under the Great
Seal of England, into the several Counties of Leicester, Worcester, and other
Counties of this Realm, tending to the great danger of His Majesty, and the
disturbance of the peace of the Kingdom: For the preventing thereof, and of
the execution and issuing out such Commissions for the time to come, It is
Ordered by the Lords and commons assembled in Parliament, That the Judges and
Justices of Assize, of the several Counties of England and Wales, be required
in their several Circuits, at the Assizes and great Sessions to be next held
for each County, within this Realm, and the Dominion of Wales respectively, in
open Court, and in their several Charges to be delivered to the Grand-Iuries
at the said Assizes, and great Sessions, openly to declare and publish, That
the said Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament have, upon mature
deliberation, Resolved upon the Question, That the said Commissions of Array
are against Law, and against the Liberty and Property of the Subject: And that
all those that are Actors in putting the same in execution, shall be esteemed
disturbers of the Peace of the Kingdom, and Betrayers of the Liberty of the
Subject.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this shall be
forthwith printed and published.

Ioh. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

FINIS.

