FINETTI PHILOXENIS: SOME CHOICE OBSERVATIONS OF Sr. JOHN FINETT KNIGHT, And
Master of the CEREMONIES to the two last KINGS, Touching the Reception, and
Precedence, the Treatment and Audience, the Puntillios and Contests of Foreign
AMBASSADORS IN ENGLAND.

Legati ligant Mundum.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for H. Twyford and G. Bedell, and are to be Sold at
their Shops in Vine-Court Middle Temple, and the Middle Temple Gate, 1656.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE PHILIP, Lord Vicount Lisle, etc.
MY LORD,
I Know well (for I know it by Experience) that your Lordship has been trained
up from a Youth in matters of Embassyes, and Legantine Affairs, as well when
you attended my Lord your Father to Denmark, and other States of Germany, as
many years after in the French Court: Therefore the Dedicatory address of
this new Piece, will not be adjudged incongruous by any discerning Reader, but
very pertinent, considering the quality of the subject, which treats of
transactions of that nature, being the Manual observations of that knowing
Knight, and well accomplished Courtier, Sir John Finett, who officiated so
many years in Affairs of that kind; Therefore this Piece goes indented with
many signal Passages of the Reception, and Treatments, of the Conduct and
Audiences, the Pretenses, and Precedencies, with diverse Contests, and
Puntilioes of State between foreign Ambassadors.

Among other parts of Industry which were known to be in that Worthy Knight,
one was, to couch in vvriting, and keep an exact Diary of what things had
passed in his Province as Master of the Ceremonies, according to the laudable
Custom of the Italians, and transmitted by them to the high and low Dutch
Ministers of State, with others.

Moreover, these Observations go interwoven with diverse Historical Passages,
and those most faithfully related, there being nothing taken here upon trust,
but all upon his own knowledge, being still upon the place himself, and an
Actor in every thing, as appeared by the Manuscript he left: And thus much, out
of the conversation I had often with him, I was desired to tell the World.

Lastly, Besides the Motives before mentioned, there went another Inducement
to this Election, which was the high respects, and Honor I profess your
Lordship, having discovered in you a true Sidneyan Soul, which by a peculiar
Noble Genius, is observed to be extraordinarily inclined to the Theory, and
Speculative part of Virtue, as well as to the Practical; In which opinion I
rest,

My most Honored Lord, Your very humble, and ever ready Servant, JAMES HOWELL.
Holborn this 20. of April, 1656.
THE Chief Heads and Substance of the ensuing DISCOURSE.
1. THe Archdukes Ambassador discontented, and the Kings Apology for his
satisfaction. 2. The Braveries used at the Lady Elizabeth's Wedding. 3. Passages
of Ambassadors about invitations to the Earl of Somersets Marriage. 4. A clash
betwixt the Savoy, and Florence Ambassadors for precedence: 5. Differences at a
Mask betwixt the Spanish Ambassadors and the States. 6. The Spanish Ambassador
excepting against the States for sitting with him in the Kings presence. 7. The
Spanish Ambassador refusing to be at a Mask. 8. The Venetian Ambassador
discontented about his Present. 9. Four Ambassadors at a Readers Feast. 10.
Ambassadors invited to hunt with the King. 11. Ambassadors invited to the
Princes Creation. 12. The rich present of Furs sent by the Emperor of Russia
to the King. 13. A clash betwixt the Spanish and French Ambassadors. 14.
Touching Sir Henry Manwayring 15. Exceptions taken by the French 16. The
sitting of Ambassadors at a Mask with the King reformed. 17. Differences
betwixt the French and Spanish Ambassadors reconciled. 18. Of the flaunting
Embassy of Monsieur Cadenet 19. Exceptions about placing. 20. Six in joint
Ambassie at once from the States. 21. The Russian Ambassadors puntillio for
precedence. 22. A great Embassy from the Emperor. 23. Questions betwixt the
Imperial and Venetian Ambassadors, concerning Titles and Visits, the like with
the French 24. The young Landgrave of Hessens entertainment. 25. The States
Ambassadors distasts: 26. The Duke of Soubizes Negotiation. 27. Exceptions
taken by the Venetian Ambassadors. 28. Exceptions of the States Ambassadors.
29. The Prince his return from Spain 30. The French Ambassador gets ground of
the Spanish 31. Difference betwixt the Spanish Ambassadors. 32. Reasons for the
Master of the Ceremonies to sit in the same Coach with the Ambassadors. 33. A
clash betwixt the French and Spanish Ambassador. 34. Sir Robert Sherley
Ambassador from Persia 35. Ambassadors extraordinary from France to treat of a
Marriage. 36. Death of King James, and Solemnities of his Funeral. 37.
Complaint of the Venetian Ambassador. 38. Reason of the Venetian Ambassador for
Parity with Crowned heads. 39. The King and Queens first interview at Dover 40.
The Marquess of Blamvilles contestations for formalities, and his Lodging and
Diet at Court. 41. His reason for not assisting at the Coronation. 42. The
great clash betwixt the Persian Ambassador, and Sir Robert Sherley 43. The
French cashiered from Court. 44. Difference betwixt the Master of the
Ceremonies and Jewel house, who is to carry Presents to Ambassadors. 45.
Bethlem Gabors Ambassadors. 46. The Reformation of Ambassadors sitting in
public, and eating with the King. 47. The Danish Ambassadors complaint. 48.
The Mantovan Ambassadors Expostulations. 49. A new Declaration touching the
Treatment of Ambassadors, and the value of their Presents abated. 50. The
Expostulations of the Duke of Savoyes Ambassador. 51. Questions and Puntillioes
betwixt Regal and Ducall Ambassadors. 52. The Lord Majors refusing to give
place to the King of Denmarks Ambassador. 53. A clash betwixt the Ambassador of
Savoy, and the Duke of Buckingham, because he gave Sanctuary to my Lady Purbeck
54. The States Ambassadors exceptions and complaints how satisfied. 55. The
notable Plot, the Spanish Ambassadors had traced to destroy the Duke of
Buckingham
With diverse other Signal Passages of State, and matters of remark, wherewith
the Discourse is interwoven.

In page 250. for and machinations, read a machination; with other small
mistakes which the judicious Reader will not stumble at.

Sir JOHN FINETS OBSERVATIONS Touching Foreign Ambassadors, etc.
THE Count Palatine of the Rhone, coming to marry the Lady Elizabeth, landed at
Graves end on Friday night the sixteenth of October, and had his first welcome
brought him thither from the King by the Lord Hay, with the attendance of Sir
Jews Lewkner Master of the Ceremonies, and his second on Sunday following by
the Duke of Lenox, attended by many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, the Kings
Servants: As he passed before the Tower in his Majesty's Barges, the discharge
of the great Ordnance there served for a warning to the Earls of Shrewsbury,
Sussex, Southampton, and other Lords, to wait on the Duke of York to the
Stairs of White Hall for his reception at his landing there, and to conduct
him to the presence of the King, Queen, Prince, and Princess, in the
Banqueting House; where having made an humble reverence to his Majesty, and
passed his first Complement, he addressed himself to the Queen, kissed her
hand, saluted the Prince, and turning to the Princess (who was observed till
then not to cast the least look toward him) he stooped to touch the lowest
part of her Garment, when with her hand staying his, he received a kiss from
her Highness, and soon after they all retired to the privy Lodgings.

The next day he spent in visiting the King, Queen Prince, and Duke of York,
and twice the Princess, once in the afternoon (at her own Lodging) in State,
and once after Supper with less ceremony.

His Train consisted of a number, not so great as Gallant, most of them being
much better fashioned, and better clothed, then Germany usually sends them
forth. There were of them eight Counts (besides Count Henry of Nassaw) about
six and thirty Gentlemen, and of the rest about an hundred and fifty.

The place appointed for his most usual abode was Essex House, near Temple
Bar, but he had other Lodgings assigned him for his own Person (as he should
have occasion to use them for his own private retraite) at White Hall with the
King, and with the Prince (...) Saint Jameses.

The thirteenth of February following I was sent by the Lord Chamberlain
(Earl of Suffolk) from his Majesty to the Archdukes Ambassador, Monsiuer de
Boiscot, with this formal invitation to the Marriage of the Princess.

That his Majesty (who desires to perform all things with convenience) having
invited the French Ambassador, and the Venetian, to assist at the first days
solemnity, requested him to honor the second, or third days, either Dinner or
Supper, or both, with his presence.

After some time of pause, his first question was, (with a troubled
countenance) whether the Spanish Ambassador were invited? I answered
(answerable to my Instructions in case of such demand) that he was sick, and
could not be there; he was yesterday (quoth he) so well, as that the offer
might have very well been made him, and perhaps accepted.

To this I replied, That his Majesty having observed that the French and
Venetian Ambassadors holding between them one course of correspondence, and the
Spanish and Archdukes another, their Invitations had been usually joint.

This he denied, (saying) The French had been fun dry times invited to Masks,
etc. and not the Venetian, the Venetian and not the French, the Spaniard the
like; but He, the Archdukes Ambassador never: That for his own particular
person (as he was Boiscot) he should think himself honored to be called by
his Majesty upon any terms, were it to serve up a Dish to the Princesses
Table; but, as he was the Representant of so great a Prince, as the Archdukes
(one who would never allow (he said) so much as a question or thought of
Competition between him, a Monarchall Sovereign, and a mean Republique,
governed by a sort of Burghers, who had but an handful of Territory in
comparison of his Master; and (as would be averred, he said, by ancient
proofs, had ever yielded precedence to the Archdukes Predecessors, when they
were but Dukes of Burgundy) he could not be present at that Solemnity. That
further, he knew not wherein he had deserved so ill of his Majesty, as not to
have received from him any countenance or favor in all the time of his
residing here, and the Venetian (as he himself had bragged) many; that for
these, and the like considerations, he would never be received to a second
place, or day, after one that should have the first bestowed on him so
unworthily. In conclusion he desired, That though this was, and should be his
peremptory answer, I would from him request the Lord Chamberlain, that that
might be allowed him for consideration; and that the next morning he would by
his own Servant send his more direct resolution, which he accordingly did in
writing (seen to few more then to his Majesty and the Lord Chamberlain) to
the former purpose, thus,

That he had ever yet had the honor to have been invited by his Majesty; that
the Invitation he now had, was in a second place to one who was far from all
color of reason to precede him; that his Majesty had herein expressed his
affection; that he was sorry he could not be there, etc.

This written signification (redemanded and taken back after it was read by his
Servant) having been made the Saturday; the Sundays and Mundayes feasting
jollity and gallantry stilld all further noise of it, till on Tuesday I was
commanded to carry him a written Declaration in French, as follows.

SA Majeste 's estant apperceu^e que l'Ambassadeur des serenissimes Archiducs a
pris ombrage de ce qu'il n'auoit este conuie auz solemnitez de Madame Fille
unique de sa Majeste, et du tres illustre Prince l'Electeur Palatin au Dimenche
jour de noces, l'ayant este l'Ambassadeur de la serenissime Republique de
Venice conuie pour ce jour la, a trouue bon que le dit sieur Ambassadeur, et
les Princes auxquels il sert entendissent, qu'en cela sa Majeste n'a voulu rien
fair qui fist prejudice aux pretensions de l'un ou de l'autre de leur Princes
ou Estats comm' en toutes procedures depuis son aduenement a ceste couronne
il'a decline se porter Juge de leur competition en cest' endroit, ains de
laisser un chacun entier en ce que luy appartient traictant tous en general
comme ses Amiss; Or quant an fait present touchant l'Ambassadeur de Venise sa
Majeste fait scauoir an dit Ambassadeur des Archiducs qu'ayant le dit
Ambassadeur de Venise quatorze ou quinze jours auant le iour des Noces fait
entendre a sa Majeste qu'il auoit order de par la dicte Republique de
congratuler aux dictes Noces qu' il desiroit fair cest' office le jour mesme
d'icelles, and d'autant que pour donner meilleure grace, et manifestation plus
ouuerte que port la dicte, Republique a sa Majeste, on luy auoit ordonne
frayspour la pomp, et liureesases gens aux despens publics (honneur que sa
Majeste n'anoit receu de null autre Prince, et qui est bien extraordinary, et
plus de constume enter les Princes) sa Majeste auoit toute raison de render a
la dicte Republique la pareille de l'honneur qui par demonstration si signalee
elle luy fairoit: Ajouste aussy ne que s'j trouuant l'Ambassadeur d'Espagne en
estat de l'assister le dit premier iour, et estant uncertain a sa Majeste s' il
ne s' y pouuoit trouuer quelque autre iour des solemnitez, sa Majeste trouuiot
bon selon sa coustume de ioindre le dit Ambassadeur de Venise a celuy du Roy
tres-Chrestien qui auoit este conuie pour le mesme jour selon la fason que sa
Majeste a tousjours tenue d'accouplir les Ambassadeurs de France and de Venise
en toutes tells ocasions comm' aussy celuy d'Espagne, et des Archiducs; Et
quant a ce qu' on pretend qu' ayant este conuie le dit Ambassadeur des
Archiducs le Mardy Gras jour dernier des magnificences, on pourroit fair
construction qu' on faisoit quelque trait d'honneur a la Republique de Venise
par dessus les Archiducs; Sa Majeste dit qu' ayant este tousjours tres-curieux
d'esquiuer toutes sorts d'offences a ses Amiss en Subject de ceste condition,
le dit sieur Ambassadeur, s' il luy plait d'y bien penser, trouuera que le fait
de sa Majeste en cecy ne port point de prejudice a sa Majeste, Carestant la
solemnite du Marriage un Act continue, combien qu' execute en plusieurs iours,
il ne contient ny prius ny posterius en soy, ains se doit entendre que tous les
iours ont pareille dignite; voire, si l'on y vouloit argumenter, il se pourroit
soustenir que le dernier jour seroit a prendre pour le plus gran iour comm'il
s' ontend en plusiours autres cas, et nommement aux festes de Noel, que le Jour
des Roys qui est le dernier se prend pour le plus gran jour, et en plusjours
places en la solemnite du Caresme prenant le Merdy Gras se prend aussy pour le
plus grand; Mesme au fait present le Ballet de la cour compose de Conseillers
et des plus Grands de la Noblesse tant seigneurs que Dames auoit este assign
au Mardy comm' au plus gran jour de la Feste; Mais pour ne se trouuer d'accord
la Noblesse de Colleges de Droict du jour enfuynant le dimenche, on a este
contraint d'ordonner celuy de la Cour au dit jour antrement se deuoit fair le
Mardy cousm' an plus gran jour. Mais sa Majeste qui ne se port pour Juge des
differences qni naissent enter les Princes, ne dit cecy pour rien resoudre de
part eu d'autre, Mais seulement pour monstrer les raisons qu' elle a eu de son
cost au quel elle pense n' auoir foit tort a person.


HIs Majesty perceiving that the Ambassador of the most serene Archduke has
taken some exceptions, that he was not invited to the solemnities of Madam, his
Majesty's sole Daughter, and of the most Illustrious Prince the Elector
Palatine on Sunday the day of the Nuptials, whereas the Ambassador of the most
serene Republicke of Venice was invited thereunto that day; he has thought
good that the said Lord Ambassador, and the Princes whom he serves should
understand, that his Majesty never intended to do any thing in prejudice to the
pretenses of either Prince or State in all procedures since his access to this
Crown; but always declind to comport himself as judge of their competitions
in this case, leaving them both entire in what appertains to them, and
treating them in a free general way as his friends. Now, touching the present
business reflecting upon the Ambassador of Venice, his Majesty lets the said
Ambassador of the Archdukes to understand, that the said Ambassador of Venice,
having fourteen or fifteen days before the Wedding day informed his Majesty
that he had order from the Republicke to congratulate the said Nuptials, he
desired that he might perform the said office the very day of the solemnity,
and that he might do it with a better grace, as also for a more open
manifestation of the honor which the said Republicke does bear unto his
Majesty, he was appointed Extraordinary allowance for the pomp, and to put his
men in liveryes accordingly upon the public charge (an honor which his
Majesty had not received of any Prince, it being Extraordinary, and not usual
among Princes) Therefore his Majesty had all reason to correspond with the said
Republicke in like civilities for so signal demonstrations of respect: Add
hereunto, that the Spanish Ambassador not finding himself in case to assist,
and be present the first day of the Nuptials, and his Majesty being uncertain
whether he would be at any other day of the Solemnities, his Majesty according
to former custom commanded that the said Ambassador of Venice should be joynd
with him of his most Christian Majestyes, who had been invited for the same
day, according to the course that was always observed, to couple upon such
solenmities the Ambassadors of France and Venice, as also those of Spain and
the Archdukes. And whereas it is pretended that whereas the Ambassador of the
said Archdukes being invited upon Shrove-Tuesday, the last day of the
solemnity, one might infer that a greater show of honor was made thereby to
the Republicke then to the Archdukes, his Majesty says, that he having
always been most curious to avoid all sorts of offenses among his friends in
matters of this kind, the said Ambassador, if he please to consider of it well,
will find that this does not carry with it any prejudice at all to his Master;
in regard that the solemnity of the marriage being but one continued Act though
performd diverse days, admitted neither prius nor posterius in it self, but it
is to be understood that each day had the like dignity; Nay, if one would
Argumentize thereupon, it might be alleged that the last day should be taken
for the greatest day, as it is underslood in many other Coses, and particularly
upon the Festivalls of Christmas wherein the Twelfe day or the Festival of the
three Kings which is the last is taken for the greatest day; And in many places
Tueseday is taken for the chiefest day of Shrove-tide; wherefore the Mask at
Court composed of Noble men and Ladies was assigned for that day as being the
greatest of the Festivalls; but his Majesty, who does not undertake to be Judge
of differences arising in this nature twixt the Ministers of Princes, does not
speak this as to determine any thing on either side, but only to show the
reasons which he has on his behalf in this particular, wherein he thinks not
to have done any body wrong.

This being read by the Ambassador I demanded his answer, which he said he
could little enlarge beyond the former; And then telling him, I was by command
to return the paper (suiteable to his own, and his Servants proceeding with
his Majesty, when he last sent his mind in writing) he affirmed peremptorily
that he neither asked, nor had any paper back again: And in this regard he
must be pardoned, if he returned no answer, since (quoth he) if I had received
a message by word, I had answered by word, If by writeing by writeing, But
taking this message for neither, I may, I suppose, be silent. Wherewith when I
had acquainted the Lord Chamberlain, his Lordship was semewhat moved (as for
his own personal interest, and taking Sir William Button, (my Colleague
assistant of the Ceremonies) to witness what he had said, and done, his
Lordship willed me to return, and affirm to him the contrary with confidence;
But half the words which I had to say to this purpose when I came to him,
were scarce uttered when he confessed the Action, yet not without blaming his
Servants mistaking, and forgetfullnesse to deliver back to him the paper.

At this time the French, and Venetian Ambassadors invited to the Marriage,
were not free from Puntillios. That made an offer to precede the Prince. This
stood upon it, that they were not to sit at the Table without Chaires (though
the Prince The King not present) had but a stool (the Count Palatine, and the
Princess, only for the honor of the day, having Chayres) and insisting upon a
formality that the Carver was not to stand above him, but neither of these
prevailed in their reasonlesse pretenses; Neither was the Wife of the French
Ambassador clear of these disputes, for when I had ushered her up amcungst the
Countesses, and left her there to the raniging of the Lord Chamberlain, he
ordered she should be placed at the Table next beneath the Countesses, and
above the Baronesses; But the Viscountesse of Effingham standing to her woman's
right, and possessed already of her proper place (as she called it) would not
moove lower, so held the hand of the Ambassatrice, till after dinner the
Ambassador her husband informed of the difference, and opposition, took it for
an indignity, and calling for his Wives Coach, that by her departure it might
be seen he was sensible, she was by others persuasions stayed, and was at
supper placed beneath the Countess of Killdare, and above the Viscountesse of
Haddington, who made no scruple of it, the Lady of Effingham in the interim
forbearing (with rather too much then too little Stommach) both her supper and
the Company.

The Ambassador of the united Provinces (Sir Noel Caron) kept himself all this
while quiet without question of Prius or Posterius, or thrusting for public
Note, being a continually entertained guest during the solemnity of the
Marriage; the carriage whereof on the day of it was this. Between the hours of
eleaven and twelve after that the Bride, and Bridegroom had (in manner of a
procession) passed along through the first Court at White Hall, on a raised
Terras conspicuous to all, the first entered the Chapel was the Prince
Palatine, attended by the Batchellrie of the Nobility, and after him the
Princess apparrelled in white, her hair laid out at length in Curls,
over-spreading her shoulders, and Crowned with a Coronet of rich pearls and
Diamonds, followed by a dozen of choice Virgins, Bcauties all clothed in
white; (who with her Highness ascended by six or seven stepps an eelevated
place purposely framed in the midst of the Chapel) she was encountered
thereon by the Prince Palatine (who ascended by the other end.) After these
came up the King, Queen, and Prince seating themselves, the King on the one
side (next whom at his right hand stood the Earl of Arundell, carrying the
sword, and next him the Prince. On the side opposite sat the Queen, next her
the Princess, then the Lady Baroness Harington her late Governesse, and last
of that company Count Henry of Nassaw (on the Kings side, standing) that place
being voyded of all others. The Sermon began preached by the Deane of the
Chapel, Bishop of London, Doctor King, and this ended, the formal words of
the Marriage (with all Ceremonies in use) were read by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and in place where it was requisite, repeated by the Prince
Palatine in English. In conclusion, a joy pronounced by the King, and Queen,
and seconded with congratulation of the Lords there present, which Crowned with
draughts of Ippocras out of a great golden Bowl, as an health to the
prosperity of the Marriage (beg an by the Prince Palatine, and answered by the
Princess) After which were served up by six, or seven Barons so many Bowls
filled with wafers) so much of that work was consummate; the Bravery, and
riches of that day was incomparable, Gold and Silver laid upon Lords, Ladies,
and Gentlewomens backs was the poorest burden. Pearls, and coastly
Embroyderies being the commonest wear. The Kings, Queens, and Princes Jewels
only were valued that day by his Majesty himself (upon occasion of discourse
happening to the purpose of the Braverie then appearing) at nine Hundred
Thousand pounds sterling.

The next two days came behind in time (not in cost) to the former, and an
open Court was for that time kept with intertaining Tables, and free admittance
to them of all worthy comers, English or strangers.

The one and twentieth of February following, there was a great supper prepared
by the King (but at the cost of certain Lords, who lost it for their ill
running at the Ring against his Majesty and his party) in a large room built
of purpose for the time over the North-Terras next the first Court of
White Hall. The King and Prince only were seated at a cross Table placed at
the end of the Room next the Banqueting House. The Prince Palatine, the Lords,
Ladies, and the Gentlemen of the Inns of Court (that had been at the Marriage
Maskers or Assistants to the Mask (whereof there were of both about forty)
sat at another Table placed longwayes the Chamber.

Passages at the Marriage of the Earl of Summerset.
1613.
THe three and twentieth of December 1613 I was sent to the Ambassador of
Venice, Seig. Foscarini.
(Sir William Button, having been sent at the same time, and on the same Errant
to the Ambassador of France) with this formal Message; Mons. de Buisseaux.
that according to his Majesty's most Royal disposition, and desire to give
all due content to Ministers of Foreign Princes whereof he himself (the
Ambassador) had the year before received a particular Testimony, having been
then invited together with the French Ambassador to the Marriage of the
Princess Palatine) I was now sent to signify his Majesty's pleasure to this
purpose. That his Majesty was persuaded, and with all desirous, that his
Excellency would not pass any Mis-construction upon his proceeding, if the
Spanish Ambassador newly come into this Kingdom, and who had not yet been
present here at any entertainments of Court) were together with the Archdukes
Ambassador invited to the Marriage of the Earl of Summerset, Don diego
Sarmiento de Acunna.
and not he (the Ambassador of Venice) that if he would be pleased to honor
with his presence the Mask of Gentlemen of the Inns of Court to be performed
on Twelfe night (a time amongst us of the solemnest observance) he should be
most welcome to it, and in the mean time I was further to let him know, that
there was an intention he should be invited to the Marriage of the Lady Jane
Dromond (first Lady of the Queens Bedd-Chamber) at Candlemas. To this, his
Answer was a question, whether the King intended the Solemnity toward for
public, or for private? This I answered I had no Commission to resolve as
from the mouth of his Majesty, and must therefore answer him with silence; But
if he asked my opinion as his friend, and Servant, I held it for private and in
no sort public, since I took it to be an honor his Majesty was pleased to
cast upon one of his most favored Servants to have the Marriage Solemnized in
his own House, and to invite to it whom he should think fit at his Princely
pleasure. This answer seemed to give him such satisfaction, as (he said), he
was of the same opinion, and added, that since his Majesty had vouchsafed the
last year to do him the honor and right to prefer him before another
(unjustly pretending) in his invitation to so public a solemnity, as was the
Marriage of his only daughter, he should bemost incivill now to except against
his pleasure in matter of so private a condition; but ought rather to return
him (as he now did) most humble thanks for the most gracious regard he
discovered to have of him, and so consequently of the State whereof he was a
Representant.

The next Morning I was sent to the French Ambassadors, who (though he might
seem the day before to hold one way with the Venetian, and had corresponded
with him to that purpose, (whether another and he did s'entre entendre, becomes
me no more to judge, then to declare) appeared now to have taken another way by
himself, and I delivered to him a formal invitation of the Marriage, which
(having first asked me whether the Spanish Ambassador were yet invited, and I
answered I thought no) he humbly beseecht his Majesty to pardon him, if he
excused his appearance at the Marriage, in regard that that night (he said) he
had the desluxion of a Rhume into his Teeth and a fit of a Ague whereof he
doubted the return. I was scarcely back at Court with his answer, when I was
told that a Gentleman from the Venetian Ambassador had been to seek me there,
and at my house, where at the last having found me, he said that his Lord
desired me that if ever I would do him favor, I would take the pains to come
to him presently; I winding the cause to be some new buz gotten into his Brain
from some Intelligence he had had from the French of that Mornings proceeding,
excused my so present repair with the necessity of my Commanded immediate
Attendance on my Lord Chamberlain, which I did to gain both time, and further
Instructions from his Lordship, wherewith so soon, as I was sufficiently
armed, I went to the Venetian, and in presence of his Secretary, Muscorus,
(whom he desired might be admitted to our Conference) he entreated me to
repeat the words of my Invitation, and those of his answer, which I yielded
to (after some discovery of my insatisfaction to be so punctually pressed, as
if he had meant to trip me) and in conclusion had his approbation, that all so
far was both in manage and report without Exception; but that which now (he
added) troubled him, and made him so to trouble me, was a later procedure of
his Majesty who (as if the State he represented had either in affection, or
demonstration of forwardnes to do the King Service, been inferior to any) had
that Morning vouchsafed the French Ambassador and not him a Solemn Invitation.

To this (after I had according to my Instructions (in case I should encounter
such formality) brought him to confess, that the French Ambassador had indeed
given him that intelligence) I replied, that to be plain with him, I had no
sooner received the message of his desire to speak with me, but conceiving it
was to the purpose that I now found, I did repair to my Lord Chamberlain with
my opinion, and for his Lordships further direction, which I said, was this.
That if the Ambassador of Venice should except against any favor showed the
French beyond him, I should let him know, it was not that his Majesty intended
a difference in distribution of honor for their more and less Ceremonial
Invitation; but that if amidst the confusion usually happening at such
Solemnities, there were any omission, he desired it might be interpreted as
chanceable, and not of design, which the better to express I came (I told
him) even then from my Lord Chamberlain, and so from his Majesty with the same
order to him, as I had done to the French, to invite him. When not yet
satisfied with an errand so ingrosse, he desired me to deliver particularly,
and in the same words the Invitation I had carried to the French Ambassador,
which when I had punctually performed, he returned this final answer. That
since I was there present a witness of his Realitie, he would not, as the
French Ambassador had done, excuse his absence with his sickness, but was
desirous his Majesty might know (after his humblest and Thankfullest
acknowledgment for his favor in his Invitation) that he took the public
honor he had received the last year for so substantial a Testimony of his
royal mind toward him (as in these private Solemnities for him to except
against inviting this person or that, whom he saw his Majesty was inclyned to
make his guests at the Feast, without overthronging it with the presence of
others) was to presume to take from him that liberty and pleasure, which (he
(the Ambassador) would strive, and had ever strived to observe with his best
diligence, and obedience. With this answer I was parting, when he suddenly
stayed me with the reading of another scruple (and hinc illae lachrimae) and
asked me whether the Archdukes Ambassador were also invited, whereof, when I
had said (to keep my self clear from Categoricall asseverations) when I knew
not fully the King my Masters pleasure) that I could not directly resolve him,
he would needs persuade me that I diffembled, and that no doubt, whatsoever I
should say, I had in charge to perform that service of Invitation, first to
him, and after in my return to Court to the other; a persuasion, which as
soon as I found it aimed at (what he was most jealous of) precedencie, I did
not gainesay it, 1 Seig. Gaveleone.
holding it ill manners to mar a belief of an Ambassadors making.

The same day I was also with the Agents of Savoy and of Florence and having
invited them to supper and to the Mask after it. The Florence said, 2 Ant.
L^^i.
that howsoever there passed a freindly Correspondence between him and the
other, and that their discretions might be like enough to keep them from
incounters; he must yet protest, and stand for the maintenance of his Masters
right of precedence, whenever he should meet any that would oppose or
question it? To this I replied, that howsoever his Majesty took no such notice
of any that resided here as Agents (and not Ambassadors) for their Masters as
that to invite, or not to invite them was esfentiall; yet my Lord Chamberlain
having told me, there was a Table to be both served, and sit at in State, was
all on the Queens side, as on the Kings, and that if the Agents would come to
either of them, the first come might make his firstchoyce, there was no doubt,
but his Lordships provident care for their placeing at the Mask would keep
them out of distance, and danger of dispute for precedence. So they both came,
but the Savoyard getting the start, and siding always close to the Spanish
Ambassador was both at the supper and Mask the more conspicuous, while the
other kept himself retired as Sconosiuto.

The Spanish Ambassador, the Archdukes, and both their Ladies were on
New-yeares day following invited to the sight of a Tilting, the King and Queen
there present, where I by Command attended them.

The first of February 1613. Mons de ^uisscaux.
The Lord Viscount Lysle, Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, sent me to invite (in
his Majesty's name) the French Ambassador to the Marriage of the Lady Jane
Dromond to be Solemnized the next day at Somerset House. He accepted the
Invitatation with humble thanks as an especial favor (he said) done to him
by his Majesty, but desired (if his desire might be presented to her Majesty as
that she might not interpret it for a singularity in him, or a disobedience to
her pleasure, which rather then to incurr he would (he said) lay aside all
other respects, and submit his reason to her will) that he might be excused his
coming to Dinner, and be present only at Supper, and at the entertainment
after it. When I had (as far as good manners would allow me) provoked him to
the reason of his request, (that I might at least glance at it in returning his
answer to the Lord Chamberlain, to procure it the better passage) he would
have made it appear, that a part of his reason was that his Lent was already
entered, and that to be at two meals of flesh together would be too great a
sin; but when I had removed that Objection, with assuring him that at our great
Feasts, Fish was an especial provision, he came nearer, telling me plainly,
(but as to his Friend, (he said) Sub Sigillo confessionis, who he knew would
carry it no further (that since the Spanish Ambassador had had the precedence
of him in his invitation to the marriage of the Earl of Somerset, he would not
wrong the Master he represented to march in the second place, as it would be
taken, if he should come to Dinner, (though many days had passed since the
other) and that the Queen, and not the King gave this entertainment; but if he
might be spared (he said) from the Brides Dinner, at the like whereof, the
other (the Spanish Ambassador) might be though to have done well to have spared
his presence, in regard neither the King nor Queen were there in person, (a
point, that men (he said) of his representative quality were especially to
regard in all such public solemnities) he could not, nor would refuse the
honor of being there at Supper when both King and Queen would be (as he heard)
present, yet he concluded, (that riterateing his request, that I would not
communicate the formality of these reasons) rather then he would in the least
point distaste her Majesty, he would (post-posing all other considerations) be
there both Dinner and Supper. With this signification I returned to the Lord
Lysle (Lord Chamberlain to the Queen) who communicated it to the Earl of
Worcester Master of her Majesty's Horse, He presented me at my parting with a
gold Chain worth 10 l.
that he might convey it to her Majesty as he should go with her in a Coach
from White Hall to Somerset House. It hung yet in intention when the
Ambassadors Secretary came to me from his Lord with a further exception, that
howsoever the Queen were pleased, that he should be present both Dinner and
Supper, he would be bold to prefer this condition to her allowance, that he
might not sit upon a Stool but in a Chair in the same manner as the Bride
should be seated. I answered, I thought that would be a matter of no great
difficulty. But how (quoth I) if the Prince be there, and have but a Stool to
sit on: If my Lord Ambassador were sure of that (replied the Secretary) I
presume he would make no further question, but in all bear his Highness
Company. To be resolved of this, I went at his request to my Lord Lysle, my
Lord Worcester, and my Lord Carew Vice-Chamberlaine, whom I found altogether,
and having assurance from them of the Prince his presence with the Bride at
Dinner, and requesting their Lordships (as the Secretary desired me) that they
would not trouble the Queen any further concerning the Ambassador till the
Secretary had been with him, and returned with his final Satisfaction, he
repaired that Evening to my Lord Lysle, and propounding the same demand of a
Chair, as he had done to me in the Afternoon; it was resolved he should have
one with the Prince, and so ended that difference.

The next day he came, and the Bride (seated at the Tables end, which was
placed cross at the upper end of the Hall) had the Prince at her left hand, as
the better place nearest the Wall, (his Highness sitting with his right hand
uppermost) on her right the Ambassadors both in Chayres, and opposite to him,
beneath the Prince in a little distance, sat on a stool a Duke of Saxony,
here at that time to visit his Majesty.

The Archdukes Ambassador received from me an Invitation the same day that I
delivered one to another, and accepted it, though he were then (in earnest)
sick in his Bed of a cold he had taken) both for Dinner and Supper without
Scruple or question (I will not say, without intention not to be at either) but
his cold increasing that night with a Looseness, he wrote to me to come to him
(as I did) the next Morning, and there desired his absence might be excused to
her Majesty. His Lady came notwithstanding in the Afternoon (as did also the
French Ambassadors with her Husband in the Morning) and had both of them their
places at the Table next beneath the Countesses. Seig. Gabellion, the Duke of
Savoys Agent was also invited, and had his place appointed him at Dinner next
beneath the Duke of Lenox, Too high.
and at Supper (both which might seem to have fallne out chanceably) next above
the Lord Knowles, beneath the Earls, and above the Barons. The Ambassador of
France sat that night at the end of the Table at the right hand of his
Majesty, with a distance between them of some half a dozen persons, the Queen
sat next the King on his left hand, and near her the Prince. It may appear,
that the scope and end of this question mooveing from the French Ambassador
was, that by some addition of honor, he might get the start he seemed to have
lost of preceding the Spaniard, and which himself bragged he had now
recovered (and was indeed judged so to have done by the three Lords mentioned)
when dineing with the Bride, he had the honor of the Princess Company, and
Supping, of both their Majesty's, neither of these having fallne to the Spanish
Ambassador at the Marriage of the Earl of Sommerset,

The 5. of January 1614. The Earl of Sommerset (then Lord Chamberlain)
notwithstanding he understood how the year before the Spanish and Archdukes
Ambassadors had been invited to the Marriage of him the Earl of Sommerset, and
not the French nor the Venetian (for the reasons elsewhere appeareing) gave me
directions to invite the Spanish and the Venetian (not usually coupled (ut
supra) to a Mask of Gentlemen set forth at the charge of his Majesty, and to
come at an hour, about six in the Evening to a Supper that should be prepared
for them in the Council Chamber. They both (with one question of what
Ambassadors would be there, and my assurance, that I understood of none besides
themselves (as indeed then I did not) accepted the Invitation, and came the
next day at the time appointed.) A little before Supper, the Spanish Ambassador
taking me aside, desired me to deal freely with him, and to tell him whether
Sir Noell Caron, the States Ambassador were invited, and if invited, what place
was intended him, whether in public near his Majesty, or in private in some
Corner of the Room? I answered that I knew then (and not before) that he was
invited, and would be there; But in which of those conditions, public or
private, I could not resolve him. Hereupon, he requested me immediately to go
to my Lord Chamberlain for clearing of this doubt, wherewith acquainting his
Lordship, and he his Majesty, I returned with this assurance. That Sir Noell
Caron was invited, and should be placed within the Bars near the King, as
Ambassadors used to be. To this he made his replye, desiring me to convey it to
the Lord Chamberlain, that if Sir Noell Caron should be together with him at
Supper or in any other place, then in the Kings presence, he would use him with
all the respects of civility, but in so honorable a place as that, where the
sacred persons of the King, Queen and Prince were to be present, he should
never with patience see the Representant of his Masters Vassalls and Rebels
(so he called them) hold an equal rank with him. That it was directly against
his Instructions to concur with him in any public Act, as an Ambassador, and
that therefore it would be better for him (as he intended with the favor of
his Majesty) to retire himself betimes without noise, then to be forced (as he
must) to discharge his duty by public exception, and protestation against the
presence of him (Sir Noell Caron) to the disturbance of so royal an Assembly,
and whereupon I told him (as from my Lord Chamberlain) that his Lordship was
informed his predecessor Don Alonso de Velasco had stood upon no such Puntillio
when Sir Noell Caron had at another time been invited, as now, and sat as it
was now determined he should; he said, he was most assured there never had been
such a concurrence, so as returning from him with this answer, I fortuned to
deliver it in the hearing of my Lord Treasurer, and received from his Lordship
an assurance that upon his knowledge, and in his sight, his predecessor Don
Alonso de Velasco had endured without any exception the placing of the States
Ambassador at the left hand of the King, while he (Don Alonso) sat on the
right. But this neither would satisfy him, nor hold him from affirming that
(not to contradict (he said) my Lord Treasurer, who yet might forget, or
mistake in some circumstances) he would engage his head to be cut off, if there
ever had been any such placing, which being again reported by me to my Lords
Chamberlain and Treasurer, they both went to the King, and debating the
business with his Majesty, first in presence of sundry of the Bedd-Chamber,
and after more in private with half a dozen of other Lords, my Lord Treasurer,
my Lord Chamberlain, my Lord of Worcester (and I to attend them) were sent to
him into the Council Chamber, and there (entreating first the Venetian
Ambassador to pardon them, if they did awhile leave him alone) taking only the
Ambassadors Interpreter, and my self with them into a little Room there by,
my Lord Treasurer delivered the Kings mind to this purpose. That his Majesty
having invited him to the Mask, with a mind to give him all content, was sorry
that this question should grow to disturb it. That his Majesty went upon
grounds of former presidents of the like concurrence in the time of the
Ambassadors predecessors, and that the had for witnesses of it (besides his
own memory) the Queen, the Prince, and sundry of the Lords, who affirmed
they had seen it. That his Majesty having heretofore entertained Sir Noell
Caron in that manner, and now invited him as an Ambassador, he left it to his
consideration what injury he should do to abate of his accustomed respects
toward him. That whereas the Ambassador affirmed, it was formally his
Instructions not to concur with him in any public Act, his Majesty wondered
that his predecessor should not have the like Instructions, or having had such,
should forget, or neglect to stand upon it, that if he had any such, his
Majesty requested him, that (reserving other matter, which he in no sort
desired that he should communicate, besides that purpose) he might have a sght
of it for his fuller satisfaction. To this the Ambassador replied (with many
acknowledgments of the honor his Majesty had done him etc.) That first, the
witnesses his Majesty had produced were so substantial, as should he with his
own eyes have seen the contrary, he should not have trusted them in
opposition of their Testimony; That if it should be known to the King his
Master that Don Alonso had committed such error, it would be enough to make
him loose his head. That it was true, that in his general instructions
received from the hand of the King his Master, it was not intended, but that
upon his Arrival in England finding in what condition of respect Sir Noell
Caron was held here, he wrote particularly to the King for his pleasure about
his manner of carriage toward Sir Noell Caron, in case he should be put to it
upon any encounter of Negotiation, or otherwise, whereunto he had received by
letter from his Majesty his will, intimating, That in concurrence of ordinary
civil respects, he should use him with courtesy; but in no case admit
concurrence with him in or to any public Act, and that his Majesty should be
an eye witness of the letter at his pleasure. The Venetian (who remaind in the
mean time in the Council Chamber) having been by the Spanish Ambassador
before the Lords entrance, made acquainted with the difference like to grow,
had affirmed to him, That he could himself remember, that when Don Alonso was
invited (as he was now) by his Majesty, he and Sir Noell Caron were seated in a
compartment, or place apart, and that Don Alonso did except against Carons
sitting in the same place near his Majesty; he affirmed also, That howsoever
it might now pass between the Spanish Ambassador and the States, he himself
would not permit that he should sit ( allato, his own word) in even rank with
him; but all the Allegations of the Venetian were held to proceed rather from a
spirit of disturbance (forward, as his naturally was, to make ill business)
then that what he said was simply truth.

In fine, the Lords returning with this Declaration of the Ambassadors to his
Majesty, came back soon after with his definite pleasure thus. That since he
could not accord this difference, which troubled him much for the respects he
bare to the Spanish Ambassador, he had willed them to signify to him, that he
might take what course should best please him; And that if he would not stay
the Mask, he would take order, that the States Ambassador should likewise
depart, to avoid all further question, about either of their pretenses. After
this the Ambassador himself, and the Lords fell to terms of reconciling (if
it could be possible) the difference, the Lords offering, that the Spanish
Ambassador should sit on the right hand of the King, and at the Spaniards right
hand, the Venetian, and that at the left hand next the Queen and Prince should
sit the States Ambassador, this he harkened (not yielded) to, but with such
limitations, as were not fit for Sir Noell Caron to admit of, as that he should
either sit a degree or step lower (which the place would not afford) or with
some distance behind the Queen, and that he should not enter with the King,
but some quarter of an hour after, and the like, but the conclusion was
(nothing being agreed on) that they would inform the King of his resolution of
departure, and so left him: yet immediately after they returned the third time,
and (after some reasons to no prevaileing purpose) I told him again, that the
King desired to see the next day his instructions, and so had sent him the good
night. The Lords being departed, I stayed behind (as was his Majesty's
pleasure, and charge given me) to tell him from his Majesty for conclusion thus
much. That he had not been driven to this straight without his own fault,
because if he had made question in season, and acquainted the King with the
limitation of his instructions in that point, there might have been another
course had for prevention: whereto he replied, that he had found his Majesty in
all so gracious, as he could not but with all most humble thankfulness
acknowledge it, and that it might be held indeed a fault in him, that he had
not before hand declared himself to that purpose, but no man could foresee all
things. So (having merrily requested the Lords before, that since his Servants
were not Ambassadors, and would not strive for places, they might be allowed
room to see the Mask) he with one Gentleman, his Secretary, and a footeman (I
attending him to his Coach) departed.

The King the next day at his dinner discoursing to this purpose, brought forth
amongst other Arguments this one against the Spanish Ambassador, that the
Exception, or protestation he had made, could not be any way made good by him,
the King of Spaines Agent, in regard the Vassallage which the King his Master
pretended of the States, was not properly his, but should belong (if to any) to
the Archdukes, to whom he had made a cession of those Provinces, and had
likewise (he said) but a poor title to them, having at the time of the Treaty
of Truce between them, agreed to treat with them, as with a free State, and
given them since in several letters the title and style they pretend to (and
which all other Princes and States (he said) give them) of Les Estats
confederez de provinces vnies. This dispute, and difference occurred in the
time that the Truce between the King of Spain, the Archduke and the States
yet lasted. The Venetian Ambassador as soon as the Spanish was departed, was
conducted by me into the second Room from the privy Gallerie, and there
attending till his Majesty and the Qucene came, went along with them, and was
seated on the left hand of the King, beneath the Queen, and the Prince on the
right. At the same time the Agent of Florence (to whom was sent by the Lord
Chamberlain to invite him, Il. Gavallo Francis co Guarolesi.
no other then an ordinary Messenger of the Chamber, as to a Minister inferior
to an Ambassador) supped also in the Council Chamber, and followed the King to
the Mask with the Venetian, but having been ordained his seat in one of the
Galleries, he entreated me to moove the Lord Chamberlain, that (as he
understood the great Duke his Masters Agent, and the Duke of Savoyes had been)
he might be placed among the Lords, Earl of Suffolk.
which was assented to, and he was placed (by the Lord Chamberlain, and the
Lord Treasurer there present) beneath the lowest Baron the Lord Mordant, and
above Sir Thomas Howard second Son to the Lord Treasurer.

26 of Oct. 1614.
An Ambassador from the Emperor of Russia landing at Tower wharfe, was there
received by the Lord Danvers, I and other Gentlemen, his Majesty's Servants,
attending his Lordship thither.

The five and twentieth of April following, he having been invited to dine
with his Majesty at White Hall, was seated on his left hand toward the Corner
of the Table, and a Secretary that came in Commission with him at the Tables
end. He had two of his own Servants attending at his Elbow, but with little
Service (the Kings Servants supplying) and his other followers bestowed
elsewhere in the Court apart. It was first ordered that the Prince should have
dined there also, seated at the Kings right hand toward the other end of the
Table; but this considered to be somewhat short, the dishes many, and doubted
besides whether the Ambassador would have accepted of the place at his
Majesty's left hand, if the Prince should have had the right, his Highness
dined not with his Majesty.

1615
On St. Georges day, the King of Spaines Ambassador discovered to the Master of
the Ceremonies (Sir Jews Lewkner) a desire he had to see the order of that
Feast of the Garter, wherewith the King made acquainted, Don Diego Sarmiento.
his Majesty returned him an assurance of welcome. He was placed for sight of
the procession as it should pass by, upon the Terras in the window there,
about the middle of the Brick-wall that divides the first Court, and the
Cloister Court, and thence had his prospect upon his Majesty and the Knights in
their passage, who being returned to the Chapel, he repaired thither through
the Guard Chamber, and had his place for sight of divine Service and Offering,
in the Kings Closet. After retyring to the Council Chamber, he had his dinner
provided at his Majesty's charge in the Lord Chamberlaines Lodgings thereby, and
conducted thence in the time of his Majesty's dinner to the Banqueting House,
he stood at his right hand, intertaining discourse with him all the later part
of his Majesty's dinner.

About the beginning of July arrived at London a Young Nobleman of Poland, Son
to the great Zomoiski the famous Chancellor of that Kingdom, he demanded
access to his Majesty by a Germane (one Ryder) that then lived in England, who
speaking in hearing of Sir William Button Assistant of the Ceremonies, (as if
the Master of the Ceremonies had been in great fault to have neglected to
press his desire of presenting his Service to the King) was reprooved by Sir
William Button for so rashly condemning the Master of the Ceremonies (then
imployd into Kent to meet, and receive the new come French Ordinary
Ambassador) asking him if Zomoiski were a Prince Sovereign or an extraordinany
Ambassador, that he should challenge that respect of a King, not to be seen at
the pleasure, and time of every stranger. But this difference quietted with the
forward Germans strikeing sail, he had an Audience appointed and given him
two days after in the Kings withdrawing Chamber.

The second or third day following the same Z^moiski sent to the Master of the
Ceremonies (to let him know of an invitation he had received from the King by a
letter written to him in his Majesty's name from Mr. John Murray of the
Bedd-Chamber, to hunt with his Majesty at Theobalds) and asked (by his
Messenger) the Master of the Ceremonies opinion and Counsel touching his
intention to be present at Court the next Sunday (as his letter intimated) at
the Audience for that day assigned of the new French Ambassador, and touching
his manner of carriage at it. Answer was returned him by Sir Jews Lewkner,
that he would not take upon him to resolve, or advise a man of his quality,
especially having himself received no direction from the Lord Chamberlain to
the purpose of his Invitation; so left him doubtful, but not enough to hinder
his repair (notwithstanding) to Court on Sunday after dinner, though too late
to come to the Ambassadors Audience.

Who that day the second of July had it at Theobalds, setcht in the Morning
from his House at Charter House by the Lord Walden appointed with Sir Jews
Lewkner, Mons. de Mareth.
my self, and half a score Gentlemen to accompany him thither, whither he had
for his transport one of the Kings Coaches, and three others at the charge of
his Majesty, besides two or three of his own providing. Arriving at one of the
clock, he was brought to rest himself in the Council Chamber, and at two was
called thence by the Master of the Ceremonies and conducted by the Lord Walden
to his Audience in the Presence Chamber, where the King standing under the
State, the Ambassador marched toward him, his own followers first, next the
Kings Servants that had accompained him from London, next before him Sir Jews
Lewkner, and at his side the Lord Walden. The Ambassador observing as little
respect at his approaches as had been till then seen, after some few words of
Complement, he presented his Letters, which while his Majesty read, he in all
that time nor before did so much as cast his eye toward the Prince there
present, till Sir Jews Lewkner rounding my Lord Walden in the ear, his
Lordship stepped to him with an admonition for his address to the Prince, which
the Ambassador took. But whether this admonition were well given, or well
taken, or had been better deferred till the King had read his Letters (or best
of all perhaps intimated immediately after he had performd his respects to the
King) it may be a Quere. His Majesty invited him once to cover at first, but
the Ambassador excusing, the King put on, and the other still stood bare
headed, till the King having read the Letter, his Majesty put off again, and
falling to a discourse with him of some length, he never after covered till he
was out of the Chamber. He returned to London with Sir Jews Lewkner, and his
followers attendance only, my Lord Walden leaving him at the Court gate, and
remaining that night (not perhaps without a Solecisme in Ceremony) at
Theobalds.

A day or two before his Audience, a question fell out between Mr. Secretary
Winwood, and the Master of the Ceremonies, whether the French Ambassador
mentioned were, or ought to be invited to dine at Court, (the Court being so
far out of London) the day of his first Audience. Sir Jews Lewkner said, he
knew of no such order; why then (quoth the Secretary) who should know it? but
his Majesty (he added) is ill served, and ill instructed, and those things now
a days which should be done, are not, and those not done which should be. The
other replied, he was none of his Majesty's Tutors, and for himself, he was to
receive his directions from the Lord Chamberlain, and without them not to
undertake any thing in his Office; but to answer (he said) more directly, he
knew not wherein he had done amiss; yes, when (said Mr. Secretary) this French
Ambassadors Ordinary was met by you in Kent, when he should not, and should
have had a dinner provided for him in Court the day of his first Audience, An
error of the Secretary.
which was neglected. Sir Jews produced his own experience against both his
assertions, affirming he had met such and such Ambassadors on the way at some
Town between London and Dover, and extraordinaries at their first landing, and
that Ambassadors Ordinary had many times to his knowledge had no dinner given
them by the King at their first Audience.

November the first.
Seignior Barbarigo (who about a month before came to reside here Ambassador
in place of Seignior Foscarini departed (his Majesty being at that time absent
at Royston) was conducted from Charter House to White Hall by the Lord Hay for
his first Audience, attended by many Gentlemen of his Majesty's privy Chamber
in two of the Kings Coaches, and seven or eight of the Lords, besides five or
six others hired by himself. Being come to White Hall, he had his conduction
(together with his Predecessor) through the first Court up the great Stairs by
the Guard Chamber into the Council Chamber, where my Lord Hay remaining with
him (while the Master of the Ceremonies went to give an account that he was
come) he was after brought to his Majesty in the Presence, no other Lord
receiving him at the Presence door, the Earl of Somerset (Lord Chamberlain)
being then in Prison. His Predecessor preceding, and first speaking, he
delivered his Letters, and a breife speech with a voice audible over all the
Room. Whence reconducted by the same Lord, and the Gentlemen mentioned, to his
house, they there found (beyond expectation) a long Table ready covered, and
many white wax Lights, not yet (it not being four of the Clock) lighted. When
my Lord Hay, offering to part but invited to stay at Supper (though
unseasonably perhaps at so short a warning for a person of his quality) after
some importunity of the Ambassador) yielded (but with excuse (to indeare it
might seem) his invitation over sudden, and familiar) that he must first
return to White Hall to wait on his Majesty, promising to return speedily
(as he did) with such Gentlemen of his Company, as would accompany him. The
supper was sumptuous, excellently ordered, and of five several Services. The
guests at it were thus ranged. At the Tables end, my Lord Hay alone; at his
right hand, the old Ambassador, and beneath him the new; at his left hand Sir
Henry Wotton then nominated Ambassador for Venice, and beneath him, Sir Henry
Rich, the rest in their places.

Within few weeks after the Ambassador Foscarini departed, who after at
Venice, (being a man free, and full of fancy, of a stirring Spirit and
undertaking) was accused to the State (of holding intelligence with the
Spaniard) by three or four conspiring Villains, for what ends, either of
malice to him, or advantage to themselves I know not, and condemned, and
strangled in Prison; but not long after being found guiltless by his Accusers
Confession, his Body was disinterred, buried with Solemnity, and his Family
(that after the course of that severe State suffered) were restored to their
suspended charges in that Republique.

The fifth of November (the day of the Powder Treason) his Majesty had invited
the Archdukes Ambassador Monsieur de Eoiscot to dine with him. He was
conducted into the privy Gallerie Chambers somewhat before dinner, and thence
to the Kings presence. His Majesty dined in the privy Chamber, where as soon as
he was set, the Ambassador having washed apart, sat down also at the Boards
end at the left hand of the King, and rising at the end of dinner, an instant
before his Majesty, he followed him back into the privy Lodgings. His
Secretary, and other Servants (two only left to attend him at the Table) had
at the same time ten or twelve dishes of meat served them in the Chapel
Chamber on the Kings side. He demanded after dinner Audience of the Prince, but
whether his Highness had such business with the Queen his Mother, as his
excuse carried, or that he thought the demand of the Ambassadors Audience
unseasonable, and too familiar with so short a warning, he had it not till the
next day, when he came purposely for it at the hour of his Assignation.

The Venetian Ambassador Foscarini being (after some five or six years time of
his residence) to return for Venice, a day or two before he had desired for
his departure his Majesty's present of Plate being brought to his House, he
addressed himself to Sir Dudley Carleton (then newly returned from his
Ordinary Embassage at Venice) with a complaint, that whereas his Secretary
Muscorus (with whom he had had a long, and harsh difference) had been presented
at his departure above half a year before with a chain of Gold of an 100 l.
value (being (he said) more by 40 l. then any of this place had before
received) he (an Ambassador) that had resided here the time of a double
Embassage was unproportionably rewarded, adding, That if he knew how to carry
it without discovery, he would at his own charge make up the ordinary value,
the present (as he affirmed) consisting of not above 600. ounces of gilt plate.
To clear the mistaking deceit, or intention of this proceeding. I went for
better satisfaction of the Ambassador and of Sir Dudly Carleton (who thought
himself in regard of his late employment bound to stir in it) to Mr. Seymer,
one of the Officers of the Jewel House under Sir Henry Carewe Mr. of it, and
was assured by him, that it was of the Kings own ordinance, and regulating; if
the value of the Present prooved less then accustomed, his Majesty having (he
said) been informed, that his liberality toward Ambassadors in the Presents
bestowed on them at their parting, exceeded that of other Princes to his
Ambassadors, so as he was resolved upon a defalcation. And whereas the French
and Spanish Ordinaries were wont to have bestowed on them each 4000. ounces of
gilt Plate, his Majesty had begun with the French Ambassador Monsieur de
Buisseaux, and had sent him but two thousand ounces, the like course (he said)
he held not long after with Monsieur de Boiscot, Ambassador for the Archduke,
whose predecessors having before had sixteen hundred ounces, he was assigned,
and received but eight hundred. So answerably, the Venetian Ambassadors having
usually received at their departures two thousand ounces, this had ordered him
(after the proportion of the other) but a thousand ounces; and for so much the
said Officer affirmed, he would justify the weight of his Present, which might
in reason have kept him from murmur, in regard he was by that proportion
honored with the gift of 200. ounces more then was the Archdukes Ambassador,
who had stood with him in competition for precedence.

The King being desirous, that the French, Venetian, and Savoyard Ambassadors
should all be invited to a Mask at Court prepared for New Years night, an
exception coming from the French, was a cause of deferring their invitation
till Twelfe night, when the Mask was to be re-acted. This French Ambassador
having demanded Audience by the mediation of the Lord Hay, and not obtained it
as he affected (having not taken the due course of access by the Chamberlain
(the Earl of Pembrooke) or being perhaps forgotten) was offended that the
Spanish Ambassador (who had demanded one before the Kings remoove to Royston,
but was referred to his convenience at his return thence) should have (as he
had) an Audience before him. With this consideration, and not without his
Majesty's sense of such formality, he was not invited till for the Twelfe
night, when he with the other two mentioned were received at eight of the
Clock, the hour assigned (no Supper being prepared for them, as at other times
to avoid the trouble incident) and were conducted to the privy Gallery by the
Lord Chamberlain, and the Lord Danvers appointed (an honor more then had been
formerly done to Ambassadors Ordinary) to accompany them, the Master of the
Ceremonies being also present.

They were all there placed at the Mask on the Kings right hand (not right
out, but Byas forward) first and next to the King the French, next him the
Venetain, and next him the Savoyard. At his Majesty's left hand sat the
Queen, and next her the Prince. The Mask being ended, they followed his
Majesty to a Banquet in the Presence, and returned by the way they entered: the
followers of the French were placed in a seat reserved for them above over the
Kings right hand; the others in one on the left. The Spanish Ambassadors Son,
Seig. Van Mall,
and the Agent of the Archduke (who invited himself) were bestowed on the
form where the Lords sit, next beneath the Barons, English, Scottish. and Irish
as the Sonns of the Ambassador of Venice, and of Savoy had been placed the
Mask night before, but were this night placed with their Countrymen in the
Gallery mentioned.

At a reading in the Middle Temple, held by Mr. Martin, were invited to Dinner,
the former three Ambassadors, Sir. Noell ^aron.
and the States Ambassador also. At the Tables end sat the Reader, on his left
hand on the Bench next the wall sat the French Ambassador, beneath him on that
side the Savoyard, then the Earl of Worcester etc. On the Readers right hand
on a form sat first the Venetian, beneath him the States Ambassador, next him
the Lord Lysle etc. It was observable that at this time the States Ambassador
(as appears) made no scruple of quitting the Precedence to that of the Duke of
Savoye, which they have fince questioned, and still stand upon.

The Ambassador of Savoy coming to the King at New Market, Note, not the Kings.
March the second, was by me fetched and conducted (in the Lord Chamberlaines
Coach with four Horses) in company of the Lord Worceston (Sir James Spence,
and Sir William Austroder) from his Lodging two miles out of Town there to the
Presence Chamber, where he attended till the Lord Chamberlain coming forth of
the Kings withdrawing Chamber brought him to his Audience there. This done, the
Ambassador requested me to moove the Prince for the honor to kiss his hand.
But it was objected, that the demand should have been more seasonably made,
before the very instant of pretending to it. Whereto the Ambassador replied,
that he had no spare time for it between that of his Arrival at Court and his
immediate repair to his Majesty, which excuse admitted, he was immediately
introduced to his Highness in his own Lodgings.

March the sixteenth, I brought the States Ambassador to an Audience at
Theobalds, after he had attended a while at the Lord Fentons Lodgings and was
called up to his Majesty in the privy Gallery.

A Messenger from Russia came to his Audience at White Hall the three and
twentieth of March, who not being qualified with the title of Ambassador, I
only (with no Lord to receive him) met him at the Court gate, and brought him
to the Council Chamber; he was after an hour and an halfes attendance there,
sent for by one of my Lord Chamberlains Gentlemen, received in the stone Table
Chamber by that Lord, and in the next admitted to the Presence of his Majesty.

The four and twentieth of March (being the Kings day of coming to the ^rowne
of England, and that year Sunday) a tilting then prepared for, was put off
till the day following. That evening a question falling between his Majesty and
some Lords, whether some, all, or no Ambassadors were to be invited? The Lord
^hamberlain asked me, if I knew whether ever the Spanish Ambassador (Sarmiento)
had been invited to that solemnity? I said, he had, and upon search of my notes
found that at the Earl of Somersets Marriage, he, the Archdukes Ambassador,
and both their Ladies had been present at a tilting. This President brought,
over-ruld his Majesty (who seemed inclined otherwise) to invite the French,
Venetian and Savoyard (never before at any tilting) and now not willingly
called to this, because of the troubles that those public Ministers usually
brought by their Puntillios at such incounters. Sir Jews Lewkner was sent the
evening before to the French, and the Venetian, and I to that of Savoy. The
next day at two of the Clock he received the two first, and I the latter at the
stayre foot of the Tilt-yard Gallery, and conducted them to the Chamber next
that of ordinary Audiences, where they all attending till his Majesty and the
Queen passed that way, they were taken along with them to the tilting. They
were seated thus, the French on the left hand of the King with his back to the
side of the Balconie window, and somewhat sidelong from the Queen, that being
held the best place after the Princes place on the Kings right hand, beneath
whom sat the Venetian, both their backs to the Balcony, and the Savoyard on
the other side beneath the French Ambassador.

St. Georges Feast being come, the French Ambassador (without notice given to
him, or from him of his coming to Court for sight of the solemnity) was
present only with Sir George ^eere a Gentleman usher of the privy Chamber, in
the Closet of the Chapel for sight of the Procession, both without Sir Jews
Lewkners, or my attendance, as his prepaire to Court, was without our
knowledge. About the middle of the Kings dinner, Mr. Secretary Winwood meeting
me, wished me to accompany him where he was all alone in the Closet, and to
bring him to see the King and the Knights at dinner. This I performed, and
conducted him to the Banqueting House, where placing himself at the left hand
of his Majesty dining, he entertained discourse with him about an hour, and
after (upon my intimation of the fitness of it) he descended to the side
Table, and saluted the Prince, and Knights of the order passing along before
them, and thence returning by the privy Galleries, took Coach in the Park to
go to his Lodgings.

His omission of not making known to the King, or his Lord Chamberlain (as
other Ambassadors had been accustomed) his desire to see the Feast, might have
brought him to some inconvenience, worse then loosing his dinner (which the
Spanish Ambassador had the year before) as this might also have had at the Lord
Chamberlains Table.

June 21.
The King invited by the Earl of Exeter to hunt and dine at Wimbleton (as was
also the French Ambassador) killed a brace of Staggs before he came to the
house. There I demanded when it would be his Majesty's pleasure to give access
to the Ambassador whom he had not yet seen there? It was assigned him for after
dinner. The Ambassador dined with the Lords and Ladies at a Table placed in the
midst of a fair Room, he seated in a Chair at the upper end, at his right
hand the Earl of Arundell, the Earl of Mountgomery, the Lady Elizabeth
Hatton, the Lady Resse etc. At his left, the Lady of Exeter, the Lady Ann.
Tuffton, the Marquess de l'Isle, Uncle to the Duke of Retz (newly come into
England, and to that Feast in company of the French Ambassador) the Lord Hay,
Then entered into favor.
Sir George Villars and others. After dinner the Ambassador going to see the
house, he attended in the Gallery the Kings coming, and had there an hours
entertainment of discourse with his Majesty.

The Spanish Ambassador being invited to hunt with his Majesty in Theobalds
Park, went thither early, Don Diego Sarmiento.
and after hunting, dined with his Majesty in the Privy Chamber. The King
seated (as always) in the midst of the Table, the Ambassador on his lest hand
at the end, his Son Don Antonio, his Gentlemen and Servants had their dinner
provided them in the Council Chamber, where Sir Patrick Murray, my self, and
some other of the Kings Servants kept them company. Don Antonio fitting on a
stool at the end of the Table, gave subject of exception to one of the Kings
Gentlemen ushers, as being, he said, irregular, and unusual, that place being
ever wont to be reserved empty for State, but this as a superstition of a
Gentleman ushers was neglected. After his Majesty's dinner, the Ambassador
(introduced by the Vice Chamberlain to the Presence of his Majesty in the Privy
Gallery) had there his Audience, Sir John Digby.
and as he was parting, the Lord Lysle Ghamberlain to the Queen asked me, and I
the Ambassador, whether he had any intention to visit her Majesty? he
answered, he thought it ill manners, and a kind of disrespect at so short a
warning to venture the trouble of her Majesty.

November the first
Toward the time of Solemnity of Prince Charles his Creation for Prince of
Wales, the King advised with some of his Lords which of the Ambassadors, French
or Spanish, were first to be invited to it. The Spaniard had by a private and
silent way offered himself to an Invitation. The French had been earnestly
pressed for by some Lords his favourous near about the King. And had he but
two days before (when he had an Audience of his Majesty) made offer of his
presence at the Feast, his Majesty had perhaps been put to some plunge how to
have excused it. But on Sunday night (the Eve of the Feast) a resolution to
invite neither was taken, and I sent to the Spanish Ambassador with this
Message, that his Majesty thankt him much for the offer he had made to honor
the Prince his Creation with his presence, that some of his Majesty's Servants
near him had earnestly solicited him to invite the French Ambassador, but his
desire having been (as it should be ever) to give content to all Ministers of
Foreign Princes, he hoped and requested that he would not take it in ill part,
if he should not be at all invited (no more then the French Ambassador should
be) to that Solemnity, assuring him that to the next (whenever) he should be
invited before any. The Ambassador returned him for answer, that he most humbly
kissed his Majesty's hands, and desired, he would in all proceed with him as
with an English man, and his Servant, that whenever it should be his pleasure
to do him the honor to invite him, it should be his happiness, and an
especial contentment to him. So again, when his Majesty should think fit he
should be absent, it should content him also, as being his Majesty's pleasure
to have it so. At my parting he was earnest to know whether there were not the
like message, and excuse sent to the French Ambassador, whereof (though had it
been so, it had been neither reason nor duty for me to discover) when I assured
him there was none, he expressed much the greater Satisfaction.

About this time Cavalvere Guaratesi Agent here for the Duke of Florence, being
assigned an Audience of his Majesty, was by mistake brought in (by whom I know
not) by the way of the Park, and privy Gallerie, and had a fire made him in
the Chamber of the Ambassadors Ordinary Audience; Sir Jews Lewkner at the same
time told me of him, and wished me to go to receive him; but neither was that
Service to be performed by me to the Person of an Agent (and therefore by me
declined) neither was any Agent to be admitted to that place by that way, but
by the way of the privy Chamber.

November the first 1617.
The Ordinary Ambassador of Venice Seignior (...) Barbarigo dying here,
Seignior (...) Contareni came hither Extraordinary, and was brought to his
first Audience at White Hall by the Lord Clifford (accompanied with half a
score Gentlemen his Majesty's Servants) in his Majesty's Co^ch and three of the
Lords Coaches. His house was at the Hospital, where he had (attending our
coming) the French Ambassa^ors Coach, the Masters of the Ceremonies who had
dined with him, and five or six of the Ambassadors own, and others providing.

After his rest in the Council Chamber, he was conducted to his Majesty's
Presence in the Presence Chamber, and there after a breife speech, Nota.
and delivery of his letters of credence which (before he had made an end of
speaking he took not from the Secretary, who held them in his hand) he returned
to his home in company of the Persons mentioned.

An Ambassador (with his assistant Commissioner Chancellor of Museovey) sent
from that Emperor to his Majesty was (the fifth of November 1617.) received at
Tower Wharfe by the Lord Compton, having been first met at Gravesend by Sir
Richard Smith and others, sent in name of the City, and brought up in their
Barges. The Kings Coach, and five or six others took them in at Tower Wharfe,
but with such disorder of Gentlemen come from Court (more then were appointed)
that too soon pressed into them, as without my care, and boldness to displace,
some must of the better sort of Musfes have walked on foot to their Lodgings.
They were wellcomd at their Landing with a volley of great Ordinance from the
Tower, and ships, and were incountered on Tower Hill by the Aldermen of the
City in their Scarlet Gowns, and other Citizens in their Velvet Coats, and
Chains of Gold, all on Horseback, and thence conducted to their House in
Bishopsgate-street, where they were Lodged and defrayed at the charge of the
Muscovey Company.

On Saturday the eight of November, the Lord Chamberlain let me know his
Majesty's pleasure for my repair to the French Ambassador with an assignation
for his demanded Audience the next day at one of the Clock, and with an excuse
of unfitness of the hour, in regard the King intended to depart that day
betimes to Theobalds. He came according to appointment, and being introduced to
his Majesty's Presence, I (with demand of Pardon) left him; and taking with me
the Kings Coach (which together with the Lord Chamberlains attended that
Service at the Court gate) went (without any Lord, or other to accompany me) to
Bishopsgate-Street to setch thence the Muscovit Ambassadors to their Audience.

All their Servants of less esteem marched all the way on foot before him (the
rest in Coaches provided by the Merchants) each of those on foot carrying
before them with ostentation to open view some parcel of the various Present
sent to his Majesty from the Emperor.

This consisted of Sable Furs, black Foxes, Ermynes, Hawks, with their Hoods
and Mantles (covering their backs and wings) all enbroydered with Gold and
Pearl; two lining Sables, a Persian dagger, and knife set with Stones, and
Pearls, two rich Cloth of Gold Persian Horse-clothes, a Persian kettle Drum
to lure Hawks with etc. Besides many other Sables, and black Fox furs sent
the King from three of the principal Nobles of the Emperors Court, and besides
some presented to his Majesty from the Ambassadors and the Chancellor. The
Queen and Prince had likewise their several presents of furrs from all these
mentioned altogether esteemed worth -- 4000 l. sterling. The Ambassadors were
received at the Court gate by the Lord Shandoys, and on the top of the staire
(at the enterie to the Guard Chamber) by the Earl of Shrewsbury, and by these
conducted along the Terras immediately (the King already expecting them with
some impatience) into the Banqueting House. There at the door they were met
by the Lord Chamberlain, and being entered the Room, the exceeding press of
the people so hindered their profound Superstitious reverences, As stooping and
knocking their for cheads against the ground.
or rather Adorations (intended to have been thrice) but by that hindrance only
once, and that close before his Majesty performed by them) as it turned much
to their discountenance, and discontent. Those that carried the Present (about
fifty) were (after the Ambassador had finished his Speech, and Interpretation
made of it) commanded to pass along on the left hand, and in sight of his
Majesty by one and one in the Privy Gallery, where his Majesty might at
leisure in his return take better view of what the press before had hindered.
The Lord Chamberlain reconducted the Ambassadors (after their dismission) to
the door of the Banqueting House, the other Lords to the Stations of the first
Reception, and I only to their Lodging.

The fourteenth of December, I was sent by the Lord Viscount ^^sle (Lord
Chamberlain to the Queen) to conduct the Wife of the French Ambassador to the
presence of her Majesty at Denmark House, where at the Gate I received her,
and brought her to a Chamber for her repose, at the right hand of the first
Court; thither (after a small time of stay) repaired for her entertainment, and
to accompany her to her Majesty) the Lady Blanch Arundell, Mistress Barbara
Sydney, Mistress Southwell of the Queens privy Chamber, and Mistress Gargrave,
one of her Majesty's maids of Honor; not long after a Gent. Usher, bringing
word that the Queen was come forth into the Privy Chamber; she passed with this
Company (her Servants going before her) toward her Majesty, and was met at
the Presence Chamber door by the Lord Chamberlain, and received by her Majesty
(without a kiss from her, though by some expected.) This done, she returned
reconducted by the Lord Chamberlain to the Gaurd Chamber by the mentioned
Ladies to the entrance of the Portico of the first Court, and by my self to her
Coach.

The 17. of December (by Order of the Lord Chamberlain to the Queen) I and two
of her Majesty's Gentlemen with her Majesty's Coach, and another attended Sir
Thomas Summerset, Son to the Earl of Worcester, for the Conduct of the Venetian
Ambassador to his first Audience of her Majesty: we found him ready at his
House at the Spittle with two Choaches of his own, and some Gent. Strangers to
accompany him thence. Bringing him first to the Council Chamber at Denmark
House, he was introduced by the Lord Chamberlain to the Queen into the Privy
Chamber, and after delivery of his Letters, and some few words of complement,
he returned home with the company mentioned.

Sir Thomas Somerset would have taken leave of him so soon as he entered the
fore-Court of his House, but I telling him it was the Custom, and would be
expected that he should leave him in his Chambers, he would not be persuaded to
pass further then he had, which the Ambassador resenting, went suddenly from
him, without so much as offering to accompany him back toward his Coach, and
not without showing a countenance of infatisfaction.

The 28. of November, Sir Thomas Spence Lord of Wormstone, who had been a
General in the Wars of the King of Sweden, let me know that an Ambassador
extraordinary from that King was arrived at Gravesend, and there attended Order
for his proceeding. My Lord Chamberlain was not then in Town, and because I
was tender in taking any course without his Lordships directions, and that also
I knew not whether the Master of the Ceremonies, then also out of Town, might
have already received Order for that Service; I wrote to him a Letter,
signifying my knowledge of that employment toward, for which, if he had already
Order, I might be discharged. He wrote answer, that he knew it two days
before, and would himself the next day go about it, and so did, fetching him
from Gravesend to his abiding in the Crouchet Friars.

The fourth of December, Master Secretary Lake sent for me, and showed me a
Letter he had then received from the Earl of Buckingham, (then with the King at
Newmarket) signifying in Answer of, and by him from my Lord Chamberlain, That
whereas the Ambassador of the King of Sweden, was desirous of an Audience
there, the King was pleased he should have it, but not to be defraied (as that
which had never yet been done to any of that Kings Ambassadors, neither would
he bring up any such Custom) but that for Coaches and other things usual, his
Majesty's pleasure was that Order should be taken to furnish him. Upon sight of
this Letter, I desired Sir Thomas Lake to send to the Master of the Ceremonies,
but he was out of Town, as was also the lord Chamberlain, whom when he
returned I acquainted with the business. At the first he was of Opinion, that
the Ambassador himself must pay for the hire of his Coaches, but I intimating,
that it was his first Audience he was to go to, at which usually his Majesty
sent his own Coach for service of Ambassadors, he assented that he should have
Coaches at the Kings charge, but not that he should have carriages, so for his
Baggages also demanded, as being an allowance without president, yet this also
at the last (besides the hire of two horses) was yielded to, and we setting
forth from London the eight of December, came the first night to Puckerage,
whence I wrote by a Servant, sent before with the Ambassadors Cooks to the
Earl of Buckingham, to signify our approach, and that if his Majesty's
pleasure were to do the Ambassador any further honor by encounter of some
Noble Person on the way, his Lordship might have time to take, and give
directions for it. But his Majesty and my Lord being (when my letters came)
already horsed to ride on hunting, all rested without further order till the
evening that we arrived at our Lodging, whence I went immediately to my Lord of
Buckingham (my Lord Chamberlain being then at London) with the accoumpt of our
coming, and to solicit the Ambassadors Audience, but this being referred for
resolution to the next morning, I acquainted Mr. Secretary Lake, and the Lord
Fenton with the Ambassadors desire of dispatch, and at eleaven of the Clock
before noone obtained the Kings pleasure for access at two After noone, when
the Lord Clifford with half a dozen Gentlemen of the privy Chamber, his
Majesty's Coach, and the Bishop of Winchesters went to receive him at his
Lodging, and with the Ambassadors followers in other four Coaches that brought
us from London, brought him to Court. He was conducted (without stay any where)
to the Presence Chamber, where his Majesty was already come forth to receive
him. Having delivered his letters of credence, he made an Oration (to the
purpose of the Kings Princely Office of mediation for Peace between the King of
Denmark, and Sweden) of almost an hour long. Which finished, and breifely
answered by his Majesty in the same Language, the Ambassador turned to the
Prince, and beginning to him another formal speech, the King left him, so did
the Ambassadors (after a while) the Prince, and returned to his Lodgings.

This was on Thursday; The Saturday following about ten of the clock at night,
came to my Lodging one of the Pages of the Bedd-Chamber to tell me from his
Majesty, that his pleasure was I should invite the Ambassador to dine with him
the next day; which I performed in the morning, and had his Majesty's Coach (no
more) attending at the Court gate, about Noone when the King having ordered,
that a Noble man should fetch him from his Lodging, it was held by others
needless, and except at his first Audience (now past) and at his last, I only
might serve the turn for his conduction, which was allowed of, and I with Sir
James Spence only, brought him through the Presence into the withdrawing
Chamber, where the King within a while entering, he took him with him to dinner
in the Presence Chamber. About the midst of the Table (as accustomed) sat the
King; at his left hand the Prince, and at the Tables end beneath, the
Ambassador) who had for his Carver none but the Princes, and for his cup one of
his own Gentlemen. Before dinner a question grew (which was diversely argued
according to opinions) whether the Prince were to fit covered at dinner or no
in Presence of his Father, seeing the Ambassador, as a Kings representant, was
not to sit uncovered? Some affirmed, they had seen the Prince sit bare headed,
when an Ambassador had his hat on: others otherwise. But the King cleared all,
when after I had given him an hint of the question, and that himself had sat
a while uncovered, he put on, and willed the like to be done by the Prince, and
the Ambassador. The Ambassadors Gentlemen had no Table appointed for them (by
the Kings express order) because (he said) the young Prince of Anhaults
Gentlemen (who had been with him the week before) had none, though the reason
might not seem to serve for one as for the other (the different qualities of
their Masters considered) but were sent two, or three of the chief of them to
the Table of the Groom of the Stool, the Lord Fenton, the rest dined after
with the Princes Waiters. When dinner was done, the King retired himself, and
left the Ambassadors there in the withdrawing Chamber to attend there his
return, which was an hour after, and then holding with him a private
conference, his Servants were after admitted into the room, with whom I
entering, his Majesty drew out my Sword and knighted with it the Ambassador.
From thence the Ambassador went (by assignation from the Prince, who would save
him (he said) his offered pains of going to his Inn and returning) straight to
his Highness Lodgings, and after a short Audience, took his leave. His
Majesty by the mediation of Sir James Spence, was pleased (besides giving him a
Patent for confirmation of his Knighthood) to add a mark of honor to his
Coat of Arms.

The next day we left New Market, dined at Cambridge, saw the best Colleges
there, lay the first night at Newport near Audley end (which rare Building of
the Earl of Suffolks the Ambassador also saw) lodgd the next night at Waltham,
and after ten days absence were again at London. There after the Ambassador
had rested a day or two, he demanded Audience of the Queen, but her Majesty
refused to give it without other reason or excuse, then that the King his
Master had not written to her, and why should she then (she said) see his
Servant. Toward the day of his parting (the King being then returned to
London) and he having already taken leave of his Majesty at New Market, it was
held by some of the Lords, that his Majesty need send him no present, his
business (they said) little concerning us here, and his Master a remote Prince
of little, or of no necessary correspondence with us. Besides, he was sent
hither with that Kings interest only, as with a demand of aid against the King
of Poland, and to solicit his Majesty's mediation for freindship between him,
and the King of Denmark, and sinally to thank his Majesty for the good, and
beneficial Office he had done the King, and State of Swethland in composing by
his Ambassador the bloody differences between them, and the Russians, with
other the like reasons too frugally (perhaps) alleged for sparing of a
Present. But I intimating to my Lord Chamberlain, that seeing he had not been
here defrayed by his Majesty further then by his Coaches, and Carriages, had
been otherwise well looked on, and graced by his Majesty had fairly carried
the business he came for, of expressing of thankefullnesse, and was the first
Ambassador that ever came from that King since his coming to the Crown of
Swethen. His Lordship moved his Majesty in it, and so prevailed, as that he
sent him by me a Diamond Ring, and his picture enclosed in it worth about --
2000 l. sent to him (I said) when I presented it, as a private Toaken without
public Ceremony to be worn by him, not for the value, but for the senders
memory. A day or two after he departed without any attendance or convoy of
Barges or Coaches to Gravesend, and there took Shi^ping. I moved my Lord
Chamberlain for the Ambassadors use of the Kings Barge to Gravesend, but his
Lordship answered me, he knew of no such custom, and could therefore give no
such directions. But his Lordship was herein mistaken, both for the extent of
his own power, and the Ambassadors right, the custom having ever been for the
Lord Chamberlain to command, and for Ambassadors (especially extraordinaries)
to use his Majesty's Barges to, and from Gravesend, as at their coming, so at
their parting.

January 5 1617.
My Lord Chamberlain acquainting me with the pleasure of his Majesty for an
Invitation (already in charge to Sir Thomas Smith chief of the Muscovey
company) to be delivered to the Ambassador and Commissioner of that Emperor
for their dining the next day with his Majesty, his Lordship added, that he had
given order to the Jewel house for a fair guilt cup to be provided, which
when his Majesty had drunk in to the Ambassador, it was upon his pledge (after
the custom of that Country) to be left to him as a present of the Kings
favor; whereupon I was bold to demand of his Lordship, how he thought it would
be apprehended, if the Chancellor his Colleague should not receive the like
honor? this moved his Lordship to send to the Merchants for their opinion,
which brought forth a resolutton, that the honor which one had, the other
would (no question) expect, and that threfore both must be alike proceeded with.

So the next day I was sent to them with the Kings Coach and the Marquess of
Buckinghams with the company of four or five of the Kings Servants (an honor
more then usual at such invitations) but the Merchants had made it their
request, and it was not stood on for satisfaction of that particular Ambassador
(whose Nation stands so much on Ceremony) with order to me to bring them to the
Court gate by eleaven of the Clock, and this without stay through the Guard
Chamber, and Presence to the privy Chamber, where his Majesty would be seated
under the State, ready to receive them. And that after their Complement should
be passed, thence I was to conduct them along the privy Gallery to the Council
Chamber for their conference with the Lords about their Negotiation (while the
King should be at Chapel) and after to conduct them along the Terras, and by
the way they had before passed to the privy Chamber to dinner. But all this
designed course, was inverted by his Majesty's impatience to stay so long for
them, when, by reason I had relied on my Lord Marquess of Buckinghams
assurance over night, that he would give order (as Master of the Horse) for the
Kings coach to be ready the next day at the appointed hour, and his Lordship
had forgotten it) we could not come to Court (being so retarded) till after
eleaven; so as the King being already gone to Chapel, I received a direction
different from the former, and discending from the Coaches at the Court gate,
then happened another incongruity; the Lord de la ware appointed to receive
them there, did not appear at his time, so as the Ambassadors (Puntillios in
their reception) made a stand under the Court gate, but at last (against their
Ceremonious stomachs) went on as far as the midst of that first Court, where
they were met by the said Lord, and after on the top of the Stone stayres by
Richard Earl of Dorset, which two Lords conducted them over the Terras into
the Council Chamber, kept them company with almost an hours patience, till his
Majesty's return from Chapel, they were at last brought through the
Stone-Table Chamber, where the Lord Chamberlain met them, to the privy
Gallery, where (about the midst of it) stood the King and received them, and
was thence followed by them into the Privy Chamber, where the two Ambassadors
seared at the Tables end of his Majesty's left hand, they had their Health
drunk to them by his Majesty after their Country manner, and the two Cups they
drunk in, presented to them; After this followed, their Emperors Health drunk
to them by his Majesty

Their servants (about fifty of them) had a Dinner provided in the Guard
Chamber, where the Guard that waited on them failed not of their accustomed
care (by soon shifting away their Dishes) to keep them from surfeiting. The
Ambassadors after Dinner were reconducted by the two Lords mentioned, to their
several Stations, and by me and some of the Kings Servants to their Lodgings.
Their failing at the time of their assignation (as before) was a cause, that
the conference they should then have had with the Council, was deferred till
the day following at nine of the Clock, which should have been otherwise either
immediately before Dinner, or in the afternoon, if they had not alleged for
excuse, that it was the Custom of their Country, that whenever an Ambassador
was to have an Audience of the Prince his Council, they were to see the Prince
his Eyes first, but in regard that their feasting with the King (where they
said) they hoped his Majesty would allow them the liberty to take their Drink,
(which they must forbear if business were immediately to follow) they desired
they might not have their Audience till the next morning, and then see his
Majesty's Eyes before they should see his Counselors.

This request (though unusual) thought reasonable and granted. I about nine in
the morning fetched them from their home, where the Chancellor took exceptions
that he had never a Gentleman sent to sit within his Coach, which was the Lord
Chamberlaines (sent ordinarily then with the Kings) as I did with his fellow
Commissioner. And bringing them by direction through the Park, and the
Tylt-yard Gallery to the Ordinary Chamber of attendance for Audiences, the King
saw them only in the next Room save one to the Privy Gallerie, and there with
three words and their low reverences left them to the Council.

Eight of which having gone before into the Council Chamber, and coming back
to meet and receive them in the Stone-Table Chamber, they were by them
introduced (the Ambassador preceding) their Business heard, they dispatched,
brought back by the Council to the Chamber where the King had seen them, and
they (as they desired) his Majesty's Eyes, and there left to my reconduction
(which they had) to their Lodgings.

A Mask prepared for Twelftyde (wherein the Prince was to be a principal
Actor) and that his first Exercise in that kind) was a subject for the King to
invite to it the Spanish Ambassador, and to observe the promise his Majestiy
had made him the year before to that purpose, the rather because a Marriage
between the Prince and the Infanta was then in Treaty. The French Ambassador in
the mean time being left with little or no regard of satisfaction given, or
sought to be given him, either by private excuse, or otherwise. At which
neglect (as he understood it) he took such shadow and offense, as repairing to
Court, and demanding (as unseasonably perhaps as impatiently) Access to his
Majesty, was entertained by one or two Lords of the Bedchamber (whom he that
instant incountered) with as satisfactory reasons as they could frame for
diversion, but with little effect, though Sir Thomas Edmons (Comptroller of his
Majesty's House, who had been in France Ambassador) were (together with the
Master of the Ceremonies, sent to him immediately after to the same purpose of
modification; so as standing first upon his Masters right of Priority before
any other Kings (particularly before that of Spain) and affirming that he
could prove by many Presidents of our own, that if the Spanish Ambassador were
ever heretofore present at any such entertainment, or Solemnity at Court, it
was by the French Ambassadors permission, when either he would not be there, or
that he was sent to by his Majesty with entreaty to excuse his absence; He at
last threatened to make protestation against the wrong done his Master in his
Ambassadors person. But this threatening little it seems regarded by his
Majesty (who was resolved upon his course for entertainment of the Spanish)
was a cause of the French Ambassadors sending his Secretary Post into France
with the Account of the Kings and his own proceeding, and of the Letters that
came shortly after with his Revocation (before his three years Residence
(wanting but a quarter) were expired; for which demanding an Audience the 16 of
March, and having it granted (or the next day he after two hours attendance,
had it of his Majesty in the Privy Gallery, and within few days after
departed the Kingdom. The ill understanding between his Majesty and this
Ambassador was an occasion that Master Secretary Lake sent for me, and
acquainted me with the trouble his Majesty had put himself to, to make
apparent the little reason the French Ambassador had to except so against his
proceeding, which to justify, his pleasure was (he said) that Sir Jews
Lewkner Master of the Ceremonies, and Sir William Button, and I, Assistants
should search our Notes, and presidents to the purpose of the Question.
Whereabout I presently employed my self, and sent my Collection (answerable to
the time of my Service, and of my experience) to Sir Thomas Lake then with the
King at Newmarket, but all to little purpose for his Majesty's satisfaction
beyond that he was resolved on for the Spanish Ambassador.

In March, 1617. The Earl of Montgomery Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber,
was pleased to entreat my Service and company with him to the Venetian
Ambassador Seig. Contereni, his Lordship being sent to him from the King with a
Message in the behalf of Captain Manwaring, which I delivered by
interpretation from his Lordships mouth to this purpose.

His Majesty understanding what present use the State of Venice had of men for
their Service, and desirous to show his affection toward them, in giving them
his leave to raise certain companies here for their War, had taken further
notice, that since they were to have Land-men to be commanded by Sir Henry
Peyton, and Ships from hence for their Convoy to Venice; he thought fit to
Recommend for command, and conduct of those Ships, Captain Manwaring, a
Gentleman that he had made special choice of, and held most fit for that
Employment; and though the Ambassadormight have heard, perhaps, that heretofore
the said Captain Manwaring had followed the not approved course of a Pirate, it
was in his unsettled years, and more desperate fortune, but that now his
Majesty knew him to be so reclaimed, as if he should himself have present use
of such a Commander, he would employ him as soon as any other of his Subjects,
and would take it for an Argument of that Commonweals respects to him, if
they would upon his recommendation entertain him. For doing which, they should
find him more forward hereafter to further, and assist them in any the like
occasion, when he should see that at his request they had made use of so fit a
Subject for their Service.

To this the Ambassador made answer, that the Republique was much obliged to
his Majesty for his so gracious notice, and furtherance of their Assigns, and
in particular for recommending one to their Service, whom he himself, and the
World knew to be so worthy, and whom he had already recommended to that State
for employment, but had as yet received no answer, which daily expecting, he
must beg pardon if he did yet attend it without giving his resolution. My Lord
replied, that the King had been informd, that the Ambassador had full
Commission, and power to employ whom he should be pleased, and that with that
liberty he might (he thought) admit of the Captain. The Ambassador disclaimed,
that he had any such liberty, and said, that on the contrary he had order from
the State to send the Ships away without any other Commander then such as were
to go along with them to govern them, in regard they had a Commission with
them not to offend or assail any they should encounter at Sea, but if they
should be assailed, then to defend themselves as they might with the power that
was to go along with them.

In conclusion, his Lordship fell to demand (that since Captain Manwaring could
not have the command that his Majesty thought to prefer him to) whether the
Ambassador would not let him assure the King (as from the Ambassador himself)
and in name of the Republique, that if there should be hereafter any other
employment, suiting with the condition of Captain Manwaring, that he should
have the offer of it before any man? the Ambassador assured his Lordship he
might rest upon that, both for the respect, that the Republique (he knew)
carried to his Majesty's Recommendation, and for the merit also of the
Gentleman then Recommended, whom he had already (as he had said) by his Letters
presented to the State for his valor, and forwardness to do them service.

The Russian Ambassador having received an Assignation the two and twentieth of
March, for the next days repair to an Audience of the Council; a request was
made by some of the Muscovy Merchants (as such that well understood their
Puntillious humoursthat way) that the Ambassadors might have (pretending it to
be the custom of their Country, and an honor due to their Emperor) a sight
of his Majesty before their conference with his Council; which yielded to, I
had order to fetch them with one of the Kings Coaches, and the Lord
Chamberlains (which was for their more honor every Audience sent to them in
Company of the Kings under title of his Majesty's Coach) taking with me one
Gentleman of his Majesty's Servants to accompany me, for avoidance of the like
exceptions as had been formerly taken by the Chancellor. I brought them to the
Court at two of the clock, and descended at the great gate there, before I
entered, I desired them (as I had in charge) not to take it in ill part, if
they found there never a Noble man to receive them, since it was (I said) a
Ceremony not performed toward an Ambassador of any Prince whatsoever, except
only at his first, and last Audience.

This could not hold them from murmuring, and expressing with discontented
Countenances their ill Satisfactions; yet onward they went following my
guidance (as my Lord Chamberlain had given me directions) up the Stone Steps,
through the Guard Chamber and Presence to the privy Chamber, where after some
little time of stay (near the State, but not sitting, nor having any Stools
for it offered them) the Lord Chamberlain came forth and brought them into the
privy Gallery, where the King seated about a third part distant from the door
there, toward the Council Chamber with his chair back to the wall on the
left hand, his Majesty rose up to them; at which they made their profound
reverences, repeated in breife the substance of their errand, had a gracious
answer, and were dismissed to rest themselves in the Stone-Table Chamber, till
the Council should be assembled for them, who in a short time after passing by
them, and only saluting them, one of the Clerks of the Council called to me
to bring them in, when coming forwards they made a sudden stand, because
they saw none of the Lords to return forth to me and introduce them, till at
length that respect also was by three or four of the principal Lords given
them, and they being entered the Chamber, and seated in two chayres placed at
the upper end of the Table, propounded, and dispatched so much of their
business as the ripeness of it would give leave, and departed by the way of
the Audience Chamber through the Privy Garden, and the Cloister or Stone Walk
there to their Coach, and were thence by me and the other Gentleman conducted
to their Lodging.

The next day being the four and twentieth of March, and the day of his
Majesty's coming to the Crown, I was sent (with a Gentleman to accompany and
two Coaches as before) to the same Ambassadors to conduct them to a Tylting
(whither the Merchants had made way for an Invitation) by the way of the Park,
to the end of the Tylt-yard Gallery next it, where in the first Window next
that entrance were placed for them two Stools, and a Carpet to lean on, the
Travers drawn between them and the King, whom after the Tylting they were
admitted to see and salute; their Followers of all conditions (excepting their
Interpreter for their use) were bestowed on a Scaffold ordained only for them
next the entrance into the Tylt-yard on the Kings left hand, where three or
four of the better sort of them had a leaning Carpet laid before them, and
Seats to sit on, the rest had a Seat or two, and so took as they could their
best commodities. At the time of these Ambassadors Iast appearance in the
Council Chamber, they had an assignation to be there again the Wednesday
sollowing, but other business then intertaining the Lords beyond expectation,
it was deferred for a sevennight longer, when I fetched, and brought them
(attended as before) through the Park and Galleries to the Chamber next that of
ordinary Audiences, where they had not, nor affected a sight of his Majesty
before their Audience of the Council (as they had done before.) Thence I go to
acquaint the Lords of their being present there, and retuning with Answer of
their Lordships readiness to receive them; They would not be persuaded to move
thence till some of the Lords should (as at other times) come forth to
entroduce them which at last they did, and brought them (giving them the hand
of entrance into the Council Chamber) whence (after they had obtained a
promise of a fair end to their Negotiation,) the Lords reaccompanied them to
the Chamber whete they first received them, and there left them to my
conduction.

The French Ambassadot Monsieur de Mareth (having been detained here by the
indisposition of his wife, or rather for foam other cause tending to his more
fair loose at his departing three weeks after he had taken leave of his
Majesty) demanded, and had another Audience, whereof he had a quick dispatch,
with no ill countenance from his Majesty, or show of insatisfaction from
himself.

The Russian Ambassadors having received Letters from their Emperor hasting
their return, demanded Audience of his Majesty, and had it the 13. of April,
attended to it by me (as before:) They expected, and desired at the same time
(as at other) when it was always refused or excused) to have a Nobleman to
receive them at their coming to Court; but it was before hand incharged to me
to put them from that hope, in regard no other Princes Ambassadorswhatsoever
were allowed that honor at private Audiences, but only at the first, and last
public, and sometimes when they were invited to dine with his Majesty as they
were.

The 24. of April following, when they should have received an Assignation for
their last Audience, and fiuall dismission, but the Signification of it having
been incharged to no one particular of the Merchants, nor (as it out to have
been) to the Master, or Assistant of the Ceremonies, it was forgotten or
neglected till the very morning of the day assigned for it, whereof (when I,
and one Gentleman with me, with only two Coaches, as formerly, came to fetch
them)they complained, as of a disrespect, being their last Audience, yet they
set forth at half an hour past two, that they might be at the Court by three,
their hour appointed precisely, and by me observed as punctually, that neither
they might stay (against which they ever murmured) for the King, nor the King
(which had been most unfit) for them. At the Court Gate they were received by
the Lord Gerrard, in the middle of the Court by the Lord Crumwell (an honor
done them more, then (for ought I ever heard) to any other Ambassador, and
yielded to upon their own and the Merchants importunity) and on the top of the
Stone-Stairs by the Earl of Ormond, who with the two other Lords conducting
them through the Guard-Chamber (a different way from what had been before
Ordered for their passage over the Terras to the Banqueting House, but suddenly
changed, with regard to the then appearance of Courtiers, which in that larger
Room would have lessened the Majesty of that presence.) They were received at
the Presence Chamber door by the Lord Chamberlain, and brought by him to his
Majesty there standing under the State, who when he had received their thanks,
and was passing to his last Complement of farewell, they fell earnestly to
press his Majesty that his Ambassador (then nominate for Muscovy) might be sent
along in company with them, and with the money granted to be lent them (which
was an hundred thousand Marks.) But the King excusing both, saying, he was not
yet fully resolved upon the choice of the person, for that charge, who must
have time (he said) to put himself to equipage. To this answer, they objected
their Commission and Instruction, which they affirmed to have from their
Emperor to this purpose; That in case they should obtain the sending back with
them of an Ambassador, they should not come away without him; so as in
conclusion, the King upon their much, and even unmannerly importunity, denied
them not that request also, whereof they knew so well how to serve themselves;
as going thence immediately to the Council, (demanding permission for it but at
that very instant) they would not let go the hold they had gotten of the Kings
assent, till they were dismissed with the like from their Lordships, of sending
the Ambassador in their company, though this could not succeed without great
charge and trouble to the Merchants in so long a stay, as must be necessary for
the preparatives of the (till then but privately nominated) Ambassador Sir
Dudley Diggs: This concluded, they left the Lords, were reconducted by the
three Lords before mentioned to the place of their first reception, and by me
to their lodging.

When the next month began, his Majesty's trouble, the Lords, and the
Merchants ended with the dispatch, and departure of these two Ceremonious
Ambassadors, who (content neither with the Kings present then sent them, and by
me delivered, having been provided at the Merchants charg (though presented in
his Majesty's name, and worth above six hundred pounds between them) nor with
the Merchants worth well near as much) murmured that they could have with them
but a third part of 100000 Marks yielded to be lent their Emperor, and for
which notwithstanding they knew not how to give one Marks worth of sufficient
Security, etc. They went within few days after (accompanied with Sir Dudley
Digs his Majesty's Ambassador to the Emperor of Russia) down to Gravesend,
and thence Northward in such Ships as the Merchants of the Muscovy company had
provided for their return, and for the continuance of the re-established
Traffic of those parts.

In September 1618. The Lords of the Council had committed to a Justice of
Peace his House (in nature of close Prisoner) one Monsieur de la Chenay (a
French Gentleman, late one of the followers of Monsieur de Mareth, and now a
domestique of Monsieur de Clear left Agent here after the departure of the
Ambassador) for having confessed upon examination before the Lords, that he had
an hand (by the said Agents employment) in an escape that Sir Walter Rawleigh
would have made into France for some disservice to his Majesty. The Agent being
hereupon sent for, and appearing before the Lords assembled in the Council
Chamber, refused to answer unto Interrogations till he should be proceeded with
(as others) qualified as he was) had been, alleging further, that Mr. Bercher
(at the same time Agent for his Majesty in France) had at an Audience before
the Council of State there pretended, and claimed a right and honor done to
his Representative quality. viz. Not to propound his business, till they the
Lords Councillors should stand up as he did, and be uncovered as he was in
that place Ambassador (he said) being allowed to sit and be covered, as they
the Counselors also were at the time of their Audiences. This le Clear
affirmed had been yielded to by the King his Masters Counselors, and that he
had reason to challeng the like from their Lordships. The Lords Answer was that
several Countries had several forms, and that the manner of proceeding in
France, was no rule for ours in England, where custom had made it otherwise.
But this answer would not serve to draw any from le Clear for satisfaction of
their demands, till at length the Lords (neither to yield to him, nor to force
his resolution) thought good to retire themselves, and him with them into
another Chamber, and there, as by way of private discourse (where the place
being no Council Chamber, no odds of observance were given, or taken) they
examined him upon his followers la Chenays confessions and actions; he twice
with great oaths denied all knowledge of them, till at length la Chenay
(brought further to confront him) acknowledging and confessing, (as he had done
to the Lords before) the truth of his employment for Sir Walter Rawleighs
escape) le Clear could no further outface it, but with shame confessed it.
Whereof as soon as his Majesty was informed, he was in his Majesty's name
commanded by the Lords to surcease from all further negotiation or exercise of
his charge, and not to come in presence of his Majesty till a messenger sent
instantly post to France should return with signification of that Kings
pleasure for the avowing, or dissavowing of his Ministers actions. About a
month after a letter came in answer with particular charge (as the Agent
pretended) that he was to deliver it himself to the Kings own hand. To which
purpose, posting to Royston (where his Majesty then was) and making offer
himself to present his Letter, he could not be admitted, but being referred
for delivery of it, to one of the Lords that then attended his Majesty, he
refused it and said, he would personally (as he had command) or not at all
perform that Service. So as returning to London, and thence in few days to
France with the same Letters undelivered, and the account of his proceeding,
the Revocation of his Majesty's Agent followed etc.

A Chiaus, or messenger from Turkey, being arrived at Gravesend, was received
there October the thirteenth, by the Lord Rich, accompanied with his Brother
Sir Henry Rich, the Master of the Ceremonies, my self, and half a score other
Gentlemen, that Lord entertained nobly at his own charge all the company,
went the next morning from his own Inn to the Chiauses, and thence conducting
him to the Kings Barge, and two others (come down for his Service) and Landing
him at Tower Wharfe, we there entered the Lords Coach, and other of his friends,
and of the City (the Kings Coach not then serving) and brought him to his
Lodging defrayed (as was also his diet, during his stay here) by the Turkey
Merchants. He had within few days after his public Audience of his Majesty
in the Banqueting House, purposely hung for him with rich hangings, where his
Majesty touched one of his followers, said to be his Son, for cure of the Kings
Evil, useing at it the accustomed Ceremony of Signing the place infected with
the cross, but no prayers before or after.

An Ambassador from Venice, Seignior (...) Donati being come to reside here in
place of Seignior (...) Contareni (recalled by the Republique) was brought to
his first Audience the first of November by the Lord Clifford the Master of the
Ceremonies, seven or eight other nominated Gentlemen, and my self as
voluntary, the Kings Coach, the Lord Marquess of Buckinghams, and three other
serving, he was taken into them at the house of his predecessor mentioned, and
their places taken up by themselves in the Coach (both on one side, the
Ancienter having the right hand next the Horses) and the other side left to the
Lord Clifford, and the Master of the Ceremonies. There came with us fifteen or
sixteen Coaches to the Court. The Ambassadors guided over the Terras to the
Council Chamber, and after half an hours repose there, back to the Guard
Chamber, were at the Presence door received, and introduced by the Lord
Chamberlain for their Audience, etc. This Ambassador Donati was not long after
revoked by his Prince for misdemeanors in his charge whilst he was Ambassador
in Savoy, and Seignior Geronime Landi sent to reside here in his stead.

A Mask of certain Lords and others, being prepared for Twelfe night, and to
be represented in the Hall at White Hall (the Banqueting House having been
burnt a little before) gave occasion to his Majesty (who had been often
troubled with the Puntillious differences of Ambassadors about invitations,
precedencies, and the like) to take advantage of this more quiet time then
accustomed, while no French nor Spanish Ministers were here, and to begin a new
course (at least pretended, if not intended) no more to admit of Ambassadors to
sit with his Majesty under the State; and to this purpose gave order for a Box,
or seat to be made apart (with Stools, Cushions, and leaning Carpets to be
bestowed in it) on his Majesty's right, but somewhat obliquely forward, and
therein were placed (without exceptions from any of them) the new come Venetian
Ambassador Donati, and four Commmissioners sent hither from the States of the
united Provinces.

The Prince Palatines Ambassador (the Baron of Donowe, at that time likewise
employed hither) was seated as a domestique (but not without consideration of
avoiding question) uppermost above all the Lords on the form usually placed
for them.

1619
The Count de Tillieurs sent to reside here Ambassador Ordinary from the French
King in succession of Monsieur de Maretz (though after almost an year, and an
halfes intermission of that charge) came toward his first Audience of his
Majesty then at Windsor, the fifteenth of September, and was met at Stains by
the Earl of Kelley Groom of the Stool to his Majesty, sent thither to
receive, and conduct him (the Lord North having been the Evening before
appointed by the Lord Chamberlain for that service, but countermanded the next
morning upon maturer consideration of the fitness to send to meet him a
person of a more eminent place, and title, then a Baron) with the Lord Kelley
went in his Majesty's Coach my self, and five Gentlemen of the privy Chamber;
he had Audience given him in the Presence or privy Chamber (one there serving
both turns) where having in a graceful fashion made his approach with three
reverences, and passed a breife Complement, called to his Secretary for his
Letters of credence, and presented them. Which whilst the King was reading, he
turned toward the Prince (then present) and passed with him a short
Complement, which some judicious standers by censured for unseasonable, having
not yet finished the purpose he had in hand with the King, affirming his
carriage had been better only to have bowed to the Prince after he had
presented his first respects to his Majesty and not to have spoaken to the
Prince till he had fully ended what he had to say to the King. After his
Majesty had invited him to cover, he obeyed, but uncovered immediately holding
his hat all the time after (except one little instant) in his hand, that night
he returned to Stains with the Lord Kellies conduct, who went immediately back
to Windsor, and the Ambassador the next morning to London.

The day of the French Ambassadors Audience at Windsor, came thither one of the
young Dukes of Halstein, cozen Germane to the deceased Queen Ann, who sending
for me to his Lodging, desired my assistance for his private access to the
King. (He having been here at another time before with his Majesty) and that he
might have the honor to hunt with him the next morning without further noise
or trouble of Ceremony. For this I repaired to the Lord Chamberlain, and
craving his advice and directions, had for answer that in regard the Duke came
privately, and desired but a private access, he wished me to address my self
to one of the Gentlemen of the Bedd-Chamber, and particularly to the Marquess
of Buckingham, that the King might be acquainted with his desires. So speaking
that night late both with his Lordship, and his Majesty, I had for answer, that
the next morning at seven of the Clock, his Majesty would be glad of his sight,
and of his Company in hunting.

At the hour assigned, he and I with him entering the Kings withdrawing Room,
while his Majesty was booting himself, he there received his welcome, and
waiting on his Majesty to his Coach, he was admitted to sit by him. After
taking Horse with his Majesty in the Park, he road, and I with him the death
of a leash of Bucks, returning after in Coach with his Majesty to Windsore, he
went the next day to London. A seavennight after his Excellency had my company
to his Majesty at Wansted, and that night back to London.

The Count Guido, Son to the Marquess de Villa, or as some others stilled him
de Sillana (who had been here Extraordinary about six years before) was sent
hither Extraordinary from the Duke of Savoy to condole the death of Queen Ann,
dead half a year before, when our Blacks had been already laid by, by which
those that he, and his followers wore, were made the more unsuitable.

He had his Audience in the Presence at White Hall (More solito) brought to it
by the Earl.

And the Sunday following was accompanied to his second and last Audience, and
to dine with his Majesty at Theobalds. He sat with the King in the privy
Chamber there at the lower end of the Table, the Ordinary Ambassador Gabellione
sitting at the side opposite to the King near the end. About the midst of
dinner his Majesty drank the Dukes health bare headed, and standing till they
both had pledged it. After this the Count Guido drank the Kings health to his
Colleague (having first demanded leave for it of his Majesty.) Three or four men
of Tille, as Count Tispoti, and (...) (which to do him honor had accompanied
him hither) dined in the Council Chamber accompanied by the Duke of Lenox, the
Earl of Leicester, Sir Thomas Edmonds Treasurer of his Majesty's Household,
and other Gentlemen

The Baron of Denow eimployed to his Majesty from the Prince Palatine, soon
after the Crown and title of King of Bohemia was conferred on him by the
Election of those States, had had after his Arrival here two or three private
Audiences without public notice or style of King given him by his Majesty. He
was afterward appointed to follow the King to Newmarket, whither he came the
27. of January, with no other company or attendance but Master Williams (Agent
here for the affairs of that King, or rather for the Queen, our Kings only
Sister, and his own few followers. (Sir Jews then remaining at London, and
expecting the Arrival of a Spanish Ambassador Don Diego Sarmiento, new made
Conde de Gondemar) some occasions at the same time having drawn me to
Newmarket) I received there the Lord Chamberlaines Command to do the Ambassador
the service of my place; so I waited on him to his first Audience there the
thirtieth of January, when my Lord Marquess of Buckingham, the Earl of
Montgomery, the Lords Viscounts of Purbeck and Doncaster, the Lord Gray, and
diverse others of his Majesty's better sort of Servants, did him the honor on
foot to come to his Inn, (his Majesty's Coach walking by) and accompany him
thence on foot to the Court, where his Majesty receiving him in the
withdrawing Chamber, rook him instantly with him into his Inner Lodgings,
whence (after an hour, and an halfes conference) he was reconducted by all the
Lords mentioned on foot as before to his Lodging. From that time he had his
accesses to Court, and to his Majesty's Presence as a Domestique without
Ceremony, and this by the Kings own Signification of his Pleasure to me to that
purpose. From Newmerket he went along with his Majesty to Royston, Theobalds,
London, and with my continual Attendance.

Toward the end of February Monfieur Reuinch Hauson, Ambassador from the
Princes of the Union of Germany, came to the King at Theobalds, conducted
thither by Sir Jews Lewkner only at his own particular request (for avoidance
of noise, and perhaps of note of his small Train) he was introduced to his
Audience by a private way over the Leads into the Prevy Gallery, where the King
with two or three of his Council (and exclusion of others) gave him Audience.

The 21. of March I had Command with his Majesty's Coach to conduct him from
his Longing in the Strand to White Hall, by the way of the Park and Galleries
to the Ordinary Chamber of Ambassadors Attendance, and thence after some two
hours presence of stay there, to the presence of his Majesty in the private
Gallery.

The Conde de Gondemar sent Extraordinary Ambassasador from the King of Spain,
arriving at Dover about the beginning of March, was met there with Coaches by
the Masters of the Ceremonies, at Gravesend by the Earl of Dorset, and by him,
with many of the Kings Servants, and near thirty Coaches brought from his
Landing out of the Kings Barge etc. at Tower Wharfe to the Bishop of Elyes
House in Holborne, taken up for him (with an Example not unmurmured at.)

The 12. of March, He had his first public Audience, conducted to it by the
Earl of Arrundell at White Hall, where, after some small time of repose in the
Council Chamber, passing over the then ruinous wooden Terras, at the instant
that he was entering the first great door next that of the Guard Chamber, the
weight of the over thronging multitude next about him, pressing down part of
the Plancks and Joyces under him, that it suddenly fell, and with all the
Earl of Arrundell, the Lord Gray, and others, with great danger, and some hurt
(particularly to one youth, who under the ruins had his arm and shoulder
broken) the Ambassador having received but half a fall of the nether parts of
his Body only, his Servants next him staying and holding him by the upper, as
he was at the instant of entering under the door. The danger, and fear of it
past, he was received at the Presence door by the Lord Chamberlain, and
brought to the Presence of his Majesty without discomposition of countenance or
otherwise for his fall, rather merrily excusing it, as an effect of his have
and longing to see his Majesty.

The Kings day ( March the four and twentieth) returning toward the Solemnity
usual at it of running at the Tylt etc. his Majesty was pleased to send an
Invitation to the Spanish Ambassador extraordinary Count of Gondemar, and also
to the French Ambassador Ordinary the Count de ^lleurs to be there; and because
of their accustomed difference about precedence, there was care had as much as
might be, to please them both to to their satisfactions, especially his Majesty
being resolved (for his reasons before alleged of the trouble they brought
with them in that point) to admit neither of them to sit under the Seat next
him. Hereupon it was concluded on his Majesty's part (and the places offered to
both their considerations) that they should be both seated in several places
on his right hand thus. The French Ambassador in the first Window of the Duke
of Lenox his Lodging over the great Gate next without the Tilt-yard Eastward,
and the Spanish in a standing dressed up of purpose over the Porters Lodge
within the Tilt-yard, Upon view
both in equal distance from his Majesty. The Spaniard professed to be pleased
with his allotment, but the French not so, alleging (though he had at the
first seemed content with the distribution) that the Spaniards assigned place
was in public, and in the King eye, his not, but in a private corner out of
the view of the King, and almost of the people, though in situation higher
then the other, and in the same body of the Kings House; but that which he most
urged, and stood upon was, that suppose there should be in their rancking there
no difference, and that they should be both placed, and entertained on equal
terms, yet even that was a Subject for a maine exception in regard that the
French King his Master would not (he said) treat with the Spaniard as
questioning only parity, nec vult Gaesarve priorem Pompeiusve parem.
but as making no question of his right of Priority, which he would challenge,
and take as his due wheresoever.

Besides (he said) because the Spaniard might seem to have the better place,
as being most in the Kings and peoples sight, and that place allotted him more
retired, and out of view, though within the Body of the Kings own House, he
desired that (if the place were so equal, as some Spanishly inclined
pretended) he might have the first choice, and it should content him. In fine
being left herein unsatisfied, he absolutely refused to come at all, or to send
his Lady, though her place were already assigned her in a Compartment provided,
and kept for her near his Majesty within the Gallery, so as in conclusion, the
Spaniard remained Master of the Field, where no Enemy appeared, taking his
place appointed over the Porters Lodge as mentioned.

In the mean time other Questions grew between other Ambassadors then also
invited; as between the King of Bohemias Ambassador, the Ambassador of Venice
Signior Landi, the Duke of Savoys Ambassador Seignior Gabellione, and the
States Ambassador Sir Noell Caron, they all invited, made promise to be there,
and to content themselves with the places appointed them at the lower end of
the Tilt-yard in the House of the Lady Walsingham; but the Venetian
understanding the day before that the King of Bohemias Ambassador was to
accompany the Ambassador of the Princes of the Union in his way homewards as
far as Gravesend, and supposing he could not possible return in time to be
present at the Titling, he sent Sir Jews Lewkner to my Lord Chamberlain to
intimate; Crowned Heads or Kings Ambassadors.
That whereas the Ambassador of Venice had been ever accustomed to be treated
al pare with the Ambassadors of Test Coronate, if he should be placed apart
with only the Duke of Savoys and States Ambassadors at one end of the
Tiltyard, and the Spanish Ambassador alone at the other, Axiom.
it would be a diminution of his quality (the first place of an inferior
degree, being ever held (he said) worse then the last of a Superior) and that
rancking being not regal (which was that he pretended) but ducall, as he must
esteem it, if he might not have the King of Bohemias Ambassador for companion.
Upon this formality of the Venetian, the Master of the Ceremonies repairing to
the Bohemian Ambassador, and receiving his assurance with promise, that he
would return in time from Gravesend, and be there in person, the Venetian and
Savoyard Gabellione concluded likewise with promise to each other to be there,
and with them the States Ambassador; but this last the Evening before obtruded
a new exception, and sent word to my Lord Chamberlain, that he had an express
command from his Masters the States (which it seems he had not so well thought
of or had forgotten till then) not to quit the Precedence to any but to Kings
Ambassadors and to the Venetians, so as if the Sovoy Ambassador should be
there, he must be absent, and so he was; but on the day of Tilting, the
Ambassador of Bohemia, and the Venetian both appearing, the Savoyard came not,
though he had that very morning by his promise assured his Presence together
with the other two. Whereupon the Venetian having already taken his place at the
lower end of the Tilt-yard (as had also the Bohemian) grew to be much
unsatisfied and suspicious, This taking the hand of the Venetian who gave it
him without question.
that the Savoyard might have cuningly insinuated himself into some place
nearer the King, either with the French Ambassador (who perhaps (he said) might
repent himself of the refusal he had made, and accept of the place first
appointed, or with the Spanish) though that, (in regard of their then not best
Correspondence) were much unlikely. In either of which Cases, the Ambassador of
Savoy should, to his scorn, get the Precedence, being so scated with the
preceding Ambassadors, against which (if it were so) he must (he said) protest
by his immediate departure, but the Savoyard (as I have said) not coming, nor
intending it, (as after appeared) laid the fault of his default upon an instant
opportunity (even then (he said) offered to him by the French Ambassador) of
writing by an express of his that day to be dispatched, though the true cause
of his absence were imagined to be, that he was not yet resolved (as having no
order for it) to quit the Precedence to the Bohemian as to a Kings Ambassador,
in regard as he was Ambassador to the Prince Palatine he had disputed it; so as
he drove forth the day in fear and doubt, till I that night resolved him (as I
promised him I would) by a Letter from my Lord Chamberlains direction, that he
had that day received no wrong at all by any cuning or indirect carriage of the
Savoy Ambassador for any advantage taken by his placing.

The Axiom before delivered by the Venetian Ambassador (that the first place
of an inferior degree, Nota.
is worse then the last of a superior) was judged upon discourse I had with
some of understanding in those Affairs) to be of value in a distinct Company,
but might be otherwise in a Joint Assembly; as at the conclusion of the Peace
at Vervins, where the French and Spanish meeting, and contending for
precedence, viz. who should sit at the right hand of the Popes Legate, an
Expedient was found of sending into France for the Popes Nuntio residing there,
who scated at the right hand of the said Legate (the Legate himself sitting at
the Tables end) the French Ambassador being offered the choice of the next
place, he took that at the Legates left hand, leaving the second at the right
hand to the Spanish, who taking it, persuaded himself to have the better of
it; sed de hoc quaere.

December 1620.
The French King coming so near England as Callays, and being newly returned
thence toward Paris, sent hither for his Ambassador Extraordinary the Marquess
de Cadenet one of the Mareschalls of France, and brother to that Kings
Favorite, the Duke de Luines. He with an Attendance of between fifty and sixty
persons of title and mark, and of above three hundred others, had passed the
seas to Dover, before any order for his Extraordinary reception was fully
resolved on at London, so as the Master of the Ceremonies being sent thither
scarcely in time to receive him; he passed his time there four or five days
for the better ordering of his occasions. After passing on toward London, the
Earl of Arrundell, accompanied with the Lord of Hunsdon, and diverse Gentlemen
of his Majesty's Privy Chamber in about twenty Barges went from London the 28.
of December, and that night visited him in his Majesty's name at his Lodging in
Gravesend, where the Ambassador not meeting his Lordship till he came to the
Staire Head of his Chamber door, and at his parting, accompanning him no
further (no more then did the ordinary Ambassador the Count de Tillieurs who
had been frownd upon by the Marquess for not meeting him sooner then at
Gravesend. The Earl of Arrundell was much displeased with it, as with a
neglect of his quality; so as the next day (in some part to right himself) he
desired the Master of the Ceremonies to go to the Ambassador, and tell him,
that in regard his Train was great, and his Lodging little, he would not be
troublesome to him there, but would meet him in the Street, and thence
accompany him to his imbarking; So he did, and on the way incountered another
cause of exception, in that the Ordinary Ambassador did not so much as offer
him the hand (my Lord pretending a kind of right to it, The most of Opinions
are, That the Ambassador Ordinary should have of the place he took.
at the least to have it offered him in the presence of the Extraordinary, but
of this Quaere.) Arriveing at Denmark House (ordained for the Ambassadors
Aboade) the Earl landing with him at the Garden Stairs, and accompanying him
not further then to the foot of the first Staire ascending to the Privy
Lodgings, took his leave, and (saying, there were Gentlemen there that should
show him his Lodging) left him. This bred much discourse, and was (with the
other reserved proceeding of both the Ambassadors at Gravesend) soon conveied
to the knowledge of his Majesty who (sensible more of the cause given by the
Ambassadors then of the measure returned by the Earl of Arrundell) stormed
much at it, till (Sir Thomas Edmonds Comptrouller of the Kings House, being
sent the same night from his Majesty with some formalization to that purpose)
The Ambassador was said the next day to have made his excuse to my Lord of
Arrundell, that his indisposition in his Journey, and at the time when he came
to receive him, was a cause that he met him no sooner, nor accompanied him no
further; whereupon the difference was for that time accommodated. After one
days rest, the King sent to the Ambassador for conduction to his already
assigned Audience; the Lord Marquess of Buckingham, accompanied with the Earls
of Dorset and Warwick, four or five Barons, and about twenty Gentlemen in the
Kings, and sixty other Coaches (so many appointed, but the number was soon
increased to above one hundred) he passed with his Train from Denmark House
to Westminster, the King there meeting him by Barge from White Hall, and
staying his Entrance in the higher House of Parliament, where he gave him (and
with him the Ordinary Ambassador) a gracious Audience. Besides the higher House
of Parliament, the Court of Requests, and the Painted Chamber (the way of his
passage) were all adorned with rich hangings of Tapistry. At the end of his
Audience, intimating to the King, that the haste of his return would make him
bold to press his Majesty for another speedy Access: His Majesty told him, he
should (if he pleased) have it that Evening, which was performed after his
return to his Lodging by a private repair to Court in Barge, accompanied only
with my Lord of Buckingham, when he had the Kings Ear two hours together.

On Wednesday following being the third of January he was invited to dine with
the King at Westminster, where his Majesty coming thither by water stayed for
him (with much impatience) Et p^ur cause) above an hour, the Antipaste having
been already set upon the Table. Being at last come and entering (with all his
company) the higher House of Parliament (wherein they dined) they so filled the
Room, disorderly stuffed before with an unruly intruding multitude, as no
Officer was able freely to dischage his Service till the King sat down to
meat, the Extraordinary at a convenient distance on his left hand, and the
Ordinary at the Tables end (the Prince not there.) The French Noblemen of the
best quality, were conducted by the Duke of Lenox, and the rest by my self to
the Court of Requests, where the greater number of them taking their places
promiscuously at the Table, and the Duke leaving them (perhaps somewhat
abruptly) before he had seen five or six of the principal, set down at the
upper end. These begun whisperingly to murmr amongst themselves, as those
that might seem neglected to be left so alone without some persons of like
quality to accompany them, and to invite them to their sitting; which I
perceiving, began to persuade them to what they came for, and had prevailed
with the Marquess de Money, and one or two more of them, till my Lord
Chancellor (Bacon) the Lord Treasurer (Montague) and the Lord Privy Seal
(Earl of Worcester) entering the Room, and passing by them to sit down (as
they did) altogether at the right hand of the Table, without giving other
countenance of respect, then putting off their Hats, or once inviting the
French to sit down with them, they took their Cloaks, and with shows of much
discontent, departed the Room to their Coaches; whether I and two other
Scottish Gentlemen followed them fast with our best persuasions for return,
but not able to prevail, we left them. Half an hour after I went, (as I had
Order) upon an invitation I had delivered the day before to the Ordinary French
Ambassadors House, for his Lady to come that Afternoon to a Dancing appointed
at White Hall; but she in her woman's haste to be at those Sports being gone
thither before I came, I there found all the Gentlemen mentioned sitting at
Dinner, To whom I saying merrily, that I was sorry they should eat two Dinners
in one day (one of their excuses having been, that they had dined already) and
neither of them in the Kings House, one of them replied, That respecting (as
they ought) the honor of the King their Master, and their own quality) they
would make me their Judge, whether when they were left alone by the Duke of
Lenox without any person of sort to accompany them at their sitting down to
meat: and that three Messieurs de robe longue (as they with a French scorn,
termed the three great Officers mentioned who had their Gowns on) came, and
sat themselves down at the upper end of the Table without scarce so much as
saluting them) they had not reason to leave (as they did) the Company. To which
I briefly Answered, I was no Judge, nor Homme de robe longue, neither were
those they termed so, of inferior rank to the greatest Lords of this Kingdom,
so leaving them, and going down the Stairs, I there met the two Marquesses of
Buckingham and Hamilton, coming to the purpose that I did, to conduct the Lady
Ambassadrice, and Madam elle de St. Luc her Niece to the Ball, when giving
these two Lords a touch of what had passed (least the French might think
perhaps they came purposely to them to excuse their Trayctment which had been
too great an honor for them) they passed with them some few Complements, and
letting fall a word or two to the former purpose, the Lords (and I with them)
returned to Court, and finding the Ambassadrice, and her Niece in my Lord of
Buckinghams Lodging, I waited on them there, and to the Ball, where the
Countess of Buckinghams Mother placing her next beneath her Daughter the
Marquess, Note this manner of placing the Ambassadrice and the Exceptions taken.
and above her self, there grew a new quarrel of Exceptions from the other
Countesses (particularly from the Countess of Dorset) that she was set above
them. The two Ambassadors entering with the King, the Extraordinary sat down at
his left hand, and next him there, the Ordinary, at his Majesty's right hand
sat the Prince.

The day of the Kings Feast, the Count d'Alle Son to the Duke d'Angontesme, and
the Count de Rochford Son to the Duke de Monbason, and two or three others
absented themselves, because they might not be admitted to sit at the Kings
own Table, as they affirmed the Count d'Allies Father, the Count d'Auvergne,
d'Angontesme had done (they said) at Queen Elizabeth's, when the Marshall de
Biron was here in England.

The next day our English Cavalliers, and the French ran at the King, whereas
the Prince won the Prize.

On Twelfeday following, the Ambassador and his chief followers were brought
to Court by the Earl of Warwick to be present at a Mask; he seated as before
with the King, the better sort of the other on a form behind the Lords (the
Lord Treasurer only and the Marquess of Hamilton sitting at the upper end of
it) and all the rest in a Box, and in the best places of the Scaffolds on the
right hand of his Majesty. No other Ambassadors were at that time present or
invited.

The Monday after the Viscount of Doncaster invited the Ambassador and all his
company (men of note) to a Supper prepared and set forth with that State and
cost as has been seldom seen.) To it were also invited (for honor to the
Feast, and Company) the King, the Prince, and most of the great Lords and
Ladies in Town. The Ambassador himself went by Coach from Denmark House to
Essex House (where the Supper was) the rest by water in Barges. At Supper, the
King seated at a Table placed cross the Room and raised two steps above the
Floor, had at his right hand (with a convenient distance) the Prince, at his
left hand the Ambassador Extraordinary, and at the Tables end below the
Ordinary.

At the upper end of another Table (reaching from one end of the room to the
other) sat on the right hand side the Lady Marquess of Buckingham, beneath her
a French Nobleman, and beneath him the French Ambassadors Lady; the rest sat a
Lord, and a Lady as they held out. On the other side sat uppermost the
Countess of Warwick, then a French Lord, next the Lady of Doncaster; so as the
Countess of Dorset, thought the Ancienter Countess (whether by choice,
because she would not sit immediately beneath the Ambassadrice, or by chance I
know not) sat beneath two or three Ladies that she in right of rank should
have preceded. After Supper, they had the entertainment of a Mask presented by
nine young Gentlemen, whereof the Lord Montjoy, and a Son of the Lord Hollis
were two etc. The Ambassador having remained here about fifteen days, took
leave of his Majesty at White Hall, and was presented with a Chayn of Diamonds
(being an old Jewel of the Crown) of 300 l. value, which (because it was not
Plate) (the King and Council having upon the sight of so much equivalent to
that sum judged it not fit to deprive the Kingdom of it) was not brought to
the Ambassador by the Master of the Jewel House Sir Henry Mildmay, but by the
Master of the Ceremonies.

The Ambassador having been defrayed for his Diet, Lodging and Coaches at the
rate (as was said) of 200 l. per diem, went to Gravesend the (...) of January:
himself and some few by Land, the rest by water, attended thence by Sir Jews
Lewkner only to his imbarquing at Dover.

When it was thought, that the Spanish Ambassador would have held it an
indignity, and wrong to his Master, to be present at a Mask seen before by a
French Ambassador (as the last, and the same Mask had been by the Mareshall de
Cadenet at Twelftide) he appeared at it on Shrove-Sunday seated at the left
hand of his Majesty under the State) different from what had been formerly
resolved on, that no Ambassador in regard of their troublesome Puntillious)
should any more sit so with his Majesty) and had his family placed over a Box
at the Kings right hand, in which were placed the Spanish Ambassadors two Sons
together with the Arch-Dutchess Agent.

In January Arrived at Gravesend six Commissioners from the States of the
United Provinces, viz. Messieurs de Senthusen, Carmelin, Soneh, Bruyning,
Schot, and de Vervow, and the Secretary of their Commission, Captain Huggins:
they were Lodged in Lumbarstreet, and had their first Audience in the Privy
Galleries at White Hall, As being but Deputies which had been enough for
Ambassadors.
fetched to it by the Lord Clifford and diverse Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber in
above twenty Coaches. Parted from his Majesty, they went with the same
attendance to the Prince at St. Jameses, where before their entrance to his
Presence, they were too late a ware of a Solecisme they had committed in having
delivered the Princess Letters to the King, as they had done the Kings Letters
(yet remaining in their hands) to the Prince, had they not suddenly cast an
eye upon them, for which they had no evasion, but to make (by the Master of the
Ceremonies mouth) an excuse of then Secretaries mistaking (in the obscure
light) one Letter for another.

For Shrove-Tuesday following I carried them from the King an Invitation to a
Mask of the Gentlemen of the Middle Temple to be represented in the Hall of
the Court, whether I was appointed to conduct them in one of the Kings Coaches,
with order to be in the new Council Chamber (on the deceased Queens side,
which had been her Privy Chamber) at seven of the Clock without preparation
(other then of Bread and Wine for Collation) I bestowed their followers on a
Scaffold on the Kings right hand, and in a Box under (purposely reserved from
them) themselves together with Sir Noell Caron the Ambassador. The Mask ended
I brought them (by direction) to the King, whom they had not yet at that time
seen) whence following his Majesty (without his notice yet taken of them) till
they came to the Guard Chamber, he there saluted them, and had their attendance
to the Banquet there, and after in the Privy Gallery, gave them all the good
night.

The twentieth of January, I had the Command of the Lord Chamberlain to
introduce the six mentioned Commissioners to an Audience of the Council, and
bring them for their repose to the old Council Chamber, where they attended
the Lords leisure then much busied about the Exceptions taken by some Lords,
and other of our Nobility against the Creation, and precedence given to certain
Scottish and Irish Viscounts before English Barons etc.

The fifth of March I received a Command and directions from the Lord
Chamberlain (the Master of the Ceremonies being then sick) to go to Dover, and
receive there at his Landing an Ambassador Extraordinary from Poland, his name
and Title Osalinskie Count Palatine of Sindomerskie. Hereupon order was given
for my receipt of 50 l. impressed out of the Exchequer which (in regard of the
pressing have pretended of the Service, that would not admit the leisure of
procuring a Privy Seal for it) was by virtue of a Warrant from the Lord
Treasurer Mountague, and the Controwler of the Exchequer Sir Fulke Grevell
(Lord Brook) paid to me the next morning (but in the mean time the Master of
the Ceremonies (having been first sent to by my Lord Chamberlain to speak with
him, and excusing his coming by his sickness, supposing his employment should
have been no other, then to attend the Spanish Ambassador (at that time
assigned an Audience) was upon better notice, and consideration of the
businesses with the likelihood of the benefit to accrue from it, resolved to
discharge it himself, and to that purpose went to my Lord Chamberlain about
it. But I already embarked in it, and repairing to my Lord, so maintained mine
interest of Primer Seazine, as his Lordship needed not persuasion to permit me
to preceede, as I did the next Morning with one of his Majesty's Coaches, and
three other hired by me to be defrayed by his Majesty. The eighteenth of March
I came to Dover, whence Capt. Buck (an old Capt. a Scottish man that came in my
Company from London, and in the Ambassadors out of Poland) went according to
the Ambassadors Assignation to meet him at Callayes; but the Ambassadors
Journey retarded by the illness of the weather, and ways between Amsterdam,
and Antwerp, and at Brussels, (where he stayed also ten days) was a cause of
the Captains fruitless stay at Callayes and of mine also, and the Coaches at
Dover cleaven days; at the end whereof, a Post sent from the Postmaster at
Gravesend, brought me word at Midnight how the Ambassador was Landed there
from Flushing. These news carried me instantly post thither, and brought me in
seven hours to his sight and reception there from his Majesty before his
rising. Toward the Evening Sir Jews Lewkner sent by the King and the Lord
Chamberlain (as supposing I could not obtain time enough to the knowledge of
his Landing) came thither in Company of Sir Robert Steward, and diverse other
Gentlemen) to welcome him from his Majesty. The next Morning the Kings, and
three other Barges being sent down for his Transport to London, we all went
thither ranged by Sir Jews Lewkner (for avoydance of confusion at our
imbarking) the Ambassador and his cozen with eight Knights, and two Gentlemen
in the Kings Barge; his chief Gentlemen, and Pages in the Lord Chamberlaines,
and in the two other the rest.

He was received at Tower-Wharrfe by the Earl of Warwick accompanied with the
Lord Cromwell, and sundry of his Majesty's Servants. And in the Kings, and
seven or eight Coaches, was conducted to his Lodging in Crutchet Friars,
ordained for him, and defrayed (as was also his diet) at a certain rate agreed
upon per diem without attendance of any of the Kings Servants. His landing at
Gravesend, and his so speedy repair to London, was a cause that the Lord
mentioned met him no sooner. The next day (being Sunday, and his Majesty
desirous for three or four days to leave the Town) his Public Audience was
assigned, and given him at White Hall (with the Conduct of the Earl of Essex,
and the like number of Gentlemen and Coaches as before) where in the Presence
there he presented Letters with a long Elegant Oration in Latin to his Majesty.

The Tuesday following he was accompanied to his Audience of the Prince at
Saint Jameses by the Lord Danvers, the Master of the Ceremonies, and my self
with other Gentlemen. The 24. of March (the day of the Kings coming to the
Crown) having been invited to a Tylting of the Prince and other Knights) he
was fetched thither in the Kings Coach by Sir Jews Lewkner; but before he came,
the French, Venetian, and Savoy Ambassadors were seated in their and his
appointed stand, hung and covered with Tapistrie over the Gate or Porters Lodge
entering into the Tiltyard, on the right hand of his Majesty. These three other
I was sent for to conduct from where they all dined together at the French
Ambassadors, Sir Edward Sackvill having been appointed to conduct the Venetian,
but he was parted from home before Sir Edward came thither. The French
Ambassador at his entrance into the Stand, casting his Eyes about him, and
asking which was the better place, that on the right hand as of Custom, or the
other on the left as of Respect, and nearest to the King? The Venetian
Ambassador (forwardest with his Answer) said, where ever the French Kings
Ambassador sits, there will be the best place. To which the French Ambassador
making no reply, This may resolve which is the upper end of a Table in the
midst of a room when the best man sits at the end of it, though the placing of
the Chimney may perhaps, and does sometimes, (as here in England) alter it.
but sitting down uppermost on the left hand from the Kings right, the other
two sat by him in their Order, till the Polonian coming they made him room
to take (as he did) the second place. The Tylting ended (and not before) they
had all of them a Salutation given them by the King from the place where he
sat, so parted without further Ceremony, then with my recommendation.

The six Commissioners of the States, and the Ambassador Ordinary, Sir Noell
Caron (with the Secretary of their Commission) were conducted by Sir Edward
Cceill to the Chamber next the Gate, at the lower end of the Tyltyard, and
there with his company saw the Tylting. These Commissioners, about the
beginning of April demanded a final Audience, and dispatch from his Majesty,
and had for Answer, that the Sunday following his Majesty was pleased they
should dine with him, and then take their leaves; but soon after a
disinvitation was brought by the Lord Kelley with this excuse. That his Majesty
having since received the news of the King of Spaines death, and intending that
day (as the most fit) to assume his habit of mourning, supposing that this and
Feasting would not accord, so if they would be pleased to stay their Journey
till the time of mourning should be expired, which would be at Saint Georges
Day about a fortnight after, they should have a day assigned them for the
honor of eating with his Majesty. In the mean time their demanded Audience
should be given them on Sunday in the afternoon, which accepted of, and the
other excused with the reason of their pressing haste to be at home, they came
then to Court in his Majesty's Coach (perhaps too high for their qualification
of Deputies, as by the place of their last Audience they might seem to be
taken for no more) introduced by the Earl of Kelley to his Majesty's presence
in the Chamber of private Audiences, there took their leaves, and received all
six of them the Order of Knighthood. Upon which grew a question from some of
the Kings Servants interessed concerning payment of their fees (accounting from
each of them to receive forty four pound sixteen shillings) these being
demanded by one Mr. Agher their Collectour and at the first not refused by them
to be paid, the next day when they came to take their leaves of the Lord
Chamberlain, a doubt being made of the duenesse of their payment, in regard
they were public Ministers, and a resolution asked of his Lordship, he
absolutely affirmed to their Secretary there present that it was unfit they
should pay any Fees, and that if they were again demanded, they should use his
name for their discharge of payment; yet (notwithstanding this Signification
from his Lordship) the Collector ceased not to solicit in the name of the
Gentlemen Ushers and others, protesting against the Lord Chamberlains power to
give away or withhold their rights, till finally at their departure ( April
14.) they left behind them this Order (upon the importunity of the Collector,
and my interposition) that if his Majesty should be pleased himself to say to
the Lord Chamberlain, or to the Officer that challenged the Fees, that they
should not be paid, they had no reason to loose the honor of his Majesty's
free favor; but if otherwise his Majesty should say they ought to be paid,
that the Ambassador Ordinary Sir Noell Caron should engage himself, (as he did
to me the same day by his promise) for their payment. I understood after from
my Lord Chamberlain, that his Majesty signified his pleasure to him, From that
time to the year 1635 none such have paid.
that those Fees should not be paid, as being not properly to be exacted from
Ministers of Foreign Princes or such as should have any Ordinary relation to
them. The Commissioners went hence the fourteenth of April to their Shipping
at Gravesend in one of his Majesty's Barges, and were followed the next day in
an other by the Baron of Donow Ambassador for the King of Bohemia, he also
having about the same time had his dismission, and that day mine and some other
Gentlemen's company to their imbarking before Tilbury. The States Commissioners
were presented (as I was informed) with 3000 ounces of gilt Plate equally
divided amongst them, and their Secretary Constantine Huggins with a Chain of
Gold 45 l. value. The King of Bohemias Ambassador had assigned him for his
present 1160 ounces of guilt Plate, but this being not then presented (but with
assurance to be sent after him) he two or three years after returned hither to
recover it, and did, (but not (...) to the value of it) in ready money: he
presented me with a Chain of 30 l. value.

On S. Georges day, Note (if it should please him) because Ambassadors are not
to be in vited but to let the King know their desires to see that Feast.
the Polonian Ambassador having before received an Invitation to see (if it
should please him) the Solemnity of that Feast, was brought to White Hall by
Sir Jews Lewkner (the Lord Gray having been appointed to accompany him, but
arriving too late after his departure from his Lodging) though indeed the
sending of a Lord at that time was Supererrogatory (and not usual) he rested
himself in the old Council Chamber till the Procession, when (placed in a
stand purposely erected for him, and his folfowers next the door at the head
of the Stone Stayres) he saw the King and Knights pass by, and after that the
Ceremony in the Chapel from the Kings Closet) there; that finished, he and
the Archdukes Agent Van Mab (all day accompaning him) were treated by the King
in the Council Chamber with the attendance of his Majesty's Servants (on whom
he bestowed by advice of Van Mab about ten pounds in Hungarian Ducats) and
about the midst of his Majesty's Dinner, went to see, and saluted the King
Prince and Knights as they sat at Table, and after retyring for a while in the
Council Chamber, he departed.

On Sunday the fifteenth of July this Ambassador (together with another of the
House of Medici) arrived here a little before from the Duke of Florence) were
invited to dine with the King, and there to take their leaves. A day or two
before, the Lord North had order from the Lord Chamberlain to accompany the
Florentine, while it was questioned, what Person (of somewhat a preceding
quality) should accompany the Polonian; But most of the great Lords then absent
from Town, and both the Kings best Coaches so employed, as they could not be
spared severally to carry them, there came a Countermand the Evening before for
the Company of any Lord, so as Sir Jews Lewkner (inone of his Majesty's
Coaches) only attended them; they came toward noon to Theobalds, were recived
at their descent from their Coaches by the Earl of Aubegney, and conducted to
the Gouncell Chamber, near which each of them had a Chamber appointed for
their retraite: they were after the Sermon brought to the King in the Privy
Chambers, and out of them following him to the Presence Chamber, they there
dined; the Polonian at the lower side of the Table on the Kings left hand, and
the Florentine at the end of it.

A Count Palatine, Cousin to the Polonian, and three or four Knights of Malta,
and of Saint Stephen (of the Florentines Train) dined in the Council Chamber.
At the end of the Table sat the Count Palatine in a Chair, and for company
the Lord Clifford (on his right hand) the three Knights on the left side, and
beneath them the rest of the Florentines company; on the other side sat the
Polonians Gentlemen etc. the inferior sort sat not at all there, but had the
remains after at the same Table. Dinner done, the Ambassadors after their
retreat to their Chambers had their several Audiences. The Polonian first in
the Gallery, who was after conducted to the Prince by his Highness Gentleman
Usher. And after him the Florentine in the same place, and order. The Polonian
Ambassador not long after departed, having obtained of his Majesty (by the
cunning assistance of the Count de Gondemar, the loan (I may say) the gift (as
never to be restored) of ten thousand pound sterling.

The 23. of December three Commissioners, Ambassadors from the States, being
assigned their first public Audience, were conducted to it in the Kings
Coach, and four or five others by the Lord Clifford from their Lodging in
Bread-streete, their names were d'Arsen, Lord of Somersdyks, Bass and
Stavenets; they were received at the Gaurd-Chamber door by the Earl of
Warwick, as Captain of the Guard in his Brothers absence, and after their
Audience of the King in the Presence Chamber, had one of the Prince in his
Lodgings.

Twelftide appearing, and a Mask being to be presented by the Prince and other
Lords and Gentlemen, my Lord Chamberlain gave me in charge to repair to the
Venetian Ambassador, Seigniour Girolenio Landi with this message as from
himself (with request of his Secrecy) That whereas he had told him two or three
days before that no Ambassador should be invited to the Mask (as the King had
signified to him his intention) he perceived that the Spanish Ambassador (the
Count of Gondemar) had underhand pressed his Majesty to be invited, so as not
to appear to have doubled with him in what he had told him, he bade me let his
Excellency know, that if he would for form sake be invited and frame some
excuse for his not coming, he would himself (as from his Majesty) send him an
invitation. But if he would be really invited and come, his request should be,
that he would make his way to it by the Marquis of Buckingham. When I had
delivered this message to the Ambassador in hearing of his Secretary (whom he
called in) he made answer, That for excuse of his not coming (though for form
invited) he would never give that advantage to the Spanish Ambassador to say of
him, that one day he would be well, and annother ill for his satisfaction (as
he knew some had been) as if he stood in awe of him; and for the other point of
making his way by the Marquis of Buckingham, he would never do it, since he had
always (he said) made his access to his Majesty's Presence by the right door
of the Lord Chamberlain, and would now enter by no other.

But since he saw (he said) what this tenderness meant, he desired me to
entreat his Lordship in his name, that he would be pleased to go directly to
his Majesty, and by way of remembrance (no otherwise) put him in mind from him,
That the last year the French Ambassador Extraordinary Monsieur de Cadenet, and
the Ordinary Monsieur de Tilliers were invited to the Prince his Mask at
Christmas, and the Spanish Ambassador to the same Mask repeated at Shrovetide,
to which he could and might justly have taken Exceptions, that he was both
times omitted, but that the King of Bohemiaes Ambassador, being not then (no
more then he) invited, he was content to suffer with him; but that now (though
he might in reason expect, that he should be (as in his turn) invited alone,
he would not be so punctual, but would refer all to his Majesty's pleasure,
yet if any other Ambassador should be invited he would expect the like honor,
as a respect due to the Prince and State he represented, who in all public
places had, and were to have entertaintment al par delle test Cornate equal
with Crowned Kings. And as for the Spanish Ambassador (he said) his presence at
the Mask should notbe an Exclusion to him) with whom though he had no
correspondency of business nor visits, he had yet of Salutation and civil
respects, which had many times in incounters in the Streets, passed between
them, and might and should pass on his part at the Mask, if he should there
meet him: This message returned by me to the Lord Chamberlain, and seconded
at the same time by the Ambassadors Secretary, and my Lord conveying it to the
King, his Majesty was pleased that he should be (as he was the next day)
invited, and was at the Mask entertained with the like respect as was the
Spanish Ambassador. The States Ambassadors were not at the same time invited
with respect to the incompatibility between them and the Spanish, and the
Russian then here might with as little reason expect it, in regard he had
questioned precedence of all other Kings Ministers. The French Ambassador had
an Invitation pro forma tantum, with a civil request of his next coming to
avoid question, which it seems, he took not with discontent, because his Wife
and Niece were there present invited.

In March 16. Sir William Russell a chief Merchant of the Muscovy company,
made request in his own name and of the rest of that Society, that I would
sometimes repair to the Russian Ambassador (a gallant Gentleman of the
Emperors Alliance, and a great Commander in his Wars by name Thomas Simonwitz)
with a visit, and Complement in his Majesty's name. I told him the Master of
the Ceremonies was already employed for his attendance, and that with the
knowledge, and order of the Lord Chamberlain, or of the Lords of the Privy
Council, and I should wrong him, and my self to undertake it. This made him
(with other of those Merchants) to intimate as much to the Council (in the
Lord Chamberlains absence.) So I was by their Lordships appointed to attend
that business, and had notice given me to that purpose both by Sir William
Russell, and Mr. Secretary Calvert, to whom objecting the Exceptions that might
be justly taken by Sir Jews Lewkner, if he were not made acquainted with the
employment cast on me by the Lords in a Service wherein he was already entered,
I had for my further Satisfaction a messenger sent to Sir Jews by Mr.
Secretary, who returned with an uncertain answer, no other, then that he would
himself come, and speak with Mr. Secretary about it, but coming not in five or
six days after, and Sir William Russell, and the other Merchants continuing to
solicit my repair to the Ambassador, he went himself to Sir Jews, and
brought me his assurance of satisfaction, with acknowledgement of my civil
procceding, and with profession of his willingness, that I should enter upon the
employment, which I did the next day. Going to the Ambassadors Lodging in St.
Thomas Apostles, and signifying (as I had instruction from Mr. Secretary) that
the King had sent me to him etc. He professed to be specially contented, and
pleased, that whereas he had hitherto (he said) had no other but Sir William
Russell a Merchant, and no Soldier, nor Courtier to be his Prestau as he
termed him) signifying the like Officer, as the Master of the Ceremonies) he
should be henceforth honored by the visits of a Cavalier; and a Courtier
attending his Majesty, with whom he might, and would be more free in
communicating whatsoever should concern the Service of his great Lord, and
Master the Emperor.

The Eve of the Kings day (March the four and twentieth) I was sent to him for
my Lord Chamberlain as from the King, whose name (though his Majesty had
nothing of the knowledge nor trouble of it, I always used in all or most of my
messages, and addresses to him, to let him understand that the next day I was
to attend him to the sight of the Prince at his Tilting (with the Service of
his Majesty's coach, and such others as should be needful for his followers;
(which coaches were to be provided at the Merchants charge, though with use of
the Kings name) but before he accepted of the Invitation (only acknowledging
the honor of it) he by way of caution, demanded if I knew what place he should
have, and how entertained, in regard (he said) that if his Majesty should not
receive him as an Ambassador preceding both the French and Spanish, he would
rather keep himself absent, then disturb the Solenmity by protesting and
standing (as he must) for his Masters right. I assured him the care for
prevention of that quarrel was already taken by his Majesty, and so it was
indeed. For whereas the French and Venetian Ambassadors were also invited, the
Spaniard the like, (but he had excused his absence with his retrait to Highgate
to take the fresh air, and merrily saying when he was invited, that he had
rather keep away, then be present at those Excercises of danger to the Prince
his person, till he should be Father of two or three Children by the King his
Masters Daughter.) those Ambassadors were appointed their places without in the
Tilt-yard in a Scaffold, or standing erected of purpose, and hung with Tapistry
on the right hand of the King near the Gate, but the Muscovite had his
ordained in the same Gallery with his Majesty (but on his left hand, and with a
Traverse drawn between them) till that after the Tilting, he was only to see
the Kings face, and so depart; all which he interpreted to be the greater
honor, the other Ambassadors letting it pass in the mean time without
Exceptions, as regarding his remote correspondence, and holding themselves not
prejudiced by his so placing.

The French and Venetians followers were ordained their stands under the
Gallery Windows at the right hand of the King; the Muscovits at the entering of
the Tiltyard on that side, and the States at the nether end. All those Stands
(as before at other times) having been taken up by the Master of the
Ceremonies, or the Assistants order to be defrayed by his Majesty. The States
three Ambassadors Commissioners were ordained their places at the lower end of
the Tilt-yard, as the year before, and this without any of their Exceptions
taken at it. But the Venetian Ambassador somewhat punctual (in remembrance of
his last years Treatment) and now expecting the like respects to be given him,
as he understood were to be given to the French Ambassador (for Sir Jews
Lewkner, being appointed to conduct him, my self the Muscovits, and Sir Robert
Anstroder the States Ambassador) he was (as it seems he understood it) not
thought on to that purpose, so as sending to me about it, and I acquainting my
Lord Chamberlain with his formality, his Lordship entreated (by me) Sir Edward
Sackvill the Earl of Dorsets Brother) to accompany him, which he being the
next day ready to have performed, the Solemnity was (in regard of the Kings
indisposition, and the fowleness of the weather) deferred till the Saturday
following, and then the like upon the like occasion till after Easter, and so
longer, till at length it was not at all performed.

The third of April I had Order from my Lord Chamberlain, that (the Master of
the Ceremonies being employed to Dover with the Kings Coach and fourteen other
at his Majesty's charge to bring up the Emperors Ambassador Suartzenberg, and
that the said Ambassador was in the interim landed at Gravesend) I should take
one of his Majesty's Barges, and hasten thither to receive him, and excuse that
cross encounter, letting him know that the Marquess of Hamilton was to come
down to receive him that Evening. With which order I took Barge when the Tide
was far spent, rowed down till we met a flowing water, and a strong contrary
wind at Woollwich, so was forced to Land there and (finding no Horses) to go on
foot five miles to Darford) where taking Post to Gravesend, I found there Sir
Jews Lewkner returned from Canterbury, and delivered my message from his
Majesty to the Ambassador. That Evening my Lord Marquess Hamilton (accompanied
with the Lord Wentworth, Lord Bruise; and about twenty Gentlemen) came to his
Lodging, and was met by him in the Entry, almost at the street door of the
Inn, conducted by him to his Chamber (the Ambassador after some little refusal
preceding though in his own House) and after brought back by them to the Street
door. The next Morning my Lord Marquess again repaired to him (with the
Company of the Lord Viscount Doncaster) then on his way Ambassador
Extraordinary for France) and a while after the Ambassador repayed their visits
at the Marquess Inn, when the Tide serving, we all came to London in ten
Barges. The Ambassador, the Marquess, the two English Lords, three Dutch
Lords, and the Master of the Ceremonies in the first Barge. Two Dutch Barons,
my self, and four or five English in the second, and the rest in the rest, as
they incountred. Landing at Denmarke-House Garden-staires, the Marquess
accompanied him to his Chamber there, and was by the Ambassador re-accompanied
to his Coach.

The Sunday following ( April seven) the same Lord Marquess accompanied with
the Earl of Montgomery) the Lords Candish, This not usual for one person
twice to conduct one and the same Ambassador.
Bruise, two other Lords and about twenty Gentlemen listed with diverse
Voluntaries (in near forty Coaches, besides other hired at the Kings charge to
attend daily) fetched him from Denmarke-House to his Audience in the Higher
House of Parliament, where he made his Oration in high Dutch, interpreted by
Sir Robert Anstroder (to whom it had been the day before imparted in writing)
he was conducted by the Marquess, and the rest to the Prince at St. Jameses
(with whom he passed his Complement in Italian) whereto the Prince called me
for interpreter, and thence returned with the same attendance to his Lodging at
Denmarke-House.

Having remained here about six days (defrayed by his Majesty, and attended by
his Officers, and Servants) the Venetian Ambassador Landi came to my House, and
acquainted me with some distasts he had to this purpose. That the first day,
and almost hour of the Emperors Ambassadors coming to Denmark-House, he had
sent his Secretary to visit him, and to congratulate his Arrival, who giving
him the Title of Excellenza, he had not corresponded, but returned him (the
Ambassador) that of Signioria Illustrissima, wherefore his request to me was,
that I would in some manner let him know by way of discourse (as if I had
incountred him somewhere by chance) that I had asked him, whether he had yet
made his visit to the Emperors Ambassador, and that he had answered me, he
forbear yet to visit him in regard, that whereas the Republique had ever been
accustomed to be treated al par delle Test Coronate, the Style of Excellenza
had not been given him, but that of Signioria Illustrissima, which for his
Princes respect, he must not let pass without tendering il pare, the like of
whatsoever title should be given him. That (unless it were of late the Kings
of Spaines Ambassador) all Ambassadors residing here had given him.
l'Excellenza; but that the Emperors Ambassador had not only not given him his
due in Title, but in personal honor also, having not rendered him the visit of
his Secretary by one of his Servants. The substance of these Doleances, I the
next day imparted to the Emperors Ambassador, and received for Answer, that he
would never treat del pare with him (there being so great a difference between
the Emperors his Masters quality, and that of the Republic of Venice) that
the King of Spaines Minister would (he knew) stand upon the same terms of
difference. That if any other Kings Minister (for I had told him the French
Kings speaking Italian, gave him always Excellenza) should do otherwise, that
should be no rule for him to be governed by. That the Venetian Ambassadors
Secretary had but once at the first given him Excellenza, and had for the rest
made use of the third Person (ella etc.) That at his parting, it was true, that
he (the Emperors A^mbassador) had given him but Signuria Illustrissima, but
that if the Venetian Ambassador should style him so he would return him only
Signuria, to express the difference that ought to be put between their two
tepresentative conditions. That if he had not repayed the vifit (sent by the
Venetians Secretary) by one of his Servants, it was because that Secretary had
said to him, that his Lord would Quanto prima, visit him, which if he had done
(as he had promised) he would after have first visited him by his Servant, and
then by himself. This was the substance, and even the particulars of his
Answer, which when I had returned to the Venetian, he only said, If hereafter
he ask you any thing concerning my Reply, let him know (I pray) upon those
terms, I will never visit him etc. The Ambassador of Venice then told me, that
such another Puntillio had passed between this same Ambassador and the French
Kings, who having given him the first Welcome by his Secretary, even at his
landing at Somerset House, and the third day after personally visited him, he
(the French) expected a return of both (especially of the later) to him before
to any other Ambassador, but that he (the Emperors) breaking the Law of Visites
(ever to be returned as they are made in time, person, and order) had visited
the Spanish before him. In which regard, when the Emperors Ambassador had sent
to know, if his leisure were that he might visit him that afternoon? He
returned a plain answer by the same Messenger, That the weather had been long
foul, and he meant to make use of that fair day to take the fresh Air
abroad, which was light sufficient for the others understanding, to let him see
the French was sensible of what had been done, and would not receive a visit
after the Spanish Ambassadors having given the first cause (he said) to be
first served in return of that complement. But some were of Opinion, that the
French Ambassador had been too quick, and too plain in his proceeding,
considering that the Emperors Ambassador both affirmed that the Spanish had
first vifited him personally (whereas the French had by an hasty anticipation
only performed it by his Servent) and that at another time, the same French
Ambassador had passed over a subject for the like punctuality without any
scruple or question, as when the Bohemian Ambassador was here, and had first
visited the Spanish, he was for all that visited by him the French. Tthat by
the style held in the Emperors Court, the precedence is given to the Spanish,
and that he was therefore bound to observe it here; yet notwithstanding all
this, the French upon a second offter of visit from the Emperors Ambassador
excused his being at home, so as there passed no complement of visit at all
between them. In the mean time the Venetian Ambassador after I had returned as
from my self) the Emperors Ambassador his answer (ut supra) wrote to me an
ofter to come to my House (which preventing by going to his) told me he had
received a return of his visit sent by his Servant by a Servant of the
others, who at the first entrance of his Message (giving his own Master the
title of Excellenza, and him the Venetian of Signioria Illustrifsima,) said his
Excellency hoped to see him before his departure; which words (though of a
double sense of seeing him at his own House, or at the others) taken as a
courtesy, he desired me to let him know (as I did) that he had spared to make
Reply to his courtesy by his own (the Venetians Servant) because the Title
likely to be used by the Emperors Ambassador, and justly to be returned,
(considering the Republics paritie with Crowned Heads) by the same Servant
might perhaps breed further distaste; but that I that was neutrall and
uninterested might let him know (as he desired me I would) without danger of
offense, or engagement by application of Title, that he was most sorry any such
difference should hinder the Visit, and acknowledgement of respects, which he
and his Republique owed the Emperor, and his Ministers, but that if any mean:
could be found to carry things with indifferency, that he would most readily
embrace it. That at the first, if he had not expressed himself by those
different Titles given by his Secretary, he had himself personally visited
him, and without further condition, put himself upon his wisdom. That
regarding the duty he owed the State he represented, he would not leave his
first hold; and finally for his own particular, he was his most humble servant
etc. To this the Emperors Ambassador returned, that he was sorry (the
difference stood so stifely upon between them) should keep him from the
acquaintance of a person, of whom he had received so worthy respects; that he
could not alter what he had once with good reason resolved, never to treat del
pare with the Venetian Minister. That what he stood upon, or had done,
proceeded not (he protested) from any Capriccio of his own, or command of his
Master, but merely (as he knew of his own experience) according to the Style,
and manner held between the Emperors, and all Venetian Ambassadors ab antiquo,
so desired pardon for his freedom, presented his love and service etc. The
last Complement being returned to the Venetian Ambassador, the business ended
without interview or further question, or difference between them.

The 11. of April this Ambassador had his second private Audience (fetched from
Denmark-House by water, by the service of six or seven Barges) by the Earl of
Aubigney, and other Lords and Gentlemen, landing at the Privy Stairs at
White Hall, and passing through the Shield Gallery, and the late Queens
Lodgings into the Kings Privy Gallery, and his withdrawing room there, where
the King held discourse with him an hour together Remotis arbitris; a day or
two after he ran at Tylt in the Prince his company with the Lord Montjoy.

The Sunday following (April 14.) he was publicly feasted in the Upper House
of Parliament, seated on his Majesty's left hand, at the distance of about
three persons between, and of one beneath. His Barons and principal Gentlemen
were placed at a Table set cross at the upper end of the Court of Requests,
accompanied at dinner by the Lord Treasurer, the President of the Council, and
the Earl of Rutland, who had been that day his conductour from Denmark House
by water.

After dinner (as before) he was brought to his Chamber of repose, and some
half an hour after fetched thence by the same Lord (his conductour) to take
leave of his Majesty in the Room where he had dined, and thence went to St.
Jameses to take leave also of the Princes Highness.

On Wednesday the sevententh of April, and the eleaventh day of his stay here
(having been all that time defrayed) he deparred hence with all his followers
in six of the Kings Barges to Gravesend, where he was to imbarke in two Ships
of the Merchants (appointed by the King, but paid by himself) for Dunkirk. At
his parting, he left his Majesty's Officers and Servants little fatisfied with
the gratuities, being but small Bracelet Chains to the value of scarce eight
or 10 l. a piece. To the Master of the Ceremonies (bringing him the Present
from his Majesty) which was his Picture set in Gold richly inchaced with
Diamonds, and hung at a Chain of Diamonds, Rubies, and Pearls, valewed at
1600 l.) he gave a small Jewel, worth little above eight pound, and for all
his Travel and attendance a Basin, and Ewer not of 30 l. value. To the Guard
then waiting being twenty four he gave -- 40 l. and to the Clerck of the
Check, a Bracelet of Gold of about nine pounds value. To me (who expected
nothing, having had no command to attend him) he gave a small Chain of
Excellent Workmanship (as a rememberance (he said) not a reward) worth ten
pound besides the rare fashion of it. To the Porters -- five pound, to two of
the Kings Coachmen daily attending him -- tend pound, to the hired Coachmen --
five pound, he took away (without leave, or demand of him) the Bishop of
Spalato, a fault in him, and an indignity offered his Majesty (considering what
noble Treatment (he the Ambassador) had received here, and the unworthy
carriage of that double Apostate Prelate toward this State, and Religion.

His Secretary had from the King a present equalling in value almost all those
he bestowed upon his Majesty's Servants, being worth above an hundred pounds.

A second Son of the Lands-grave of Hess, by name Phillip (...) sent hither on
a Negotiation from his Father, was to have an Audience of his Majesty on Easter
day April the one and twentieth, and though he were not a qualified
Ambassador, yet regarding his condition I had order to receive him at the Court
Gate, so conducted him thence to the Privy Chamber, whence he was (after about
an hours stay) called for, received at the door of the Privy Gallery by the
Lord Chamberlain, and had there his Audience, the Prince being present, but
unsaluted by him (as he had been by me upon demand of his manner of carriage to
that purpose directed) till he had made an end of speaking to his Majesty, and
presented in writing the sum of his Negotiation; parting thence, he requested
me to make Trial, whether the Prince would be pleased that Evening to give him
Audience at his own Court (in regard he held it a Solecisme in good manners to
be present at the Tilting (appointed for the next day, and that sight much
affected by him) before he had kissed the hands of his Highness.

His Highness returned answer, that he thankt him for his respects, but having
some business with the King that Evening, and the next day being assigned for
the Tilting, a day or two after might serve for that Complement of visit, which
he in the mean time accepted as performed.

The day following, he attended the Kings coming forth into the Gallery to
wait on his Majesty to the Tilting, and there to ^^and at his Elbow. But the
Ambassadors (in virtue of their former Invitations) having already taken up
their stands, and prepared their Expectations, the Kings indisposition, and the
continuing Tempestuous Weather, were causes, that all was remitted till the
Sunday following, when it was yet the third time deferred till the eighteenth
of May following, and then upon the indisposition also as before for altogether
discharged.

The three and twentieth of April he had his Audience of the Prince at St.
Jameses in the Privy Chamber there, and was received by me at the great Gate,
observing there the same style as when he had access to his Majesty.

The nine and twentieth of April the Russian Ambassador having not stirred
from his home all the Winter, and being desirous to take the fresh Air, was by
me accompanied to Theobalds, attended by as many of his followers, as filled
four coaches and that night returned. The next day he went with the same
Train and my conduct to the Artillery Garden to see that company trained, but
their hour not serving till toward the Evening, he went in the interim to the
Tower, where at four several Storehouses of Arms, and at the Wardroabe, the
Merchants Servant that waited on him as his Steward gave to cach but -- two
shillings six pence, and to the Warders at the Gate (comprehending with these
two of them that every where there attended him) ten shillings, so poorly
acknowledging was he for himself, or the Merchants for him.

Don Carlos de Coloma Arrived here for Ordinary Ambassor from the King of
Spain in the beginning of May 1622 and four or five days after had his first
Audience at White Hall with the conduct to it (from his House in Holborne the
Bishop of Eleys, and possessed before by his Predecessor) of the Marquess
Hamilton, the Lords, Wentworth and Bruise, and about seaventeen or eighteen
Knights, and Gentlemen, (so many having been listed, when eight or ten would
have sufficed for the service, in regard of the encumbrance so often growing
from their numbers intruding to places in Coaches, with the extrusion of
strangers) The Coaches sent for him were in all nineteen or twenty, the greater
part with four Horses.

His Majesty received him in the Presence after he had been guided thither
(together with the Conde of Gondemar) by an unusual passage through the great
Hall, and by the Chapel up to the Council Chamber (in Queen Anns time, the
Presence) there to rest him, the former Council Chamber being converted to a
Lodging for the Duke of Lenox, and the Banqueting House prepared for a Mask
toward.

Three or four days after the Conde de Gondemar took his leave of the King
at Greenwich, and with an Extraordinary honor, dined that day privately with
his Majesty.

On Friday May the fifth, the Ambassador of Russia received from me an
Invitation to dine with the King on Sunday following, which (though with some
scruple at first to do so before he had received answer of his business
propounded to the Council) he yet thankfully accepted, and (having appointed
him, and hired by the Merchants six Coaches (whereof one, as I had ordained)
with four Horses) I brought him by half an hour after eleaven in the Kings
coach, accompanied with Sir Francis Kinnerston, and Sir Edward Peyto, chosen by
myself (as I had order, and liberty given me.) At the Court Gate he was
received by my Lord Wentworth, at the upper end of the Hall (his passage
ordered (as before to the Spanish Ambassador) by the Earl of March; after
about a quarter of an hours rest in the Council Chamber, he was conducted by
the Lord mentioned through the late Queens Lodgings to the Kings privy Gallery
(his followers returning from the door thereof to the Guard Chamber, where
they were to dine) and there met by his Majesty, the Ambassador following him
to the Privy Chamber, where after his Majesty had washed (and that the
Ambassador had been wished to the like by the two Gentlemen mentioned, who held
the Basin, and Towell, as the Gentleman Usher had appointed) but in his
Country civility of respects to the Kings Presence had refused it) he was
called to sit down at the lower end of the Table, and was presented before he
did eat by his Majesty with a Roll of Manchet, and salt in a salt-seller) (the
Custom of his Country challenging the presentation of them as an expression
of his welcome; without the observation of which Ceremony, I was bold merrily
to tell his Majesty, that it was then in his power to starve the Ambassador,
who must not cate till it were performed. Toward the middle of Dinner his
Majesty stood up, and bareheaded drank to him the Health of his Emperor (till
which Invitation of the King he was also by the Custom of his Country not to
drink:) soon after to the Health of the Patriarch of his Country, who had sent
the King a rare Cup for a Present; and lastly, to the Ambassador himself in a
gilded covered Bowl of about twenty pound value, which Bowl after the Pledge,
was to be his own, having been provided at the charge of his Majesty, though
with the Merchants ready money, and by a Warrant from my Lord Chamberlain
reinburst to them, (his Lordship having first made a question, whether the King
or they were to provide it) by the Master of the Jewel-House.

The Ambassadors Followers were entertained at Dinner in the Guard-Chamber,
where at the upper end of the Table sat his Nephew, a person of greatest
respect about him, and of each hand of him, and next to him sat Sir Francis
Kynnerston, and Sir Edward Peyto to accompany him; beneath whom was a distance
left for one man's seat, to make a difference between that Nephew, his company,
and the rest of the Ambassadors Followers, who might, nor did not presume once
to touch any Dish, that he had tasted of. Dinner ended, the Ambassador followed
his Majesty into the Privy Gallery (his Followers going the other way) and
there taking leave returned by the way, and with the conduction mentioned.

The night following was represented a Mask, Acted the Christmas before by the
Prince etc. At which were present (seated with his Majesty) the Spanish
Ambassadors Don Carlos de Coloma, and the Count de Gondemar, though this had
taken his leave three or four days before, his Son and other their Followers
of quality had their feats near the King in a Scaffold on his right hand; the
rest of them were bestowed together with the States, and other strangers
promiscuously on a Scaffold behind the King, over the entrance there on the
left hand of his Majesty. The young Landsgrave of Hess was brought in by me the
back way through the Garden, and supping with the Duke of Lenox (as did also
the Baron of Paperhezin remaining here after the departure of the Emperors
Ambassador) was seated amongst the great Ladies.

The French Ambassador Monsieur de Tillier receiving a kind of Invitation, by
way of offer, to be present at this Mask, returned answer, that he most humbly
kissed his Majesty's hands for the honor intended him; but his stomach would
not (he said) agree with cold meat, and desired therefore his absence might be
pardoned, here by pointing at the Invitation and presence of the Spanish
Ambassador in the first place at the same Mask the Christmas before now
repeated.

May the two and twentieth was the day assigned for Sr. Georges Solemnity,
deferred till then. The day before my Lord Chamberlain sent me to Sir Noell
Caron to let him know (and the rest of the States Commissioners Mess. d'Arsen,
Bass, and Stavenets) that his Majesty would be pleased with their Presence at
the provision and solemn service of that day, and that to that purpose, they
should have their standings for sight of the first in a long window on the left
hand, almost over the Gate, and of the latter in the Chapel Closet on the
Queens side, (the Spanish Ambassador Don Carlos de Coloma being to possess that
of the Kings side) I delivered this Message (by encounter) to them all four,
being then at the house of Sir Noell Caron near Lambeth, which they thankfully
accepted, only Monsieur Stavenets asked whether there would be as much respect
in the entertainment for the general given to them, as to the other
Ambassador? I answered, I nothing doubted it; but as soon as I was returned to
render an account of my service to my Lord Chamberlain, I found I had been up
and down sought for to be stayed my Journey (but too late) for when I came to
his Lordship, he told me, if I had invited those Ambassadors to stand in the
Closet of the Queens side, I had exceeded my Commission, because the Spanish
Ambassador (he said) would never endure them so near him, where there was but
a thin Wainscot Board between them, and a Window to be opened at either of
their pleasures, which might be an occasion of scandal; and distemper. I
answered, I had done no otherwise, then I had directions) which his Lordship in
part denied, and I was not so unmannerly as to contest against.) But at last I
received a new command to repair to them with this message, That there had
been a misunderstanding, and that the place in the Chapel for the regard
mentioned of the Spaniards neerenesse to them was improper; But if it would
please them to be at the procession in the morning in their appointed stands,
and in the Evening at the divine Service and Solemnity there; which would be
all one with that of the Forenoon, they should be welcome. This unpleasing
message delivered, I received for answer from the mouth of Monsieur d'Arsennes.
That as often as it would please his Majesty to honor them with Invitations to
any of his entertainments, they should esteem it for an especial favor, and
gladly accept it; so again, since it now seemed, that their presence (though
they had been once invited) might give distaste either to his Majesty or to any
other, (meaning the Spanish Ambassador.)
whom he should be pleased more especially to favor) they would in that also
submit themselves to his pleasure, and would be willingly absent; but as for
being present at either the procession; or the Service in the Afternoon, they
desired (since they must not be at that in the Forenoone) that they might be
excused if they came not all, the rather, because they were invited to the
Earl of Exeters at Wimbleton, and if they should stay the procession, they
doubted they should come thither (unmannerly) too late to Dinner, and return
to Court not soon enough to Evening Solemnity. With this message, I returned
to my Lord Chamberlain, and so had the next day the free use of their places at
the Procession, and of the Closet at the Service for the young Landsgrave, and
his followers, whom I conducted in the Dinner time to the Banqueting House,
where the Prince supplying his Fathers place (his Majesty being then
indisposed) the Landsgrave stood at his Highness left hand (as the Spanish
Ambassador did on his right) most part of the Dinner time.

The Ambassador of Russia, being upon his departure, I carried to him -- fifty
pound from the Merchants of the Muscovy company (but as sent to him from the
Lords of the Council) so as the Company had directed me) with this formal
message) That whereas (different from some Ambassadors employed from his
Emperor) he had desired money, and nor provisions to be laid in in specie for
his feeding at Sea, that sum of fifty pound, was sent him according to
President, but exceeding in proportion; because, whereas other Ambassadors
(whereof one had thirty five men his followers, and the other fourscore) had
not had above forty pounds worth of Victuals for their whole Journey, the sum
now sent him was -- fifty pound, but he seeming much unsatisfied with so small
proportion, and saying that Sir John Merrick Ambassador to his Emperor had had
above -- two hundrd pound given him for the like, made show to refuse it,
whereupon I left him, when sending his Interpreter after me down the Stayres
(not as I thought, to receive the money) but desiring me to keep it, or leave
it with the Steward of the house, I refuse it, and saying, that this was a
matter of consequence (inferring that either the Lords of the Council (in
whose name I was to present the money) did not (in my Lord Ambassadors opinion)
understand what they had to do, or that the Ambassador did do more then he
ought, to the dishonor of the King my Master) I would have returned up to him
to have taken the refusal (as I said to the Interpreter it became me) from the
his Ambassadors own mouth; but on the stairs I met one of his servants, that
brought order from his Master, that he should (as he did) receive it.

The first of June following I repaired to him with a summons from my Lord
Chamberlain to take his leave the next day at Greenwich (whether we went by
land in four Coaches, besides the Kings for himself, his Nephew, my self, and
his two Interpreters) and descending at the Garden gate, he was (at the
entrance of the open Room at the foot of the back Privy Stairs) received by
my Lord Wentworth, and by him conducted up to the Room at the end of the Kings
Privy Gallery, and there took leave, reconducted by the same Lord to his
Station, where meeting by chance with my Lord Cavendish, and upon my motion
saluted by him, I made use of that civility so far as to tell the Ambassador,
that that Lord being at the foot of the Stairs, when he went up, and his
Interpreters gone up before, he could not acquaint him with the cause of his
encounter there, which was (I said) by command of his Majesty. This officious
lie I made, least the Ambassador might have expected and found himself
disappointed of a second Nobleman, (of precedent rank to my Lord Wentworth) to
receive him according to the former Style of reception of those Russians first
and last Audience, and as I had the day before written to my Lord Chamlaine,
that it had been, and would be required; but his Lordship mistaking, it being
only an honor (he thought) proper for his dining with the King, and for his
first Audience, and no other, it had been (without this devise, omitted, but
this made use of, it was by him very thankfully accepted.

Two or three days after he was feasted at his own House (as he himself,
though another place were offered, desired) by the Merchants of the Muscovy
Company whereof Alderman Freeman was Governor) with whom, with the rest, and
best of that Company, dined my self, and two or three other Gentlemen, that I
was entreated to bring with me. Dinner being ended, and the Table uncovered;
the Health to his Emperor was begun, and pledged round, then our Kings, the
Emperors Father (the Patriark) then the Princes, his own and others Vsque ad
ebrietatem; after all, the Company by their servants brought in their Present
to himself, viz. a gilded red Bowl, a piece of fine skarlet wrapped in Taffaty
to make him a Gown, and three other pieces of fine cloth of different
colors. This delivered, there came in other Presents, a gilded Bowl, and a
piece of fine cloth to his Nephew, and to each of the Interpreters, and a
piece of cloth for his Porcest; after those to each of his servants a pecce of
cloth; so all more merrily then soberly parted.

Three or four days after the Merchants requested me to deliver him his
Present of Plate in the Kings and Princes names (though provided at their
charge.) I received it at Alderman Freemans House near the Exchange, being gilt
Bowls of several sizes (only one Basin and Ewer parcel gilt;) and for
distinction of the Kings Present from the Princes, by my advice, they tied a
piece of red silk Ribbin to every parcel of that, and a piece of white to
this: the number of his Majesty's pieces, being fifteen, and of the Princes
eight. With these bestowed in two Hampers carried by two Porters I went (that
they might not be suspected, if met by any of his Followers, to come from
elsewhere then the Court, and from the King) first down to Queen Hithe, and the
up to the Ambassadors at Saint Thomas Apostles. Brought to his House, I caused
my man (after I had finished my feighned complement in name of Majesty, and of
his Highness) to range the Plate orderly, each portion by it self on a Table;
that done, the Ambassador with a formal Oration of thanks, took one of the
Kings Bowls, and one of the Princes, and drank their Healths in each, inviting
me the next day to Dinner, that he migh (he said) express his thankfulnese
(which suddenly at that instant he could not) for all my pains. The Present he
made me the next day, and which after Dinner, was solemly brought into the
Room by six several men, and carried before them, consisted of two pair of
rich Sables, a lining for a Gown of Sables Bellies, a lining for a Iub of
white and yellow Fox Bellies, a Cup of silver gilded, worth five or six pound,
and a Turkey Bow, and two Arrows, worth altogether about thirty pounds.

The Duke de Soubise refuged hither from France upon miscarriage of some
undertakings of his there, 30 l. And Merchant. 50 l.
had an Audience of the King at Greenwich ( June the fifteenth) and the next
day, one of the Prince, given him by his Highness in the upper Garden Walks,
where he entertained him in discourse above an hour, with much respects from
his Highness, to whom he was at his Christning in Scotland a Godfather.

A day or two after, the Russian Ambassador had received his Present, he sent
to me one of his Interpreters with the request that I would let the Lords know
how the fifty pound sent him for his Provisions by Sea, was all laid out, and
that I would entreat their Lordships in his behalf for some addition. Further,
that whereas in Lent he had forborne to take the first fasting week his
Allowance of fish, that he might (as he had formerly (he said) requested) have
an allowance in money (equivalent) for it. Also, that their Lordships would be
pleased before his departure to order some course about a woman that had
deceaved him (upon account of work done for him) of -- 18 l. To these requests
the Merchants (to whom I repaired for satisfaction, the business being unfit
for the Lords notice) entreated me to return these answers in the name of the
Lords (as I did.) That his Lordship (the Ambassador) might (if he had pleased)
have received his provisions in specie (as his Predecessors had done) at other
times, which would have taken away all Subject of further question, but since
he would have money, and himself therewith provide Victuals, they had sent
him -- 50 l. which for the proportion of his revenew, exceeded all former
Presidents. That they could not exceed that sum, if they would prevent future
inconveniences from such Presidents; but for his want of a weeks allowance,
their Lordships had appointed the Merchants to let him have -- 10 l. more; and
for the Woman that had deceaved him, he must be righted by the Ordinary course
of Law, which if he would leave behind him a Letter of Attorney to prosecute in
his absence, they would give it their countenance, and order for the just
dispatch of it. These answers returned (as if I had received them from the
Lords) he made little reply to, not without shows of insatisfaction, only the
money which I delivered to his Interpreter, he not unwillingly accepted.

In the interim of carrying the Present to this Ambassador and his demands
mentioned, Seignior Valeresso, Ambassador Ordinary from Venice in place of
Seignior Landi arrived at London, fetched from Gravesend by the Master of the
Ceremonies on Friday the seaventeenth of June, and on Monday following had his
first Audience at Greenwich, conducted to it by Land by the Lord Cavendish, Son
to the Earl of Devonshire, with the Lord Bruise, and others in twenty five
Coaches, attending his Majesty, he rested himself in the Council Chamber, and
there entering the Presence, was at the door received by the Lord Chamberlain,
there presented by his Predecessor Seignior Landi, he spoke breifely, and
departed.

Having visited his Predecessor the Saturday before, and after at the same time
himself (something unseasonably perhaps before he had had his Audience)
Seignior Landi seemed to complain (as of a neglect cast upon his Successor)
that he had not yet received a welcome from his Majesty by some person of
Title, as had been (he said) the Custom of proceeding toward all his
Predecessors. Wherewith I acquainted my Lord Chamberlain, brought for an
answer from his Lordship, that he understood not but that the Complement of
wellcoming Ambassadors from the King upon their Arrival, had been-onely used
at such times as their Audience was excused for having been deferred for reason
of some instant pressing affairs of his Majesty, but that for this time, the
interim would be so small between his Arrival, and his Audience, as that the
visit would hardly be given, or at the least would be excusable, if omitted;
which answer passed for current both with him, and the other, as he professed
to me when I first visited him after his Audience, only he desired that my
Lord Chamberlain would but intimate his reason to him personally when he would
next see him, that he might receive the more honor from his own Testimony, as
he did after to his satisfaction.

His Predecessor next day after his Audience, took leave of his Majesty,
accompanied to it at Greenwich by the Lord North, And also the girdle and hang
er.
when he received the honor of Knighthood from his Majesty and had the day
after (according to Custom) the Sword wherewith he was Knighted sent to him
from his Majesty, and two or three days after an addition to his Arms, in
memory of his employment hither.

June the thirteenth, the Russian Ambassador being upon his departure (after I
had the day before assured my Lord Chamberlain (whereof he doubted) that
Ambassadors from those parts had usually at their parting (as at their first
Arrival) some person of Title to accompany them to their imbarking, I went in
my Lord Chamberlains name (as for his Majesty's Service) to the Lord Stanhop,
who accepted of it, we went together the next day in the Kings Coach to the
Ambassadors House, and thence with five other to the Tower Wharffe, where his
Lordship leaving the Ambassador. This entered the Kings Barge (his followers in
an other,) and with the Company of Sir John Merrick, Alderman Hammersley, and
other Merchants, we came to Gravesend, Lodged at the Christopher, were there
Feasted that night by the Muscovy Company, and the next morning making use of
the Kings Barge to carry us to their Ships riding four miles off at Tilbery,
he there imbarkt, and we returned that night to London.

The 24. of June, The Venetian Ambassador Ordinary, Seignieur Girolomo Lando
parted from London without the Master of the Ceremonies attendance to Gravesend
(his Company spared them as not of use, or Custom for an Ordinary at
departure) neither had he the Kings Barge appointed for his Transport; whereat
the chief Barge-Master Warner (respecting his Interest) murmured, as at a
course unusual, and with wrong to the Ambassadors quality.

But herein he was mistaken, the use being (as has bin said) otherwise. The
Thursday before his parting, on the Monday, when it was not known but that he
would be gone the Saturday, he had received not one word to the purpose of his
Present, when it should be brought him: Inso much as glancing (in discourse
with me) at the affront (as he called it) like to be put upon him in his
particular, but in the general upon his Republic, Meaning Sir Jews Lewkener
who could never relish that States Ministers, as Troppo steretti dimano.
(not unlike to proceed (he said) from some ill affected to it) I wrote to my
Lord Chamberlain about it, and his Lordship with some passion recommending the
consideration of it to the Lord Treasurer, Order was given, and the business
effected after the proportion (as my Lord Chamberlain told me) of 1200. ounces
of gilt plate, being two hundred more then were given his Predecessor
Forscareni) as with more respect to his better merit, and to his nobler fashion
of carriage here toward persons of all conditions, beyond any or most of his
Predecessors.

After the young Prince ( Landsgrave of Hessen) had made about three moueths
stay in England (in which time he made a posting Journey to see Scotland) he
went in Coach with my company to Windsor, there to take leave of his Majesty
the sixth of July, but could not have his Audience (being remitted with reason
of his Majesty's then pressing affairs) till Tuesday, when after the Sermon
(whereat he was present) entering with my conduction by the door of the Terras
Stairs into the Presence, I received command to bring him through the Princes
Lodgings into a Back-withdrawing Room there behind the Kings Privy Lodgings,
whence the King coming to him, he with his two Assistants (Counselors to his
Father) Master Klingelbuck, and Master Zoble, had his Audience, and Farewell of
the King, and of the Prince also in the same place. Thence he returned to
London, and the sixth of July imbarqued for Gravesend, whether I accompanied
him, though without Order, or without use of the Kings Barge, or other respect
of Extraordinary Honor by Present, or the like, only I moving the Lord
Admiral (the Marquis of Buckingham) for a Ship of his Majesty to transport him
(in regard of some hazard to his person not unlikely to come from the
Dunkerkers, if they should light on him at Sea, he being then in the States pay
Commander of a Company) he had assigned him a Lesser of two Ships, then riding
in the Downs, 24 pouud.
which by directions of Sir William Saint John's Vice Admiral, was to take him
in at Dover.

A Mask to be presented by the Prince, the Marquis of Buckingham, and other
Gentlemen on Twelfnight, 1622. was for that day, and a second remitted till
Sunday the ninth of January, principally with regard to his Majestes
indisposition, but as some thought, not without expectation that the States
Ambassadors would first be gone, to avoid the distaste that might be taken
from their not Invitation, whereto it seemed his Majesty (for some Spanish
respect as was thought) had no great affection. But they staying, (their
business with the Merchants, about composing the East-Indian differences being
not yet concluded) diverse underhand passages, and discourses for and against
the sight of the Mask, were carried to and fro as much as might be to content
them, and not displease others. For first, they had an offer made them to have
a Box appointed them apart and by themselves only, which they absolutely
refused, Ambassadors Ordinary before having had (said they) the honor to sit
with his Majesty in the same place together with the French, and other Kings
Ambassadors (as also with the Spanish, till that Question fell between him and
Sir Noell Caron) but the intention in truth was, that they should not then be
invited (at least to be ranked in public, as they pretended it to be their due
al par delle Test Coronate) and reasons were framed to keep them off from
discontent, as well as from their appearance there, but they might seem not of
the Substantiallest. As first, that the States having given their assistance to
the Rochellers against the French King, the presence of their Ministers would
be distasteful, and in a manner incompatible codem loco, tempore and honor
with that Kings Ambassadors, but this proved not exclusion, the French intended
to make no such, having (as he said to me) no order for it, neither had the
pretended distasts for the States former assistance yet passed (he said) so
far, as to public notice, and exception from the King his Master. Another
exclusion was obtruded upon their pretense of Precedence to the Duke of Savoys
Ambassador, but no such Ambassador being now in England, there wanted ground
for that exclusion also. Arsennes Stavencts and Basse.
The last was against their number, that they could not all there be
conveniently seated together with his Majesty, with the other Ambassadors
invited; but this Bar they removed by their answer, that if they might have the
honor of an Invitation, there should be but one of them present to receive it,
esteeming that a sufficient honor to the rest absent. In a word, when neither
these reasons, nor others would serve to still their Exceptions against their
not being invited, they were referred to adventure of content, or not content,
and so were not at all invited, Only a dozen of their followers had places
assigned them over the Lord Chamberlains Box at the entrance into the
Banqueting House from the Princes Galleries. Monsieur de' Arsennes Son, and
their Secretary Sr. Constantine Huggins, were placed on the form beneath the
Lords. The French Ambassador that night, and the Venetian supped with the Duke
of Lenox, and entered the Room with the King, both seated there on his left
hand; the French even with him, and the Venetian somewhat more forward.

The Negotiation of the States Ambassadors with our East-Indian Merchants,
being brought (in appearance) to a final conclusion, the Master of the
Ceremonies only (without any Titular Person) was sent for them with the Kings
Coach ( January the one and twentieth) to take their leaves of his Majesty, but
a new difference in the interim occuring, they were sent to at two of the Clock
(the instant of their setting forth, and were stayed their Journey; which
appointed for the Friday following, they had again the Kings Coach (with the
Master of the Ceremonies, and one other) sent for them, and entering White Hall
by the Park, and Tiltyatd Gallery, they attended his Majesty's time (he being
then ill at ease) in the Chamber of Ordinary Audience next that of the Stone
Table, whereinto (after an hour) they were called by Mr. Secretary Conway, and
being there (with the Commissioners for that business) upon point of signing
their general agreement) a new question arose from the Merchants with
exception against the validity of their caution, which lasting til late at
night (Mr. Secretary in the mean time passing often between them, and the King)
they had a dismission for the next days Audience of his Majesty, to which the
Earl of Warwick had appointment to conduct them (his Lordship having said in
the hearing of some of the Lords, who after told it to the Lord Chamberlain)
that it was fit some person of honorable Title (not Sir Jews Lewkner only)
should be sent to their Lodgings to accompany them to Court at their last
Audience, (which my Lord Chamberlain excusing, as forgotten by him, having not
been put in mind of it (he said) by Sir Jews) it was against the next day
provided for, when the Earl of Warwick accordingly (attended with two or three
other Noblemen and diverse Gentlemen of the Kings Servants, in eight or nine
Coaches besides the kings) brought them to Court, where passing through the
Guard Chamber, and Presence into the Council Chamber on the late Queens side,
they there rested, till the Lords Commissioners for their business came to
them, and after an hours expense in discourse about some remaining rubs, It was
finally agreed on, and the Lord together with the Ambassador having signed to
the accord, their Lordships leaving them, repaired to the King, and after them
followed the Ambassadors through the late Queens Lodgings into the Privy
Gallery, where entering the Kings withdrawing Chamber, they there took their
leaves (the three Ambassadors with Sir Noell Caron first, and after the other
inferior Commissioners (strangers) for that business.) Monsieur Stavenets was
there Knighted, and two other having been knighted before, viz. Monsieur de
Arsennes, by the King of France, and Monsieur Basse by the King of Sweden.

The next day being to take leave of the Prince, they had sent for their
conduct Sir Robert Car, Gentleman of his Highness Bedchamber, with the Kings,
and Prince's Coaches, entering by the Privy Garden Gate at White Hall, and
thence (by the further end of the long Stone Gallery) into the Prince his
Lodgings, where in his Chamber of presence he gave them their Audience and
farewell, thence they went to visit, and take leave of the Marquess of
Buckingham, and so home.

The first of February, after they had spent here the full time of fourteen
months in Negotiating, and had had of the King, and Council above sixty
Audiences, they went in Coaches of their own (without the Kings) to Tower
Wharffe, and there embarked in hired and borrowed Barges to their Ships which
laid not far off, and were purposely sent to transport them. This default of
the Kings Coach and Barge at their parting (ever wont at that time to serve
Ambassadors) proceeded from the Master of the Ceremonies, who should have been
my Lord Chamberlains Remembrancer) for I acquainted his Lordship after with the
omission, and I had for answer, that he knew not of the certain time of their
departure, which the Master of the Ceremonies might, and ought to have
observed, if he had not learned overmuch to some others particular
satisfaction, The Spanish Ambassador.
or been over partial etc. At ten in the morning when they were all ready to
depart, the Present from his Majesty was not come, which (for that slackness)
they were upon point of leaving behind them, but the Master of the Jewel-House,
Sir Henry Mildmay, even then in tempore, arriving, and personally presenting it
(as he said his Majesty had particularly commanded him (though that might seem
to have been said, ad captandum) they received for each of the three
Commissionershares five hundred ounces of fair gilt plate, and to their
Secretary Sir Constantine Huggins a Chain of Gold of a hundred marks (more by
twenty pound then he had the other time of his being here) bestowed on him,
which my Lord Chamberlain told me he himself had caused to be so increased,
done as a Cast (he said) of his Office to a person worth. They gave at the
instant of their parting no gratuities to any (that I could hear of) excepting
to the Master of the Jewell-House) who discovered no great satisfaction in
matter or manner to that purpose) only they had set down in a list the names of
such as they intended should be gratified after their departure (as they
signified to Sir Jews Lewkener, and to my self, who three days after
received from the hand of Sir Noell Carone, (coming personally (in all their
names to my House) a purse and in it fifty pieces. 50. pound.


Monsieur de Boiscot Ambassador Extraordinary from the Archduke, Arriving at
London, Who had been here before Ordinary Ambassador. An. 1612.
while the King was at Theobalds in his way to New Market, and setting forth
from London, (in Company of the Spanish Ambassador, Don Carlos de Coloma to
come for their Audience of his Majesty) On Sunday the 23 of February, lay at
Ware the first night, the next at Royston, the third at Cambridge, where in
Trinity College, the Masters Lodgings were taken up for them, and the Kings
Officers of his House appointed to serve them being defrayed there, and all the
way out, and home by his Majesty, but not before nor after in London. The
Wednesday following they were fetched (by the Lord Walden, with three or four
Gentlemen, the Kings servants in the Kings Coach, and others appointed for
their Journey) to New Market, where straight entering the Court for their
repose in the Princes Lodgings, (his Highness being then gone for Spain) they
were introduced by the Earl of Arrundel, meeting them at the Presence, then to
the Privy-Chamber door, through it, and the withdrawing Chamber, into the Kings
Bedchamber (where all other, but the Agent of the Archdutches Monsieur Van
Mall, who attended him there) were excluded; they had an hours Audience of his
Majesty, and returned that night to Cambridge. The next day passing their time
in sight of several Colleges, and of the Schools, (where at a Congregation
purposely called) they were admitted Masters of Arts, and heard after that a
disputation in Philosophy) they the next morning parted thence to Audely-end
and entertained there that night by the Lord Walden in absence of his Father
the Earl of Suffolk) they the next day came to London.

1623
In May. I received his Majesty's command to attend the Earl of Rutland
(appointed Admiral General of the Fleet sent for Spain to transport the
Prince and the Infanta to England) with order, and Instructions, that as soon
as his Lordship should be come to Saint Andera (our Port assigned) I should
carry to the Prince (wheresoever he should then be abiding in Spain) the news
of the Ships Arrival for his, and the Infantas Service. Sir Thomas Somerset
Son to the Earl of Worcester, had obtained the like employment from his
Majesty after I had received mine, which I stirring in, as being a derogation
from my Service, his Majesty was pleased to resolve it with this signification,
That he had sent Sir Thomas Somerset, as a Person of more eminent quality for
the more honor of the employment, and me as his Ordinary Servant, and Officer
of the Ceremonies for my more near, and useful attendance on it. Imbarqued,
and my Cabine marked for me in the Admiral of the Fleet (the Prince Royal) I
kept on the same course with the General from the Downs to Portshmouth, to
Waymouth, to Plimmouth, and thence to Spain with the slow motion, that the
winds lent us in above three months time from our first falling to the Downs,
till upon the eleaventh of September we entered the Port of Saint Andera in
Biscay (where meeting an assurance, that the Prince was already come within a
day or two's Journey of that Port (with intention to imbarke himself, and
company (being till then out of hope of our Ships so opportune an Arrival) in
the two Ships of Sir Francis Stewart, and Captain Love, that had lain there
(for his Highness Service long before our coming) though there were some
discourse about the fitness or not of Sir Thomas Somersets, and my going to
meet the Prince, before we should hear he were come into the Town of Saint
Anderas, my reasons (and resolution with them) for discharge of the Service
which we were sent for, viz. to carry the news (as soon (as we should come to
Spain) of the Fleets readiness there) prevailed, and he and I rowed immediately
to shore, whence ryding that night over the mountains in most dark, and
Tempestuous weather, we met his Highness about six leagues up within Land
early the next morning, when (besides the Joy his Highness received at our
encounter, and the Fleets Arrival (a news that he said made him look upon me,
when I told it, as on one, that had the face of an Angel) the Duke of
Buckingham, when I after met him, and told him the like, to express his
content, kissed me, and drawing from his finger a Diamond of above an hundred
pounds value) gave it me for a present. As soon as his Highness was come to
Saint Andera, he committed to my charge and attendance an Ambassador
Extraordinary Don Dicgo Hurtado de Mendoza, and honorable Person of that House
(one that I had known, and received honors from in Spain nine years before,
when I was sent thither with a present from his Majesty) and was now sent by
that King to wait on the Prince to England, and to bring back an account of
his sase Arrival there. He was quartered, and I with him, in Sir Francis
Stewarts Ship (the Saint George) out of which I accompanied him one day in the
Port of Saint Andera, and another at Sea, to his Audiences of the Prince aboard
his Ship, and a third time in the Castle of the Isle of Silley, wherein the
Winds in our return had forced us. The third day of the Prince his stay for
wind at Saint Anderas (in which Town his Lodging was prepared (though he lay
every night on Shipboard) upon an occasion offered of a storm that took him
the first Evening, when having been aboard (and the Spanish Lords also that had
accompanied him from Court) he intended to return on shore in a Barge, but
was with hazard of drowning to himself, and all with him driven to lie for
that night in one of the other Ships, which they happily recovered) he made a
Dinner for the Grands, and the rest of quality in the great Cabbyne of the Ship
called the Prince, where at his own Table, placed cross at one end of the room
sat himself, the Spanish Ambassador mentioned, our Kings Ambassadors Sir
Walter Ashton) the Cardinal de Capata, and the Conde de Gondemar. all the other
Tituladoes, and persons of quality, being placed at another Table set long
ways; no man but I, Sir William Crosts, one of his Highness Gentlemen, and
such as must necessarily attend the service being allowed Entrance. The wind
coming fair of Oct. His Highness parted from Saint Andrews, and the fifth of
October (having in the mean time touched at Silley, and passed some foul
weather) he came before Portsmouth, where he, and the Duke of Buckingham
immediately landed. The Ambassador Mendoza held it his duty immediately to follow
them, so went on shore, (and I with him, though somewhat over-late) that he
might there personally congratulate his Highness safe Arrival, when his
Highness in his haste to Court, rode out at one gate before we could land and
enter the other. There lodging the Ambassador by the Mayors Billetting, we
passed three nights before we could be provided, (in that troublesome time of
so many men's landing) with Coaches, Carts, and Horses for his proceeding to
London. To which purpose sending a Warrant, (which I had before proviseonally
gotten at Sea with the Duke of Buckinghams hand to it) to Sir Daniell Norton a
Justice of Peace in Hampshire, he sent in three Carts, whereof we employed but
two, and sufficient number of Sadle Horses, and his own Coach, and four Horses,
with which, and with the Prince his (left purposely by his Highness for that
Service) we set forward to London the eighteenth of October, went that night to
Petersfield twelve miles, and the next day to Gilfford, twenty miles, where the
Ambassador being met, half a mile from the Town by one of the Viscountess of
Annundales Gentlemen (her Lord waiting then on the King in his place of
Gentleman of the Bedchamber) with an Invitation to Lodge at her House, it was
accepted. The Master of the Ceremonies with three or four Gentlemen came that
night to us, having brought with them three or four hired Coaches, and one
with six mules sent the Ambassador Extraordinary, by the Marquess de la
Inojosa, who sometime before arrived in England.

The next day the Marquess mentioned, and the other Ambassador Extraordinary
Don Carlos de Coloma met us (Answerable to an assignation given by Sir Jews
Lewkner) about four miles from London, with half a dosen more coaches. Then
the Ambassadors quitting their own Coach, and entering the Princes, were all
arrived in the Evening at Excester House, their appointed Lodging, where Lodged
also with them Don Hurtado de Mendoza out of his own, and the other Ambassadors
election, after offer had been made him, both for his Lodging, and defraying at
his Majesty's charge (but was excused by the Marquess de la Inojosa with saying
he should be his guest while he remained in England) so much I signified the
next Morning to Don Diego from my Lord Chamberlain, with intimation further,
that if he found himself not Lodged, or treated to his mind, he should have
other provisions elsewhere, adding that his Majesty (and particularly the
Prince) had given my Lord Chamberlain an especial charge to do him honor in
all things, and to procure him his full Satisfaction. To this offer he replied
with many thanks, but with refusal, saying, the Marquess was his kinsman and
with him he would quarter, and defray himself (the furniture and Hangings of
his Chamber supplied him from the King, being (he said) an honor sufficient
for him.) There he remained, and at three days end I was sent to him from my
Lord Chamberlain to know his desire for his Audience, and to let him know
withal, that if he had aessicted a speedy dispatch, his Lordship would write
to the King for it, that going from London the Wednesday, and coming that day
or the next to Royston, he might the next day after have his Audience, the King
having dessigned his remove from thence on Saturday to Fincham-brook, a place
that afforded no commodity for his reception; or otherwise, if he were not
pressed by his Affairs, he might be pleased to respite his Journey to the King,
till his Majesty should return to Theobalds, where he would not be till a
Fortnight after. This latter offer he made choice of, as of the most proper
allowance of time to provide himself of Liveries etc. for his followers, of
which he came unprovided.

In the mean (within four or five days of his Arrival at London) his
Lordship willed me to know of him if he would be pleased to receive visit from
him, and other Noblemen that owed, and would discharge their respects; which
offer he thankfully accepted of, and received on the next day from his Lordship
and the Earl of Arrundell coming to him both together. The thirteenth of
October, the Marquess de la Inojosa, and Don Carlos de Coloma set forth toward
Royston to congratulate the Prince his return not yet seen by them, his
Highness remaining yet with the King, but being on their way as far as
Buntingford, they there met a message from Mr. Secretary Conway in name of his
Majesty, either that they should be pleased to come presently to his Majesty's
Presence (and from that to the Princes) and return that night to Buntingford
(Royston being a place, the messenger said (as he was willed) of ill reception)
or to stay at Buntingford that night, and have their Audience the next day, and
so return.

This choice seemed somewhat round, and of hard digestion to the Marquess, and
passed not without Exception comparatively against the much different Treatment
of the French Ambassador the week before, who had (he said) both supped and
Lodged in Court at Royston (though this his Treatment was sudden, as was his
coming thither by Post, with only two Gentlemen congratulate the Prince at his
Arrival) who prevended by the same Ambassadors Servant with a congratulation
at his Landing at Durham House Stayres in name of his Master, and having
assured him he should be the first Ambassador he would give access to) his
Highness was immediately after sent to from the Spanish Ambassador to the same
congratulating purpose, The wind coming now about for France.
but he refused his demanded Audience with excuse of his have of repair to the
King his Father. In conclusion the Marquess went to Royston, and had so good
respects (out wardly at least) from his Majesty and the Prince, as he (in
countenance) made show of good satisfaction but etc.

About a week after Don Hurtado de Mendoza his Arrival, I dined with the
Venetian Ambassador Seig. Valeresso, he upon notice taken of my former
acquaintance with the other, desired me to let him know (after he had first
told me how he had sent a Gentleman to the Marquess de la Inoj^sa with a
congratulatory visit, and that for the title given the Marquess of Excellenza,
he had returned his thanks in the third Person only) that he was his humble
Servant, and desired to perform personally all due Complements, but that he had
found a door shut, which hindered him of Entrance, so hoped he would pardon
him, and to that purpose. To this, I brought him answer from the Marquess, that
he had heard of his worth, desired his acquaintarve, and good Correspondence,
and was sorrey that any thing should hinder it; but if it should please him to
honor him with a viset; he could not exceed the Title, which other Ministers
of the King his Master had used; and so left it to his consideration, whether
he would, or not visit him.

To a Sergeants Feast at the Middle Temple, the French Ambassador had been
invited in the first place, and after the Spanish, which known to this, and
interpreted in the sense it ought, he excused his Presence with some business,
that he doubted might at that time be brought him from his Majesty. The French
Ambassador came, and with him the Venetian, and the States Ambassador, who
disappointed of the company they were promised (of the Master of the
Ceremonies) I met them there, and after dinner brought them to their Coaches.

The Marquess de la Inojosa (who came hither Extraordinary Ambassador long
before Don Diego Mendoza) doubting that this would challenge precedence as
being the last, and freshest person of employment from the King his Master
(according to the received rule of Ambassadors come the last and of March
first) wrought by all the cuning means he could to lessen his esteem, as by
entertaining him (under pretense of his Allye, being of his family, and name)
into the same House with him, abating thereby the splendor he should have
received, if Lodged elsewhere, and at the Kings charge (as it had been offered)
and by styling him in his Letters sent to him on his way from Portsmouth thus,
a Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Ambassador Extraordinary de sa Majestate circa
la persona del Principe. Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Ambassador Extraordinary
of his Majesty about the person of the Prince. All this would not keep Don
Hurtado from his pretense (which to some appeared to be cleared by his sitting,
as he did always, at the head of the Table in the Marquises House) which yet to
others seemed but to make him a guest, and that place therefore in that right
^nly given him) nor from professing (as I heard him often) that it was his
right to preceed, and would do so wheresoever he should meet him abroad and in
public, not respecting the reasons alleged for the Marquis that he was
Consejero de Estado, Vizroy of Navarr, and had the Marriage Negotiation etc.

Don Diego de Mexia, Governor of the Castle of Antwerpe, General of the
Ordnance to the Archdutchess, and her Ambassador Extraordinary to his Majesty
arrived here November. 5. followed by many brave Gentlemen Tituladoes and
Soldiers, he was received at Gravesend by the Lord of Bellfast, late Lord
Deputy of Ireland, and by him conducted to his Lodging (the same with the three
Spanish Extraordinaries) whether he came on foot after his landing at the
Savoy, whilst the Kings and Noblemens Coaches sent from Court to receive him at
Denmarke-House, had a Countermand to take him in at the Tower, but the Tide
falling fair (otherwise then was supposed) to give him safe passage under the
Bridge, they missed him, and returned as is mentioned.

Don Hurtado de Mendosa, after a months stay for his Audience, during the
Kings absence from London, received a Message from my Lord Chamberlain by Sir
Jews Lewkner, and by me, That since he had had so long a patience in
attendance of his Audience here at London, his Majesty would not add further
trouble to it, but come himself hither to give it him. So the 13. of November,
the King being come to Town the day before, the Earl of Rutland (who had in
his Fleet brought him out of Spain) was made choice of for his conduction to
Court.

The Lord attending at Bedford-House where he Lodged (the repair thither of
the Gentlemen of the Kings Privy Chamber listed for the Service) a Messenger
from his Lordship brought them word to WhiteHall, as they stood expecting his
coming thither, that there were three Coaches attending them at the Court-Gate
to carry them to the Earl of Rutlands House.

This Message so much displeased them (it being in their Opinion, an irregular
course for them to go to his House, when the Custom (said they) had ever been
for the Lords, wheresoever sent, to take them along with him to White Hall) as
some of them refused to go at all, others went thither in those sent Coaches,
and attended his Lordship with the Lord Windsor, the Lord Scroope, and Sir
Thomas Somerset to the Ambassadors at Exeter House, followed by twenty Coaches,
and thence to White Hall. With the Ambassador (to present him to his Majesty)
came the first sent Ambassador Extraordinary Don Carlos, the other (the
Marquess de lainojosa, excusing that part more due and fit, as was judged for
his discharge) with regard to the Question of Precedence mentioned. After his
Audience of the King, the Lord Viscount of Andever being there ready to conduct
him to the Prince, brought him by the way of the Stone Gallery to his Highness
Quarter, where after a gracious reception in his Presence Chamber, the
Ambassador returned as before accompanied to his Lodging.

The Earl of Kelley, well attended with many Gentlemen and Coaches went from
White Hall (the 15. of November) to fetch the Archdutchess Ambassador from
Excester-House, supplied there with hired Coaches, so many as made the whole
number of them at the least fifty. After his rest a while in the Council
Chamber (disposing the Lackeyes, and inferior sort of Followers to come
behind) that their Masters might have the easier and fairer access to his
Majesty) whereof the Spanish Ambassadors Gentlemen, for want of that Order
failed the day before) he had Audience of his Majesty, and thence wnet straight
to one assigned him of the Prince; he was accompanied to these Audiences by the
Marquess de la Inojosa, and Don Carlos de Coloma in the same Coach, neither of
these two questioning Precedence (as the Marquess had done of Mendosa) who told
me the Evening after, that, that question was resolved by Letters, which he had
that very day received from the King his Master to his advantage, which was
ended, but feighned as appeared soon after. For Sunday the 16. of November Don
Hurtado de Mendoza (hastening his dispatch) had assigned, and given him his
second, and last Audience, which my Lord Chamberlain the day before told me
was to be given him in his Majestes withdrawing Chamber by the way of the Park
and Privy Gallery, as private, whereupon I was bold to put his Lordship in
mind, that that being the last sight he was then like to have of his Majesty,
it would be expected, that according to Custom he should have some Nobleman
sent to conduct him, which his Lordship apprehending as fit; My Lord of
Kneighton, Captain of the Guard was appointed for it, and with a President
Extraordinary and irregular, but for his respect to the Ambassador, whom it
seemed, he desired particularly to honor, or for the more resplendent
attendance of his own person, as Captain of that Band, he brought along with
him (ranckt all the way through the Strand in head of the Coaches) the Company
of the Kings Guard, to the number of sixty, which in my hearing the Ambassadors
Followers did interpret as an honor done their Master, never done before to
any other; and when to undeceive them, (I said) the Guard marched in that
manner for attendance of their Captain; They replied, their honor was the
greater to have such a Lord for company, that had attending him such followers,
so apt are strangers to make use of all to their own advantage. This Ambassador
having finished his Audience of the King (which lasted at the least an hour) as
he told me himself) passed between them from first to last in Latin (a
Language that he was far more bold then perfect in) he regarding neither
Grammar nor congruity) he took leave also in the same place of the Prince his
Highness. The Captain of the Guard, and his brother the Lord Montjoy not
leaving him, till they brought him with the same Attendance to the Dining Room
of his lodging.

Here I think good to insert for suture occasions, and use to the Master of the
Ceremonies, that Sir Jews Lewkner reported to me, that when he came from Dover
in conduct of the Archdutches Ambassador Don Diego de Mexia, Mr. Van Mall Agent
here for her Highness, persuaded him to take his place in one of the hired
Coaches with some of the Ambassadors Gentlemen, and with it to lead the way,
leaving the Ambassador to come in the Kings Coach in Company of such persons of
Court Eminency, as himself should be pleased to make choice of, which (though
Sir Jews and he stumbled at) he at last allowed of; but being come to London,
he let Van Mall know, it had been ever the manner (and with good reason) that
the Master of the Ceremonies employed from the King for the Ambassadors honor,
and to receive him at the Sea side, or elsewhere in his way to Court, was to
have place with him in his Coach, unless perhaps some Noble person were
withal employed in that Service; which assertion confirmed by him with diverse
Persidents and Reasons (the Marquess de la Inojosa, and Don Carlos de Coloma,
acknowledging that they had both severally received him into their Coaches at
their first Arrival into this Kingdom) the Archdukes, and Van Mall with
acknowledgment of their Error, allowed it for requisite. One Reason given then
for the fitness of the Master of the Ceremonies sitting in Coach with
Ambassadors on the way, was that his Presence so at hand was most useful, and
necessary for avoydance of disturbing incounters from passengers or otherwise
in the way; another, that it was fit, the Ambassador should have the Master of
the Ceremonies always near him for discourse, and satisfaction upon Questions
concerning the Country etc. And lastly, for the honor of the Master, that
sends such a one to do honor by his conduct to the Person of the Ambassador.

Preparetion being made November the eighteenth for a great Feast by the Duke
of Buckingham to entertain principally Don Diego de Mendoza, and with him Don
Diego de Mexia the Archdukes Ambassador and his followers of quality.

The Marquess de la Inojosa (it was intended) should have been at it as was Don
Carlos de Coloma, but for the difference mentioned of Precedence between him
and the other Extraordinary; but the day before, the Duke sending to him Sir
George Goring with a message that he was sorry to understand he would be absent
from the entertainment he intended, because of some inconveniences etc. The
Marquess returned answer, that he knew of no such inconveniences, but that if
it had, or should please the Duke to invite him, he would come to his Feast etc.

In sequel hereof the next day at Evening (somewhat before the invited
Ambassadors should set forth, and were attending the person that should come to
conduct them; the Duke sent a Gentleman of his Chamber (Mr. Endimion Porter)
which a Regalo of three large Flaskets full of Provision of the choicest of
three Courses of Cates intended for the Feast; One full of cold meats for the
Antepasto; another with fat foul, (raw, and ready for spit) of all sorts; and
a third of the best, and rarest sweet-meates, all presented with this message,
that the Duke kissed his hands, and would have held it an honor, and an
happiness to have had his Company, but since he would not have it, he desired
him to taste of what he had provided for him, at that at the tasting of it at
his Supper, he would be pleased to drink the health of the King of England, as
he would at the same drink the health of the King of Spain. The Marquess
immediate answer to this message, was no more but this.

For the happiness my Lord Duke says, he should have had in my Company, he
might have had it, if it would have pleased him to command it. After returning
thanks for his Present, and saying, it was easy to conceive what the Feast
would be, when a taste of it was so rare, and plentiful; he gave the bringer
fifty Crowns, bad the Company good night, and went to Supper privately in his
Chamber. Soon after the Earl of Northampton being sent for conductor to the
invited Ambassadors. These, after their reception at York House (the Dukes)
they were there thus placed at the Table.

On the left hand of his Majesty (who was there as a guest inviting himself)
sat with a convenient distance Don Diego de Mendoza, at the Tables end below
Don Carlos de Coloma, and the Archdukes Ambassador; at the other end of the
Table on the right hand of the King, sat the Prince. At a long Table (not
half filled with guests) placed long ways the Room) sat the Tituladoes, and
Cavaliers, that came with Don Diego de Mexia, the other Don Diego Mendoza,
having with him no followers of quality worthy of that place, and Company; and
none of the Marquesses de inojosa then appearing with regard to their Cheefes
absence. After Supper there was a Mask with a fair appearance of Ladie^ at
it, and after the Mask, a most sumptuous Banquet.

The one and twentieth of November Don Diego Hurtado de Mendoza, set forth for
his departure with my attendance toward Dover, and being by me provided (at
the Kings charge) with four Coaches besides the Kings coach with four Horses,
and a day or two before his goods being sent thither in the weekly returning
Wagon, at the rate of five shillings six pence per cent. all the way by land
at the Kings charge.

We laid the first night at Rochester, the next at Canterbury, and came the
next day to Dover, where the wind standing contrary, after he, and one Don
Pedro de Aldeberandino, Nephew to Pope Clement the eight (glad to take the
advantage of the Kings Ship for passage) had in a small Boat set forth the
Haven, and were forced back again (as the Kings Ship at the same time was)
into the Downs, we went in the Kings coach to Deal, where expecting the wind
two or three days with the patience of an hungry entertainment from a close
handed Ambassador (as his present to me at his parting from Dover (being but an
old guilt Livery Pot, that had lost his fellow, and was not worth above twelve
pounds, accompanied with two pair of Spanish Gloves to make it almost
thirteen, made good to my shame, and his) he at length embarked for his
Transport under the conduct of Sir Richard Ringley Admiral of the nar row Seas
in the Ship called Happy Entrance, and was there left by me, but not so soon by
the cross winds, which held him in the Downs almost a seavennight before
they would blow him over.

He was scarce abroad when Letters overtook him (sent from Spain in the
Marquess de Inojosa Pack) with sharp reproves for his resumption to contest
about Precedence with the said Marquess (who (it seemed, after the style of
Spain (different from ours, that gives the last Extraordinary the first place)
was to have it for the respect of his being Gouncellour of State, Vizroy of
Navar, and formerly Governor of Milan, which Letters not only revoked the
Commission he had from the King of Spain to the Arch-Dutches, and the King of
France (as he should return that way home) but commanded also his retrait
immediately upon his Arrival in Spain, to his own House (with a kind of
Confinement) till he should know the King his Masters further pleasure.

The Arch-Dutchess Ambassador Don Diego de Mexia parted from London about a
week after, and having pressed hard for liberty to be transported to the Port
he came from of Mardick near Dunkerk, could not obtain it (for satisfaction
it might seem to the Hollanders, offended, and taking Exceptions at the
manner, and place of his first passage with his Majesty's Convoy from that
Town, pretended to be then by them (at Sea beleaguered) so as he was forced to
imbark at Dover for his Transport to Callaies in the Kings Ship commanded by
Sir Richard Bingley.

A Mask being prepared by the Prince (with the Duke of Buckingham, and others
etc.) for Twelfnight a message was sent from his Majesty to the French
Ambassador (by whom carried I could not learn) to this purpose. That whereas
there was a Mask toward, and that his Majesty was desirous that the Marquess
de la Inojosa, who had not seen any in this Kingdom, should be at it, he
intended to visit him also (the French Ambassador, and in the first place, but
would take it, as a respect to his satisfaction, if (to avoid the encounter,
and question about their Precedence) he might before hand know, that he would
be absent, framing some such excuse, as he should think fittest. To this the
Ambassador returning at that instant no satisfieing answer, he soon after
entreated the Earl of March to present one from him to his Majesty in these
words. That about two years since upon the like occasion, he had received the
like message, but knowing how strongly his Majesty stood then affected to the
Allience with Spain, he would give him no distaste, but with excuse of his
indisposition kept himself absent, that if he should now again do the like,
he should in the sight of the world put a scorn upon himself, and do an
unanswerable wrong to the King his Master, between whom, and the King of Spain
his Majesty knew (if he would be pleased to declare his knowledge) that there
was no question to be made of the right of Precedence; that in this regard, he
humbly beseecht his Majesty to proceed plainly, and fairly without useing any
more colorable, or alternative Invitations (as he had done,) which might imply
a Parity, in no sort to be yielded to by the King his Master, in whom was the
absolute right of Priority. That if his Majesty intended to invite him, he
hoped he would intend also to entertain him with fitting respects, for come he
would, if he should be invited, and if he should not, and the other should, he
would protest against it, and immediately return home to the King his Master
with the account of his Treatment. That further his Majesty would be pleased to
consider, that whereas he was at that instant sending a Person of quality to
the King his Master, he might with reason expect, that whatsoever want, or
omission he (the French Ambassador) should meet with here, it would be returned
in France in the same measure. This message (the substance whereof he repeated
to me two or three days after) was brought little sooner to the King, then it
was made known to the Marquess de la Inojosa, who instantly sent for the Master
of the Ceremonies, and in a storming manner gave him a message (repeating it
twice or thrice) to be delivered to his Majesty by him in this sense; that he
knew what respect had been formerly given the King of Spaines (his Masters
Ministers) especially those that had been here Extraordinary, and what
alternative course of invitation had been used with them, and the French; that
he looked for no less honor to be done to him then to his Predecessors, and
that since it was both his right and his turn to be now invited, he would
expect it, beseeching his Majesty not underhand to invite the French
Ambassadors (as he knew (he said) he was intended) but to invite him directly,
and openly first, and only, that so if (he Inojoso) must be made a Subject for
gazers abroad, it might be to some purpose, and that he might have a just, and
an apparent cause to write to his Master of the wrong done him here in his
Minister, with other words in an high Spanish Style to that purpose, which when
the Master of the Ceremonies had twice or thrice requested him to temper, to
take time to think better of them, and to communicate his intended message with
his Colleague (Don Carlos) he only yielded to satisfy him in this last of
communicating his intention (as he did that night with that much more temperate
and considerate Gentleman) from whom wresting (as Don Carlos himself after
acknowledged) a consent for the carriage of that message to the King by Sir
Lowes Lewkner, the Mask was thereupon respited etc.

The nineteenth of January, having received directions from my Lord
Chamberlain to repair to Newmarket for attendence of Sir Robert Sherrley
(arrived Ambassador from the King of Persia) to his Audience, which by his
Majesty's appointment he was to have there with the advantage and commodity of
his near abode at Saxham, (his first rest after his Landing and long Travells,
and whence his sister the Lady Crosts sent to me to London, to prepare his
access to his Majesty) As soon as he was come to Court I sent my man to him
with norice of my coming thither to serve him, and having received answer of
his desire^ to be dispatched for his speedy return, I acquainted both the Duke
of Buckingham, and Master Secretary Conway with the cause of my coming, and
the address I had from my Lord Chamberlain to him too for my further
Government: so the 27. of January I was sent to Saxham with the Kings Coach
only, and five Gentlemen, the Kings Servants; and parting thence the next
morning early (in obedience of a Command sent Post to me thither from my Lord
Duke after midnight, That the King having assigned the Audience for the
afternoon, would have me bring the Ambassador by ten in the forenoon) we came
with three Coaches, besides the Kings to Court, where conducting him immediately
up to the Princes Privy Chamber (which in absence of his Highness was purposely
hung for honor to the Ambassador) he was fetched thence by the Earl of
Anglesey through the Privy Chamber, and the Withdrawing-Chamber; (where the
Duke met him) into the Kings Bedchamber; There having made his two first
respects of Approach with his Turbant on, (his whole habit being Persian) at
the third, he took it off, and laid it at the Kings feet, and made his Speech
of Entrance kneeling, till the King willing him to arise and cover, he did, and
presenting his Letters of Credence (written in the Persian Language, and
un-understood for want of an Interpreter no where then to be found in England:)
After this, having gracious words, and countenances from his Majesty, he
returned accompanied as he came to the Prince his Lodgings, where Master
Secretary Conway repairing to him, entertained him an hour with discourse
concerning the Propositions of his Negotiatiation, (which he had a little
before delivered to him, and the Duke in Writing, and so returned to Saxham.

Immediately upon this Ambassadors Arrival at Court, I acquainted the Duke with
his intention to lay his Turbant at the Kings feet (though (he said) he had
kept it always on in the Presence of the Emperor and the King of Spain) and
thereby made way for his Majesty's Allowance of his covering, which was
otherwise doubted would not have been permitted in regard of his natural
Subjection (though in his former employment into England (when he wore his own
Country Habit) he had been (after some question about it) allowed to cover in
the Kings Presence. From the same King.


The 12. of February he came to London with my attendance in company of his
Sister Crofts, and others, met between Tottenham, and Newington with six
Coaches, whereof one with four Horses, and hired by me at the Kings charge by
my Lord Chamberlains permission for that day only, his Lordship saying, he had
yet no order for it from his Majesty.

The 14. of February having received an assignation for his Audience of the
Prince at Saint Jameses, (his Highness Coach, and two Horses being commanded to
be ready there at twelve of the clock) I found there the Earl of Arund. (Son
to the Lord Marquess Hamilton, and Gentleman of the Prince his Bedchamber)
with six or seven more of his Highness Servants, that had received Order for
his conduction to his presence. We went thence to the Ambassadors Lodgings in
Fleet Street, and there meeting the Lord North, and some Gentlemen of his
Kindred, we brought him to the Prince his Presence Chamber at Saint Jameses,
where his Highness standing ready to receive him, the Ambassador entered,
performing all his reverences with his Turbant on, bowing himself low at his
second reverence, and touching the ground with his right hand and then his
head, when come near the Prince (who stood uncovered) he fell on his knee, but
instantly raised by his Highness, he fell to the Complementall part, and from
that to the earnest of his errand, which offered to the Prince's consideration
in writing, he retired as he entered, and returned to his home with the
conduction mentioned.

The five and twentieth of February Mr. Secretary Conway wrote me a Letter to
come to speak with me for the Kings Service, which obeyed, he told me the Duke
of Buckingham, and he had received notice of two Ambassadors landed at
Gravesend from the States of the United Provinces, This was when Sir Jews
Lewkner was had in Jealousy for his affection to the Spanish Ambassadors,
and that they had made choice of me to be sent thither to receive them. I told
him (after humble thanks for the honor my Lord Duke and his Honor intended me
in that employment) that I must in the duty of my place receive my charges from
the Lord Chamberlain, and that I thought the Master of the Ceremonies had, or
would have the discharge of that Service committed to him. He replied he
thought he would rather attend the Spanish Ambassadors then the Dutch; and for
my Lord Chamberlain, (he said) he had sought him for that purpose, but not
finding him, he desired me to acquaint him with the Dukes, and his choice of
me, which when I accordingly imparted to his Lordship, he told me that Sir
Jews had been with him that afternoon, and received his Directions to go
presantly to Gravesend with the Kings Barge to bring them to London.

The next morning my Lord Wentworth sent me word; that he was made choice of to
receive them at their landing at the Tower, and desired my company, with other
Gentlemen's thither; whence he conducted them (being two Joint Commissioners
Monsieur d'Arsennes that had been here not long before, and Monsieur Jaachimi
one of the States General of Zealand) with the attendance of half a score
Coaches, half a dozen of the Kings Servants, and as many Commanders of the Low
Countries (whereof General Veere was one) to their Lodging in Lumberstreet.
The Sunday following (29. of February) the Lord Cavendish had order to bring
them to their Audience of his Majesty, with him went the Lord de la Ware, and
other Gentlemen, whereof my self one (though Sir Jews had charge of the
Service) being come to the Ambassadors Lodging, we found so many Coaches sent,
and brought thither to do them service and honor, as our whole number (all
with four horses) was thirty. Having rested themselves a while in the
Councell-Chamber, they were introduced to the Kings Presence in his withdrawing
Chamber (by the back way, that leads from the Council Chamber to the Privy
Galleries) and not in the Presence Chamber the ordinary place of Audience for
Ambassadors Extraordinary (quod nota.)

The next day having received an Assignation for an Audience of the Prince, and
the Lord Compton, (son to the Earl of Northampton) being appointed to conduct
him to it at Saint Jameses; I went thither about one of the clock, with
intention only to be present at it; when hearing that Sir Jews Lewkner was not
likely to be there for his service, I (upon request of the Lord Carew
(Chamberlain to his Highness) attended it, accompanying the Lord Compton (who
had with him two of the Princes Coaches beyond Custom) and two of the Lords,
and on the way in Cheapside meeting them (the Ambassadors not expecting (as
they said) a person of honor should be sent for them) they there shifted
Coaches, came to Saint Jameses, and with their Coaches entered the first Court;
(this also beyond Custom) only once excepted at an Audience of the Marquess de
la Inojosa) and had their Audience etc.

The 23. of March I was sent to them, to assign them an Audience of his
Majesty, the next day at two in the afternoon; but the King the night
following taking little rest (by reason of a defluction in his foot) I was
again sent to them with Excuse, and request from the King to spare their
pains till the day after between three or four. When entering by the Park, I
conducted them to the Ordinary Chamber of Attendance for Audiences, and there
let them know (as I had directions) that in regard his Majesty was not yet
free from his pains, and was then fallen to sleep, they would be pleased to go,
and rest themselves a while at Master Secratarie Conwayes Chamber as a place
more commodious wherein to pass the uncertain time of his Majesty's sleep, and
that at his waking the Duke would come and fetch them to his Majesty. But his
Grace being then with the Prince in Exercise at Saint Jameses; three hours
almost past before his return to White Hall, where at length coming to them,
he brought them to the King by the back Stayers into his Bedchamber, whence
(without entering into Treaty of business, the hour so late, being unfit for
it) they had a quick dispatch and departed.

The nine and twentieth of March, the two Spanish Ambassadors ( Inojosa, and
Coloma) were assigned an Audience for two of the clock, and the States at
four; when to prevent their incounters, the Spanish were introduced by Sir
Jews Lewkaer through the Park, and Privy Galleries to the King in his
Withdrawing Chamber, where they had a loud, and long expostulating Audience)
and I in the mean time (as I had directions) received the other Ambassadors of
the States at the Court gate, and conducting them to the Council Chamber on
the late Queens side, they were (immediately upon the Spanish departure) called
to the Kings Presence in the same place, and making their Entry by the other
end of the Privy Galleries, they had a fair Audience, returning (as the other
did) by the way of their entrance.

1624
June the fourteenth having understood, that the States Ambassadors were to
take their leaves of his Majesty at Theobalds, and that Sir Jews Lewkner had
neither received order, nor intended to conduct them to it, I galloped thither,
and found them dining with Mr. Secretary Conway. After dinner I went to the
Kings back Lodgings, and finding there the Prince, presumed to beseech his
Highness to be pleased to move his Majesty for their admittance to his
Presence, whereupon receiving a command to bring them into the Privy Gallery
(over the Leaden Terras there) they had a long, and a favorable Audience, and
also the like of the Prince in his Quarter.

The 19. they parted thence by Land (toward Margate for their imbarking there,
without provision of Coach or Barge, or care taken for either by Sir Jews
Lewkner.) The little pains which I took in their Service was (beyond my
expectation) acknowledged by them with the gratuity of a piece of Plate worth
-- 30 l.

The 21. of June, the Marquess de la Inojosa (after he had much imbroiled his
Masters, and our Kings Affairs in the Treaty of Marrriage then on foot between
the Prince, and the Infanta, and had forged (as was said) certain reports of
the Duke of Buckinghams (and some other Lords of Parliament) secret Combynation
to his Majesty's prejudice, and to the raising Apprehensions in him (if he
would have cherrished them) against the Prince his Son) was upon his departure
hence; when demanding Access to take his final leave of his Majesty he was
refused it; and without any present sent him, or Allowance of one of the Kings
Ships to convoy him, or of other Coaches or carriages on the way (other then of
his own hiring) went (together with Don Carlos de Coloma his Colleague in
Office, not in disposition) to imbarke at Dover in a Merchants Ship attended
thither by Sir Jews Lewkner (not as Master of the Ceremonies, and the Kings
Officer) but as a private Gentleman accompanying, and assisting him of
courtesy for prevention of Inconveniences, and Affronts (not unlikely in their
passage to be offered that Nation by some of the inferior sort of ours,
especially parting (as they did) in terms of disgrace, and disagreement from
his Majesty.

The French Ambassador Ordinary (Count de Tilliers) after almost five years
residence here received from the King his Master an unexpected short warning
for the quitting of his charge, and for his speedy return home; which remove
(the World said) was of design carried in such have, that the Count de
Tilliers might not make means for his longer stay here, while he was known to
be no friend to the Match, then in proposition between our King, and the French
Kings second Sister: his departure was about the end of June, when an
Extraordinary (the Marquess de Fiat) came hither, who had been formerly here
in company of the Mareshall de Cadenet; and at his Arrival now at Gravesend,
was met by the Earl of Warwick, and by me conducted to Suffolk House (with no
great number or luster of followers) to be there Lodged (as well as defrayed)
not without murmur of the Earl of Suffolk, forced to a corner of his own
House, which he could not wholly leave by reason of his lingering sickness
then upon him. Instantly upon his coming thither, he sent to demand Audience of
his Majesty ( en courser as he termed it) who was then at Windsore, and had it
given him the very day of his coming thither, being Sunday the fourth of July,
after he had been domestiquely entertained at Dinner by the Marquess Hamilton
(then Lord Steward of the Kings Household) having been brought from London to
Court by the Lord of Kensington, with the company (in the same coach) of the
Master of the Ceremonies, and two or three other Gentlemen: he was at the great
Chamber door received by the Lord Chamberlain, and in the Presence or Privy
Chamber (both being come there) had his Audience with much grace, and
countenances of Familiarity from his Majesty. The Prince at his entrance
stood by (as a Beholder) and after salutations given and returned the King
inviting the Ambassador to cover, he excused it, as long as the Prince should
stand (as in his Fathers Presence) uncovered, till at last for these respects
his Highness retyring, he put on, presented his Letters, and after a good time
of entertainment in several discourses, he retired to his Lodging in the Deans
House till Wednesday following, and then returned to London. This House (though
within the Castle) could not be properly said to be of the Kings, See after
when Monfier de Chasteauneuf was here for the Peaces Ratification.
because the Deans, though some French for their glory would have had it
otherwise held. The rest of that Summer, he almost continually attended his
Majesty in the Progress, always lodged and defrayed. Toward the end of
Novemb^r (upon order from my Lord Chamberlain for reception of another
Extraordinary from France Monsieur d^ Villiaueler Secretary of State there, and
hither sent about the same business of Marriage with Pr. Maria Henrietto) Sir
Jews Lewkner went to Dover with the Kings coach, and fourteen other hired, but
much sooner then he needed for the Kings profit (though not altogether by the
fault of his forwardness) but of Letters to that purpose from Mr. Secretary
Conway, for when he was come thither, no news certain could assure him of the
Ambassadors yet arrival at Callayes. In the mean time, the other Ambassador
already here (hastening likewise his encounter more then he needed) pressed my
Lord Chamberlain for two more to other two attending (hired) Coaches, which he
had already to meet him (as he intended) at Rochester, when my Lord imposing on
me late at night the Service of procuring them, I with much a do got them
ready by eight the next Morning, which done repairing to my Lord with the
account of the Ambassadors Accommodation and readiness to depart, Letters came
from Sir Jews of the others not yet Landing, or so much as knowledge of his
approach; this known to the Marquess de Fyat, could not stay, or turn his
resolution of going that night to Rochester, whither (he said) he must go or
fast, having sent his cook and provisions before him, so as parting the three
and twentieth of November, he had too much (and perhaps to little reason, both
for respect of the Kings charge, and of President, as one Extraordinary to
meet another so far off with no more difference of quality between them) he
went as far as Dover, whether no sooner then six days after came the other
from his place of Landing (the Downs) forced thither by the winds, and the
next day after to Canterbury, the next to Sittingborne, the next to Rochester,
and the day after to Gravesend, where he was that day received by the Earl of
Dorset (Edward) accompanied with five and twenty Gentlemen the Kings Servants,
and others come down thither with two and twenty Barges. These (with regard of
the Tides unfitness) were commanded to attend at Tower Wharfe about Noone, and
his Lordship hastening thither by Land in Coach, we rowed two hours against the
Tide, and coming to our Inn in the Evening, waited on his Lordship to the
Ambassadors Lodging, where in the midst of the entery toward the Staire foore,
my Lord was met by the Marquess de Rothelin, brother in Law to Monsieur de
Valliauiler, and Monsieur de Massy his other brother in Law, and received by
him and his Colleague on the top of the Stairs (no sooner.) Thence after a long
contention, the Earl of Dorset entered first the Chamher, after him Monsieur de
Villeaviler. next him (with the like strife) Sir Edward Harbert (not long
before Ambassador Ordinary in France) and then Monsieur de Fiat. At his
Lordships return, the Ambassadors (enforcing likewise upon him the Precedence)
brought him to the Street door. In the time of my Lords Supper, the Ambassador
sent a Gentleman, to know of him his commodity of imbarquing the next morning,
and had the like complement, returned from my Lord by a Gentleman, with the
good night, and the liberty of his time to imbarque (howsoever the Tide would
invite him to be ready against a eleaven of the clock the next day) and after
some question from his Lordship, whether he were again to repair to the
Ambassadors, if he did not personally return his Visit the next morning, and
a resolution hereupon from the Master of the Ceremonies, Sir Edward Harbert
(that had been an Ambassador) my self and ethers there that though they should
fail of their Complement, he must not of his to fetch them from their Inn to
their imbarquing) he performed it, and with the two Ambassadors, the Marquess
de Rothelin, Sir Edward Harbert, Monsieur de Massey and the Master of the
Ceremonies in the first Barge, some other principal persons and my self in
the second, we came to our landing at Suffolk-House, ascended with my Lord of
Dorset (always fored to the Precedence) to the newest Ambassadors Lodging, but
(after much contenrion) could not keep off the Ambassadors company, till taking
leave, and Coacht at the street Gate, his Lordship and the rest departed.

In the time of this Monsieur de Villiavilers stay here (which was about a
month) the King then at Newmarket) his Majesty invited him to his Audience to
be given him at Cambridge, where received, and defrayed all the way out, and
home, and presented from his Majesty with a Diamond Ring; of 4000 l. value (so
the Ambassador himself that pretended much knowledge in Jewels esteemed it) and
with one from the Prince of above a thousand pound value, he there took his
leave, but had after at Theobalds, and London several Audiences, and on
Newyears-Eve departed toward Dover, the other Ambassador accompanying him to
Rochester, with an intention to have gone with him as farte as Dover, but that
Sir Jews Lewkner with regard to the irregularity of his Journey, further (then
had been formerly by president from other Ambassadors Colleagues undertaken, and
with respect of his Majesty's charge for two, more then for one) he diverted it
with intimation (silently given the King) of Monsieur de Fiats changeable
intention, and signification thereupon from his Majesty to the Ambassador, that
he must speedily speak with him, which brought him back from Rochester to his
home at Suffokle-House the day following. Both these Ambassadors were defrayed
to Rochester, but no further.

The fourth of January I received Order for the invitation of the French
Ambassador (the Marquess de Fiat) the Venetian Seignior Pesaro (not long before
arrived here in place of Seignior Valeresso) and two Agents Monsieur Brumeau
for the King of Spain, and Monsieur Van Mal for the Archdutches) to a Mask of
the Prince, with certain Lords and Gentlemen on Twelfnight. I propounded, and
obtained of the Venetian that he would (Sir Jews Lewkner being then absent)
call in his way to Court, and accompany thither the French Ambassadors, that I
might with one labor attend them both, and introduce them (as I had
directions) by the Park through the Galleries at eight of the clock at night
(the place, and hour assigned also the Agents) but being the next morning,
assured by the Prince himself, that the Mask was to be put off till Sunday the
ninth of January, I was upon his Highness intimation sent to disinvite them all
which I performed with the French personally, and with the rest by Letter. But
on Saturday reinvited them for the next day, when about four of the clock, the
Marquess Hamilton, (Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household) then supplying the
place of the Lord Chamberlain indisposed) gave me in charge to repair to the
Ambassadors, and to let them know, that in regard of the inconveniency that
would grow from the intrusion of multitudes of people by the way of the
Galleries (if they were left open) he desired they would enter the Court by the
great Gate, and thence pass for their repose to the Marquesses Lodgings, till
the King should come by, and take them along with him. This intimation was
given also to the two Agents, who had the same Order for their Entrance as the
former, but were likewise diverted, and conducted to a Room apart in my Lord
Stewards Lodgins, which was so ordered of design to avoid their, and the French
Ambassadors encounter, not with apprehention of strife for place, their
difference of qualities of Agents and Ambassadors clearing all such question,
but of distaste perhaps to either from their incompatibility; a regard taken
also in placing their Followers in several Scaffolds to avoid differences and
wranglings that might occur even amongst those of inferior condition, if
feated promiscuously together in a Scaffold; a provisionable care that the King
himself had, and expressed it that day at his Dinner. The Ambassadors were
seated with the King (as accustomed) and the Agents bestowed amongst the Lords,
beneath Earls, and above Barons.

Here end the Services of my Place of Assistant Master of the Ceremones under
King James, who died the 27. of March following.
SERVICES PERFORMED by Me as Assistant Master of the CEREMONIES, The first
year of King Charles.
From the beginning of the Reign of King CHARLES.
THE thirteenth of April I conducted the Persian Ambassador (Sir Robert
Sherly) from his Lodging at Tower Hill to an Audience of his Majesty at
White Hall. Descending at the great Gate of the Court, I brought him, William
Earl of Pembrick.
(as I had my directions from the Lord Chamberlain) through the dark passage
from the Sermon Court to the Council Chamber on the late Queens side, whence
going to the Kings Privy Chamber, I there gave notice of the Ambassadors
arrival to a Gentleman Usher of that Chamber (all further passage being begun
then to be debarred to all, but Privy Councillors, and Bedchamber men) who
conveying my intimation to my Lord Chamberlain in the Privy Galleries, I had a
charge returned, that conducting him by the way of the late Queens Lodging to
his Majesty in his Withdrawing Chamber, no other but my self should go along
with him, this obeyed, he passed with his Majesty some few words of condoling
complement, and returned by the way he entered. The next day I conducted to an
Audience (for the same purpose, and by the same way) Monsieur de Bruneau,
Secretary Resident (as he styled himself) for the King of Spain) with whom
entered only into the Privy Gallery one Cosmo, sometimes Servant and Secretary
to the Conde de Gondemar, but I had instantly charge from my Lord Chamberlain
upon his sight of him to tell him, he must avoid that Room (as he did upon my
admonition.)

Three days after I performed the like Service (and with the like directions
and Service) for conducting of Monsieur Van Mall, Agent for the Arch-Dutches.

The third of May I introduced the Venetian Ambassador Seignior Pesaro to the
like Audience, his Secretary (notwithstanding my admonition) following us into
the Privy Gallery, and by his example the other followers) when hearing me say
to the Ambassador that he might be pleased to leave behind him la sua gente,
the Secretary answered Si si bisoina Leseine la gente, as reckoning himself
being Secretary not de la gente, leaving them, behind and entering with the
Ambassador not only into the Gallery, but into the Presence of his Majesty,
though not approaching nearer, then half the way within the Chamber. The
French Ambassador performing his complement of condoling, with conduction of
the Master of the Ceremonies.

Another Extraordinary Ambassador from France, The Count de Tremes.
sent to condole the death of King James, arrived at Dover, in the beginning of
May, and was received there by the Master of the Ceremonies, with the Service
of twenty Coaches hired at the Kings charge for his Transport to Gravesend, and
thence of an answerable number of Barges to Suffolk-House his appointed
Lodging, together with the other Ambassador Monsieur de Fyat Resident
Extraordinary. The day after his arrival, he was brought to his public
Audience in the Presence Chamber by the Earl of Montgomery, served by five
coaches of the Lords (besides that of the Kings) all covered with black cloth
for mourning; his passage was through the Hall to the Council Chamber, and
after his rest there, to the Kings Presence where, (in company of his colleague)
presenting four Letters to his Majesty, one after the other. The last of which
appeared by the Kings cheerful countenance at the receipt of it, to come from
his then affianced Mistress.

On Saturday the seventh of May, the Funeral of King James was to be
Solemnized, and his Body to be attended to Westminster Church by his Son King
Charles and by all the other Lords, Officers, and Servants in their proper
rancks (as they had (by their several places, and charges) relation to that
last duty. For this purpose, the general Rendez-Vous or assembly being to be
made at Denmarke-House about nine in the morning, and the King himself
repairing thither between twelve and one, many disputes grew between
particulers for their pretended rights of Precedence; about which, while they
were in question, and I attending the Heralds call to my place of march
(either as assistant Master of the Ceremonies together with Sir Jews Lewkner,
to precede the Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber (as the Heralds told me we were
ranckt by the Earl Mareshall) or promiscously to go amongst them as sworn
Servants of that number) I had command from his Majesty to repair to the two
French Ambassadors (where they were at that time reposing themselves in a
Chamber apart) and to wait on them all the way to Westminster Church in rank
next after the Archbishop of Canterbury, as in the chief, and highest place
that could be assigned them; about which, That is, (as by o^der of procession
before.
after some questions propounded by them for their better satifactions, they
were desirous to see the Heralds Book, where their places were ordered, which
showed by Sir John Burrowes (Norrey King of Arms) they took Exceptions at
their rancking, (though it were next the Standard, and nearest the Body of all
other, except the Heralds, Trumpetours and other Officers of necessary
Assistance) because the King himself (they said) went behind the Body alone
(with whom (as Representants of their Master) they pretended an equal rank,
and March one on his right hand, and another on his left. But this not allowed
them (as being against our received Custom, and they having denied it the day
before) they at length seemed to rest satisfied, so set forth at the time
(having first presented themselves with their respects to his Majesty) and
took, and kept both, one even course of Parity, and the latter came marching
all the way on the right hand of the other, though next the kennell (as they
sometimes crossing the street incountered) followed by no other of their
Servants, then such as (to the number of seven or eight) did set hand to their
Trains, marching all the way bare-headed, only the Count de Tremes had
walking, and talking along with him (but somewhat sidewayes before him) his
Secretary also bare-headed. Immediately before them went none but my self
covered, and before me the Mareshall of the Ceremonies, my under Officer
uncovered; and so jealous were they of the least shadow of any man's
incroaching upon their rights, as they would not suffer any other to be near
the Bishop of Canterbury either behind, or on either side of him, then his Page
that carried his Train, and one that walked at his left hand now and then to
ease, and support him being aged and infirm. When in this manner we were come
to Westminster Church, and had entered the Quire, the Ambassadors at the upper
end of it upon the entrance toward the Hearse made a stand till (the King come
thither, and withdrawing himself toward the right hand to give way for the
placing of the Body, that he might after seat himself in his chair during
the Sermon) they passed a short complement with his Majesty, and from him went
round about the Hearse to the North door near it, and then passing without
side of the Quire, they issued out of the East door of the Church to take
Barge at the Parliament Stayres, and thence to their home.

At this time the Venetian Ambassador (who having had his Blacks sent him from
the King in the same full proportion for quality and goodness of cloth as were
sent to the two French Ambassadors) should have been an assistant at the
solemnity, was absent upon this occasion. Howsoever the Blacks that had been
sent him in due time before, might seem to serve for an Invitation (as Sir
Jews Lewkner pleaded after in defense of the accusation brought against him by
the said Ambassador.) He made complaint that the Lord Chamberlain having given
directions to the Master of the Ceremonies to invite all the Ambassadors, the
two French Ambassadors, had been formally and personally invited by him, and
not he the Venetian, except (he said) in transitu, as he once met him upon the
Stairs in the French Ambassadors House, where he Sir Jews having said
something tending to the purpose of his Invitation, he was answered by the
Ambassador, faro quel che mi dira, intimating (as the Ambassador said after)
that he expecting a formal Invitation (with some instructions how to behave
himself in the solemnity) should have been presented him in his own House,
and not so slightly a one in an others, but Sir Jews not coming thither to
him at all, and both the French Ambassadors visiting him, and propounding to
him (as to one interessed in their cause) their difficulties, and the
exceptions they had made to the place, and manner of their March (affirming
that upon the terms offered them they would not assist at the Funeral) was a
cause that he neither made his preparations for the time, nor inquired further
after it, especially when on the day of the Solemnity, he received toward
Noone, a message from the Mr. by the Mareshall of the Ceremonies (which was one
of his maine formalities, and challenges against the Master, that he discharged
not that Office in his own Person) that the two Ambassadors had now fully
considered of all, and were absolutely resolved not to assist at the Funeral.
This was the Tenor of the message, as Sir Jews Lewkner affirmed he sent it,
and as the messenger swore he delivered it; but the Ambassador affirmed, it was
delivered to him thus, viz. That the King and Council were now resolved, that
no Ambassador should Assist at the Solemnity, whereupon, he having been before
invited to dine with the Duchess of Richmond, there to be Spectatour only of
the Solemnity passing by, went thither as giving over all thought of being an
Actor in it, affirming that the wrong he had received, proceeded chiefly from
the Master of the Ceremonies (notwithstanding that when he sent the message he
sent word with all that he was gone home sick) who should have punctually (he
said both before, and at the instant of the French Ambassadors change of
resolution) given him notice of it (he the Master of the Ceremonies, and not
they) being obliged (he said) by Office to those respects.

For this his particular sufferance, and wrong done him in these neglects and
omissions (which he pretended highly to concern, not only his own Person in
point of honor, but his Republic also in reason of State (since it challenged
all Rights and Honors equal with Crowned Heads) he first formalized himself
against the two Ambassadors (but with little remedy, other then with their
excuse of sudden change of mind, and with affirmation, that they had
acquainted the Master of the Ceremonies with it, who they thought would not
have failed to let him know of it) and the next day demanded, and had Audience
of his Majesty (to which I introduced him) for complaint against Sir Jews
Lewkner; who excusing himself with sickness etc. the Marshall of the
Ceremonies bore for that present all the punishment, and was for some days
laid up in the Marshalseys for mistaking (as was laid to his charge) his
message. This brought forth Sir Jews Lewkners restraint a while after.
But the Venetian Ambassador not so satisfied, sent an express to Venice with
the account of all the proceedings. Many were of opinion (and the Venetian
Ambassador said as much to me) that the French Ambassadors so sudden change
of mind, or at least their semblence of it, proceeded chiefly from the Marquess
de Fyat, of purpose to exclude the Venetian, that he might not by his Presence
be a dis-lustre to him in his march, while the last come Extraordinary taking
his place in the midst (as was his right) with his badge, and Ensign of Order,
one would be more conspicuous, and he the less, when a third Person (the
Venetian) should be added to their number, and march (as he would) in even
rank with them. Others affirmed, that it proceeded from the stomach of
Monsieur de Tremes, who would not brook, (and so some said he professed) that a
Minister of a Republic should in so public a Solemnity, march in the same
rank with the Minister of so great a Monarch, as the most Christian King his
Master.

This Ambassador of Venice (upon occasion of discourse I had with him three or
four days after concerning his Princes pretense to all Rights, and Marks of
honor given to Kings) affirmed that their Ambassadors having had always
their seats in Capella given them at Rome, and their Audiences Nella sala
Regale there (and not Nella sala Ducale) al per delle test Coronate, and the
like honor done them in the Court of France by making for them a full Guard in
Arms, when they came to their first Audiences, which was made to none, but to
Emperors and Kings Ambassadors. Also that the same quantity of Wine ( viz. so
many Tonns) was allowed them here in England free of Impost, as was allowed to
Kings Ambassadors, with a difference of a less quantity to those of inferior
Princes. And that he had at the Funeral sent to him from his Majesty the like
quantity of Blacks as was sent to the French Ambassador.
All which, and more were Arguments (he said) of their unquestioned Parity with
Crowned Heads. He told me further, that in Spain not long before, the Emperors
Ambassador endeavoring the abatement of the respects given them there, made a
request to the King, that he would alter the Pragmatick of giving the Title, of
Illustrissimo to the Venetian; which the Venetian Ambassador having notice of,
made it known to the French Ambassador there Resident, and entreated him to
acquaint therewith the King his Master, which he did, and had answer returned
from the King, that if the Title of Illustrissimo given the Emperors and his
Ambassadors were to be changed for that of Excellentissimo, he should in his
name demand, that the like alteration might be made for the Venetian; otherwise
that the already received, and used Title of Illustrissimo, should be
continued, answerable to the present Pragmatick, as it has been ever since
without change given in Spain to the Ambassadors of the State of Venice, as to
all other Kings Ambassadors without difference.

The 31. of May, 1625. Madam Maria Henrietta, second Daughter to Henry the
Fourth King of France, and the then affianced Wife of King Charles being upon
her Journey for England; his Majesty prepared for her encounter and Reception,
went by water to Gravesend, thence by Post and Coach to Canterbury. A day or
two before the Master of the Ceremonies had order for the Provision, and
sending down of thirty two Coaches to serve her Majesty, and the Duke de
Chevereuxe employed then Ambassador Extraordinary from that King for his
Presence at the Solemziation, and final ratification or consummation of the
Marriage. The Coaches mentioned to be taken up for the Service were defrayed by
the King, but Carts and Posthorses (brought in by Warrant sent abroad to the
Country) were to be immediately paid for at prizes usual by such as should
have use of them. The confusion was extraordinary (for want of orderly
directions) in almost all things, but especially in the distrbiution of
Coaches, Carts and Horses, he that first laid hand on them, possessing them,
though unworthy, when others of far better quality, and more modest, were not
at all, or ill accommodated.

His Majesty entering Canterbury was received by the Mayor (who had borrowed
the Recorder (Master Henry Finches mouth for a wellcomming Speech delivered
with much Elegancy) was lodged at the Lord Wootons House, parcel of the
demolisht Abbey of Saint Augustine; The great Lords, and their Ladies that
attended him from London (which were Arrundell, Excester, Devonshire, Saint
John's, Andever, Dacre, de la Ware, Mordant, Wentworth, Harvey, and others) were
quartered severally in the City, and had their Randezvous for Diet (of his
Majesty's providing) at the Bishops Palace. The third day following his
Majesty leaving the married Lords and Ladies at Canterbury, went to Dover for
view, and directions of what was fitting for the Queens accommodation; about
which, and in expectation of the news of her approach, he there spent the time
from Thursday to Tuesday, when Master Robert Tyrrwhit, servant to his Majesty,
returned from France (whether he had been purposely sent) with the news of her
departure from Amiens, and her intention to be on Wednesday at Bolloigne, which
made the King (upon assurance that the Queen Mother (indisposed in her health)
would not come thither with her daughter) alter the resolution he had of
passing the Seas, and the next day returned to Canterbury with the reason of
giving to the Queen some time of refreshing after her Sea-distempers before he
would see her.

But on Thursday, the Kings Fleet not able (for the winds opposition) to
recover Bulloigne, and left for the same cause on Friday, and two days after,
on Monday the 12. of May about nine of the clock, the reports of Canons from
the French coast, and the wind then come fair, made us presume of her Majesty,
then shipping, as it did after assure us of her landing at seven in the
Evening, passing out of her Boat on shore by an artificial moveable Bridge
framed for that use only. The news of her arriveall was by Master Tirwhit
within half an hour and six minuits carried to the King at Canterbury, Her
Majesty rather ill at ease, then sick after her Sea motions, was carried from
the shore to the Town in a Litter, there received Welcome, and presented by
the the Mayor, she went in Coach up to the Castle, and had there the next day
her best and happiest Reception from the King, come that morning from
Canterbury. May 13.
Their Majesty's dining that day together; the King after dinner gave Audience
to the Duke de Chevereux, the Duke of Buckingham with my Service introducing
him to the Presence Chamber of the Queen, whence the King honored him (after
his Audience) with his company to his Majesty's own Presence Chamber for a
sight, and welcome of the fair Duchess de Chevercux. After this their
Majesty's set forth for Canterbury, and within two or three miles of it on
Barrham Down were attended (for their meeting, and reception) by the Lords and
Ladies mentioned, these latter presenting themselves from a fitting distance
(where the Queen stood) to her Majesty, each in their rank, with three low
reverences kissing her hand, and her Majesty them for their greater honor.
That night their Majesty's supt, and slept together. Sic consummatu^ est. The
next day they removed to Cobham near Rochester, and from thence and Gravesend
they came with the loud welcome of great Ordinance from the Ships on the
Thames, and from the Tower to London, May 16. Their landing was at the Privy
Stairs of Whitehall; where in the Shield Gallery stood on each side ranged
those Ladies of quality and beauty, that had not yet seen the Queen, and there
they had from her particular respects of satisfaction. The Duke de Chevereux,
and his Lady were lodged at Somerset House, and had the next day a Visit sent
them from his Majesty by the Earl of Arrundell with two or three Lords, with
diverse Gentlemen attending, who after conducted him to his public Audience of
his Majesty in the Presence Chamber. Thence he was upon passage to the Queen
for the like, but word being brought that she was not well at ease, he was
remitted to another time, and returned to his Lodging with the company of the
Count de Tremes, and the Marquess de Fiat (with him joint Commissioners.)

The next day (being that of the Overture of Parliament) his Majesty (to avoid
the danger of the Plague (then growing strong by the concourse of people) went
to it privately by water, and after him the French Ambassador, for a sight of
the manner of his Majesty, and the Lords first entrance to that great Work. The
Ambassadors were placed, as in private, behind a Traverse on the Kings right
hand, which when the King began his Speech was drawn open. The Venetian (not to
loose any of those Rights he was so jealous of (and with reason upon so fresh a
hazard as he had run) sent to me before hand for knowledge of the course
designed for the Ambassadors repair, and requested he might be admitted to the
sight of it (as they should be) public or private. Hereat my Lord Chamberlain
made at the first some difficulty, as not of Custom (he said) though once
allowed to his Predecessor Landi, adding that the French would be there as
attendant Domestiques of the Queen (that she had been there, as was intended,
but was hindered by her indisposition,) and that no sit place could be found
where he might see unseen; but at last the Earl of Arundell acquainting the
King with his designs, I had directions to bring him by a private back way to
the entrance near the King on his left hand, where in the throng he stood
concealed.

The ninteenth of June, An Ambassador from the States. This was too high and
irregular.
an Extraordinary Embassage from the States brought Monsieur de Arsennes,
Monsieur de Joachimi (both formerly here) and Monsieur Burmania from Gravesend
with Sir Jews Lewkners conduction to Tower Wharffe, where received by the
Earl of Lincoln, they passed on with his Lordship to their Lodging at
General Cecils House in the Strand: their employment was chiesly to
congratulate the Kings marriage.

The 21. of June, Ratification of the Kings marriage.
the three French Ambassadors were by the Duke of Buckingham (with attendance
suiting such a Conductour) fetched from Somerset House, and brought to
White Hall, by the way of the Guard Chamber, Presence and Privy Chamber to the
Kings Withdrawing Chamber, whence (with both their Majesty's) they entered the
Banqueting House. Thore their Majesty's seated in their chaires of State, the
Queen on the right of the King, the Duke de Cheuereux (seated somewhat more
forward) on the left, together with the other two French Ambassadors, behind
whom stood the Lord Keeper, the Earls of Carliel and Holland (both there
imployd in France for conclusion of that matrimonial business) with other
great Lords, and next besides, and behind the Queen, the great Ladies, and
French Lords. There was solemnly and distinctly read the Ratification etc.
After which the King joining hands with the Queen and kissing her, they all
withdrew, while the Room might be prepared for the Kings dinner, the Queen
retyring her self to her Quarter dined there in her own Presence Chamber, the
great Ladies by themselves in the Guard Chamber, soon after the King with his
Ambassadors came to dinner in the Banqueting House; where on his left hand
(with the usual distance) sat the Duke, and at the Boards end the two other
Ambassadors. A Question in the interim growing between the Officers, whether
the place opposite to the Duke, were not the most proper for them, which the
Master of the Ceremonies affirmed had been the custom of one instant Treatment
of three Commissioners, but his assertion was not followed for the betterr
convenience of the said Officers carving and sewering; after Dinner, the Room
cleared, and cleansed, their Majesty's with the Ambassadors, the Lords, and
Ladies returned, and spent the rest of that Afternoon in revelling etc.

The Ambassador of Venice, who had forborne to request or make so much as an
offer to be present in public or private of the solemn ratification of the
marriage (where he thought not fit perhaps to bring to question the intent of
his pretended Rights of Parity con le test Coronate) was the next day
introduced to an Audience of the Queen demanded by her Majesty's Lord
Chamberlain (the Count de Tillieurs) late here Ambassador Ordinary with the
King, and now returned a follower of the Queen) After notice given me of this
assigned Audience, I received the Ambassador at the Court Gate, conducted him
through the Preaching Court along the long dark winding Entrey, up to the
Queens Guard Chamber, and into the Chapel Chamber next it, whence (after
notice given by me to her Majesty's Lord Chamberlain of his Presence there) he
passed on, was received there at the Presence Chamber door by the Lord
Chamberlain, and by him brought to the Queen in her Privy Chamber, and thence
after his congratulation returned to his Lodging without my attendance.

The three and twentieth of June, the three Commissioners from the States had
public Audience of his Majesty, conducted to it by the Earl of Warwick, they
passed the old Ordinary way up the great stone Stairs over the Wooden Terras
to the old Council Chamber (then restored to the Ancient use upon the Queens
use of the other for her Presence Chamber) and were called thence by the Master
of the Ceremonies to proceed through the Guard Chamber (where the Earl of
Holland Captain of the Guard, stood ready in the midst of the Chamber (his
company ranged on each side of it) to receive them) and the Lord Chamberlain
then absent) to introduce them to his Majesty's Presence in the Presence
Chamber. Whence after dismission they turned by the way to the Chapel Chamber
into the Queens Guard, and Presence Chamber, received there by her Majesty's
Lord Chamberlain, and by him brought to their Audience into her Privy Chamber.
This their Access to the Queen was demanded somewhat late that day, but
referred therefore to the time of her own pleasure, only intimating that the
King had granted them that day an Audience, and requesting my Lord Chamberlain
to let her Majesty know so much and with all their most humble desires of the
like honor from her Majesty, but with their due respects of her own best
convenience that day, or another at her pleasure. Soon after these Audiences,
Monsieur de Arsennes, and Monsieur Burmania taking their leave returned home,
Monsieur Joachim remaining here with the charge of Ambassador Extraordinary.
They were at that time presented each of them with a 1000. ounces of gilt Plate.

The Venetian Ambassador having taken shadow at the carriage or mis-carriage of
his service done at King James his Funeral, was tender, and jealous of every
occasion that might touch his State in interest of honor, for which regard,
having received advice from his Prince, that an Embassage Extraordinary was
resolved on to be sent from Venice, for condolement, and congratulation in
August or September following, he was curious to know by my inquiry from my
Lord Chamberlain, what would be the manner, and extent of their reception?
About which employing my self, I could get no more from his Lordship, then
that they should be sure of it to the full of former Presidents, which he could
not learn (he said) had been ever further off, then at Gravesend, whether a
Master of the Ceremonies should be sent with the Kings Barge to meet them, and
a Nobleman of fitting quality to Tower Wharffe to receive them at their Landing
there.

The eight and twentieth of June a Turkish Chiaus or messenger (who came hither
about the time of King James his Death) having demanded Access to the Queen for
congratulation, and being allowed it, I was the same day sent to for that
Service by Monsieur de Tilliers, and in absence of Sir Jews Lewkner (who came
notwitstanding at the instant of the Audience) introduced him to her Majesty in
her Privy Chamber, where she received him with the interpretation of Sir Jews
Lewkner in French, another in English to the Queen of what another said to him
in English from the Chiaus his mouth in Turkish.

About that time, the Duke de Cheuereux (with his Lady the Duchess) took leave
of their Majesty's, so did Monsieur de Tremes, and the Marquess de Fyas soon
after. The Duke presented me by his Steward with a chain of -- 30 l. value,
which was assured me to have been ordained double to that) but I had to do
with the unjust Steward.) The other Ambassadors acknowledged my pains with
thanks, et nihil ultra.

These gone, the Plague increasing, the Court removing to Salisbury, and I with
my family retiring (from the danger of infection in London) to the Country, I
rested all the rest of that Summer unimployed. In the mean time a Splendid
Ambassador N. Oxensterne (arrived at Southampton from the King of Sweden) was
received and conducted by Sir Andrew Kith to the Presence of his Majesty at
Salisbury, Sir Jews Lewkner being then under restraint for his carriage
toward the Venetian Ambassador, and I absent etc. for the reasons mentioned.

Having in October understood of the Treatment of the Ambassador of Sweden at
Salisbury, and how necessary my Service was, and would be at Court during the
absence, and restraint of the Master of the Ceremonies for the cause before
specified, I repaired thither making the best way I could through the danger of
the sickness, then dispersed almost every where over the Country, and being
arrived there found Sir Jews Lewkner commanded from his attendance on the
Marquess de Bleinvill (newly come over Ambassador from the French King) to his
House at Acton near London, upon complaint of the Venetian Ambassador for his
pretended interest and partial carriage toward the said Ambassador, at the
Funeral of the late King, (as is before delivered) whereupon I received the
Lord Chamberlains commands (upon his Majesty's pleasure signified to that
purpose) to attend that Service entered on by another (one of the Heralds) but
quitted upon the charge given me to discharge it, so repaired to the Ambassador
with the signification of the proper duty of my place, and of the command I had
from his Majesty to perform it at all his occasions, whereof one fell out two
or three days after, when going to see that antiquity at Stonenge, I
accompanied him. The next day going with him to render his visits to the Earl
Marshall, and Lord Chamberlain, I had order opportunely to taste his disposition
for his remove, the King being assigned his to Windsore, and Hampton Court,
when I finding his ambition to Lodge in the Kings own House there, acquainted
my Lord Chamberlain with it (who had already given order for his Lodging at
Kingston) and received from his Lordship answer, That his Majesty would never
allow any Ambassador to be Lodged so near him; whereupon letting the
Ambassador know (as dexterously as I could) what order had been already taken
for his residence at Kingston; His answer at first was, that what was his
Majesty's pleasure should be his obedience, but proceeding, he asked, the
Plague having been (as I am told) so much, and so lately in that Town) may I
not be Lodged within the Kings House at Hampton I replied, it had not been the
Custom for Ambassadors to be so Lodged; yet (said he) the Duke de Cheuereux
had his Lodging in the House at Richmond, and so had the Marquess de Fyat. To
this I spared then to reply, as by way of contestation, but conveying his
answer to my Lord Chamberlain, and he it to the King: His Majesty commanded me
to carry to the Ambassador this small resolution. That the Queen having been
desirous for the long acquaintance sake that had passed between her, and the
Duchess de Chevereux, to have her near her, at the time of her (the Dutchesses)
Delivery, and lying in (then toward) would have her lodged in the Kings House
at Richmond, and that she having her lodging there, it was fit that the Duke
her Husband should have his there also. And as for Monsieur de Fiat, it
concerned both his Majesty's profit and his ease to bring him together with the
other Ambassador to one House, when a second kept for them at London, at the
Kings charg (as was the Dukes at Richmond) would be both dangerous in regard of
the Sickness, troublesome to the Kings Officers by their serving in of
provisions for Diet, at two several places, and of great expense. Besides, it
was intended, that if those Ambassadors should have come to lie at Hampton
Court from Richmont, the King would have instantly removed to Windsor, or to
some other of his Houses. To this the Ambassador Bleinville answered, he knew
not that, but this he knew (he said) that Lodgings were marked for the other
within Hampton Court, and to be made use of there at their pleasure, adding
that the Earls of Carliel and Holland (late Ambassadors to the King his
Master) when they were with his Majesty at Saint Cermans, were quartered near
the Kings House, yet would not rest contented with their Lodging, till they had
gotten within his Majesty's own House two or three rooms furnished for their
retraite, and to lodge in at their pleasure, though indeed they spared to make
such use of them. In conclusion, I said, that neither his Majevty, nor the King
his Father had ever lodged any Ambassador in their Houses, while they
themselves lodged in them, and that his Majesty now would be loath to make a
President, that would hereafter beget him so great a trouble, as this was like
to be, and that therefore his Majesty hoped, that the Ambassador would not take
it in ill part (if desirous to give him satisfaction, and to treat him in all,
as the Representant of the King his Master) he did in this not correspond with
his desires etc. Having said thus much to him as from the King, he (not without
some countenance of insatisfaction, and with intimation, that he had but
propounded it only, and would leave it to the Kings consideration, and
pleasure,) there was for that time no further question made of it.

To days after desiring me to procure him an Audience, I intended the King for
it at his return from Hunting, and though it were late, I was sent to him with
his Majesty's pleasure for his immediate access (without further Ceremony) his
Majesty being to return the next day early to Hunting, so the Ambassador
repairing to Court at six in the Evening, (with reception of the President of
the Household at the foot of the stairs, and of the Chamberlain at the top) he
was introduced to his Majesty in his withdrawing Chamber, all his Followers
remaining in the Presence.

The King (upon assurance of the Plagues beginning to lessen at London, and in
other places near about) removed to Windsor, and Hampton Court, and leaving the
Queen some few days at Salisbury, the Ambassador being upon his departure to
follow his Majesty, I let him understand, that according to our Custom, he was
not to have his Posthorses defrayed (though all the rest had been so hitherto)
when (almost at the instant I received a Letter from the Earl of Carliel (to
whom in absence of my Lord Chamberlain I had written for a formal resolution
to that purpose) signifying his Majesty's pleasure, that he should be defrayed
for his Posthorses also, (as he had been for his Coaches and Carriages) but
with a protestation, enjoined to be made by me as from his Majesty to the
Ambassador (as it formallv was, when I delivered my message) that he should be
the last, who should receive that Treatment, and that he should have also his
lodging provided in Court at Hampton, which favor of his Majesty he (at least
in appearance) accepted of most thankfully. This Letter mentioned was written
to me from the Earl of Carlisle which siginification of his Majesty's pleasure
appearing in it for discharge of the Ambassadors Posthorses) upon an account I
had given that Lord (at the instant of his departure with the King) what words
of resentment had fallen from the Ambassador, after I had told him of our
Custom here, as before in these formal terms and with passion answerable.

He had well observed (he said) how he had been entreated here since his
coming in a different manner from other of his Nation and quality; that
Monsieur de Fiat, and Monsieur de Villiaviller were not persons to stand with
him in comparison, otherwise then as they were his Masters Ambassadors, yet had
they received better respects then he. That the world knew well enough what his
condition and person was near the person of his Master, Monsieur le prmier.
being the first Gentleman of his Chamber and lodged always (for diverse years)
next him in Court, though he were now denied lodging in the Court of England
(where others had been allowed it) especially in a time that the contagion of
the Plague might be a motive to lodge him rather there, then elsewhere with
danger to his person, whereas others (as the Duke of de Chevereux) though being
a Prince he named him not as an equal instance) and besides him Monsieur
Villiaviller, and Monsieur de Fiat had had their lodgings marked for them at
Hampton Court. That the Earl of Carliel though he had lodgings ordained for
him at Saint Germans in the Chancellors House, the best of the Town, and near
the Court) would not be contented, till he had his lodging Chamber, and
Antichamber in the Kings own House, and had been treated for some eighteen
months in manner as the world knew, yet that he an Ambassador (who for ought
he knew was not to stay two months here) was refused respects and treatment
answerable in many things. That he saw well enough what had been put upon him
from time to time, whereof, but for doing so ill an Office, as to raise
difference or debate between the two Kingdoms (which would be an ill Servants
and Subjects part, especially in times of our Wars with Spain) he would have
showed himself sensible, He was after re^uted the maine boutefou of our War
with France.
and would have returned the provision of diet that the King gave him, which he
thankt God he had means of his own (besides that he had from the King his
Master) to allow himself in a plentiful measure, and that what regard, and
treatment he had here, he knew how (and was in place about his Master able) at
one time or other to repay. That further, for that one particular of
Posthorses, one or 200. crowns, more or less, was a poor thing in his
consideration, which to be defrayed, or not defrayed, was nothing to him in his
own person, but as he represented the person of the King his Master, he was
bound to take and give notice of it. These, and other the like Stommachous
Speeches he let fall in my hearing, which reported by me to my Lord of Carliel,
and by him to the King, brought forth the Letter, and with it the allowance
specified. The day before his departure, when I presumed that his Majesty's
Officers had or would defray the Lodgings taken up, and made use of for his
Followers, I found the Harbengers all departed, and no Order left for their
discharge. In which regard for the Kings honor and avoidance of clamor from
so many poor men, as had furnished them with Beds and Chambers; I sent for all
their names, caused them to come before the Green Cloth, and there promised
them my best endeavous with my Lord Chamberlain, and after procured of his
Lordship a Warrant for twenty two pound to be paid them out of the Treasury of
the Chamber for their respective satisfaction, but when to be paid, viderit
tempus.

Saturday the 28. of October, after Dinner, when (all being ready we all
supposed the Ambassador would instantly depart) he called me into his Chamber
and imparted to me (with request of my Secrecy) his design to stay behind (
pour se purger (as he professed) to purge himself (but whether of the humors of
the Marquess de Bleinvill, or of Monsieur l'Ambassadure taking the opportunity
of the Queens stay behind the King, for his more freedom of access to her
Majesty I know not) there he stayed, (entreating me to proceed with the gross
of his Train, retaining with him two or three Gentlemen, and the Kings coach,
and assuring me he would follow on Monday. Not to contradict him in his course
designed, I without reply or excuse, parted that day with his Steward, and
followers in five coaches (followed by seven carts for his Baggage,) and forty
four sadle Horses, and coming that night to Andever; we had word brought us
thither, that the carriage with his Plate was not that day come forth of
Salisbury, a knavish carter when he see us all parted, taking advantage, and
stealing away with his carriage before it came to loading, so as leaving the
Marshall of the Ceremonies behind to attend that charge, we went on that night
to Hart-ford Bridge, then resting all Sunday (more for the Frenches
Satisfaction in attendance of their Lords Plate, not yet come, then for the
duty they would have paid the day by rest, though they had their Mass in the
Inn, but first with request of myapprobation for the fitness or unfitness of
it, in regard of scandal) we were the next day at Kingston, where at the
furthest end of the Town Eastward, the Ambassadors House was appointed, but
not yet (by default of some of the Kings Officers) Lodgable; so as returning
into the Town, we Lodged in Inns, and elsewhere, as we could on such a sudden
be provided, and not without French murmurs, till they were the third night
after better bestowed in the quarter ordained from them. This Ambassador being
not yet come from Salisbury, the Gentleman of his Horses, and of chief manage
in his Affairs (in observation of his Lords desire, and the Kings pleasure,
signified to him by the Earl of Carliel, that the Ambassador should have a
Chamber in Court (not (as was mis-understood to lie in it, but only for his
retrait, as is before mentioned) entreated the Earl of Carliel to move the
King for his favor to that purpose, when I had already for prevention possessed
his Majesty and my Lord Chamberlain, that the Ambassadors intention of demand
of a Lodging in Court, was with the like limitation, as the Earls of Carliel
and Holland had had theirs in the Court of France, viz. only at time to retire
to.

In conclusion it was the pleasure of his Majesty (and for such made known by
my Lord of Carliel) that expecting no cloth of State, The yeomen hangers had
only began to set one up in his Chamber at Court, but I instantly hindered it
as not fitting, whereof I gave account to the Lord Chamberlain, and was
applauded for it.
which from first to last of his stay there was not allowed him in Court,
(though he had one (as all Kings Extraordinary Ambassadors have) in his private
House at Kingston) and having in his Chamher the allowance only of a
Gentleman, and two Grooms to lie by him in Pallet, he should be Lodged in
Court as a particular or private Person, and not otherwise, for avoidance of
future trouble to the King by President.

This obtained, I sought to prevent another inconveniency, by acquainting my
Lord Chamberlain and Carliel with the Expectation I saw toward of having his
Diet provided in Court, which would have made that public, which was intended
private.

To prevent this, I had order to fall (as I did) in discourse with the
Gentleman of his Horses, and to convey the Kings mind to him (as I understood
it.) I said from report, and collection) that it was intended he should have no
other Diet, then what he had at Kingston by provision there from the Kings
Officers, and that if he would eat at Court at any time, it might be at the
Table of the Queens Lord Chamberlain, or elsewhere there) as a private Person,
sending thither, Monsieur de Tilliers.
when he would from Kingston part of his provision to have it dressed in Court
for increase of his Diet at the Table of her Majesty's Lord Chamberlain; but
this was but discourse, and to little purpose, while the Ambassador himself
remained yet with the Queen at Salisbury.

The stay of his there longer, then he at the first intended (or at the least
in show pretended) gave me the liberty to sisit my home (then at Brocket Hall)
for retrait from the sickness) till a messenger bringing me the news that the
Ambassador was come to Hampton Court, I the next morning returned thither, and
that Afternoon accompanied him with two coaches each with four Horses
(appointed for his continual Service) to the sight of Nonesuch. These two
coaches I increased to three with two Horses to each as more useful then one,
and capable of his followers for their daily passage to and from Court to
Kingston. The fourteenth of November, that he might take possession of the
honor allowed him by his Majesty to be Lodged in Court, he commaded some of
his stuff of more necessary Service to be transported thither, he himself
that Evening following it, and was there Lodged in the Garden Lodgings, where
had been sometime quartered the Lady Elizabeth before her marriage, but
presuming to have his Kichin allowed him there also (ut supra) he was refused
it) for having by his Servant formerly demanded it by my Lord Chamberlain (as
has been touched) his Lordship now sent for me, and gave me in charge this to
say to him. That he beseecht him to believe, his Majesty did, and would give
him all the respects due to his quality and person, and that for his own
particular, he had faithfully endeavored to do him his best Service for his
Accommodation in Court according to his own desires; but he found his Majesty
absolutely resolved not to give way to what he requested concerning the having
of a kitchen, and some other Lodgings for some of his Gentlemen for convenience
sake.

This message delivered by me, he asked me, how the King would have him live in
Court without eating? I answered, It was never intended (for ought I knew) that
he should have further then his first demand, which was a Lodging or two for
his repose sometime, or at the most to lie in, with a Pallet or two, and one
Gentleman for his attendance, as had been intimated to his Esquire before, and
that for his Diet, he might be pleased to take it, (and augment it as he should
think fit with some of his own dishes brought thither from Kingston) at the
Table of the Queens Lord Chamberlain (ut Supra) To this he gave this peremptory
reply; Howsoever his Esquire had let him know, that he must be there in his
Lodgings with limitation as a private person, he was never of the mind to
assent to that distinction so much against the King his Masters honor, to be
Lodged (as the King of Frances Ambassador at Kingston, and as the Marquess de
Bleinvill in the Kings House) but that both the Earl of Carliel had told him
it was not intended, Because at Kingston he had a State set up and his Table
kept.
but that he should be treated in his Lodging in every thing as became an
Ambassador, and he himself also did now protest for it, that he would not be,
and remain there, but absolutely under that title, and would insist upon his
Accommodation in all things there, as an Ambassador from so great a King, as
the King his Master. Which resolution of his I having made known to my Lord
Chamberlain, his Lordship acquainted the King with it, and presently called me
to the Presence of his Majesty in his Withdrawing Chamber, where after I had
repeated the Ambassadors answer, his Majesty commanded me to return to him
with his pleasure thus plainly and particularly expressed. That the Ambassador
might remember, that having requested earnestly the favor to have a Lodging in
his Court to retire to only, he would not at first assent to it, till upon his
Wives earnest entreaty (he being loath to deny her the first request she had
made to him) was content to yield to it, but that he never intended (no more
then he (the Ambassador himself had demanded) that he should have his Kitchen
there, or any other Lodging for any of his followers; except for some such as
were of necessary Service about his Person. That Carliel and Holland being in
France had never any such favor done them there, and that he would have
Monsieur de Bleinvill know, he valewed their condition not less then his,
rather more, regarding the business they then treated on (being of an higher
quality then that he now had in manage) that notwithstanding all this, he
intended no such distinction of Lodging him there as a private Person, with
wrong to his public quality, that he would in all respects treat him so, (the
free use of his House reserved) and that he hoped he would not press him
further to what was against his likeing, and which he intended not to grant
him, so desired him to rest satisfied.

Having carried this his Majesty's pleasure to the Ambassador, he made no
further answer then this. That he saw his Majesty had bestowed a favor on him,
which he meant he should not make use of, in giving him a lodging to lie in,
and no Kitching, to dress his meat in, and without eating he could not live.
That he would only take himself to my Lord of Carlisle for justification of
what he had told him of his Majesty's intention, that he should be lodgd in
Court, not (as was told him by his Esquire) as a private Person, but as an
Ambassador, and so might expect all Terms answerable, that in the style of an
Ambassador he expected, and had order from the King his Master to expect, and
stand upon his Treatment in all things as his Minister; and that if he failed
of this, he would demand of his Majesty a particular Audience for his
satisfaction to that purpose.

When I had conveyed all this to the Kings knowledge by my Lord Chamberlain,
and that the Ambassador had personally conferred about it with his Lordship,
and with my Lord of Carliel also, I knew not how it come about by those Lords
satisfaction (when perhaps they saw no other remedy) or rather by the Queens
once more mediation with the King in the Ambassadors behalf, he had at length
all he craved both for his Kitchen in Court (part of his Diet being deducted
out of that allowed him at Kingston) and for inlargment of his Lodgings, having
all those assigned him next the River in the Garden, where sometimes Lodged the
Lady Elizabeth, but he could not obtain allowance for any of his Gentlemen to
be Lodged there, except only such Servants as were of immediate Attendance.

The next day he had an Audience (but for other business this being cleared)
and the two and twentieth of November following, another.

By this time Sir Jews Lewkner Master of the Ceremonies had by his friends in
Court so solicited his return to the Service of his charge, as the Venetian
Ambassador (satisfied with a kind of acknowledgement from him) was no hindrance
to his re-attendance upon this, and other Ambassadors as there was occasion.

The Coronation being ordained for the second of February, two days before it
my Lord Chamberlain sent Sir Jews Lewkner to this Ambassador for knowledge of
his final resolution (having made some question of it) whether or no he would
be present at the Solemnity, when I meeting Sir Jews near the Ambassadors
House, we went both together to him, and after some small time of conference
between them two part (I called too by the Ambassador) we both received from
him this answer, That he would not be present at the Coronation for two or
three regards; the one was, that his religion tied him not to assist at our
prayers, and Church Ceremonies, but herein (he said) he was not so scrupulous
as that he would not be content, pour le respect du Roy de la grand Britain de
vouloir fair quelque petite bresche a sa conscience. But that which most
prevailed with him for his absence was (he said) that he had not been proceeded
with in his Invitation, as became the Person, and quality of the King of
France's Ambassador, and (as he understood) the King of Spains Ambassador had
heretofore been in a larger, and more noble measure. That he was not before
hand called (as the other had been (at other Solemnities toward) to confer,
and to be made acquainted with the style, and condition of his Treatment, and
placing at the solemnity, whereof he had received hitherto no other notice or
allowance, then what was given, and to be given to the Venetian and States
Ambassadors. That further for him to be a Spectator where the Queen, his
Masters Sister, excused her presence, and her participation of the Solemnity of
Crowning, would be an incongruity, with other the like exceptions to this
purpose, amongst which one was (which (he said) he had reason to take) against
his Treatment here, as not agreeable to his quality. Whereat I interposed this
question, whether, his complaint in that regard extended to that particular of
his Invitation, or to his Treatment in general? he replied, it extended only
to that of his Invitation, and that for the rest of his Treatment, he had
received such respects, and usage from his Majesty, as he could not except
against it. Parting with this answer, we incountered the Venetian Ambassador
where he then was, at the Lodging of Mr. Rossorfe the King of Bohemias Agent,
and could not in a long time drive him from the suspicion of the Ambassadors
earnest, that all this was to deceive, and amaze him, that he might not come to
the Coronation, but by his absence run the hazard of the like affront, as was
put upon him at King James his Funeral, till resolved in the Evening, he made
that appear, which he had before intimated at his House, that he durst not be
present at the Coronation, if the French Ambassador were not, not (he said) for
scruple of conscience (as the French pretended) since he professed to
understand it as an Act of State, and not of Religion) but for the scandalls
sake, which might grow, with censure to him for assisting in one of our
Churches at our Churches Ceremonies, in company of the States Ambassador
(reckoned an Heretic) during a Solemnity, whereat the French Ambassador (a
Catholic) had refused his Presence. So as neither of both the Ambassadors
came, (though the Venetian by question examined all ways possible how he might
have a sight of it without notice of any man) in some corner, but none found
allowable, and I excusing my attendance on him, as being a public Officer,
that should thereby discover him for a public Minister, if I should be seen
near and serving him.) There was only present the States Ambassador, whom Sir
Jews Lewkner fetching from his House in the morning, while I accompanied his
Wife, and Daughters by water from the Savoy Stairs, we were all let in at a
little posterne door on the South side of King Henry the sevenths Chapel upon
a Scaffold there, and there beheld the whole Solemnity. The French Ambassador
had his stand (as he said he would) at the House of Sir Abraham Williams near
the Gate House of the Pallace-yard in company of the Queen (as Bleinvill) which
was his own distinction) and not as Ambassador) where (with her Majesty) he
had a view of the King in his passage from Westminster Hall, to the Church, and
back again.

The Queens Reason (as it was voyced) for not being Crowned together with the
King, was because she could not (they said) by her Religion be present at our
Church Ceremonies, where she must have had divine Service celebrated by our
Bishops, and not by those of her own Religion (as was demanded) for her
Crowning.

The ninth of February following, the King was to ride to Parliament, and
though the Venetian Ambassador had assurance from me, that the French was to
have no other stand appointed him for view of that Solemnity, then the company
of the Queen as a private Person, and not as an Ambassador, yet his jealosie of
loosing the pretended right of his Re-publick in Parity with Crowned-heads,
made him apprehend the allowance of an House taken up for him in King Street
(about the midst of it, where also was assigned one for the States Ambassador
at the charge of his Majesty) to be an Abatement of his respects, which he
affirmed was, that he was to stand in the same House and place with the French
Ambassador, but in the end pacified, he accepted of it; In the mean time a
difference that fell out about the place for the Queen (she affected to stand
in the Banqueting House, or in the Privy-gallery (when the King had given
reasons for her better fight in the house of the Countess, Mother to the Duke
of Buckingham, next the Gate in Kings-street) was a Subject for some discontent
etc. so far as the Ambassador Bleinvill, seeming to his Majesty to have been
the causer of it, had the next day a message brought him by the Lord Conway,
that it was his Majesty's pleasure that he should forbear further access to
the Kings or Queens Presence; which he storming at, and excepting against as an
indignity offered to his Representative quality, demanded by two or three
several messengers, Audience of his Majesty, for knowledge of the Reasons of
his restraint, but was refused it with this limiting distinction. If he
demanded Audience for any particular business concerning the King his Master,
he should readily have it, but if for himself to expostulate his own
grievances, the King did absolutely let him know, that if he came to him, he
would not see him, so as the Ambassador replying; that he was here for the King
his Master, and not for himself, and that the refusal of his Audience touched
the person he represented, and not his own. He the next day refused the Kings
diet, and betook him to his own, leaving the Lodging taken for him at
Durham-House, and removing with the chief of his Train to Greenwich, whence
two days after returning to London, he with the Kings permission had a sight of
the Queen, and the next day went again to Greenwich. He had in the interim
dispatched two or three Couriers, one following another with an account of all;
but at Dover (the Ports being by Order shut before hand) none of them could be
allowed passage till after fourteen or fifteen days (when Master Walter
Mountacue had been purposely sent from the King) they were opened, and the
Ambassador had his liberty of sending his messenger.

About a month or six weeks after, this Malantenda, this Ambassador,
receiving Order from the King his Master for composing of his affairs, and
differences here, and for applying of himself to his Majesty's pleasure, he
had an Audience or two, and peecing up matters, took his leave at a solemn
Audience at White Hall Presence, conducted to it by the Earl of Holland, the
Kings Guard attending their Captain through the streets, but what congruity (as
was done before) quere. and two or three days after departed; first, for a
night or two to his private Lodging at Greenwich, and thence to Dover,
accompanied by Sir Jews Lewkner, but undefrayed on the way, leaving the Kings
Officers and Servants (my self in particular, after my so long, and painful
attendance) ill satisfied with his none at all, or most unworthy
acknowledgements.

About the middle of February, The Merchants of the East Indian Company (having
signified to his Majesty, That a Ship (long held for lost, and then arrived at
Portsmouth) had brought in her an Ambassador from the King of Persia) obtaind
his Majesty's Coach (with the Earl of Warwick, the Master of the Ceremonies,
and other Gentlemen the Kings Servants in it) for his Reception at Kingston,
and transport to London.

These Merchants (with an affected honor, beyond that done to the other
Persian Ambassador Sir Robert Sherley) had procured the Kings Coach to be drawn
with eight Horses (as with the more grace to the latter to disgrace the
former.) He came to London the 19. of February, and was lodgd (the Merchants
defraying him) in the House of Alderman Holliday then deceased. There resting
himself two days, his Audience was solicited, and assigned for Shrovetuesday
following, which suspected by Sir Robert Sherley and his friends to be a plot
of the Merchants by so hastening an Audience to prevent his repair to Court, and
to prepossess the King with the new Ambassadors Reports) he entreated the Earl
of Cleaveland (Husband to his Niece) to accompany him at a Visit he would
bestow on the said Amdassador for his Welcome, and for the declaring of his
own quality of Ambassador from the same King, from whom he had so long
negotiated here under that Title. To this purpose the Earl of Cleaveland
addressing himself to the Lord Chamberlain for his favor in procuring from
the Lord Conway, Principal Secretary, the Letters of Credence brought to King
James by Sir Robert Sherley. The Lord Chamberlain excepting his meddling in it,
as being (he said) no duty of his place. From him the Earl of Cleaveland, went
to the Duke of Buckingham, and by his means obtaind allowance from his
Majesty for the Lord Conway to impart them for so much use and sight as might
serve the Ambassador Sherleys turn for the others satisfaction; so as my Lord
Cleaveland having gotten them into his hands, he the morning that the new come
Ambassador, was in the afternoon to have Audience departed with the Kings
Coach, and seven other (eight or nine Gentlemen and my self accompanying him)
to Sir Roberts Sherleys Lodging on Tower Hill; whence being ready to set forth
toward the other Ambassadors; I propounded the fitness of sending to him
before (to avoid the incivility as it might be interpreted of a surprise) with
signification of our instant coming to him to Visit him. To this his Answer
met us on the way without other complement, then that we might come. Entering
the Hall, (where he then was sitting in a chair on his legs double under him,
after the Persian Posture) and affording no motion of respect to any of us, Sir
Robert Sherley gave him a salutation, and sat down on a stool near him,
while my Lord of Cleaveland by an Interpreter signified, in three words, the
cause of the Ambassador Sherleys and his and our coming to him, but with
little return of regard from him, till I informing the Interpreter (of the new
Ambassador) what my Lords quality was, he let fall his Trust-up-leggs from his
chair, and made a kind of respect to his Lordship. This done, Sir Robert
Sherley, unfoulding his Letters, and (as the Persian use is in reverence to
their King) first touching his eyes with them, next holding them over his head,
and after kissing them, he presented them to the Ambassador, that he receiving
them, might perform the like observance, when he suddenly rising out of his
chair, stepped to Sir Robert Sherley, snarcht his Letters from him, toare them,
and gave him a blow on the face with his Fist, and while my Lord of Cleaveland
stepping between kept off the offer of a further violence; the Persians Son
next at hand flew upon Sir Robert Sherley, and with two or three blows more,
overthrew him, when Master Maxwell of the Bedchamber, and my Lord of Cleaveland
nearest to him, pulling him back (while we of the company laid hands on our
Swords (but not drawing them, because not any one Sword or Dagger was drawn by
the Persians) my Lord of Cleaveland remonstrated to the Ambassador the danger,
and insolency of the Fact, saying, that if he, and the Gentlemen there with
him had not borne more respect to that King whom he represented then (he the
Ambassador) had done to the Letters showed him for justification of the others
quality, neither he, nor those about him, that had committed that insolency
should have gone alive out of that place. After these words, he made some show
of acknowledgment, and said, he was sorrey he had offended his Lordship, and us
by his Act which he had performed (transported with extreme rage against a
Person that had dared to counterfeit the King his Masters hand (which was
always (he said) set on the top of his Letters) when these Letters he had
showed had it on the backside) and to hear (as he had done) that so mean a
fellow, and an Imposter, should presume to say, he had married the King his
Masters Niece.

To this Sir Robert Sherley (who was in the mean time retired behind the
company, amazed and confounded with his blow and Treatment) stepped in and
answered. That he never said he had married the Kings Niece, but the Queens
kinswoman; and that for the manner alleged of signing his Letters, it was
true, that the King of Persia, in all employments of his own Subjects to Foreign
Princes, or in writing to them, used to sign above in the front of his
Letters, but that when he employed a stranger to any Foreign Prince, his
signature was usually affixed on the back side of his Letters, that before
their opening, they might show who sent them. To this the Ambassador replied
with scornful looks only, we all with little or no respects to him departed,
and conducting Sir Robert Sherley to his Lodging, accompanied the Earl of
Cleaveland instantly to Court, where finding the Duke of Buckingham in the
Presence Chamber (the King being even then come forth to Dinner) his Lordship
acquainted his Majesty with our adventure, and I received present order to let
Sir Jews Lewkner know that he should instantly repair to the new come Persian
Ambassador, and tell him that his Audience for that afternoon was thought fit
to be snspended, and remitted to another day, that his Majesty might be
particularly informed of the causes of the disagreement, and disorder happened.
The greatest blot, and fault of this ado, was cast upon Sir Robert Sherley for
his default in his resolution, not to return with blows (or words at least)
the affront done him; which had he done, would have confirmed the truth of his
representative quality, and not given subject (from such weakness, and want of
Spirit discovered by him) to the Merchants to dispute (as they confidently
did,) and to his own friends to defend (...) the soundness of his commission;
yet at length he writing to his Majesty, and beseeching him to send him into
Persia with his two Letters tied about his neck for trial whether they were
true or false, the world began to have a conceit of his unjust sufferance, and
the King to charge it home to the Merchants, with his command, and especial
pleasure signified to them, that he should be senr a long in their Fleet (then
ready to part for the East Indies) and be by them Landed in Persia, there to
make his Purgation, which they (though unwillingly) assented to, and pressing
for the other Ambassadors Audience, he had it (after eight or ten days delay)
assigned and given him, the sixth of March, fetched to it by the Earl of
Warwick etc. Entering the Banqueting House, (where his Majesty stood under the
State to receive him, (without one look or gesture of respect, till coming
close to the Kings person, he clapped his Letters to his cyes (one after the
other) kissed them, and presented them to the hand of his Majesty, but not so
much as bowing his Body at their delivery, only having finished his little
Ceremony, he in his retrait (after some twenty paces made with his back to the
King) turned about and waving his hand on each side imperiously (as commanding
a prospect) hindered by the multitude that pressed in between his sight, and the
Kings) he made a kind of a stoopping reverence, so a second, and a third, and
departed. When understanding that the Queen was gone abroad (whom he meant to
visit) he employed the time a while in a walk with all his coaches about
Saint Jameses Park, and returning, saw her Majesty.

The next day I brought the other Ambassador Sir Robert Sherley to a private
Audience of his Majesty in his Withdrawing-chamber. After many Contestations
between the Merchants and the Ambassador Sherley (whether he were to be
defrayed by them, as the King required, or by the King, since his Majesty had
intimated his resolution that he should be transported to Persia in the Fleet
that was to pass for the East Indies at the beginning of May, and in them also
the other Ambassador, that time being come of their departure, they both
arrived too late at the place of their imbarking (the Downs) for performance of
that voyage in that season, the Fleet, that could no longer stay for them,
being already gone (though Sir Robert Sherley had gotten the start of the other
and embarked in a Pinnace of the Fleet, together with Sir Dormer Cotton
employed by his Majesty at the same time Ambassador to the King of Persia, both
for truth, whether Sherley were, or not an Imposter, and also to fix a Trade
there (which the other Ambassador came to Negotiate) so as they were all forced
to return to London, and there attend the opportunity of departure in March
ten months after, when beginning their voyage (the two differing Ambassadors in
several Ships) they all three dyed on the way, and with them the quarrel and
inquiry after it.

The Venetian Ambassador Seignior Pesaro (called home somewhat sooner then
other Ambassadors of that States formerly had been) parted hence to Gravesend
without other attendance, then those of his Family, having sent me (after I had
taken my last leave of him) a Gold Chain of five ounces weight, and the like
of little more value to the Master of the Ceremonies. He had no sooner passed
the Seas, but here arrived by the way of the low Countries two Gentlement sent
Extraordinary Ambassadors from Venice, the one Seignior Coraro, who had resided
here Ordinary about fourteen years before, and Seignior Contareni, they Landed
at Gravesend (seasonably for observation of the new order resolved on by his
Majesty, that no Ambassador should be met, and received further off then there)
and were thence conducted by Sir Jews Lewkner etc. to their Landing at
Tower-wharffe, where they were welcomed by the Earl of Dorset, accompan^ed by
the Lord Herbert (Castle Island) and other Gentlemen (my self one, not as an
Officer, or listed for it, but Voluntary) with the Kings Coach and seventeen
other (not one of them taken up at the Kings charge (as had been accustomed)
but borrowed of Noblemen (to avoid the charge of the Master of the Ceremonies,
professed to the Lord Chamberlain he would not undergo, without assurance of
better re-imboursment of his money, then he had met with) and were brought to
their Lodgings in Aldersgate Street at the Lord Peter's House, defrayed there by
the King with all their attendance (of almost an hundred Persons) their Diet
compounded for by Philipp Verzellini, an Italian, (who had lived long in
England) at 40 l. per diem, not comprehending the charge of the Houses
Furniture (being all the Kings) and waited on by his Majestyes Officers and
Servants, (whereof twelve of the Guard gave their daily attendance.) The five
and twentieth of June (Sunday) they were fetched to their public Audience at
Greenwich by the Earl of Carliel from their House in the Kings Coach, and
other to Tower Wharffe, and thence by Barges, introduced by the way of the
great Gate, Hall, and Guard-chamber to the Presence, where his Majesty standing
under the State to receive them, Seignior Carara spoke first briefly,
delivering their credence, when the other settling himself, as to begin a more
formal set speech, his Majesty looking about for one to interpret (the Master
of the Ceremonies being retired out of sight, not over forward to do Offices of
his Office to that State) I being called to by the Lord Chamberlain, made a
repetition of the chief heads, and some of the Ambassadors long Oration to the
King, and after of his Majesty's breife replye, which done, they returned
(accompanied as before) to London. The Sunday following, they had a second
Audience in private by the way of the Patke through the Privy-galleries to the
Withdrawing-chamber there, fetched to it from their home by the Earl of
Holland, an honor not formerly afforded any Ambassador to have an Earls
conduct from their House to a private Audience, to which customarily none was
to bring them from home, but the Master of the Ceremonies, though their
Embassage were Extraordinary, and if ordinary, he to have received them no
further off then at their descent from their Coach at the Court Gate, or foot
of the Stayres next the Park. But this honor was done them by the Kings
especial pleasure, and command (as I was told) it might or may be hereafter of
trouble by the consequence, when other overpunctuall Ministers of that State,
may perhaps challenge the like from president.

The second of July, the Lord Conway, Secretary of State sent word to my Lord
Chamberlain (then somewhat indisposed) of the arrival of two Commissioners
from Hamborough, who were styled by their followers (whom they sent before with
their Letters of credence) Lords Ambassadors. Their Letters being opened in the
Lord Chamberlains sight, Mr. Secretaries, and mine, the Commissioners were
therein thus named, Spectabilem and Doctissimum virum Dominum Luntzman Syndicum
etc. and Spectabilem virum Dominum Brand and Senatorem etc. Ablegavimus, which
words made me question the right and reception they seemed to pretend to of
Ambassadors, so far, as communicating my reasons with my Lord Chamberlain, and
receiving his opinion that Ablegavimus was no more, then we have deputed as our
Ministers, I was sent back to my Lord Conway, and by him (when also ill at
ease) with their concurring opinions to the King, who approving them, left me
to follow my Lord Chamberlains directions, according to which I that night
wellcomed them at their Lodgings at Crouchet Friars in name of his Majesty, and
let them know his pleasure for their Audience the next day at one of the clock,
to which I fetched them in the Lord Chamberlains coach only, least the use of
the Kings might have seemed to raise their respects to the title they seemed to
affect (but upon better advise refused) of Ambassadors, they were received of
his Majesty in his Withdrawing-chamber, where one of them having made a formal
harange, containing (besides complement of condoleing and congratulating) a
complaint against his Majesty's Ships lying at the mouth of the Ebb, and
hindering their free Traffic, and an humble request of his leave to transport
through his Seas without molestation, Corn, Powder, Copper, and Cordage to
France, and Italy, their Merchants entering caution to their Senate, that they
should not transport any to Spain (then our Enemy) his Majesty entered,
answered them by my interpretation, that he would gladly continue with them the
friendly correspondence held by his deceased, Father, and did not, nor would
interrupt them, either at the mouth of their River, or elsewhere at Sea for
any quarrel he had to them, or any way to hinder their Traffic, but only
keep them from Trading with the King of Spain, his Enemy, which by Law of
Nations, and in justice he might, and would do. To which purpose they should
further repair to his Council, to whom he would give Order for their access
to Negotiate; so dismissed, they returned, and I with them to their Lodgings.

The sixth of July, an Ambassador Extraordinary, Paul Rozenerantz, sent from
the King of Denmark, arriveing at Gravesend, Then but a Baron and no Privy
Councellor.
was there received by Sir Jews Lewkner two days after at Tower-wharffe by
the Lord Willoughby, Lord High Chamberlain of England, and by him brought to
his Lodging in Lumbard-Street, where he had his Diet defrayed by his Majesty at
eighteen pound per diem. His attendance of the Kings Servants consisted only of
a Gentleman Usher daily Waiter, a Sewer, and two others, without any of the
Guard daily to attent him. His own Train passed not in all a dozen persons.
The day after his Arriveall, he sent to know his Majesty's pleasure for his
Audience, which the King desired speedily to give him, because of his intended
remove the week following to Wansteed. This had been assigned for Sunday the
ninth of July, had not the Master of the Ceremonies intimated that it would
prove improper (in regard, that the two Venerian Extraordinaries were that day
to have their parting Audience at two of the clock (and to alter their hour by
anticipation, or this to come after them, might beget distaste) his Majesty
would have appointed the next day, being Saturday, but that being judged too
precipetate, so to surprise an Ambassador before he could recollect himself so
soon after his Arriveall, and he also apprehending it in that sense; it was by
me made known to him, that he should have his Audience the Tuesday following (
July 11. at Wansted.) In the mean time I received Order from my Lord
Chamberlain to hire two Coaches (of the Kings providing) besides his Majesty's
own Coach for his and his Followers daily use. The 16. of July I was to wait
on him to his Audience assigned at Wansted with the conduct of the Earl of
Northampton, but his Majesty altering the hour of two after to ten before
Dinner, I was put to it at nine of the clock the night before to command an
Assembly for the altered hour, so brought him at his due hour to his Audience.

The 9. of July, the two Extraordinary Venetian Ambassadors took leave of his
Majesty in the Banqueting House (purposely prepared for it, and hung with the
rich Hangings) introduced by the Earl of Mongomery; their repose having been
first in the Council Chamber, whether they came by the way of the Park, a
sudden extreme shower, having made the ordinary way through the Sermon-Court
impossible. Then after took leave of the Queen also. July the 17. They parted
to Gravesend in Barges of the Kings providing, and so far the Master of the
Ceremonies attended them; but leaving them there (as at the limits of all
Ambassadors conduct, or reception in observation of the new Order resolved on
(as before) they were served only by Walter Brisco Marshall of the Ceremonies
for the readier hire of their Carriages at their own charges, as was also all
their Coaches (the Kings for their personal use excepted) to their lodging the
next day at Sittingborne, to their Dinner the day following at Canterbury, and
to their imbarquing at Dover in two Ships of his Majesty's for their landing at
Callis. Though I had done little or no Service, they sent me a Chain of twenty
two pound value, having toward the rest of the Kings Servants carried
themselves as Italian Lesnianti without superfluity, but not without the others
murmurs.

The day that the Denmark Ambassador had his public audience of the King at
Wansted (he having expressed to me his desire for the convenience of admitting,
and returning visit of particulars, before he had seen the Queen with an
over-nice curiosity, having already seen the King) I wrote to Sir Morris
Dromond, a Gentleman Usher of her Majesty's Privy-chamber, that he would help
me to the knowledge of her Majesty's pleasure for his Audience, which he did by
Letter (upon communication both with her Majesty and her Lord Chamberlain
Monsieur de Tilliers) with signification that I should bring him the next day
between one and two in the Afternoon; so as late that night I wrote to my Lord
Chamberlain (for better assurance from Error) what order I had received from
Sir Maurice Dromond, and touched upon the course usual of fetching the
Ambassador at his first public Audience,) from his home by a Person of Title,
but that the shortness of the time, and the two Courts divisions hindering
this, I thought (I said) it would be sufficient, if the Count de Cipierre
Master of the Horses to her Majesty should receive him at his Landing at
Greenwich, so that morning I conducted him in the Kings coach and two other
hired to his imbarking at Tower Wharffe; thence to the encounter at Greenwich
Bridge of the Count mentioned to his repose in the Councell-chamber, and after
to the Queen in her Privy-chamber, the Ambassador speaking to her French,
having (upon my advise) changed his first purpose of speaking to her in Latin
etc. The next day (hastening his private Audience of his Majesty) he sent the
King his Masters Agent, Master Below to Wansted, and obtained it for the day
following ( July the fourteenth) introduced by a private stayre to a Chamber,
where he might attend the Kings time of admittance, which instantly succeeding,
his Majesty in the Gallery there (no Privy Councillors or other near) gave
him his ear for above half an hour, and dismissed him for his return to
London.

The two Commissioners from Hambrough, They had brought no Letters to her
Majesty, yet demanded and had Audience contrary to that when the Ambassador of
Sweden demanded, and was refused of Queen Ann because he had brought her no
Letters.
being desirous to kiss the Queens hand (as an honor (they said) which other
imployd from their State before them had received of the Queen deceased) they
requested me to make their way, which I did, repairing for it to her Majesty's
Lord Chamberlain, but he then instantly gone for France, I addressed my self to
the Bishop of Mando, and between him and Madam de Saint George (Groom of the
Stool to her Majesty) got their Audience to be assigned for the next day, (the
thirtyeth of July) between four and five after Vespers. But about two that
Afternoon, I was told by Sir William Gordon Gentleman Usher to the Queen, that
the King would speak with me presently about a business of importance, when
repairing to his Majesty in his Privy-Gallery, he commanded me that I should
without any noise, or notice to any, go instantly to the deputies of Hambrough,
and let them know, that whereas they were assigned their Audience of the Queen
that day, her Majesty being ill at ease could not give it them till the next. I
perceiving this alteration to be without her Majesty's knowledge, and for some
particular cause best known to the King, went without further question about
the Service, but first told Sir William Gordon, that it might happen (as I
guessed by some directions doubtingly given me by the King) that he would alter
his mind, and that the Audience should proceed at the hour first appointed for
it, upon which consideration I would go (I said) to the Commissioners (where
they then Lodged at the Still-yard, and discharge them of their expectation,
but not so fully, as that I would not leave them in some opinion, that the
Queen might perhaps so recover of her indisposition, as to send to them to come
to her that day: this I performed, and entertaining them in doubt, whether they
should go or not, having persuaded them to dismiss their already prepared
coaches, and if they should be sent for to make their passage by water. I
(after an hours expense of time with them) had a messenger sent to me from the
King, that I should come presently along with the Hambourgh Commissioners to
the Queen (as I had been first appointed.) In obedience whereof I presently
taking Boat with them, and landing at the Common-Court Stairs, we were there
met by two of her Majesty's Gentlemen-Ushers of her Presence Chamber, and by
them told that we should not repair to any place of repose (which I had
assigned in the Chapel Closet on the Queens side) because her Majesty was
already staying for them in her Privy Galleries, whether going by the passage
of the Privy Stairs, they there had their access, the Queen standing at one
side of the Gallery amonst the Ladies. This succeeded the Eve of the day, (
July 31.) that the French were removed from about the person of her Majesty,
the Kings Order to me (ut supra) relating to that important business.

The 13. of August, The Ambassador of Denmark went in the Kings Coach (his two
Coaches defrayed by his Majesty attending) to an Audience at Nonesuch, in the
Privy Chamber, there (all but the Lords of the Privy Council excluded) he was
fetched to it from his Chamber of Repose (such being the Kings pleasure, though
more then usual at a private Audience) by the Earl of Dorset.

The 23. of August, An Ambassador Ordinary from Venice, by name Alanso
Coutarim, (having resided with the States of the United Provinces) arrived at
Gravesend, where he was received by the Master of the Ceremonies, was welcomed
from the King at his Landing at Tower-Wharffe by the Lord Willoughby, Then but
a Baron.
Lord High Chamberlain of England, and by him conducted to his House at
Charter House, where entreated to stay Supper (an invitation which upon so
short warning savoured more of good Fellowship then Courtship) his Lordship and
those with him had an Royal intertainment.

The 13. of September, The King having received at Theobalds the unhappy news
of an Overthrow given the King of Denmark, by the Count of Tilly General for
the Emperor, came to London, and that morning sent for the Ambassador of
Denmark to come to him after Dinner, and received him at Denmark-House (the
Queen then there) in the Privy Chamber, introduced by Sir George Goring
Vice-Chamberlaine to her Majesty, and fetched from the Lord Carews Lodging by
the Queens Gentleman Usher.

The 21. of September, A Messenger formerly sent by the same Ambassador to the
King his Master, being returned, he demanded and had an Audience of his Majesty
in the Presence at Hampton Court, without reposing any where, though the
Chapel had been assigned for it. That night he returned to London, he was
pleased to excuse my attendance further then to my House in his way at
Twittenham, where he had taken me up to his Coach in his passage to his
Audience of his Majesty. He had demanded this access to his Majesty two or
three days before by the King his Masters Agent, Ma. Belaw; but whether it had
not been more properly carried to have gone immediately to Court, and there in
person to have by the Lord Chamberlain demanded an immediate Audience
(considering the near relation between his Master and the King, and the
consequence of the news then brought him of his Masters defeat) was by some,
and may be with reason made a Quere.

The 22. of September, as I was at Supper with the Ambassador of Denmark, one
came to me with this message, That Monsieur Quadt an Honorable Gentleman sent
Ambassador from the Prince of Transylvania, (Bethlem Gabor) being that day
arrived here, had address by Letters, both from the Prince his Master, and from
the King of Bohemia to Monsieur Rosberf residing here for the affairs of that
King, but understanding that Monsieur Rosberf was out of Town, and my self
(one of the Kings Masters of Seremonies) to be there, he desired my advise, and
furtherance for his proceeding; I answered the Messenger, that my way must be
by the Lord Chamberlain, for his to his Majesty, and that to that purpose I
would repair presently to his Lordships approbation of my Opinion, that
Monsieur Rosdrose return (to whom the Ambassador had such a particular
address) it was unfit, and needless to give notice of him to his Majesty. I
went to him (though without Commission) and complied with him the next morning,
where receiving his allowance (with thanks) for my course taken, and advise to
stay the returning of Rosdrofe; I wrote to this Gentleman how I had procecded,
and sent my Letter by his Servant. In the mean time his Majesty having notice
of the Ambassadors arriveall, signified his pleasure by my Lord Chamberlain to
Master Rosdrose then returned, and to me, that the correspondence between the
Ambassador and themselves considered, and answerable to the proposition made by
us two, Two Ambassadors Arriving at different times, lodged and defrayed in one
House, and at one Table.
from themselves the Prince of Transilvanians Ambassador and the King of
Denmarks should be lodged together in the same house, and dieted at the same
Table with addition of ten pound per diem, to the others eighteen pound. The
train of the latet consisting but of four persons, and that he should be
admitted to his Andience the Tuesday following, which was performed
accordingly. I accompanying to Hampton Court with the service of only two hired
Coaches each with four horses. He had allowed him by the Lord Chamberlain one
Coach with four horses daily to attend his service; but for his Majesty's
profit, and with the Ambassadors likeing, I brought it to an attendance at such
times only as he should be pleased the Evening before to command it.

In the mean time I doubting, that some of those respects ordinarily given to
Ambassadors at their first Audiences might be omitted, whereof (but that he
himfelfe professed to affect privacie) it was one, not to have a Titular person
appointed to accompany him thence to the Court; I sent a Groom of the Chamber
early that morning to order what my Lord Chamberlain had left unordered, and
to have some Nobleman to meet and receive him there at his descent out of his
Coach. This being incharged to the Lord Compton, he received no sooner then at
the second Gate, and there turning up the great stairs through the great Hall,
and Guard-chamber, the King was already under the State in the Privy-chamber
expecting him, which by suddenness of his approach so danted him, as, though
he passed through well with his Latin Oration, he forgot to present his
Letters of Credence, and was forced after his parting from his Majesty to send
them back to him with excuse of his Servants absence, whom he feyned to have
had them about him, when he being so suddenly (without stay any where)
introduced, and his Secretary left in the Press behind him, could not come at
them opportunely to deliver them. All the time of his Audience he never
covered, being not invited to it by his Majesty, who likewise stood all that
time uncovered.

After he had finished his Oration, and that his Majesty by me had given him a
breife, but a gracious answer, I acquainted his Majesty with his instant
desire, that it might stand with his Majesty's pleasure to have his public
Audience made private, by commanding an avoidance of the pressing company, or
by his Majesty's retrait to his more private Lodgings, where the Ambassador
might have an immediate access to him for communication of some particulars of
his Negotiation, which required speed in dispatch. His Majesty was graciously
pleased to allow of the former, and commanding all to stand back but the
Ambassador, they spoke together a good time out of the hearing of any. After
taking his leave to return to London, and incountring on the way the Duke of
Buckingham, he caused his coach to turn back after him, but in vain, the Duke
taking another way, but overtaking the Ambassador that night in his more
speedy return, he there in the way received his Letters, his complement and
his request of a speedy dispatch in his business.

The fifth of October, he had his Audience of the Queen assigned, and given him
at Hampton Court without any Person of Title to receive him at the Gate, with
excuse (from the Gentleman Usher upon my remonstrance) of their absence for
Service of her Majesty the next day in her remove. The Queen received him in
her Privy-chamber, where he (after an Invitation or two of her Majesty)
covered, for which he went not away uncensured of the observing Ladies, and
Lords there present.

His Majesty having received an account from France of the cold reception, and
entertainment given his Ambassador (Sir Dudley Carleton) Lord of Imber-court,
imployd thither Extraordinary for prevention, and accommodation of whatsoever
differences that might grow from the late remove of the French from about the
Person of the Queen; news came soon after to Court of the arrival at Dover (
September the four and twentieth) of Monsieur de Bassampierre sent Ambassador
from that King about the same business, whom to entertain answerable to the
style, and Treatment of our Kings Ambassadors there, it was consulted of and
resolved; that neither the Master of the Ceremonies, nor other Officers of his
Majesty should be sent to receive, and serve him further off, then at
Gravesend, and a Nobleman no nearer then Greenwich for his conduction thence by
water to Tower Wharffe; and to his house hired, and furnished by himself in
Leaden-hall-street, for which latter complement was chosen the Earl of Dorset.
On his way toward his House, the Master of the Ceremonies letting fall some
words concerning the provision of Diet made for him by his Majesty's Order; he
would by no means accept of it, answering, that if the King would have been
pleased to have assigned him a House, he would have received also the favor of
his Diet, but to eat at an other man's charge in his own House, (as he would be
bold to call that hired for him by his his Officers) he desired pardon, if he
refused it; so were the Kings provisions that had been already served in,
turned back again. For Sunday following (September the thirtieth) he had his
audience assigned him at Hampton Court, and came thither in the Kings coach
(followed by diverse Noblemens) with the conduct of the Earl of Carliel (though
some were of opinion, that the Earl of Dorset should have been properly his
conductour, as had been one, and the same Person at the reception, and first
audience of the Lord of Imber-court in France) he was brought after his repose
in the Councell-chamber, where a Dinner had been prepared for him, but he came
to late (purposely it was thought) to eat it, and a collation set ready on the
Table at his coming, but remained untasted of by him, or any of his followers)
through the great Hall to the Presencechamber, where both the King, and Queen
stood under the State to receive him, the Lords, and Gentlemen ranged on the
Kings right hand, the Ladies with the Duchess of Fremoville on the left. And
having presented his Letters to the King, and passed other respects with his
Majesty, he performed the like with the Queen, after which parting toward his
coach, accompanied by the Lord mentioned, and others, he was in the outward
Court told that the Duke of Buckingham was coming after him, whereat making a
stand till the Duke came, they two privately and apart from the rest, discoursed
half an hour together before they parted, the Ambassador dismissing the Kings
Coach, returned in his own to London.

The twentieth of October, a Signification from the Lords of the Council came
to the Ambassadors of Denmark, and of Betblem Gabor (as also to Monsieur
Benica, Agent sent hither from the Marquess of Baden) that if they would be
pleased to come to Monsieur Rosdorss, resident here for the King of Bohemia) at
his Lodging near White Hall (which they could not but think (as they did) a
bold Invitation for persons of their quality) they should have word sent them
thither of the time of the Lords readiness to receive, and hear them; but
when they were all there at the hour assigned, one of the Clerks of the
Council brought word, that Bethlem Gabors Ambassador and the Envoy from the
Marquess of Baden, were to have present access, but that for the Ambassador of
Denmark, their Lordships desired his patience till some other time, which he
(not without show of resentment for such an Exclusion) saying, the other two
were by me introduced (first the Minister of Bethlem Gabor, and immediately
after his dispatch, the other.)

The two and twentieth of October, the Ambassador of Denmark had access to the
King in his Withdrawing-chamber with my conduct, and upon his dispatch, I
demanded pardon if I gave him not my attendance home, because of a charge I had
(I said) instantly tofetch the two Commissioners of Hambrough to their parting
Audience: so repaired to them, where (as I had already ordered it) they stayed
my coming at my House (having before sent them to their Lodgings a Noblemans
coach for their transport thither) I brought them by the way of the Park, and
Privy Galleries (answerable to the style of their first introduction in quality
of deputies, not Ambassadors) into the Withdrawing-chamber, there thanking his
Majesty for his favors, and desiring some small addition, and clearing to and
of their River of Elb, blocked up by his Majesty's Ships (their other demand of
transport of Corn, Copper, and ammunition of War (ut supra) being with reason
denied them) they took their leave, and two days after had their presents of
two Gold Chains (each of the value of 210 l. brought them by two of the under
Officers of the Jewell-house) who had for their gratuity given them by the hand
of one of the Commissioners ten pieces, and to their Servants twenty shillings.
Two days after inviting me to dine with them, they before Dinner presented me
with a purse, and fifty pieces. Soon after taking their Journey to Dover
(without my conduction, or expectation of it) they there imbarqued for France
to return by Paris, Bruxells, the Hague, and Hambourgh.

The Ambassador of Denmark had the fifth of November a private Audience of his
Majesty in the Withdrawing-chamber, and was after it by me conducted over the
Terras cross the lower end of the Guard-chamber to the Queens Closet in her
Privy-chamber for the like Audience of her Majesty to signify the King his
Masters pleasure of employing him on a posting Journey into France, with
intention and command of his speedy return hither. But four or five days
after, as he was upon the instant of his departure, Letters came from his King,
which for a while retarded him till others coming; he the sixteenth of
November wrote to me to procure him another Audience of his Majesty (with all
possible speed, (always (regarding (he said) his Majesty's convenience.) This
in absence of my Lord Chamberlain I moved for, and obtained within two hours
after, he coming to Court by water, the Kings Coachman being not to be found
for his so immediate Service.

The eighteenth of November (after he had the day before prepared for his
silent departure) he in the morning early went in a Barge (of his own hiring)
to Gravesend, and by coach also (at his own cost) to Dover, leaving behind him
some murmurs of the Kings Servants, that having done him the Service of their
places, expected their satisfaction, and would not believe, but that they
should be deceived of it, he parting so suddenly without notice given, or
leave taking (except some few days before of the King, Queen, and certain
Lords) though his intention of his speedy return were not undiscovered to some
besides my self, whom he trusted with it.) The day of his departure Monsieur
Bonika (sent from the Marquess of Baden about important business) having
taken leave, and received for his present a Chain of Gold of 150 l. value,
posted after for his company, and safer passage to Paris.

On Sunday the fifteenth of November, the Duke of Buckingham having prepared a
sumptuous entertainment of a Supper and a Mask at York-house for the French
Ambassador Monsieur Bassampierre, had his Feast honored with the Presence of
both their Majesty's, the King sitting toward the end of the Table with the
Queen at his right hand, the Ambassador was (as soon as they were set) invited
by his Majesty to sit down at the end of the Table on that hand which might
seem to be the upper end, but was held the lower, because next the door, and
furthest from the fire he had a wet Towell to wash, which given him by the
Duke, who stood by to serve him all the time of the Supper, and would not be
put from him, nothwithstanding the Ambassadors many excusing refusal of such
service etc. the Ladies, and strangers invited had a plentiful supper in the
great Hall of the House, while the King, and Queen were retired during some
preparations for the Mask in that Room, where their Majesty's were Feasted,
who that night lodged at Somerset House, and had the next day a continuance of
their, and the Ambassadors entertainment of Feasting, Dancing, etc.

The sixteenth of November, the Queen prepared for him a Mask, represented by
the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Holland, Sir George Goring (her
Viz-Chamberlain) and other her Majesty's Servants, at Somerset House, whereto
he came from White Hall in company of their Majesty's by water, and had made
for him after the Mask, a most sumptuous Banquet. He should have had (by
assignation) his public parting Audience, but the King (with an entreating
complement of letting him know, and leaving it to his consideration how
seriously the Queen was at that time applying her self to her Masking
business) drew him to have it deferred till the Sunday following, when toward
four of the clock, the Earl of Carliel (with the Kings best coach and another
of his Majesty's) fourteen of the Lords Coaches following (six or seven of the
Kings Servants only in them to leave the more place for strangers) brought him
for his repose to the Councellchamber (where Wine, Bread, Beer etc. usually
served in by the Guard, was for that time spared, as a custom of improper use
toward the French) and from thence over the Terras to the Banqueting House,
where both their Majesty's standing ready to receive him, and the Ladies ranged
in order of their qualities on the left hand of the King all along the Room,
and the Lords and Gentlemen on the right (The French that marched before the
Ambassador being made to stay, and be placed on that side for the fairer
passage, and prospect to their Majesty's) he there took public leave of them
both, but after followed them along the Privy-galleries as far as to the
Withdrawing-Roome, and was thence conducted by the Earl of Carliel to his
Lodgings to Supper, in company of diverse great Lords, and Ladies, with whom
after Supper returning to the King, and Queen, he was present with them at a
Play in the great Hall, which ended, and their Majesty's waited on by him to
the Kings Withdrawing-chamber, he there took a second leave, and returned late
to his Lodgings.

Two days before his departure, it being talked of in Court, that the Master
of the Jewell-House, Sir Henry Mildmay had made his means to the Duke of
Buckingham, and other near about the Kings person for carriage, and delivery
of the Present designed to the Ambassador (which was a rich Jewel of four
great Diamonds, with a great Pearl pendant at it, altogether esteemed by
Jewellers (at a Merchants rate) to be worth seven thousand pounds) the Master
of the Ceremonies, understanding of these endeavors to the others profit, and
his disadvantage both present, and future from president, came to my house (as
to one whom it highly concerned) he said) in my right of reversion after his
death, or in case of his sickness, or absence, when I was to carry the like
Presents to those Ambassadors that I had attended, or done Service, to whom
they should be formerly presented) with Jewels from his Majesty) and entreated
me to go with him to the Lord Chamberlain (the Earl of Montgomery.) To whom
when we came, his Lordship upon the first overture of the difference resolved
it to be an undue claim of the Master of the Jewell-house, and professed he
would to his power oppose him. From his Lordship, we went both together to the
Earl of Pembrok (then Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, and but a
small time before Lord Chamberlain) and he (with expression even of passion)
condemned the pretense of the Master of the Jewell-House, saying, no man could
better speak to that question, then he could, who had been present when it was
moved before the Lords of the Council, and King James himself for their
decision, By Sir Henry Carew and Sir Jews Lewkner.
which had most right to the carriage of Presents, the Master of the
Ceremonies, or the Master of the Jewell-house? this latter pretended indeed (he
said) to their carriage, when they consisted of Plate or chains of gold, and
were issued out of the Office; but he had heard (he said) the Master of the
Jewell-house (Carew) nobly of himself disclaim all pretense of right to carry
them, when they consisted of Jewels, as Rings, Chains of Diamonds, Hatbands,
or the like, and that to this he could, and would say more of his mind, and
knowledge, if he should be called to it by his Majesty. This question thus far
cleared, Sir Henry Mildmay nevertheless desisted not to make friends underhand
for maintenance of his Claim, till the day, and almost hour that the Jewel
was to be presented, when the Duke of Buckingham (that had seemed before to
favor him) came about for the Master of the Ceremonies, and declared his
opinion for him, so as the Earl of Carliel (who had in the interim the Jewel
committed by the King to his custody) after he had also declared his sentence
the same way) delivered it to the hands of the Master of the Ceremonies, by
whom it was that Evening presented to the Ambassador, and who the nex day
received in gratuity for it, and for his attendance, and pains taken in this
Ambassadors service, three hundred pieces; immediately after he had presented
it, he entering the Kings Withdrawing-chamber to give account to his Majesty
how thankfully it was accepted, I then standing at the door, heard his Majesty
say (when Sir Jews thankt him for his most gracious favor in committing it to
his carriage) that it was the Master of the Ceremonies right, and none other to
carry, and present Jewels to Ambassadors. The day of the Ambassadors departure
( November the fifteenth) when he was resolved already, and the Kings Barge
with two other appointed for his transport to Gravesend (the Tide falling late,
and the wind proving high, and contrary, he had Coaches hired for him (at his
own charge) and with them and his own coaches went thither by Land, the Master
of the Ceremonies accompanying him so far but no further, answerable to the new
Order for conduct of Ambassadors. The Marshall of the Ceremonies (Walter
Brisco) only appointed for his service on the way forward, as there might be
necessary use of it, till he should be imbarqued at Dover etc.

The Ambassador of Bethlem Gabor, Prince of Transylvania, having received a
full satisfaction of his business, as the condition of our affairs would
permit, and his Present of a thousand ounces of guilt Plate brought him by the
Master of the Jewel House, and two of his Officers with him, rewarding these,
he reserved the gratuitie that might be expected from him by the other to time
and consideration. In the mean time I having been sought to by a Gentleman,
(the Ambassadors only follower qualified as fit to sit with him at the Table)
to procure him also a Present as to the Ambassadors Secretary; I told him I
doubted of good success in that suite, in regard not only of the present
necessitous condition of the time, but also because he had not at any time
appeared in the Negotiation between his Master, and the Lords, which having
kept him from notice of his merit, would prove, I thought, a reason for his
exclusion, as indeed it did, when acquainting my Lord Chamberlain with his
aim, his Lordship gave him a negative Answer to that purpose, wherewith I
quieted him.

The day after the Ambassador had received his Present, recommending the demand
of his parting Audience (not yet formally given him; to the Vicechamberlaine
(the Lord Carleton) (in absence of the Lord Chamberlain, then ill at ease) and
his Lordship demanding it in my hearing, I propounded the fitness of his having
it given in the Presence Chamber (as being his last Audience) therefore
requisite to be in public, as the first Audience had been at Hampton Court;
but was answered by the King, that he took him to be no man that would stand
upon point of Ceremony, so would have it (he said) in his Withdrawing-Chamber,
and me to introduce him by the way of the Park, which obeying, I brought him
after Dinner with the Service of two hired coaches (the Kings beings excused by
him, when I offered it, because he had not had it (he said) at his first
Audience) he was received by no other Nobleman then the Lord Vice-chamberlaine
at the entrance of the Privy Gallery, and by him brought to the King in his
Withdrawing-Chamber, whence I after conducted him to the Queen for the like
Audience of her Majesty; but receiving notice, that she was even then gone to
Somerset House to her vespers, and would return for that Ambassadors occasion,
he likewise went to his Lodging, and stayed there, till the Queen repassing
before his door, he followed her to White Hall, and had in her Majesty's Privy
Chamber Audience, and dismission. This passed, I accompanied him to the Duke of
Buckingham for his farewell, but the Duke being then absent, and I going in his
Search to the Privy Galleries, found there his Majesty sitting all alone, when
(after demand of pardon for my entrance so at unawares to his Presence) I made
use of the opportunity to tell his Majesty what had not an hour before passed
between me, and the Ambassador upon a question moved by Sir Maurice Dromond
Gentleman Usher to the Queen immediately before his Audience; which question (he
said) had been then in his hearing moved by the Queen to the King, viz.
Whether the Ambassador would or not cover in her Presence, and that the King
was of opinion he would not cover; I answered the Gentleman that I would not
resolve him for the future, but that for the time passed, I knew (I said) he
had covered at his first Audience after the Queen had once or twice invited him
to it. But for better resolution of this doubt (I further told his Majesty
with this opportunity) I had a little before his said Audience asked the
Ambassador (as with the pretense of my own satisfaction, who had not (I said to
him) sufficiently observed him in that point) whether he had at his first
Audience covered, or whether he would now at his leave-taking cover in Presence
of her Majesty? His Answer was, No, I will not now cover, though I did at
first, because (said he) I shall now appear before her Majesty as coming of
my own Errand, only to take my leave, having no particular Order for it from
the Prince my Master; but when I came first to her Majesty's presence, I speak
to her my Masters words, by my Masters command, and so thought fit upon her
Majesty's Invitation to cover, which now I will not do, though I should be
invited to it, as having nothing to say to her from any but my self, and this
only tending to the leave I am to take of her Majesty.

Having reported this unto the King, and finding him to approve of the
Ambassadors reasons, as civil; I proceeded further to intimate to his Majesty,
That I had observed both at this Ambassadors first and last Audience, that his
Majesty was pleased to stand bare-headed all that time, as if he would not have
him to cover in his Presence, either from his Example or Invitation; the King
answered, that I had well observed, and understood it, and that he had
purposely kept off his own hat, least the other might have put on his, which
for some considerations he was not yet satisfied to be convenient etc. During
the time of this Ambassadors stay here, there passed no visit, or other
correspondence between him and the Venetian, both of them pretending to
precedence, and not appearing upon the title to be mutually given of
Excellenza, or because the latter stood upon it, that he was not visit first,
though the other came last, being a Representant of a State that pretended to a
parity with crowned Heads. The fourth of December, he took Barge at the Savoy
Stairs without any conduct (though offered) perhaps irregularly being no Kings
Ambassador) and went that night to Gravesend for his further Journey. The night
before his departure, (after many complementall Excuses of the length of his
Journey, and shortness of his provisions for it) he presented me with a Purse,
and in it thirty pieces. He gave to the master of the Jewell-House two days
before a chain of fifteen pound value, which was received but coldly, as a
gratuity beneath expectation, and not proportioned to his quality.

There being a Mask in practice of the Queen in person, with other great
Ladies for the end of Christmas, I three or four days before Twelftide, asked
my Lord Chamberlain what course would be taken with the Ambassadors here
resident, Contareni for Venice, and Joachimi for the States? he answered, that
the King had already signified his pleasure, that if they would come, they
should be welcome, and have places apart provided for them, but that his
Majesty was resolved never more to admit any Ambassadors resident to sit next
his person under the State, no more then to eat with him in public; I
replied, that I thought this change in his Majesty from his Fathers manner;
would draw some Puntillious exception, or Cavil from the Venetian, unless it
were seasonably and heedfully carried, which to prevent, it would not be (I
thought) amiss for his Lordship to send to the Master of the Ceremonies for use
of his experience, which referred to me, I wrote to him about it, that morning
he came to Court, and thence after conference with my Lord went to both those
Ambassadors, the Venetian, and the States. This made no question of his coming
nor placing, other then as the King should command (only (he said) that if the
Venetian should refuse to come, he should perhaps doubt, whether it would be
fit for him to be there alone, as (out of a kind of Singularity) condemning the
others absence by his Presence.

The Venetian desired time for consideration, and resolution, it being a
Novelty, and a lessening to him (he said) of the honor affoarded to his
predecessor; but in the mean time he prevayled so by his reasons (how heavily
it might follow him in the Judgment, and censure of his Republic, when he
should be the first of his Predecessors that ever suffered by such an
exclusion, and had as yet since his imployent here never received public
honor from his Majesty etc.) as that the King was pleased to let him know by
my Lord Chamberlain (personally repairing to him under pretense of returning
his visit) that he should for this once have the respects of being seated next
his Majesty in manner as his Predecessors had been before him, and with him
the States Ambassador, whom also my Lord Chamberlain had then visited with the
same signification, but that neither he, nor any other Ambassador were ever to
expect the like hereafter, and that to confirm, and intimate the Kings
resolution in this point, he (as also the other) should do well to give account
of it to his State (least other of their Ministers might hereafter pretend, or
think to obtain the like honor with importunity) and further to take notice,
that if the King should make another Mask at Candlemas, he must be content
with a place to be assigned him apart (and not next the chair of State) if he
would be present at it) with which plain intimation he seemed to hold himself
satisfied, and the Moneday seven night after following after Twelfday, he and
the States Ambassador were assigned their Rendez-vous at the great Gate of the
Court at six in the Evening, and with them the States Ambassadors Wife, and
Daughters with limitation of as few followers as might be, and those of the
better sort. The place for their repose was the Councell-chamber, whence they
were conducted (first the Ladies to a Box reserved for them at the upper end of
the Banqueting House on the Kings right hand) and next their followers to a
Scaffold over, and behind his Majesty, then the Ambassadors themselves to the
Presence of the King in the Privy-Galleries, and after with his Majesty to the
Mask; the Venetian was seated on the right hand, the States Ambassador on the
left of his Majesty. I understood after that the States Ambassadors Lady, and
her Daughters took exceptions against their being thrust up in a corner without
respects. To which I answered, that I had brought the Ambassatrice a liberty of
election from my Lord Chamberlain whether she would be pleased to sit amongst
the great Ladies or apart, and she had chosen to sit apart with her own
company, because (she said) she wanted Language, so the fault was hers, not
mine, if she were unsatisfied.

Monsieur Rosdorfe, after he had resided here four years for the King of
Bohemia, being called home, was to receive his present, which was endeavored
by his friends, that it should have equalled (if not that Ambassador Baron
Donnows of 400 l. in Plate) at least that of Monsieur Paul (that had been here
in the same condition as Rosdorfe without Title of Ambassador, and receiving at
his parting a Chain of 300 l. and 50 l besides as an ayudu de costa) But
Rosdorfe having not been well relished by some, particularly by the Duke of
Buckingham for his harsh plainness, had given to him a Chain worth only 220
l. as of equal value (upon comparison and instance made) with that of the
resident of the King of Spain Monsieur Bruneau, and of Monsieur Van Mall Agent
of the Archdukes.

While I was at Canterbury for some domestique occasions of my own, Her Catz.
I received a Letter the eighth of March signifying the arrival of a deputy
from the States, and of the dangerous sickness of Sir Jews Lewkner Master of
the Ceremonies, of whose Office I was the Reversioner. These two accounts, and
their consequence brought me the next day to London. Two days after I received
from my Lord Chamberlain this direction, that I should intimate to the States
Ambassador and to the deputy newly arrived, that whereas they had desired an
access to the Duke of Buckingham, for an entrance to their business in hand,
and that my Lord Duke judged it not so proper to give them one, before their
Audience of his Majesty, they should be pleased to think, and resolve of a
time for the Latter, which if they would demand for that day, or the next, he
doubted not, but they should have it, the rather because his Majesty was to
return (from whence he came but the day before) to Theobalds, and would not be
again at London till Thursday following. That in the mean time their first
Audience being past, they might Negotiate with the Commissioners appointed for
the further prosecution of their business. This message received, I interposed
what I thought might be expected by them, or be thought fit for the style of
their reception viz. whether to be brought to the Kings Presence by a Nobleman,
and to have the use of his Majesty's coach etc. as had been allowed to other of
their Country qualified Ambassador.

To this it was answered by my Lord Carelton (Vice-chamberlain) that he then
knew the Minister new come to be qualified no otherwise then for a deputy,
though a joynct Commissioner with the other, and that he could not, nor (he
thought) would expect other Treatment then under that Title; with this
intimation I repaired to them, and after delivery of my message (with a touch
to he last purpose) I had for answer their desire of an Audience the next day,
which they had of his Majesty in the great Gallery of Somerset House the twelth
of March by ten in the morning (the Queen being then in her House retired, or
not yet risen.) After Dinner my Lord Duke came to their House (the Lord
wimbletons) to visit them, while I that day dined with them, I had the news
brought me of the Death of Sir Jews Lewkner, by which in right of his
Majesty's grant of Reversion by his Letters Patents, I became sole Master of
the Ceremonies.

The thirteenth of March; the Ambassador of the States had (without his
Associate the Deputy) a private Audience of his Majesty in his
Withdrawing-chamber) whether I conducted him by the way of the Park,, and the
Privy-Galleries, this being the first time of the States resident Ambassadors
access to his Majesty by that way, they having been always till then
accustomed to have their Audiences, and accesses given them by the back-stayres
without introduction or attendance of the Master or assistant Master of the
Ceremonies, which was at that time altered with the Kings better service, and
more convenience for avoydance of Surprises, and also to that Ambassadors great
honor (not unaffected by him in that particular) when his silent, and private
accesses given him before by the back-stayres, and other obscurer passages
might (and did seem to some) an undervaluing of his public quality, and in
this, of the State he represented (though others would have had it understood
for a particular respect of his Majesty given to him as a Domestique, which yet
while his Audiences were never granted, nor access given him, but when at his
request it was moved for by a Groom of the Bedd-chamber, or by one of the two
principal Secretaries, it would hardly be so interpreted, and so he himself
expressed to me to conceive of it, when upon my introducing him by that new way
of the Privy Gallery, he fell to discourse with me about it.

1627.
The Ambassador of Denmark, Paul Rosenkrantz having negotiated with the King
of France by the space of five Months or more, returned for England and Landed
at Dover in a Holland man of War, when he had already written, and obtained a
grant of for one of the Kings Ships to transport him ( March the nine and
twentieth 1627) the next day he came to London, before his Lodging was fitted,
or order given for it. To which purpose for excuse, I compleyed with him from
the Lord Chamberlain, that he would be pleased to have patience for his ill
accommodation, till the Officers of the Wardrobe might set up his Bed, and
directions be given for his Service and attendance as before; this performed,
the next day he began again upon the Kings diet and charge, having of his Train
by list two and twenty persons. Sunday, the first of April, he had Audience
assigned him both from the King, and Queen. To the first I conducted him
(without company of a Lord, or other then his own followers) this being not
public (though the first Audience after his return) from the Court gate by the
Staire that ascends to the Sone-table chamber (the way accustomed through the
Park and Tiltyard Gallery being restrained by the King, pleasure for his more
privacy there) and reposing himself in the next Room to that Chamber, was
called forth to his Majesty in his Withdrawing-chamber, and had there his
Audience. After passing through the Councell-chamber over the Terras by the
lower end of the Guard-chamber to the Chapel Closet on the Kings side, he was
met at the Presence door by Sir George Goring (the Queens Vice-chamberlain)
and brought to her Presence in her Privy-chamber. He was censured of too much
forwardness (instantly after he had performed his respects) to cover, which
though he might pretend to have done in right of the King his Master, as his
representant, yet toward a Lady and a Queen to have forborne, till he had been
by her twice, or thrice invited to it (or rather, not to have covered at all
since he would forfeit no place nor pretention by it) had been no derogation.

Before he came to the Presence of the King, I asked him if he desired his
Gentlemen should kiss his Majesty's hands? he answered, in no sort, because
(quoth he) I would not have notice taken of my new train, as if I were a new
come Ambassador; and for their kissing of the Kings hand, they may do it at my
departure. This passed for a reason against the honor they might have had (but
was not moved for) of kissing the hand of the King, remitting it to some other
opportunity, which was offered the Sunday following ( April the eighth) when
the Ambassador having a day before (upon signification of his Masters pleasure
for his return) demanded Audience for his leave taking of both their
Majesty's, he was fetched from his Lodging in Lumbard-street by the Earl of
Barkshire (in correspondence of the Earl of Northampton, that had accompanied
him to his first Audience at Wansted) with the company of half a dozen
Gentlemen of the Privy-chamber etc.

The Sunday seavennight after this his last Audience, my Lord Chamberlain,
having delivered to my hands a Jewel (being a Picture case set with fair
Diamonds and the Kings Picture in it) to about 800 l. value (but to the Kings
cost of 1200 l. it being sold to his Majesty for this use at that rate) which
his Lordship told me before he had destined to my carriage in observation of
the course before established, concerning the right pretended to by the Master
of the Ceremonies for carriage of Jewels, as the Master of the Jewel house
does of Plate to be bestowed on Ambassadors. I carried it, and presented it
with this complement.

MOnsieur, j'ay l'honneur que par ma main le Roy vous fait present de son
purtrait, le quel il vous pry poster pur amor de luy en testmoignagede bons
and agreables services, and devoirs que vous luy auez rendus pour le Roy vostre
Maistre durant vostre Ambassade icy en Angleterre.


My LORD,
I have the honor that the King by my hand does present you with his purtrait,
which he prays you to we are for his Love, in Testimony of the good and
acceptable services, and duties which you have rendered him in behalf of the
King your Master during your Embassy here in England.


Three or four days after he had taken leave, he entreated my opinion and
Assistance for punishment of one Phillip Weisman a Germane, whose chief Trade
of life, having been to undertake the conduct and defraying of Gentlemen of his
Country at a price agreed on in their Travailing to, and in this, and other
Kingdoms (as he had formerly done of Phillip the young Landsgrave of Hesse, and
a Duke of Holstein here) he made offer of of his service, and was entertained
for the defraying of this Ambassador while he remained at Paris (after the time
of that Kings defraying him till his first Audience was past) at the rate of
five hundred and fifty Crowns a Month for Diet, and Lodging of twelve
Masters, and twelve Servants. This Bargain made (but as the fellow pretended
much to his loss in regard of the daily increaseing number of guests at the
Ambassadors Table) he a while held himself silent both at the Ambassadors
departure from Paris, and on the way, (where he undertook the whole companies
defraying at twenty five Crowns a man till they should come to London) but
within two days after their arrival here, he began to make his demands in so
unreasonable a measure, and with such touch to his honor, as he made complaint
of him by me to my Lord Chamberlain, who acquainting the King with it, his
Majesty was pleased, that the Lord President of the Council, the Lord
Chamberlain, and Vice-chamberlain should hear, and determine the business.
Whereupon the said Philip appearing before them (together with two or three
Gentlemen of the Ambassadors and my self) the Lords passed on him their
sentence, which (according to the Ambassadors request sent by me to the Lords,
and as it was the next day repeated by the Lord President, and referred to the
Ambassadors own penning in French) was as follows.

MOunsieur Henry Comte de Manchester, President de Conseil prive du Roy de la
Grand Brittaigne, Phillipe Comte, de Montgomery Grand Chamberlan Conscillers du
Conseil prive, and d'estat de la dicte Majeste (Commis and Depute par sa dicte
Majeste pour entendre la potestation que Sieur Rosenkrantz Ambassador
extraordinaire pour la Majeste dt Densmark auroit fait a l'encontre de
Phillippe Weysman pour quelques injures, and mesdisances que qu' il auroit
proferree, and escrites contre sa person au prejudice, de reputation du Roy
son Maistre, and de sa bonne renomme 'e, en particulier) ayants par
commandment expres de sa Majesty adiourne and examine le dit Phillippe Wiseman
^nsemble entenduenmesme temps par confrontation quelques uns des domestiques du
dit sieur Ambassador and aultres ensemble lu and examine sa lettre and dit
sieur Ambassador. Avons trouve que le dit Phillippe sans raison, and horse de
propos (apres avoir receu beaucoup plus d'argent qu' on ne luy autoii accord
selon sa propre confession) auroit malicieusement and effrontement mis en avaunt
tells paroles and eserits sans avoir esgard a la dignite de la parsonne que le
dit Ambassador represente ny a sa qualite particuliere and avons ordonne qu'il
soit mis en sure guard jusques a ce qu'il donnera satisfaction, au dit
Ambassador si ce n'est qu'il troue bon de le fair mener, au Roy son Maistre
pour l'estre chastie selon qu'il a merit. En foy de quoy nous signons la
present le 14. of April 1627.

Manchester. Montgomery. Carleton.



My LORD,
HEnry Earl of Manchester, President of the privy Council of his Majesty of
Great Britain, Philip Earl of Mongomery, great Chamberlain, and of the
Council of State to his said Majesty, being Commissioners and Deputies for his
said Majesty to hear the Protestation which the Lord Rosenbranck Ambassador
Extraordinary to his Majesty of Denmark shall make against Phillip Wiseman for
certain injuries and calumnies, which he should speak and write against his
person, in prejudice of the honor of the King his Master, and of his own
particular reputation, having by express commandment from his Majesty
adjourned, and examined the foresaid Philip Wiseman, and understood the same
time by confrontation of some of the Domestiques of the said Lord Ambassador
and others, as also examined his Letter to the said Lord Ambassador: We find
that the said Philip without any reason or cause, having received more moneys
then were agreed upon according to his own confession, has maliciously, and
impudently blazed abroad such words and writings without having regard to the
honor of the person whom he presents, or to his own particular quality:
therefore we have inordered that he be put in safe Custody until he give
satisfaction to the foresaid Ambassador, if he thinks it not fit to bring him
before the King his Master, to be punished according to his demerit. In faith
whereof we sign this present Instrument this 14. of April. 1627.

Manchester. Montgomery. Carleton.



The fellow persisting stubborn and most averse from submission, was (after
four or five days restraint in the house of a Messenger) delivered by Warrant
of the Lord President of the Council, and the Lord Chamberlain from the
Messengers hands, to the Ambassadors, who causing him to be imprisoned in the
Counter by virtue of the said Warrant, which gave him power to dispose of him,
he was upon the point of being sent for Hambourgh; but his stomach lessening,
and his submission made with acknowledgement of his fault, both by word and
writing, he was at last set at liberty.

Five or six days before Saint Georges Feast was to be kept at White Hall,
the Ordinary Ambassador of Venice Contareni desired my Confetence (intimated by
his Secretary sent to me) to the purpose of his best course for his sight of
that Solemnity. I hereupon repairing to him, told him; That the manner had ever
been (except in one or two Exceptions, when the King was pleased to send his
Invitation) for Ambassadors to convey to his Majesty's knowledge by the Lord
Chamberlain their desires to have the honor of his right, and the solemnity
that day; whereupon he desired me to perform that part from him, which I did,
had his Majesty's allowance to it, and let the Ambassador know as much, who
expecting (answerable to my promise, That I should a day or two before the
Feast, assign him the time and way of his coming to Court) I in the interim
by my Officer sounded the disposition of the States Ambassador and Deputy for
their sight of it also (which I did the more covertly, because the Venetian
seemed to affect his being alone at the Feast, and that the other (unless they
should of themselves request it) might be absent (for what cause I could not
conceive, unless for his own more conspicuous note) when finding them also
desirous to see the solemnity, I rendered the account hereof to his Majesty, and
after to the Venetian, that he might not be ignorant of his company, which he
readily allowed of; but when my Officer had cast out a word (as I had given him
in charge tentandi gratia upon some doubt I had of a Puntillio) that the
Denmark Ambassador (finding the winds blow so stiffely against his departure)
would be there also, he started at it, and whereas before he had given his full
resolution, that he would not fail to be at the Court gate about nine of the
clock before noone (as I had assigned him) he added, that he could not tell in
what disposition of health he might be that day, so if he came not at the hour
appointed, I should no longer expect him. From this change of his resolution to
an uncertainty, I presumed he would fail, and so found it, when on the day,
and somewhat before the hour he sent his Secretary to me with a Complement to
be delivered by my Lord Chamberlain to his Majesty, that the night before
having had a Fit of an Ague, and doubting the effect of the cold Air so soon
upon it, he should not dare to venture so soon abroad to have the honor of
his Majesty's sight at that great Feast, but he hoped, that the next year he
should have that happiness etc.

From what reason this Puntillio grew was unknown, I was told after by one of
the Venetians Followers, That he was absent a^ affecting Precedence of the King
of Denmarks. In Ambassador regard this gives it to the Ambassador of the
Electors, and the Venetian does not.
but guessed at to be a pretense of precedence, that the State of Venice might
perhaps have as Kings of Cypres and Candy (though by the Turks dispossessed of
the former) and under that title, to pretend precedence of the King of Denmark
as an Elective King, whe^eas they held themselves Kings of Cypress by
inheritance; hut what reason the Ambassador of Venice, (Landi) had at the
Prince his first exercise of his Arms at Tylt ( Anno 1619.) to yield the hand
to the King of Bohemias Ambassador, the Baron of Donnow.

The Venetian Ambassador was of opinion (when I I first discoursed with him
about the accustomed manner of the Ambassadors seeing the Feast, and presenting
themselves to the King at his Dinner) that he was to perform it alone without
company of the States Ambassadors, and of the same mind was the Ambassador of
Denmark for himself, and this course approved of by my Lord Chamberlain; but
when during the Kings Dinner they attended the instant for discharge of that
Complement in the Conncell Chamber, and that the States Ambassador Joachimi had
described them the manner of his march, together with the French Ambassador at
a Feast two or three years before, when he was employed a Commissioner hither:
The Ambassador of Denmark refused not to assist, and make one work of it,
which they did, viz. The Ambassador of Denmark, Joachimi, and Mousieur Cattz,
with my conduct in the time of second course (as the King himself had ordered
it upon my Proposition,) first the first, and next the other two complying in
their order at the Kings left hand, as they altogether entered that way, and at
that side of the Table, and after passing down along before the Knights of the
Order (with their respects bestowed personally on each Knight, as they deemed
fitting) and by the way they entered, returning. I had received them at their
repair to Court one after the other (as I had first designed with the Venetian
Ambassador) at the Court gate, whether also (and no further) I went to receive
him of Donmarke, because he came upon his own invitation, and not the Kings,
and had intended not to come, had not the cross winds taken away his liberty
of departure. From the Gate I brought them to the Kings Chapel for sight of
the Ceremony there, having also appointed the Queens Closet in the Chapel for
the States Ambassador, in case the Venetian had come; but in his absence I made
use of it for the others followers. Thence at the beginning of the Provision, I
conducted them cross the lower end of the Guard Chamber to the Terras) where in
the first corner next the door on the right hand, I had caused a Scaffold to be
raised, and carpet to be spread on the wall before, and on the rayles behind
them) where they might have sight of his Majesty, and the Knights in their
procession. That finished, we returned to the Chapel, and the Service ended,
I bestowed them for their repose in the Council Chamber, till the time should
serve for the sight of his Majesty at the Feast (ut supra.)

The Ambassador of Denmark preparing daily for his departure, retarded only
by the want of 10000 l. sterling to be paid him for his Master (to whom his
Majesty was debtor of a far greater somm) some about him touched upon the
custom here of the Kings presenting his Secretary with a Chain of Gold, which
though I pretended, and alleged (from example, and for reasons brought
against the Transilvanian Ambassador) might be denied him, I made way for it
notwithstanding by my Lord Chamberlains favor, (which after his Lordships
question whether I could produce a president for it, and my answer, that if
there were none, it would not be amiss (I said in my opinion) that one might be
dispensed with for a Secretary of a Representant of a King so near in blood to
his Majesty, and to whom he stood so much engaged for supplies of money etc.)
it was assented to, and a chain of an 100. marks value presented to one Mr
Calendrine a Gentleman that having followed, and served him all the time of his
abode here, and now at his return in place of his Secretary (then absent) was
thought by the Ambassador fittest of any about him to be under that Title so
rewarded.

All occasion of longer stay being removed, and the time of the Ambassadors
departure being designed (as by his letter he let me know) for the third of
May; I warned the Kings coach to be ready to carry him to Tower-wharffe and his
Majesty's Barge with two other (for his baggage and Servants) to Gravesend, so
that day I accompanied him thither, took leave there of him and the next day
returned to London. Toward the time of his departure he showed himself
careful in acknowledging the pains taken by the Kings Servants and others for
his service and having by his own servants inquiry learned of me how other
Ambassadors employed hither had enlarged, or straightened themselves to that
purpose, he thus proportioned his gratuities, viz. To my self he sent by one
of his Gentlemen in a Purse 80 l. sterling; to the Marshall of the Ceremonies,
Walter Brisco 10 l. To the Gentleman Usher, that all the time of his stay here
gave his attendance, he gave 20 l. To the two Quarter waiters each of them 12
l. To the two Grooms of the Chamber, each 7 l. To the Yeoman Usher, Yeoman
hanger, Yeoman of the Ward-robes Servants, and the Groom Porters Servants,
amongst them 14 l. To the Kings Coachman that attended him all the time of his
first being here 6 l. To two of the Kings Coachmen that attended him after his
return between them 6 l. To the Master of the Kings Barge 2 l. To the eight
Rowers of that Barge amongst them 1 l. 4 s. To other two Masters of two hired
Barges 11 s. To six men of both those Barges 1 l. 4 s. To the Porters of the
Court Gate 3 l. To the two Keepers of the Privy Lodgings 1 l. To two Porters of
Saint James Park 1 l. To six Coachmen of six Coaches hired at the Kings charge
3 l. To my footman 1 l, To the Servants of the House where he was Lodged, and
fed at the Kings charge amongst them 10 l. To my Lord Treasurers Secretary who
had hastened his dispatch of 10000 l. of money paid and due, (besides a far
greater somm) a pair of silver pots which cost 21 l. 6 s. To the Master of the
House where he had Lodged, a Basin and Ewer, that cost 18 l. Besides other
gifts, amounting in the Total to 260 l. Sterling.

On Whitson Tuesday, Beare-baiting being appointed for the Kings pastime at
White Hall, I the day before gave notice of it to the Venetian Ambassador
(Alonso Contareni) Resident, and the next morning had his Servant sent to me to
signify his desire to be present at it; this imparted to my Lord Chamberlain,
and by him to his Majesty he was ordained his standing in the Pergola of the
Banqueting House on the left hand of that appointed for his Majesty and the
Queen with Carpets to lean, and tread on, and a stool (no chair) to fit on.
The sport ended, the Ambassador that had entered before the King, and remained
there after him, was only saluted by their Majesty's in their passage without
further complement at entering and parting.

Two days before the Departure of the Duke of Soubize (with my Lord of
Buckingham toward Portsmouth for the expedition then in hand to Retz) I was
commanded to accompany him thither to the seventh of June in company of
Monsieur Blancan a brave valiant Gentleman, He was refuged hither from France.
and other his followers, (himself riding in Coach with his Majesty) and had
his Lodgings taken up by Sir John Jepson, and the Majors authority (by the
former in Houses of Garrison Soldiers, by the latter in those of the
Townes-men) Two nights after his rest there a gang of drunken Mariners fell
foul in the streets with some of the meaner sort of French, but after some two
or three heads broaken, and a slight wound or two given, all was pacified.
After which for (prevention of further mischief) complaint was made by one to
the Earl of Denbeigh then aboard as Rere-Admirall, the Duke (the Admiral) and
the Earl of Lindsey Vice Admiral, being then absent) who sending to all the
Fleets for restraint of their Mariners being on shore at undue hours, we
heard no more of their insolency, especially when within four days after the
Dukes returning from London, a Guard of a dozen Soldiers of the Garrison were
commanded to give their daily attendance before the Duke of Soubizes Lodging.
The thirteenth of June going with him to his Majesty at Southwile (where the
Court then lay four or five miles from Portsmouth) and asking the Lord
Stewards (Earl of Pembroks) opinion, in absence of the Lord Chamberlain his
Brother) what course was to be taken for satisfaction of the Duke de Soubize
his host, and other of the Town for his followers Lodgings, his Lordship gave
me for answer, that in regard his Lodgings had been defrayed by the King at
London, it was fit the like should be observed till his departure, and that I
should make a bill of my disbursements for them, leaving his Diet, wood, and
coal, and table linen to his own provision, and discharge as they had been at
London.

The fourteenth of June I had word of two Commissioners (styled by them who
brought news of them Ambassadors) arrived in the road of the Cowes from Saly
in Barbary, for my better information whereof I went the day following to
Court, and had order for my repair to them, but not as with an honor to them
of being sent for their reception before or at their landing, but to discover
what I could of the scope of their Negotiation, and to let them know his
Majesty had taken notice of their arrival, and proceeding to London, they
should there at his return, have a fitting time appointed for their Audience;
but when I came to the Cowes they were parted thence to Southampton, whether
following them, I there performed my charge (finding the substance of their
Negotiation to be a suit for his Majesty's protection and confederation with
them against the Spaniard, who had expelled them Spain) and the next day
returned to Portsmouth.

About ten days before the King went to Portsmouth, there came to London from
France a Count of Emden (second Brother to the chief of that title, and
Family) after whom his Majesty commanding my inquiry, whether he were of the
Imperial party, I found him not such, and to be come hither only for sight of
England, and of his Majesty, pretending (as I was told) that he desired to live
here unnoted till he might receive his Horses and Apparel left in France for
his better splendour at Court; but the King going his journey before those came,
he (while I was at Portsmouth) came thither, and not addressing himself to me
for his Introduction to the King, took an uncertain way by another Gentleman,
who leaving him alone (when he came to Court walking in a place unbesitting for
him) I offered him my service, gave his Majesty notice of him, and had order
for his access. After which he immediately without further Ceremony took his
leave, and dining at the Lord Stewards, and Lord Chamberlains Table (joined) in
company of the Duke, and Monsieur de Soubize, he after returned to Portsmouth
with a Warrant that I at his request obtained for him of the Duke, for
transport of six Geldings, and two stone Horses, for which Warrant he supposing
(because I in absence of the Dukes Secretary drew it) that it had been a part
of my Office, in which (till then) I had not served him) presented me by one of
his Gentlemen with five pieces, which I excusing to receive, my Servant after
accepted of as for his own, and to that end in terms of such expression given
him.

An hour before his imbarking, his Steward presented me from him (as too small
an acknowledgment (he said) for my great pains) with twenty pieces. I gave the
host of his House for his own Bed, and Chamber (as paid) by the King (for which
and for the rest I was after to pass my account) twenty shillings and for four
or five Beds more in his House, the like, not hindering by this the
gratification whatsoever that Monsieur de Soubize should think fit to bestow on
him. The proportion I held of payment for Beds for his followers Billetted in
the Town, was after two shillings the week a standing Bed, and fifteen pence a
Trundle-bed increasing this somm to some, as their good, and kind treatment of
strangers deserved it.

The seven and twentieth of June, the two Commissioners from Saley had their
first Audience of his Majesty at White Hall upon a removing day, which served
me for excuse of the small appearance then at Court, and of their not seeing
the King under the State in the Presence Chamber at their first access, though
being but Representants of a newly formed Republic, and no Christians, they
had no more reason to expect, then to have that honor to be done them. I
conducted them from their Lodging in Fleet Street to the Common Stayres at
White Hall in one of the Kings Barges, and thence to their Audience in the
Privy Gallery, whence his Majesty for further knowledge, and debatement of
their business, remitted them to his Council.

July the eigh, The Ambassador Resident for the States of the United Provinces,
and their Deputies for the East-Indian busnesse, and for accommodation of
differences grown lately at Sea, parting from London to Lodge at Colebrook,
were early at Windsore, dined with my Lord Conway principal Secretary, had
their Audience in the Afternoon in the Withdrawing-chamber, went that night to
Kingston, and the next day to London.

The tenth of July the Deputy being upon his departure, I inquired of the
Ambassador what might be the disposition of the said Deputy touching his
Present from his Majesty, whether to receive it in Plate, or in a gold chain,
and found him indifferent, yet intimating withal, that if his Majesty would
be pleased to Knight him, it would make the Present (whatsoever) more
acceptable. This made known by me to my Lord Chamberlain, and by his Lordship
to the King, he was that afternoon dignified. Sir Jame Catz, and (after he and
seven or eigh more attended the dispatch of some remaining part of his
business) he departed for Gravesend, and thence for Holland July the twentieth
having the day before presented me with five and twenty pieces, but leaving the
present ordained him for his Majesty of 500. Ounces of gilt plate (already
prepared but reserved in the Goldsmiths hand, and pour cause) to be sent after
him, as it was (being cousened for him by the under Officers of the Jewel
House to Monsieur Joachimi) two months after, the Bringer receiving from him
the gratuity of six pieces.

The Duke of Buckingham, being ready for his Expedition to Retz, and solicited
by his Servant Master Fotherley for his Signature to the Warrants, (annually
bestowed on Ordinary Ambassadors and Agents) for Venison, his Majesty appointed
the Earl of Dorset for Justice in Air during the Dukes absence, so the
Warrants being by him assigned, and I sending for them to Master Fotherley,
received from him (not a refusal) a question, Whether it were not a part of
his charge, and a due for him to deliver them to the Ambassadors; But this
question soon resolved (from presidents of Sir Jews Lewkner) I had them and
delivered them, viz. To the Ambassador of Venice three (whereof one he bestowed
on me, as a right (he said) of my charge,) to the Ambassador of the States
three, (whereof one was returned to me; to the King of Denmarks Agent two,
whereof one came to me, and to the King of Bohemias Agent two.

The sixth of August, while I was retired to my Country home at Twittenham, I
had notice given me, that the Marquess Pompeio Strozzi, Ambassador
Extraordinary from the Duke of Mantova, was arrived at London with ten of his
company, whereof the Count di son Paulo Nicolo Delfino a Gentleman of Venice,
and Bartholomeo Amaltheo his Steward, were received as men of quality.

This Ambassador having in his way negotiated with the French King, came hither
for condolement of the Duke his Master (who dyed above five months before) and
for congratulation of the other Duke (his Brothers succession to that
Dukedom.) After I had (of my self with respect to his quality visited him)
and drawn from him by discourse something of his ends etc. I repaired to my
Lord Chamberlain, then at his House at Endfield) and from him (as I had
directions) to his Majesty then at Winsore, having before dispatched this my
Officer with Letters to my Lord Chamberlain. But these coming in his
Lordships absence, were opened, and presented by his Secretary to the Earl of
Holland, and by him to the King, who in answer of their contents passed his
resolution to be signified by me to my Lord Chamberlain, That the Ambassador
should have his public Audience at Winsore on Sunday following, but not to
have his Diet defrayed (no more then any other Ambassador should from thence
forwards) nor have any coaches provided for them at his Majesty's charge,
Except at times of public Audiences.

I, after this speaking with his Majesty (for my better warrant concerning
this new Order, had a confirmation of his pleasure to that purpose, and
propounding only how fit, and acceptable it might be for the said Ambassador if
(in correspondence of the treatment, which I understood he had received in
France) he might have a dinner provided for him in Court the day of his first
Audience) it was assented to, and his Majesty's pleasure for it, intimated by
me to the Lord Steward of the Household (the Earl of Pembroke.) After returning
to London, I let this Ambassador know his Majesty's resolution taken for no
more defraying of Ambassadors either diet or coaches; whereat he taking no
exceptions, provided himself of two Coaches with six Horses each, with which
and with the Kings (sent thither from Windsore for carriage of his own person)
he went the eleaventh of August to Bed to Stains, and receiving there the next
morning his Majesty's welcome by the Earl of Cleaveland, was by his Lordship
(with the attendance of four or five Gentlemen of the Privy-chamber in the
Kings, and the Lord Conways coach) conducted to Windsore, and found there
prepared, and fairly hanged three Lodgings of the Earl of Worcesters, and a
Table ready covered for his dinner (answerable to what I had propounded to his
Majesty and the Lord Steward for avoidance of a greater charge from continual
defraying) and for the Ambassadors more easy digestion of the new order,
established to that frugall purpose. He had at Dinner the Service of the Kings
Officers, and Guard, and the company (besides of the Earl of Cleaveland) of
the Lord de la Ware and of seven or eight Gentlemen, the Kings Servants.

I immediately after dinner repairing to the King for knowledge of his pleasure
for the instant of his Audience, was by his Majesty called apart, and asked
whether he must not invite him to cover? (I excusing my my definite resolution)
answered that I had by discourse already drawn from him, that at his Audience
of the French King (then sick in Bed) he had been called by him to his
Bedside, and made to sit down, and cover. But (replied the King) I know that
the King of Spain does not allow the Duke of Mantova's Ambassador to be covered
in his presence. Sir, quoth I, That may be an effect of the supercilious and
affected greatness of that King beyond others, in conformity whereof I am told
by this Ambassador, that while he was at Paris, neither of the two Spanish
Ministers (Ordinary nor Extraordinary) vouchsafed him a visit, and that he in
return thereof, never looked after them. Well, replied his Majesty, then I
know what to do, bring him to me; with that his Majesty entering the Presence
Chamber, stayed there under the State the Ambassadors coming, and the
discharge of his complement, which was brief, only expressing the respects of
his Master in the account he had command to give his Majesty of his Assumption
to his Principality by the death of his Brother: How much the Duke his Master
honored the King, what honor he himself had by that employment etc. The King
before he spoke, having made him an invitation (which he took) to cover. This
finished, he returned to his Chamber, the Earl of Cleaveland reconducting him
thither, but refusing to pass further with him in the Kings coach on any part
of the way, he was to go, as not suiting (his Lordship said) with his quality,
of which opinion was my Lord Chamberlain producing for example Monsieur de
Bassampierre who had the use (he said) of the Kings coach to his first Audience
from London to Hampton Court, but that dismissed there, he returned in his own
coach to London, and had not the Earls company back that brought him thither.
The like both for Lord, and coach was here observed, and the Ambassador left to
proceed on his way (with his own coaches and company) toward the Queen then
remaining at Wellingbourn to drink those waters. We went that night to
Ammersham, there in conference, I acquainted him with something touching the
Kings question to me of his covering, which question (he said) he hoped his
Majesty did not move as making doubt of his Masters right in those points of
respect, but to see how I could resolve him, because (said he) it is well known
to all, that he goes not less in respects given him by all Kings, and
Princes, then the great Duke of Tuscany, and the Duke of Savoy, whose
Ambassadors cover (and so does (said he) the Duke his Masters Ambassadors) in
Presence of the Pope, the Emperor, and the King of France, of all whose
Ministers when they are employed to him, he takes the hand in his own House,
and elsewhere, he only giving them visits at their Lodgings, sed in hoc Quaere.

From Ammersham, we went through Alesbury to Stony-Stratford, to dinner, and to
Bed to Northampton. Thence I instantly dispatched my Officer with Letters to the
Queens Vice-Chamberlain Sir Geoge Goring and to the Earl of Carliel to procure
an Audience the next day. To which the Earl returned answer by Letter (the
Vice-Chamberlain being absent) and assured me of the Queens especial content
for the Ambassadors arrival there, and that she would give him an Audience and
a dinner the next day at Wellingbourn seven miles from Northampton, from which
he was fetched by the Lord Percy, and four of her Majesty's Gentlemen of the
best quality in two of her Coaches and one Lords, was entertained at dinner by
the Earl of Carliel in his Lodgings (but at the Queens charge) without the
accustomed Court confusion (unavoidable where the Kings Servants, especially
those of the Guard give their attendance) and waited on only by the Kings
Servants, and accompanied by the Countess of Oxford, and three of the Queens
Maids of honor. After dinner he was conducted by the Lord Percy (in other two
of the Queens Coaches for the more honor by that Variety) to the place, where
her Majesty's Tent was planted near the Wells, and was there at the Tent door
met, and introduced by the Earl of Carliel to her Majestyes Presence (her
musickke with voices disposed in an inner Room of intent of entertaining him
at his entrance) had there a most gracious Audience, delivered his Letters,
and complement in words little different from those he had used to the King;
and (having taken his leave, but after making a short return with excuse of
his desire to hear the Music) which he did for almost half an hours space in
company of her Majesty (both of them all the while standing) he with exceeding
satisfaction for so much honor received, returned (reconducted by the Lord
Percy in the same coaches) to Northampton. The next day, we went to Dinner to
Stony Stratford, to Bed to Dunstable, and the sixteenth of August to London,
where at the instant of our Arrival we were told of two Ambassadors
Commissioners come from the King of Denmark to his Majesty. This made the
Ambassador (answerable to some discourse passed between him and me to that
purpose) fall to question me in what manner I thought should be their
Treatment, whether with or without defraying? to which I returning no direct
answer (as holding it unfit for me definitly to resolve what would be his
Majesty's pleasure) he put me in mind of what I had told him to that purpose at
his first coming, viz. That the King would no more defray Ambassadors Diet,
Lodging or coaches (having begun already with Monsieur de Bassampierre. Now
(added he) if the Ambassadors of Denmark, or the Duke of Savoys (voiced to be
on the way coming hither (to whom (he said) he held himself being the Duke of
Mantovan's Representant, equal in all conditions) should receive those
respects beyond him, he could not but in his Masters behalf resent it, who
(not to reckon it (he said) as a merit, and to challenge from thence the Kings
better respects) had sent to his Majesty a person (himself) of as eminent
quality (he might, he said, boldly without arrogance say it) as any of his
Court) to give his Majesty an account of the late Dukes death, and of the
Assumption of this now living to his Principality (without regard what the
Spaniard thought, or would think, or do against it) before he had ever heard,
or looked to hear from England, for complement of condoling, or congratulating:
Whereas the Emperor, the king of France, and the Arch-Dutches had already by way
of prevention sent to his Master persons of eminent condition, to condole and
congratulate, who had been lodged in his Masters Court, Viz. After that of
Monsieur de Bassampierre.
and defrayed (as he was most assured) that any Ambassador should be whom the
king of England should please to send (in return of his employment) to the Duke
his Master, howsoever it had been his fortune to be made a second President for
that course of not defraying, newly taken in this Court, and to be observed
hereafter (answerable to the intimation he had received by my mouth from his
Majesty: Which (as it was, he said, a liberty that such great kings might take
in their degrees of Eminency above other inferior Princes (as the king of
France had likewise already began and continued) yet for his Majesty to
establish an Order, and after to break it (especially while he himself should
be here a Witness, and a Sufferer in it) could not but be to him of so hard
digestion, as that though he did but now discourse of it with me in private
(hoping and beleiving that no such measure should be offered to him) yet he
must (if offered) for the Duke his Masters honor, formalize himself against
it, and give account of it.

With these words and reasons I acquainted his Majesty at Aldershot, and
brought him such satisfaction with them, as having regard to the Ambassadors
content, and to the consequence of his own Order (established for no more
defraying) His Majesty gave me in charge (with the best dexterity that I could
apply) to let the Ambassador understand his resolution taken to that purpose.

In obedience hereof, I, the twentieth of August, returning to London;
conferred first with one Mr. Wollsin his Majesty's sworn Servant (Though
imployd here in some businesses for the King of Denmark) let him know his
Majesty's resolution; no more to defray Ambassadors, and entreated him to go
before to Gravesend, for the more civil conveyance of the Kings pleasure to
that purpose, least, if I should directly and in plain terms acquit my self of
my charge imposed, it might have had the relish of an Exclusion, or Exception
of their persons from Honors formerly received by other Ambassadors. That
night taking a barge for my passage, I went to them to Gravesend, Their names
were Tomson and Brah.
and only letting them know I had been at Court with the account of their
Arrival, and for knowledge of his Majesty's pleasure about their Reception,
(not so much as touching the point of their not being defrayed for the reason
mentioned.) I concluded that I was there by the King my Masters command to
receive, and obey theirs, for assistance of any of their followers, that they
should be pleased to employ to take up their Lodgings, and to perform other
Services for their Accommodation. So without other answer, question, or
exception from them that might bewray distaste from such Innovation, I took
leave and returned to London, where Mr. Wollfin, I, and a Servant of the
Ambassadors conferring with one Paul Four (an entertainer of strangers, and
dwelling in Lumhard Street) at what rate he would provide them their Diet, and
Lodging, he (with a Mechanic consideration of the plunge they were like to be
put to (being disappointed of their first expectation to be defrayed) made
unreasonable demands, as of twelve pounds for eight Masters, and six Servants
per diem, till sending to Gravesend to the Ambassadors for their resolution,
they agreed for -- six pounds per diem. So after the preparation of the Kings
and two other Barges (leaving a Light-horsman to be taken up for their Baggage
at Gravesend) and of the Kings Coach with the Venetians, the States
Ambassadors, and three Lords Coaches to attend their landing at Tower wharfe, I
traveled a whole day up and down in London and Westminster to find a Lord
fitting for their conduct from Gravesend: But the Service refused, or exculed
by all for want of Authority from the Lord Chamberlain then with the King in
Progress; I at last prevailed with the Lord Ershin, Son to the Earl of Mar,
to undertake it, and fetch them thence (with the attendance of half a score
Gentlemen, the Kings Servants to their landing and lodging, ut supra.

In observation of the new Order established (That no Ambassador should be met
further off then Gravesend, and there but by the Master of the Ceremonies only
for their first welcome.) They should not have had a Noble man to meet them
nearer then G^eenwich, or till their landing at Tower wharff: But the
intimation made against their being defrayed, as before, being new and harsh,
this course was thought fit as for that time to be taken, somewhat to sweeten
the other.

The twenty fourth of August, these Ambassadors much pressing their Audience of
his Majesty, I sent my Oshcer about it to the Court then at Aldershot, and had
for answer, That whereas the Ambassador of the Duke of Mantova desired to have
his parting Audience, as soon as might be (though it were, he said, in answer
of the Kings objection, of the unfitness of the place he then was in) under a
Tree, which should be to him, he said; a Palace, and he esteemed himself as a
Prince by such a favor) His Majesty resolved, they should have their Audiences
both in one day the Tuesday following as Oatelands, where there should be a
Dinner provided for them, and two Noblemen (with two of the Kings Coaches) for
their several conditions.

To this purpose I having a Blanck Letter sent me from my Lord Chamberlain to
superscribe and present whatsoever Nobleman I should think fitting for the
company of the Ambassadors of Denmark, and being left to my adventure, without
a Letter for the choice of another to accompany the Montavan, I subscribed my
blanck Letter to the Earl of Murray of Scotland, obtained his assent, and
prevailed so by entreaty with the Lord Morley, as our Journey was appointed for
the day, when two days before came to me a Letter from my Lord Chamberlain,
intimating, That whereas the Queen was to come to Oatlands at the time assigned
for the Ambassadors Audience there, and that therefore the king would not alter
his determined remove from Aldershot to Oaking; That if the Ambassadors
(particularly those of Denmark) should persist in their desire of a speedy
Audience (otherwise then the king wished they should) who would willingly have
remitted them till Sunday following, for their more solemn Reception at London)
They must not expect an entertainment with a Dinner in a place, where nothing
good was to be had, etc. But should have (all of them together) their Audiences
at Oaking on Tuesday.

In observation of which direction I repaired to them, salved up all as
dexterously as I could, and having the kings coach, with the Earl of Murreys
(and for his companion the Earl of Galloway) for attendance of those of
Denmark; And my Lord Morly with a coach of the Queens (in place of the Kings)
to conduct him of Mantova, we altogther (having besides the service of three
hired coaches for the first, and two for the latter, all at their own charge)
parted from London on Tuesday morning, and were by two after Dinner at Oaking,
where after a brief Complement passed between the Ambassadors, that had not
till then seen one another (The Mantovan having always kept behind, to let it
be seen he was of another company, and employment) and bringing them for their
rest to two several chambers; I first introduced those of Denmark, whose
complement dispatched, Letters delivered, and themselves reconducted to their
chamber, I after brougth in the Mantovan for his farewell.

This passed, and he returned to the place of his repose, I again conducted the
other two to a private Audience after their public, and leaving them with his
Majesty accompanied the Mantovan to his coach, and returned to the other, whose
private Audience finished, we went that night to Winsore, the next morning to
Hampton court, and were that evening (as the Ambassador of Montava likewise was
by another way) at London, whether both this and the other were accompanied by
the Lords their conductors to their several lodgings, with a course and
trouble to me beyond example, of bringing two Ambassadors at once in one day to
their Audiences, so far from the ordinary standing court of his Majesty.

The next day, August the twentyninth, when the Ambassador of Mantova, had
before hand (immediately upon his return) solicited, and obtained Assignation
for a parting Audience of the Queen (then come to Somerset house) at two of the
clock after noon, and that I had received the desires of the Ambassadors of
Denmark to have likewise their Audience of her Majesty with her first
convenience: I received from the Earl of Carliel her Majesty's pleasure, That
at the same hour those of Denmark should be admitted, and the Mantovan an hour
after, and that to this purpose, I should repair to the Earl of Dorset for his
company with the former, and to the Lord Morley for the latter: But this Lord
being indisposed, I was driven to my former shift of procuring a Nobleman for
the Service. The Earl of Dorset undertook, and discharged his part, fetching
the two Danes from their lodgings to Somerset house, there entering the court
with the Queens coach (their other coaches staying in the street) and
accompanying them in the Council chamber, till their time of admission to the
Queen, and dismission back, whither his Lordship went with them to their
lodging. In the mean time only attending them to the Gate of the court, was
arrested there by the necessity of my service, for the introduction of the
Mantovan, who for want of a Nobleman to accompany him, was fetch from thence by
Sir Robert Ayton, Secretary to the Queen, and in one of her Majesty's coaches
brought to court, where after a public Audience given him in her privy
chamber, she gave him a more private one in her withdrawing chamber; and at his
leave taking presented him with a Diamond Ring from her own finger of four
hundred pounds value; which giving him exceeding satisfaction, was an occasion
taken by me for preparation of his better acceptance of the Kings Present to
come of a thousand Ounces of gilt Plate (as if both their Majesty's had
understood one another in the consent of so presenting him, that the public
and ordinary rates present might pass with the better acceptance, and more out
of danger to become a Prefident for the Kings greater charge hereafter. But
while I was thus provident for my Masters honor and profit, a Message was
brought me from my Lord Chamberlain then at Court, intimating, that whereas his
Majesty was pleased (by likelihood from the Queens persuasion to correspond
with her in the quality of their gifts) That this Ambassadors present should
have consisted of Plate) He was now resolved to convert it to a Jewel, and to
add to the value proportioned, as above: And that to this purpose I should
respite the presenting of the other, till I should understand further from his
Majesty.

This I did accordingly, and the day after the Kings arrival at London, I
received from the hand of the Earl of Holland (the Lord Chamberlain being then
going out of Town) and leaving with me such order) a Jewel being a
Picture-case, set with four Diamonds of about five hundred pounds value, but no
Picture in it, for which his Majesty's complement was for my delivery; That his
Picture wanting there (because one could not be so suddenly provided and
fitted to it) it might be supplied with that which the Ambassadors would, he
said, preserve of him in his memory.

About the same time one of his Gentlemen (whom he had made now and then use of
for his Pen, and had withal carried the Title, and sometime executed the
Office of Steward) having heard of our custom heretofore, to present
Ambassadors Secretaries with Chains at their parting, expected the like, and
made one Sir Francis Biondi his means to me by his Letter to that purpose, whom
I answered by Letter with reasons as before; when Bethleem Gabors Secretary
petended to the like favor from his Majesty, but was refused it, and so was
this (I having first acquainted the Ambassador himself with his pretense, and
with our course of limitation here for presenting Secretaries only when they
were as the Venetians Secretaries, of the Embassage, or had been for some
especial affairs employed, and noted for Assiduall Negotiators.

The fifth of September, this Ambassador parting hence in the Kings Barge with
no more Barges or Boats (that one being capable of his Train) I accompanied
him to Gravesend, where presenting me with sixty double Pistoles, I left him in
his way to Dover for his imbarking etc. He was not visited during the time of
his stay here by the Venetian Ambassador, no more then this by him.

The two Moors Commissioners from Saly (having long attended the Kings return
to London, and found little fruit of their Negotiation with the Lords)
demanded, and had at last an Audience of his Majesty in the Privy-gallery,
coming to Court from their Lodging at Sir Abraham Williams in Westminster in a
coach of their own hyring without my conduction, only I received them at the
Court Gates, brought them to the Councell-chamber, thence to their Audience,
back to their coach, and there left them.

The ninth of December, the Ambassadors of Denmark went to an Audience of his
Majesty at Havering with the Kings coach, and two others hired by themselves
(only my self, and no Nobleman accompanying them (their Audience being to be
private.) Arriving there toward Noone, we found a Table covered for their
dinner at the Kings charge, whereto they sat down, immediately after the King
was set to his, and were served by the Guard, for whom at their parting they
gave to the hand of a Gentleman Usher Quarter-waiter, 10 pieces. After dinner
they had their Audience in the Privychamber, and that night returned to London.
They were at their Dinner accompanied by the Earl of Holland, Sir John North
and others; the upper end of the Table being found too narrow for both their
seats, they sat in chaires at the two sides, opposite one to the other, the
preceding Ambassador taking his place with the end of the Table on his left
hand, as the first place in his opinion. These two Ambassadors (having another
private Audience assigned them at Hampton Court) were pleased upon my request
to them by Letter to pardon my repair to their Lodging in London, thence to
accompany them (as I ought to have done) in the Kings coach, and take me in
their way at my House in Twittenham, where (returning) they left me, after I
had entertained them with a collation etc. to their satisfaction.

Two days after, they sent my Officer for demand of an Audience to take their
leaves, which they had granted them for Sunday following, and were brought to
it from London by the Earl of Cleaveland and four or five Gentlemen of the
Privy-chamber, (having provided for them a dinner at the Kings charge (this
being their last Audience) as they should have had at the first (answerable to
the style then observed) but omitted toward them, as also to the Mantovan
Ambassador for the interruption mentioned before.

This course of their entertainment at a Dinner, I propounded to his Majesty in
time of his Supper, two nights before by direction from my Lord Chamberlain,
intimating the fitness of it (they having the like at Havering in stead of
that they should have had at their first public Audience, but was excused for
the reasons as before) and had from the King this formal answer O yes, yes,
let them by any means have a Dinner. At the same time also I propounded (with
agreement of the Master of the Jewell-House standing by, and by direction from
the Lord Chamberlain) the consideration of having their Presents assigned
beyond the proportion of their Predecessors which had been 1500. ounces of
gilt Plate, and no more, making our reason the regard of their not having been
defrayed, as those other had been etc. which his Majesty approving commanded
the number of 2000. ounces to be made ready for each of them, being soon after
brought them by the Master of the Jewell-house himself, who had from them the
gratuity of (...) and his two Officers between them twelve pieces. Their
Secretary having not appeared in any business, had no present. After Dinner
(at which their conductour the Earl of Cleaveland, and the Lord Gordon, and
others, were guests with them) I introduced them to their Audience (by the
proper way being public) through the Great Hall, and Guard-chamber to the
presence, thence to the Queen in her Privychamber, whither my Lord of
Cleaveland made at the first some scruple to accompany them, till my Lord
Chamberlain had resolved him of the fitness, and custom of it, but would by
no men's return with them (as both he (by custom) and the Gentlemen with him
should have done) to London whither I only served them with my Attendance, the
rest taking their leaves at the Ambassadors taking coach.

The eleventh of October, (while neither their Letters nor present, nor 1000 l.
which they were to receive by way of defalcation (from the great debt due to
the King their Master from ours) were ready for them) they requested me to
procure them a private Audience (if this might not (they said) appear a
Solccisme after they had had a public one for their leave taking) which I did,
bringing them to it by the way of the Titlt-yard, and Privy-Galleries to his
Majesty's Withdrawing-chamber etc.

Near the time of these Ambassadors departure, Animo revertendi.
my Lord Chamberlain let me know, that having received news of the coming of
the Abbot de la Seaglia (Ambassador from the Duke of Savoy) he had written a
Letter (but not yet sent it) to my Lord Major for provision of a House for him
in the City, to be paid for by the Ambassador, but, after I had intimated to
his Lordship that the course had been to receive a signification first from the
Ambassador himself of his Arrival, and of the number of his train, and
accordingly to provide for him; that if his House should be taken up before
such signification were given, and that he should not come in a month or more
after, the charge of it for that time must (in reason) rest upon his Majesty,
the House being not taken by his own order, and he being to defray himself for
all (as was intended) the letter was stayed, and the provision of the House for
that time respited. After it was assured by some passengers in the same Ship
with this Ambassador that he was landed, and come onward his way as far as
Rochester, I repaired to my Lord Chamberlain for order of his reception how,
and where etc. went with his Lordship to the King about it, and received from
his Majesty this formal signification, that answerable to the order
established, and already practiced toward the King of Frances Ambassador
(Monsieur de Bassampierre) the the Duke of Mantovas, and the King of Denmarks,
and particularly toward the last, his Unckles) he would not defray him, nor
any other, except at conclusion of Peace Marriages, Baptismes of his Children,
and such like Extraordinary occasions. Upon further discourse that then passed,
where, and how he should be received, it was concluded by his Majesty not only
for the present but for the future, that neither he, nor any other Ambassador
under a Kings, should be met, or received further off, then at Tower-Wharffe in
the Kings coach, after he had been brought thither from Gravesend by the Master
of the Ceremonies, and that if he were a Kings Ambassador (the Master of the
Ceremonies meeting him no further off, then at Gravesend (unless his coming
for the before excepted purposes might by order carry him further) he should be
received no nearer London, then at Greenwich by a Nobleman out of the Barge
that brought him from Gravesend into the Kings Barge, and thence by him
accompanied to his landing at Tower-wharffe, and thence in the Kings coach to
his Lodging.

The day after that this Order was established (or rather revived) no certain
notice being yet given, or taken concerning the Savoy Ambassador for
preparation of his House, because no follower of his was come immediately about
it) Mr. Gerbiere (a Gentleman serving the Duke of Buckingham) who had passed
the Seas in his company, and had received some particular direction to that
purpose) went with me to my Lord Chamberlain, and acquainted him with the
Ambassadors intentions and desires (as of one that agreed not well, he said,
with Journies by water, and had brought with him a Coach and Horses of his own)
to come by land: But this desire and design of his was soon diverted by his
Lordship, after he had pointed at the incommodity of a Noblemans meeting him
with the Kings Coach, at the end of Southwark (where was no house nor place
proper for his, and his companies stay, til the instant of the Ambassadors
coming thither) and what he should want in that part of honor of having sent
to him from the King to Gravesend, the Master of the Ceremonies (with his
Majesty's Barge for his transport) who if he should come by land, could not
with that provision (and must not with Coaches, because of their late restraint
of employment for service of Ambassadors at the Kings charge) attend him.

It was further intimated, that if he should not think fit to make contiunall
use of the Italian Jeronimo's house for his lodging (which he had already
hired) he should have another hired for him for his better accommodation, at a
rate reasonabe (to be paid by himself.) These Allegations and Reasons taken
notice of by Mr. Gerbiere, were conveyed to the knowledge of the Ambassador at
Gravesend, and his approbation being returned, the next day I went early with
the Kings Barge, and another to bring him to Tower-wharff, where by the Lord
North with half a dozen Gentlemen, the Kings Coach, and seven other attending
him, he was conducted to h is lodging, October 19. At my first access to him at
Gravesend, that I might (besides the complement of his Welcome) intimate to him
his Majesty's pleasure and course held and to be held for the Traytment of
Ambassadors answerable to the new Pragmatick) I spoke to him in French thus

MOnsigneur, sa Majeste m'a enuoye icy aure l'honnour de ses Commandments pour
vous receuoir, and vous dire de sa part que non seulement pour l'estime qu'ells
fait de la person que vous representez, mais aussy de vostre propre person
vous estes tres-bien venu en, son Royaume; Et si vous trouuez que le traitement
que vous receurez ne responen tout a vos merits, vous l'attribuerez, sil vous
plait, non pas a manquement de respect de le part de sa Majeste, mais au rei
glement, and procedure qu'il luy a convenu tenir d'oresen auant envers tous les
Ambassadeurs and Ministres des autres Roys and Princes comme enter autres sa
Majeste a recentement practique enuers les Ambassadeurs de son Oncle propre;
pour mon purticulier Je suis joy pour etc.

MY Lord, his Majesty has sent me hither with the honor of his Commandments
to receive you, and tell you in his behalf, that nor only for the esteem he
makes of the person which you represent, but also for your own particular, you
are most welcome into his Kingdom: And in case you find that the Treatment
which you shall receive does not correspond in all things with your merit, you
shall impute it, if you please, not to any want of respect on his Majesty's
part, but to the regulation and procedure, which it has behovd him for the
future to observe toward the Ambassadors and Ministers of other Kings and
Princes, as his Majesty has lately practicd toward the Ambassadors of his
Uncle, and for my particular I am here, etc.

Friday October. 19.
The night of his Arrival at London, he demanded Audience of the King with his
first convenience, which referred to his pleasure (if he should think Sunday
following too soon for it) he accepted the liberty as a favor, so far as for
that day it was appointed, and an Invitation delivered with all by me (as I had
order) for his dining in Court, whereto he was voluntarily fetched by the Earl
of Carliel (a Supererogatory courtesy of his Lordship, and an irregularity of
all president (when a Baron, Of no good example for Ministers inferior to
Kigns, who might expect the like.
not an Earl should have discharged that part for a Dukes Ambassador) and with
the attendance of five or six Gentlemen of the Privy-chamber in five coaches
(besides the Kings) came to Court, dined in the Councel-chamber with the Earl,
and Gentlemen mentioned, and five of his own company. And about four of the
clock (attending so long the Queens return from Vespers, of whom (having been
formerly known to her) he had a sight and Bay-samaine in transitu, as she went
to her coach through the Privy-Gallery) had his Audience in the Presence,
returned to the Councel-chamber til the Queen and her Ladies were in readiness
to receive him, and having had a gracious Audience of her Majesty, with the
same company and attendance that he came, returned to his Lodging.

The Tuesday following, though he had let fall (of purpose it seemed for his
after freedom, some speeches tending to the liberty which his Majesty (he
said) to me) had given him once for all to have access to his Presence without
Ceremony) my Lord of Carliel telling me (and desiring me to let him know) his
Majesty's Pleasure to give him a private Audience that Afternoon, I entreated
his Lordship as far forth as he could, he would direct that domestique privacy,
as diminishing from the respects due to his Majesty, and the right of my charge
in the duty of my attendances for those Services. Which his Lordship rightly
understanding, took on him to regulate by remonstrating to the Ambassador (as
he did) how much he should derogate from the regard proper to his own quality
(besides what might be challenged due to mine) by the worlds taking notice, and
the discourses of the causes why I did not attend him at his Audiences) and by
persuading him, that howsoever he might have his private accesses at his own
times to the Kings Presence, yet that he would not (upon account to be made of
the businesses of State or of particular charges received by Packet from his
Master) present there commendation without my introduction.

So that day to begin his course, I accompanied him to his Audience (which he
would otherwise have sought and had alone) by the staier leading from the
Garden to the first Chamber of the Privy-lodgings, thence bringing of him to
the King in his Withdrawing-chamber, and a sevennight after did again the like.

In the mean time having not in five or six days after his public Audience,
received any visit from the Ambassadors then here residing, A mazime amongst
Ambassadors.
the custom amongst them carrying it, that the first come, is first to visit
the last come; I cast out a question, whether the Ambassador of the King of
Denmark had yet visited him? he answered no; and that he was willing to
interpret the sickness of one of them (Monsieur Brahe) to be a cause that the
other forboare that complement; because (said he) being joynct, they may
perhaps think a joynct visit requisite, and so one stay for the other till
both be in good disposition. In the mean time though he would (he said) make
no scruple to visit the sick Ambassador (who was unable to visit him) yet
that he could not conveniently do it to the one without the hazard of the
worlds opinion that he did it to both, which would be (he said) a Solecisme in
point of visits not approveable amongst Ambassadors, especially while one of
them was in health, and might therefore visit him without the others company.
This may appea e to be an acknowledgment of precedence from the Venetian which
seemed questioned.
For mine own betterinstruction to the purpose of this Puntillio, I went
instantly first to the Venetian Ambassador, and found him to have forborne that
complement, expecting the first discharge of it to come from the Danish, and
that as they should lead, he would follow. From him I went to the other of
Denmark, and found him that was in health, not excuseing the forbearance of his
visits by his Colleagues sickness, but plainly affirming the observation of it
to be improper, as from the King of Denmarkes Ambassador to a Duke of Savoys.
Besides that he could plead (he said) that he and his Colleague having taken
their public leaves of the King, their visits of an Ambassador later come,
were not to be expected.

To this I replied with a President I had learned from the relation of an
experienced. Statesman, Her. Joachimi Ambassad or for the States.
how the King of Frances Ambassador (at the time that the States of the united
Provinces were first acknowledged free, and Sovereign) being at Disseldrop
(and come thither before the States Commissioners Arrival) about a Treaty,
expected to receive from them the first visiit, as from Representants of an
inferior condition; but they standing upon their pretended rights of
Ambassadors (last come to be first to be visited) refused to visit first, till
at last the French Kings Ambassador (the business he had in manage
necessitating him to it) gave the first visit; but this was no prevailing
allegation for the Ambassador of Denmark. From them I went to the Ambassador of
the States, and found him not expecting to have those of Denmark for his
leaders, but only hindered by a Catharre, which past (he said) he meant to
visit the Savoyard, and so he did the next day. At that time when I
(purposely) cast out some words tending to the question of precedence between
the States, and the Duke of Savoyes Ambassador, the States said, he wondered
that any man would make that question, when it had been adjudged the due of his
State by the King of France in particular etc.

The next day, being that of the Lord Majors Annual Feast, and the Ambassador
of Savoy desirous to see his Lordship pass through Cheapside (he having
received no Invitation to the Feast with other Ambassadors perhaps because of
his so fresh Arrival, or else to avoid the inconveniency of question likely to
grow from precedence between him, and the States Ambassador, and the
Ambassadors of Denmark not looking after it with consideration of their leave
already taken of his Majesty) I was requested by the said Savoy Ambassador to
inquire somewhat further of the Ambassadors, of Denmarks reasons, and
resolution for not visiting him which I did immediately repairing to him,
Monsteur Tompson.
where he had taken his stand in Cheapeside for sight of the show (Sconosciato)
and plainly received it for his resolution, that neither he, nor his Colleague
had any intention to visit him first, as having no example of the like done at
any time by either the King their Masters Ambassadors or by any other Kings to
the Ambassador of the Duke of Savoy, and when I after met the Venetian at the
Feast (whereto he and the States Ambassador were invited) I understood the like
of his mind, and expectation for example to be given him by the Ambassador of
Denmark (as pretending) to do nothing (he said) but should be al par delle
test Coronate, with which insatisfaction I returned to him of Savoy, who could
not make good his pretense by any President, or example, but rather he had one
against himself (which the Venetian Ambassador was said to have suggested to
the Ambassador of Denmark for his forbearance) of the French Ambassador (the
Marquess de Bleinville) who would not give the first visit to the Savoyard
when they were both here together in England, the Ambassador of France standing
upon it, that in regard of the honor of so near alliance, as the Duke of
Savoy had with so great a King as his Master, he ought to give him the first
respect, as being most due to him. But this reason the Ambassador of Savoy
retorred to his own purpose, as that therefore the French Kings Ambassador
ought first to visit him for the more honor to the King his Masters Sister,
and with no disparagement to himself in regard of the not questionable
difference of their rancks. But in the end, all, or the chief blame of the
Savoy Ambassadors want of visit lighted on the Venetian (so that of Savoy
charged him) as on him, that having committed a former error (he said) not to
have visited the Duke of Mantovas Ambassador while he was here (from the same
reason of difference stood upon by him of Denmark) cared not to commit another,
and a greater error, though he and all the Ministers of that Republic that
should negotiate with his Master might be sure by way of retribution (as he
threatened) to suffer for it.

The consideration of inconveniences which might in likelihood accrue to the
common cause from such ill correspondence amongst Ambassadors our friends, made
me the next day after the Lord Mayors Feast to address my self to the Earl
of Carliel (as to a person of the most experience in Ambassages for his
judgment in these differences) this was, that the Ambassadors of Denmark, and
that of Venice, were in the wrong, and that for Presidents, if they stood upon
them, he himself would furnish them with one of his own, having himself (as
he affirmed) when he was Ambassador Extraordinary in France) given the first
visit to the self same Ambassador of Savoy, Arriving there after him, and had
observed that the Popes Nuntio, and all other Ambassadors then there had done
the like, yet that for the better information of his own judgment, he would
(he said) instantly go, (and so did) to the King for his, who together with
the Lord Steward, Earl of Pembrok, the Lord Chamberlain, and other Lords there
present in his Majesty's Withdrawing-chamber, were all of opinion that the
Ambassadors of Denmark were over punctual, and (as the King himself said) so
much too blame for standing upon such nice points, in a time that required
rather care, and study to get friends then for lack of performing complements,
hazard the loss of any, as were they his Ambassadors, and should do so, he
would chide them well for it. The substance hereof I conveyed to the
Ambassadors understanding, but it would not move them.

While these Puntillio's were in agitation, a Play on all Saints day (being
appointed at Court to begin Christmas with) I was told the day before by the
Venerian (when he visited me at my House) that he was invited to the sight of
it, and to a Supper by the Countess of Denbigh as was the Savoy Ambassador at
the same time by the Earl of Carliel, understanding thus much, I did (to
prevent all inconveniences that might happen by any sudden encounter) let fall
a word or two in hearing of the Savoy Ambassador for his knowledge of it; who
answerably took his course in such sort, as that after the Venetian was (before
the Kings coming into the Hall) entered there, leading the Countess of
Denbigh, and seating himself uppermost at the end of the Lords seat toward
the Kings right hand, next above the Lady mentioned) the Ambassador of Savoy
entered with the King passing promiscously amongst the Lords, and (as I had
before prepared the Duchess of Buckingham, were seated next above her, the
other great Ladies) the Lord of Carliel sitting next above the Ambassador, but
sidewayes upon another seat) on the Kings left hand, neit er of these
Ambassadors so much as looking one toward another, much less saluting, either
entering, or parting, that of Savoy going our, as he entered after the King,
leaving the Duchess, and the other of Venice after those were gone following
with the Countess.

Whiles one of the Ambassadors of Denmark (Monsieur Tompson) attended the
recovery of the others sickness (Monsieur Brabe) and both of them the payment
of a thousand pounds promised them by way of defalcation, but after intimated
to them by me (from the King) to be intended as a gift to them in lieu of
their not having been defrayed) he sent my Lord Major word (Sir Hugh
Hammersley) that he would dine with him, and bring with him three or four of
his Gentlemen^ his Lordship returned an acceptance both by the Ambassadors
messenger, and by a Servant of his own; but when (I hearing of it) had let him
know by Master Wolfin (his Masters Agent) that if he were not informed already
touching the manner of his personal Treatment for the place, he should do well
to inquire, whether the Lord Major would give him precedence (which he had
never yet given to any person of whatsoever quality under the King) the
Ambassador changed his mind, made his excuses of an unexpected business, and
only sent his Gentlemen with whom I sending my Officer to accompany them, and
to sound what he could of my Lord Majors disposition for the place, in case the
Ambassador himself had come to him) he made a plain profession, (which I also
after received from himself) That he meant to maintain the Lord Majors Right
and ancient Custom of preceding all men, within the City, but the King
himself. So as (without this prevention of mine) there might have followed,
perhaps, some scandal, or difference to the insatisfaction of the Ambassador,
and the trouble of the Lord Major, not without subject of discourse for other
Ambassadors, etc.

These 2 Ambassadors being at length possessed of their long unpaid thousand
pounds, which should have been presented them (as had been intimated in lieu of
their not having been defrayded, and not by way of defalcation, as they
demanded it, and it was carried) They prepared for their departure, and the day
before sent their Secretary to the Ambassador of Savoy, with a complement of
their offer of service, etc. which he the next day returning by one of his
Gentlemen, it was all the correspondence, which during their abode here had
passed between them.

The two and twentieth of December, having the service of the Kings Coach, and
two other hired by themselves to their imbarquing at Tower-wharff, they went
thence in the Kings Barge, with one more (I accompanying them) to Gravesend,
where they presenred me with a Purse, and fifty pieces, and were there left by
me to the guidance of my Officer Walter Briscoe, to their shipping at Dover.

On the way to Gravesend, I fell in discourse (purposely) with Monsieur
Tompson, concerning their not visiting the Duke of Savoys Ambassador, and found
by his Ejaculations, that they repented them of their puntillioes, professing
to me; That if they had at first understood that the King (and since the Duke,
who had made a visit to them five or six days before their departure, on no
other errand then touching that visit) would have taken such notice of it, they
would have dispensed with their own reasons for want of examples, and have made
a visit to him; but as that now (so were their departure) would have been
unseasonable, so they had left it to the hazard of whatsoever inconvenience
might follow. I replied, they might have discovered by my diligent endeavors,
the affection of his Majesty to have had that Complement performed, as
requisite for entertainment of the correspondence between their King and that
Prince, and others, in times that needed it, but that having no formal command
from his Majesty to meddle in it, I had reason to be so reserved as I had been.
At last, I pressed him to acquaint me with the truth of what was held, I said,
at Court, that the Venetian had been the first moving cause of their not
discharging that visit with the reasons mentioned before.

But Monsieur Tompson protested to me, that he was charged wrongfully, having
been rather, he said, a perswader of them by Sir Francis Biondi (sent to them
by the Venetian to that purpose, with assurance that they beginning the
Complement, he would not fail to second them) then that he had ever used one
word to dissuade them.

With this acknowledgment I after acquainted the Savoy Ambassador, and had for
answer; That it was now too late for them to amend the faults they had made, he
having (he said) given account of their proceedings to the Duke his Master, and
was for himself, he said, resolved, that if they should make a return, as they
intended, to England, he would never, he said, receive any visit from them,
though they should (with acknowledgment of their error) make offer of it.

The two Commissioners from Saley in Barbary, Mehemets, Bensayd, Hamet, Naxuaez.
having obtained Letters from the King to their State (with grant, and for
settling of a correspondence between us and them) and to Sydi-Hamet-Laynshi, a
Saint, as they termed him, much reverenced amongst them for his holiness, and
descent from a Race of qualified Saints, and of great power for force of Horse
to be levied at his pleasure. They went hence the twelfth of November to Dover,
there to embarque in a Ship fraughted for Barbary, and to be conveyed till
within a days fail of their Port, by the Fleet for Turkey then bound thither.

His Majesty having defrayed them for the time of their abode here at forty
shillings per diem, Diet and Lodging, presented each of them after they had
taken their leaves in the privy Gallery, with a Gold Chain of a hundred pounds
value, they presented me at their parting with thirty pieces.

In time of Christmas, the Viscountess of Purbeck, having for execution of a
sentence pronounced against her in the high Commission Court, her house beset
by a Sergeant at Arms, with other Officers of Justice; a Gentleman came in the
morning from the Countess of Buckingham to the Ambassador of Savoy, demanding
leave of him for the said Officers to pass through his house into his Garden
(joined to the Ladies) for her more easy apprehension, and arrest by that way,
which though at first he somewhat stuck at (as wronging and lesning (he
thought) the respect of his quality, to leave his house free of entrance to
such persons, especially for the surprise and arrest of a fair Lady his
Neighbor) he at last, notwithstanding suffered the Constable to enter it, and
with convenience to remain in it and in the Garden, watching his opportunity
till dinnertime, when some of the Gentlemen attendants on him, contriving a
way to be rid of that encumbrance, dressed the Ambassadors Page (a handsome
fair Boy) in woman's apparel, thrust him suddenly into the Lords Coach, (as if
it had been the Lady making her escape) and drove fast with him down the
Strand, followed by a multitude of people, and those Officers (not without
danger to the Coachman, from their violence) but with ease to the Ambassador,
that had his house by this device cleared of the Constable, but himself after
charged by the Duke, That all this was done of design for the Ladies escape
(which in that Hubbub she made) to his no small prejudice, and scorn in a
business that so nearly, he said, concerned him (she being Wife to his Brother,
and bringing him Children of another begetting, yet such as by the Law
(because begotten and born while her Husband was in the Land) must be of his
Fathering.

The Ambassador for his Purgation from this charge, went immediately to the Duke
at Whitehall, but was denied access: Whereupon repairing to my Lord Chamberlain
for his mediation, I was sent to him by his Lordship to let him know more
particularly the Dukes displeasure, and back by the Ambassador to the Duke with
his humble request but of one quarter of an hours audience for his disblaming;
But the Duke returning answer, That having always held him so much his friend,
and given him so many fair proofs of his respects, he took his proceeding so
unkindly as he was resolved not to speak with him: I reported this to the
Ambassador, and had for his only answer, What Reason cannot do, Time will. Yet
after this, the Earls of Carliel and Holland interposing, the Ambassador
(hungry after his Peace, from a person of such power and regarding his Masters
service, and the public affairs) he a sevennight after obtained of the Duke
an interview in Whitehall Garden, and after an hours parley, a reconciliation.

About the same time, the Ambassador of Venice, Contareni, having sent an
Express to Dover with a Packet, came the Councels Warrant for passage of it, to
the Denmark Ambassadors, attending there their passage, for conveyance of it by
them to the Venetian Ambassador in France: Sir John Hippesley (Lieutenant of
the Castle under the Duke of Buckingham, understanding of it (and withal the
mind of his Lord and Master mentioned) sent to them for a sight of the Packet
only, as a duty, he said, of his charge, which with some question, Quere
Whether this were not Pas de Clear in their mystery.
the Ambassadors yiedling to, and sending it to him by their Secretary, he
refused to return it, saying, he would have care for the conveyance of it; But
sent it immediately to Court to those hands that opened it, and taking out (as
the Ambassador made complaint, some particular Letters, sent the rest to him,
whereat he formalizing himself (as he did also for another Packer, the
Duplicate of this sent after it) by his Secretary at Dover, which delivered to
the hand of a Mariner then upon passage, was likewise intercepted.) He
demanded Audience of his Majesty, made protestation and offer to retire himself
to Greenwich, till the State he represented, should upon the Account of his and
their wrong signify the sense of it, and pleasure for his further proceeding.
But maturer consideration (all his Letters being returned, and his Majesty
having professed to him his high displeasure for such proceeding) made him
alter his course, and digest the pretended injury so far, as only to give
account of it to his State, from whom he not long after received their
pleasure, that he should spare his access both to King and Council, till he
should formally receive some public satisfaction. The usual course was and is
yet, for Ambassadors to send to the Master of the Ceremonies a signification of
their arrival: And after the said Master to let them know the time when be
would repair to them to welcome them and conduct them to London.


After a long expectation of two Ambassadors Commissioners to come from the
States, Viz. Monsieur Randwick, and Monsieur Pawe, they arrived at Gravesend
the seventh of February, and were there met by Her. Joachimi the Resident here.
Amongst other discourses they had with him (as I was informed, being then
absent) concerning the Treatment they might expect from his Majesty. A Question
was moved whether the Master of the Ceremonies were not to receive them there
with the Kings welcome, and to know their dispositions for the time of their
coming to London, before he should come to fetch them thence with the Kings
Barge, which it was affirmed, Sir Jews Lewknor had at other times done to some
of their Ministers.

This scruple intimated to me (at a time when I could discharge neither of
those services) my Wife being then dangerously sick of the small Pox, and in
that respect not stirring out of doors) I wrote to the Resident Ambassador to
this purpose: That howsoever some, perhaps, extraordinary occasion might have
begotten at some time such a redoubled course of observance (the like whereof
had not come under my experience) it was no rule, and that if I my self had (as
I remembered I had once the Summer before) made a first and second Journey to
Gravesend, to the Ambassadors of Denmark, it was in the way of good manners to
comply with them, at a time of the Kings remote absence from London, his
Majesty being then in progress, while in the interim I attended answer to my
Letters for direction about the manner of their Treatment upon the Reformation
then newly established for the defraying of Ambassadors, which I hoped should
serve them for a consideration to keep them from drawing into consequence that,
or any other former reception, different from the Ordinary, especially at a
time, that his Majesty endeavored more then ever to reduce our forms of
Treating Ambassadors to the style of those practiced by other Princes.

How these reasons prevailed I know not; sure I am they had not any man sent to
them in my place, till the fourth day of their stay at Gravesend (when Master
Beaulieu (Secretary to his Majesty for the French tongue) entreated to that
Service by me, and allowed of upon my recommendation by my Lord Chamberlain)
brought them in the Kings Barge the twelfth of February to Tower-wharffe, where
received by the Viscount of Wimbleton (accompanied with half a score Gentlemen
in five Noblemens coaches with the Venetian and Savoy Ambassador (but without
the Kings) they were brought to their lodgingat the Italian Ordinary, there to
reside till at more leisure they might find better accommodation (without touch
at any hand to the purpose of the Kings not defraying them.) The failing of the
Kings coach proceeded from the forgetfulness of my Lord Chamberlains Gentleman
of his Horses, and became a Subject of no small distaste, and complaint formerly
made by the Resident Ambassador to his Lordship in name of the rest, as of a
lessening in the respects usually afforded to all other public Ministers of
Princes, which to reconcile, a mean was thus found. It was agreed that the
Ambassadors should (the third day after) return in their own coaches by a
private way about by London walls to the Tower, and after a sight of that place
to be fetched thence by the same Lord Viscount of Wimbleton with as many
coaches as before attending the Kings coach (and the Queens also sent along
with it) this accordingly performed, and they so accompanied through London to
their Lodging, all was composed to their satisfaction.

The next Puntillio obtruded was, whether at the day of their Audience, they
should dine in Court as some other Ambassadors (particularly the Savoyard) had
done lately before. To remove this rub I wrote to my Lord Chamberlains
Secretary a Letter for his Lordships sight, and consideration, imparting that
the Summer before in the progress time, the Mantovan and the two Danish
Ambassadors had dined in Court (the first at his first Audience at Windsor,
Whereof see the reason as also why the Mantovan dined not in Court at his first
Audience.
the latter at Havering at their second private Audience) and that since that
the King coming to White Hall, though the Treatment of dineing in Court were
not perhaps necessary, nor fit to be made to any Ambassador (as out of an
established course) at or in the Kings standing House) it having been made
elsewhere with regard of inconveniency, or want of place fitting with their
own provision to give themselves a dinner at or near the Court in time of
progress) his Majesty was yet pleased to comply with them in that point, but
not to serve for an example to others.

But now there must a step be made backward to the year 1624. at which time
there happend a noble traverse reflecting on the two Spanish Ambassadors viz.
the Marquess de Inojosa, and Don Carles Columa then Resident here, the last of
a good disposition, the other sower and harsh, so that they were compard to oil
and vinegar; the business was thus; the Prince of Wales being back from
Madrid, matters began to gather ill blood twixt England and Spain; for the
Treaty both of the match and Palatinate were dissolved by Act of Parliament,
and the Duke of Buckingham made use of Parliament, and Puritan (who swayed then
most in the Houses) to compass this work. The Spanish Ambassadors
understanding that the rupture of the matrimonial treaty proceeded from the
Practices of Buckingham, they devised a way how to supplant, and ruin him;
they fell into consideration that King James was grown old, wherefore the least
thing might raise umbrages of distrust and fear in him, therefore by a notable
way of plotting, they informed him at a private Audience that there was a
dangerous design against his Royal Authority traced by the Duke of Buckingham
and his confederats, the manner of which conspiracy will appear in this
following Memorial or Remonstrance of Sir Walter Ashton left still Ambassador
ledger in the Court of Spain, which he presented there to the King himself,
which was thus.

To the King.
Sir
SIr Walter Ashton Ambassador to the King of great Britain, says, that the
King his Master has commanded him to represent unto your Majesty the reasons
why he could receive no satisfaction by your Majesty's answer of the fifth of
January, and that thereby by the unanimous consent of his Parliament, he came to
dissolve the Treaties of Match, and Palatinat.

He received another answer from your Majesty, wherein he found less grounds to
work upon, and having understood that neither by the Padre Marsto, or your
Majesty's Ambassadors who have assisted, these days passed in his Court there
was something to be further propounded and declared touching the business of
the Palatinat, whereby he might receive contentment: The said Ambassadors to
this day have not said any thing at all to any purpose, which being compared
with other circumstances of their ill carriage, he gathers and doubts that
according to their ill affections and depraved intentions wherewith they have
proceeded in all things, but specially in one particular, they have labored to
hinder the good correspondence with the so necessary and desired intelligence
which should be conserved with your Majesty.

Moreover he says, the King his Master has commanded him to give an account
to your Majesty, that in an Audience which he gave to the Marquess of Inojosa,
and to Don Carlos Coloma, they under the cloak and pretext of zeal, and
particular care of his Majesty's person, pretended to discover unto him a very
great Conjuration both against his Royal Dignity and person. Which was, that
at the beginning of this Parliament the Duke of Buckingham had consulted with
certain Lords and others of the Arguments and means which were to be taken for
the breaking and dissolving of the Treaties both of Match and Palatinat, and
their Consultations passed so far, that if his Majesty would not conform
himself to their Councels, they would give him a house of pleasure, whither he
might retire himself to his sport, in regard that the Prince had now years
sufficient and parts answerable for the Government of the Kingdom: The
Information was of that quality, that it was sufficient to make impressions in
him of an everlasting jealousy, in regard that through the sides of Buckingham
they wounded the Prince his Son with the Nobility, it being not probable that
they could effect such a design without departing totally from that Obligation
of faith and loyalty which they owed to his person and Crown, because the
interessed Lords made themselves culpable as Concealors: Nor is it likely the
Duke would hurt himself upon such an enterprise, without communicating it first
to the Prince, and knowledge of his pleasure.

But because the Information might be made more clear, his Majesty did make
many instances to the said Ambassadors, that they would give the Authors of the
said Conspiracy, this being the sole means whereby their own honor might be
preserved, and whereby the great care and zeal they pretended to have of his
person might appear: But the said Ambassadors instead of confirming the great
zeal they made profession to bear him, all the answer they gave consisted of
Arguments against the discovery of the Conspirators, so that for confirmation
of the said Report, there remained no other means then the examination of some
of his Council of State, and principal Subjects, which was put in execution
accordingly, causing them to be put to their Oaths in his own presence, and
commanding that such Interrogations and questions should be propounded unto
them that were most pertinent to the accusation, so that not the least part,
particle, or circumstance remained which was not exactly examined, and
canvas'd: And he found in the Duke and the rest who were examined, a most clear
and sincere innocence touching the impeachments and imputations wherewith your
Majesty's Ambassadors had charged them.

This being done, he returned to make new instances unto the said Ambassadors,
that they would not prefer the discovery of the names of the Conspirators, to
the security of his Royal person, to the truth and honor of themselves, and
to the hazard of an opinion to be held the Authors and betrayers of a plot of
so much malice, sedition, and danger; but the said Ambassadors continued still
in a knotty kind of obstinacy resolving to conceal the names of the
Conspirators, notwithstanding that he gave them Audience afterward, wherein
the Marquis of Inojosa took his leave.

But a few days after, they desired new Audience, pretending they had
something to say that concerned the public good, and conduced to the entire
restitution of the Palatinate, and thereby to the conservation and confirmation
of the friendship with your Majesty: But having suspended some few days to
give them Audience, thinking that being thereby better advised, they would
think on better courses, and discover the Authors of so pernicious a Plot, and
having since made many instances to that effect, and attended the success of
so long patience, he sent his Secretary Sir Edward Conway, and Sir Francis
Cotington Secretary to the Prince, commanding them that they should signify
unto the said Ambassadors, that he desired nothing more then a continuance of
the freindship betwixt the two Crowns, therefore if they had any thing to say,
they should communicate it unto the said Secretaries, as persons of great
trust, which he employed therefore expressly to that end, and if they made any
difficulty of this also, then they might choose amongst his Council of State
those whom they liked best, and he would command that they should presently
repair unto them; and if this also should seem inconvenient, they might send
him what they had to say in a Letter by whom they thought fittest, and he would
receive it with his own hands.

But the Ambassadors misbehaving themselves, and not conforming to any thing
that was thus propounded, the said Secretaries, according to the instructions
which they had received, told them that they being the Authors of an
Information so dangerous and seditious, had made themselves incapable to treat
further with the King their Master, and were it not for the respect he bore to
the Catholic King, his dear and beloved Brother, their Master, and that they
were in quality of Ambassadors to such a Majesty, he would and could by the Law
of Nations, and the right of his own Royal Justice, proceed against them with
such severity as their offense deserved, but for the reasons aforesaid, he
would leave the reparation to the Justice of their own King, of whom he would
demand and require it.

In conformity to what has been said, the said Ambassador of the King of Great
Britain says, That the King his Master has commanded him to demand
refaction and satisfaction of your Majesty against the said Marquis de Inojosa,
and Don Carlos Coloma, making your Majesty the Judge of the great scandal, and
enormous offense which they have committed against him, and against public
right, expecting justice from your Majesty in the demonstrations, and
chastisement that your Majesty shall inflict upon them; which, in regard of the
manner of proceeding with your Majesty, and out of your Majesty's own
integrity and goodness ought to be expected.

Furthermore, the said Ambassador says That the King his Master has commanded
him to assure your Majesty, that hitherto he has not intermingled the
correspondence and friendship he holds with your Majesty, with the faults and
offenses of your Ministers, but leaves them and restraines them to their own
persons, and that he still perseveres with your Majesty in the true and ancient
freindship and brotherhood, as formerly, to which purpose he is ready to give
a hearing to any thing that shall be reasonable, and give answer thereunto,
therefore when it shall please your Majesty to employ any Ambassador thither,
he will afford them all good entertainment, and receive them with that love
which is fitting.

For conclusion the said Ambassador humbly beseeches your Majesty that you
would be pleased to observe and weigh well the care and tenderness wherewith
the King his Master has proceeded toward your Majesty's Ambassadors, not
obliging them to any precipitate resolutions, but allowing them time enough to
prove, and give light of that which they had spoken: And besides by opening
them many ways besides, whereby they might have complied with their Orders, if
they had any such, which course if they had taken, they might well have given
satisfaction to the King his Master, and moderated the so grounded opinion of
their ill proceedings against the Peace, together with the good intelligence
and correspondence 'twixt the two Crowns.


Such was the complaint, or charge rather which was exhibited by our Ambassador
in Spain, against Inojosa and Coloma (for their misdemeanors in England) which
filled that Court full of dark whispers for the present, and the World expected
that the said Ambassadors should receive some punishment, or at least some mark
of disgrace at their return; but matters growing daily worse and worse betwixt
the two Crowns, they were rather rewarded then reprehended, Inojosa being
promoted to be Governor of Milan, and Coloma received additions of employment
and honors in Flanders.

But the Civilities of England at that time toward the said Ambassadors was
much cried up abroad, that notwithstanding so pernicious and machinations to
discompose the whole English Court, and demolish Buckingham, yet were they
permitted to depart peaceably, and though they had no Kings Ship to transport,
them, yet Sir Lewis Leukner was sent to conduct them to the Sea side, for
prevention of any affront, or outrage that might have been offered them.

AN ABSTRACT Of the Signallst Passages that go to the Composure of this
DISCOURSE.
A Pernicious plot of the Spanish Ambassadors, to destroy the Duke of
Buckingham, fol. 243 The arrival of the Palsgrave in England, with the
particular of his Train 1 The Ambassadors of France and Venice stand upon their
Puntilioes 9 The arrival of a Russian Ambassador, etc. 24 An Ambassador with
the Chancellor of Muscovy sent to England 38 An Ambassador extraordinary from
Sweden arrives 41 An affront offered the Swedish Ambassador 42 Another affront
offerred the Swedish Ambassador 45 An Ambassador come from Turkey 57 The
Ambassador of Venice ranked always among Crowned heads 65 The Ambassador of
France denies to be at the Coronation, for two reasons 169 An Axiom of State,
That it is more honor to be last of a Superior Order, then first of an
Inferior 63 Agents from Barbary arrive in England 213 No Ambassador to have
his charges defrayed except at conclusion of Peace, Marriages, or Baptismes 228
An Ambassador of a King to be brought in by an Earl at least ib. An Ambassador
of a Duke to be brought in by a Baron ib. No Ambassador except a Kings to be
met in the Kings Coach further off then Tower Wharfe ib. Abbot de la Seaglia
Ambassador from Savoy 227
B.
BOiscot the Archdukes Ambassador discontented 3 Barbarigo the Venetian
Ambassador dies in England 37 Baron Donaw sent Ambassador from the Palsgrave 61
Ballompierre arrives in England, refuses the Kings diet 188 Benica Agent for
the Marquis of Baden 189 The business 'twixt the States and our East India
Merchants concluded 117 Barham Down the Rendezvous of the English Ladies to
welcome the Queen 153
C.
NIne Counts attended the Palsgrave to England 2 A clash 'twixt the Savoy
Ambassador and him of Florence 15 A clash 'twixt Gondamar and the States
Ambassador 22 The Complaint of the Venetian Ambassador about his Present 39 A
clash 'twixt England and France about le Clear 57 Cadenet the French Favorits
Brother sent Ambassador Extraordinary into England 67 A Caprichio of some
French Lords 70 Cadenet the French Ambassador allowed two hundred pound per
diem for his diet 73
D.
THe Duke of Lenox appointed to attend the Palsgrave 1 The Duke of York meets
the Palsgrave 2 Donati the Venetian Ambassador recalled for misdemeanour 58 Sir
Dudley Carltons cold reception in France 188 A difference 'twixt the Master of
the Ceremonies and him of the Jewell-house, about the delivery of Presents 194
The difference decided 195 Sir Dormer Cotton sent Ambassador to Persia 177
E.
THe Earl of Somersets Marriage, etc. 12 Exception taken by the French
Ambassador 28 Exceptions taken another time 64 The Earl of Arundels revenge of
the French Ambassador 68 An Error in the Danish Ambassador 185 The Earl of
Rutland sent to transport the Prince from Spain, etc. 129 The Earl of Dorset
Justice in Air in the Dukes absence 214
F.
THe first Complement 'twixt the Lady Elizabeth and the Palsgrave 2 The French
Ambassador stands upon some puntilioes. 12 The Florentine Ambassador placed
beneath the lowest English Baron at Court 24 Foscarini tragically and
wrongfully put to death 29 The first rise of the Duke of Buckingham 35 The
French Ambassador much discontented 49 The French Lords discontented because
they sat not at the Kings Table 71 Fifty pounds sent the Muscovian Ambassador
by the Lords of the Council to pay for his Sea provision 108
G.
GOndamars first arrival in England 12 Gavelone Agent for the Duke of Savoy 15
Gondamar precedes the French Ambassador at the Earl of Somersets Wedding 17
Gondamar casts an aspersion upon the Hollands Ambassador 20 A great clash
'twixt diverse Ambassadors 66 The great clash 'twixt the Persian Ambassador, and
Sir Robert Shirley 174
F.
CO: Henry of Nassaw accompanies the Palsgrave to England 2 Sir Henry Manwaring
recommended to the State of Venice by the King 50 Hamburgh Commissioners deemed
to have Audidience of the Queen. 183
I.
INojosa the Spanish Ambassador clasheth with Don Diego Hurtado an Ambassador
also extraordinary from Spain 126 Joachim made Ambassador ledger from the States
160
K.
KIng James his Apology to the Archdukes Ambassador. 4 The King Knights six
Holland Ambassadors at once, without paying any sees 78 Kings James his
Funeral 174
L.
THe Lords make a Supper for the Lady Elizabeth 11 The Landgrave of Hessen
comes to England 114 Sir Lewis Lewkner suspected to be of the Spanish faction
^38 The Lord Mayor of London to give place to no other but the King 237
M.
THe manner of the Marriage of the Lady Elizabeth 10 Mareth the French
Ambassador 53 Monsieur de la Chenay committed prisoner about Sir Walter Rawley
56 Monsieur de Tilliers the French Ambassador has lodgings at Court but no
diet 165 Tilliers much discontented, and his high language 163 The Marquis
Pompeo Strozzi Ambassador from the Duke of Mantova 214 A maxim among
Ambassadors 232 Means found to content the Dutch Ambassador 242
N.
A Notable clash 'twixt the Persian Ambassador, and Sir Robert Sherley, the
circumstances thereof 174 A notable high Memorial the English Ambassador gave
the King of Spain 245 News brought in half an hour from Dover to Canterbury
of the Queens arrival 153
O.
OSalinskie Ambassador Extraordinary from Poland 74 New Orders at Court
touching the treatment of Foreign Ambassadors 228 The new Orders practiced first
upon Ballompierre the French Ambassador 228
P.
PResents to Ambassadors lessened 31 A rich Present sent by the Muscovit to the
King 39 The Polish Ambassador receives 10000 l. of the King by way of loan 90
The Prince like to be drowned in Spain 221 A Picture case delivered the
Mantouan Ambassador from the King, without his Picture, for a Present worth 500
l. 222 The Prince taxed by the Spanish Ambassadors 245
Q.
QUadt an honorable person by the Prince of Transylvania 185 She excuses her
presence at the Coronation 169 The Queens arrival in England, and news
brought in half an hour from Dover to Canterbury by Mr. Terhit 153
R.
AReformation of Presents given Ambassadors 31 Aremarkable passage, for
precedence happened at Vervins 'twixt the French and Spanish Ambassadors 67
Rosdorf Ambassador for the King of Bohemia 197 Rosencrants the Danish
Ambassador 180 Sir Robert Shirley lays his Turban at the Kings feet 137 Mr.
Robert Tirhit rides in half an hour from Dover to Canterbury
S.
THe States Ambassador gives place to him of Savoy 32 The Spanish Ambassador
countenanced more then the French 48 Six Commissioners in joint Embassy from
Holland Soubizes arrival in England, being Godfather to the last King in
Scotland 111
T
THe Turks Ambassadors Son touched by the King 58 The title of King denied by
King James to the Palsgrave 62 The Tarrace at Whitehall falls under Gondamar
when he had his first Audience for a match in Spain 63 Two Ambassadors of
diverse Princes lodged in one house 186 The Co. of Tremes sent to condole King
James' death 146
U.
THe Vicountesse of Effingham clasheth with the French Ambassadors Wife 9 The
Venetian Ambassador gives place to the Bohemian 66 The Venetian Ambassador
Knighted and the Sword given him 113 The Venetian Ambassador questions the
giving of precedence to him of Denmark 207
W.
Away found to please the Ambassador of Spain and France 36 A way found out
another time to please them 64 A witty answer of the Transilvanian Ambassador
195 Sir Walter Ashtons complaint in the Court of Spain against the Marquis of
Inojosa and Don Carlos Coloma 244
Z.
ZAmoiski Son to the Chancellor of Polands arrival 25
FINIS.

