GOOD NEWS FROM WESTCHESTER; BY GOOD INTELLIGENCE: SHOWING The Resolution of
that City to adventure their lives and fortunes in defense of the King and
Parliament, being lately opposed by the Cavaliers.

ALSO A perfect Reltaion of the Lord Brook his fidelity to the Parliament,
going down to Warwick Castle for the defense of his Country.

Also the manner of Sir John Sackvills apprehension near Seaven-Oake in Kent.

With the number of horse lately taken by the Earl of Warwick coming from
Flanders.

AND The description of a great combustion at Brainford on tuesday last, being
the 16. of this instant August. wherein many of the Cavaliers had much
mischief.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for John Iackson. August 18. 1642.

GOOD NEWS FROM WESTCHESTER, By true Intelligence.
News is so conformable and agreeable an object to the understanding, that
good subjects earnestly thirst for the relation thereof, especially when it is
true, and such as reflects on the prosperity and good of the King, the
Parliament, and the Commonwealth. The true Protestant Religion, for which the
Parliament stands, has a secret quality to attract the good wills and
resolutions of this land to expose themselves in defense of the King and
Parliment. This occult influence of religion, working supernaturally on humane
affections, is the adamant that does attract such a numerous confluence of
fidelious subjects to maintain the pious and religious proceedings of the
Parliament. Amongst the rest, the brave and magnanimous resolution of the town
of Westchester deserves commemoration: for they (notwithstanding that many
towns have been assaulted, and suffered much by the Cavaliers, who rove about
in all parts, to give the country a sensible taste of the bitter effects of a
civil war) not fearing any opposition that can be made against them, are fully
resolved to maintain the Kings honor, and the Parliaments privilege against
the malignant Party, and have in a Petition presented to the Commons delivered
their readiness to serve the King and Parliament with their lives and
fortunes; and their (...) for hindering the drawing up of that Petition is sent
for as a delinquent. Much opposition they have had by the new disorderly order
of Cavaliers; who delight to be the incendiaries of the Commonwealth. But the
undaunted courage of the Citizens of Westchester is firmly contracted and
settled upon the King and Parliament, for whom they account their lives but a
cheap sacrifice.

And that it may be further known how the love and affection of the Commonalty,
and the well-affected Nobility are really and strongly united unto the
Parliament; certain intelligence being given that Banbury is taken by the
Earl of Northampton, and that fine Pieces of Ordnance left by the L. Brook in
the custody of his son M. Fines were forced from him and carried to Warwick,
the L. Brook taking this indignity in high indignation, has now very lately
raised a great and well appointed troop of horse, that may courageously
encounter with the L. of Northamptons forces; and without all question he will
perform noble and heroical exploits against the ruining flashing valor of the
Cavaliers. The L. Brook himself, that he may infuse the greater magnanimity
into his troops, does with his presence give animation and encouragement to
their and his resolution: and for that purpose is now (exasperated with the
injuries and affronts offered to him gone down to desend his country against
the violent oppressions of the malignant part^, that their malice may be
daunted at the first apparition of his warlike troops, intending, by the
favor and auspicious appointment of the Parliament, not only to secure his
much distracted Country from all divellish oppositions and machinations
plotted by the malignants; but also to the uttermost hazard of his estate and
Fortunes to defend his Castle at Warwick, being an ancient structure rightfully
unto him belonging; God send him prosperous success and crown his attempts
with victory, since the grounds of his resolution are pious and honorable,
being in defense of his King, Country, and Parliament.

And as God has made this Kingdom resolute and full of fidelity in adhering
to the Parliament, so does he daily demonstrate his miraculous power in the
discovery of all pernicious plots and designs against this land, all the
purposes and secret preparations of the malignants and Papists being digito
Dei, by the finger of almighty God showed and pointed out unto us before they
come to any maturity; and thus by the divine providence of God, some having a
great suspicion that Sir John Sackvill was Popishly inclined and ill-affected
to the Protestant Religion. Upon this supposition, he dwelling at, or near
unto the town of Seven-Oakes in Kent, was by many of the inhabitants on Sunday
last, when he least suspected it, laid wait for as he was at Church, being a
neutrall or Church-Papists, the town of Seaven-Oakes stood a while in his
defense, endeavoring to rescue him from them, that so he might not be taken;
but when they perceived that the other who came to apprehend him were too
strong for them, they fearing to endanger themselves in such a combustion, and
to give offense to the high Court of Parliament, unto whom he was to be sent as
a Delinquent, suffered them to carry him away, afterward having put him in safe
custody, his house being diligently searched, there was found therein all sorts
of warlike ammunition; and especially great saddles, all which were conveyed in
five wagons upto London; and brought with much joyful exultation through the
City unto the Parliament, and besides many horses were also found out, which
the said Sir John Sackvill had obscurely kept a long time in a cave
underground, which being discovered, they also with the aforesaid ammunition
were speedily brought up to London, for without question this Knight had no
good intention in providing and secretly keeping such ammunition, saddles and
horses; but (as it may be probably conjectured, did purpose to use them in time
of need, and with this unknown strength to aid the malignant party against the
Parliament; but his malicious design, as others of the like nature, were
brought to light, himself being apprehended, and his warlike ammunition and
his warlike ammunition and horses seized on as a most happy discovery.

Moreover as God has protected this Parliament and the Kingdom by land, so by
his auspicious favor the Earl of Warwick through his vigilant care and
industry has surprised certain ships coming from Flanders, wherein many great
horses were to be brought over into England, and so to be sent unto his
Majesty, to strengthen the malignant party against the Parliament, but thanks
be to God, they are come far short of their intended journey, though it is
likely they were sent from the Queen, or some Catholics in Flanders, there
being many of the Popish malignant party in foreign countries, who would be
exceeding glad to add fuel to the civil war in England, and to send any
forces or money to advance the catholic cause; thereby to subvert the true
Protestant Religion, and induce Popery, as they have always endeavored by
many contrived plots hitherto discovered. This Kingdom is at this present put
into great amazement and terror by the Cavaliers, especially in country
villages, taking away the armor of all that refuse to go with them or assist
them, and slaying them that refuse to give up their arms, robbing carriers and
passengers, and taking all the booty that they can get wheresoever they come.
But the Parliament has now sent diverse troops of horse to relieve the
country. Westchester also is and has been much troubled in this common
calamity, by reason that His Majesty had sent thither diverse Captains to raise
volunteers, which do much hurt in the city and country by their insolences
and evil demeanours to the inhabitants that refuse to obey their commands; but
the Mayor of Westchester, Sir John Brewerton, and the other Deputy Lieutenants
have raised forces to suppress all their attempts and traitorous endeavors
tending to disturb the peace of the country, and moreover Westchester (as
aforesaid) is most loyally and lovingly resolved to show their courage and
magnanimity in maintaining the true Protestant Religion, as it evidently
appears by a Petition lately by them presented to the Parliament, wherein they
declare their cheerful willingness to defend the King and Parliament against
all those who endeavor to engage this Kingdom in a civil war, but hitherto
(as the Relation has showed) the Commons are fully resolved to withstand all
opposers of the Parliament, all their plots and proiects being hitherto by Gods
providence found out and discoverd.

Every day brings forth some new accident. It is reported for certain, that on
tuesday last at Brainford there was a great contention between the Cavaliers
and the Parliaments souldies, in which skirmish many of the Cavaliers were cut
and wounded, some their hands cut off, some their elbowes cut, besides diverse
other wounds which they received. Also how Captain De la Bar a French man
has entered into a Papists house, in whose defense he stands, having resolved
there to live and die: which resistance of his gave occasion to the former
quarrel between the Cavaliers and our soldiers.

Ordered, that Sir John Girlington, Sir George Middleton, and Sir Edward Fitton
be sent for as delinquents.

Hen. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

