GOOD THOUGHTS FOR EVERY DAY OF THE MONTH.

Translated out of French By Mrs. D. S.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the George in Fleet Street, near
Cliffords Inn, 1656.

DIRECTION for the READER.
THis short Collection includes the chief Heads of Christian life, distributed
into Weeks. In the first, the Motives that we have to go to God; in the second
and third, the Virtues that lead us to him; in the fourth, the Exercise of
those Virtues.

As for Method in using them, I know, that the two best and most certain
Directours in prayer are the Holy Ghost and Practice; That we cannot learn
better how to pray then by praying; That prayer is a good Method for it self;
Yet not to engage you without some direction, let me advise you,

1. To choose a convenient precise time; the Morning before you enter into the
trouble of business; or at Night when your mind is at ease.

2. In some retired place, your spirit being settled and recollected: First,
lift up your self by an act of faith to God who is present and attentive to the
voice of your Heart. My God, I believe firmly that thou art here within my
soul, and that my soul is in thee, etc. Secondly, adore him submisly; humble
your self to the utmost. Lord I am but dust and ashes, etc. Thirdly, ask pardon
of him for any offense, known or unknown, that may render you unworthy to
appear in his sight. Lastly, invoke the assistance and light of the Holy Spirit.

3. Read the first thought of the day, but stowly: Though you should do nothing
more then rest upon conceiving the truths therein, yet will they work in you,
as it were without your help: There is nothing in God that is not holy and
sanctifying, and his words are Spirit and Life: Thoughts have the same
operation upon our Mind, as a Seal upon Wax: The Soul receives the impression
even of simple notions, if she stop there, and concur with them: But you shall
do better, if as soon as you have read the first thought, you discourse a
little to your self upon it; and examine, Is this true? Is it reasonable? Is it
necessary? Why? How? Did Jesus and the Saints practice it? Does God inspire me
with it? If I do it not, What then? etc.

This done, proceed to the next thought; and if your time be spent, only read
the rest leasurely; but above all, pause upon the Conclusion; and resolve on
the performance of something conformable to your subject; begging of God (...)
severance and Effic^^^.

4. The little sentence at the end, (taken out of the Scripture, or some
Father,) is like a drop of Essence, to be worn all that day; it contains all
the virtue of the good thoughts it concludes; it is easy to call to mind, and
to retain; if you reflect often upon it, it will quicken and fortify your
light, and instill it self into all occasions.

Thus we may with application and constancy, raise our good thoughts to such a
point of vigor that they may extirpate our ill; or at least make them weak and
ineffectual; and exalt and magnify them, till they bring us to a pious
immobility, and some extraordinary purity; This S. August. means Hom. 16. de
50.

He cannot have ill deeds who has good thoughts.

Good Thoughts FOR EVERY DAY of the MONTH.
The First Week.
The Frst Day of the Month. Of the End of our Creation.
1. WE are created for God, God himself could create us for no other but
himself; and we should betray our selves if we did not confess this truth;
our heart tells it us, and we cannot contradict it.

2. It is fit that every one should have his own: then let us be for God since
we are his: if not, we belly our selves; for if we are not his Children under
the love of his Bounty, we shall be his Slaves under the rigor of his Justice.

3. As then Bread which is made to nourish, the Sun to give light, the fire to
warm, if they should refuse the office for which they were made, would be as
if they were not, or as Monsters in Nature, because every thing must tend to
that end for which it was made, and cannot decline it without going to its own
destruction. So the Heart of Man which is only and essentially made for God, if
it stray from him, or refuse to go to him, belies its essence, and becomes
monstrous, a scorn to the World, and to all reason.

4. Well then, do I carry my self like a Creature that is for none but God? Is
my Heart and all my affections for him? Ah how few things do I, that I can say
are truly and only dove for God! Ah, how much time is lost, how much reproach
gotten in one day? What do you do upon the Earth, if you do not that for which
you are there?

You must here renew your design of seeking God only, and your resolution to
rob him of nothing that appertains to him.

S. Aug. lib. 6. Confess. cap. 6. Oh intricate ways of the World! Woe be to
that audacious Soul, which presumes to hope that by leaving Thee, it may find
any thing else which is better!

The II. Day. Of Sin.
1. O God, what is it it to lose Thee! To lose God an infinite good, is it
nothing? Men that lose their goods by some accident, as by Fire or by Law,
seeing themselves reduced to beggary, are so troubled and afflicted therewith,
that they lose their sense and grow desperate. Ah, what then will a soul do,
that has lost her God!

2. O Sin, too familiar, but unknown to Men; in play and divertisement to make
our selves the object of the infinite wrath of God! God, so good, an Ocean of
goodness, becomes to a sinner an infinite ill, and cannot but hate him
infinitely; to hate ^ little, is to wish a little ill to a Man; to hate to
death, is to wish death, and there it ends; but to hate to infinity! O God,
what do we fear, if we do not fear the dreadful hate of God!

3. See the horror of Sin in the sufferings of JESUS. What a spectacle is
there! Yet the state of a Soul in sin is much more horrible then that of a God
dying on a Cross; since that JESUS died to destroy sin, that he might no
longer behold that which afflicts him more then Death: But alas, can I believe
that God will spare me, who delivered his Son over to such horrid pains?

After this you must make an act of Contrition, as well as you can, upon all the
sins of yhour life past. We ought not to grieve for any thing else, for nothing
else can Grief remedy.

Jerem. 2.19. Know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter that
thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in Thee, says the
Lord of Hosts.

The III. Day. Of Death.
1. HOw much must that soul apprehend Death, which all its life time has been
an enemy to God! What regret, for having for fifty years of life, which is now
past away as nothing lost Eternity!

2. If I stay so long, can I be assured to be delivered from the insinite
evils that overwhelm a soul which appears before God without repentance.

3. What then would I wish I had done? O God, the great folly of neglecting so
long, and providing so late for a business of the greatest importance in the
world! we dye as late as we can; but we should rather think how to die well
then how to shun Death.

4. How shall I value then those things which now I love, and esteem the mostin
the world? Let us at present advise with death; he is faithful, he will not
deceive us: What will become of this flesh, this money, this pleasure, this
honor? How do we judge, what do we think at our death? the living Man boasts,
the dying Man cries. In life one esteems the world, in death one despises it,
who says truest, which shall we believe, life or death? Whom shall we trust,
this living man, or that dying? O the Tapers at our death enlighten all, unmask
al! but the misfortune is, that it comes too late; we have not time to
undeceive our selves.

Think what it is that you should fear most, if you were to dye presently, and
take order about it from that moment without deferring it; but above al things
frequent the Sacrament, and in it practice how to dye.

Tertul. l. de exhort. cast. c. 12. A Christian bath no morrow.

The IV. Day. Of the last Judgment.
1. OMy sovereign Judge, I must then one day show my self before thy Tribunal,
to receive according to the good or evil done in this life; I believe this
truth more firmly then if the Trumpet had already sounded for the general
raising of the dead.

2. What shall we say at the view of so many ill thoughts, of so many evil
words, of so many years lost, of so many graces neglected, there where every
thing shall be accounted for; every moment of time, even to the least sight,
and nothing abated.

3. If we did not know the judgment that shall be in the other life upon al
men, we might be excusable; who does not know it? Let us therefore govern our
selves after the judgment of God, and not after that of Man: For if our
present judgment agree not with that our judge, what a trial must we expect,
what a dreadful sentence! Go ye cursed depart from me, etc. Alas, whither Lord
shall they go, who depart from thee? to what refuge, to what Port shall they
retire? In what part of the world may we dwell far from God? where can be that
strange abode? Far from God, cursed of God: Alas!

Imagine that you were presented to God at the latter judgemnt: of what would
you have most fear touching your conscience? Bethink your self.

S. Aug. Confess. 9.13. Woe be to Men who lead a commendable and exemplary life,
if thou look upon it without mercy.

The V. Day. Of Hell.
1. IF we could hear by some vent, and lend an ear but a quarter of an hour to
the groans and pitiful cries of the damned! In that bottomless pit, they
confess their most secret sins; they sigh, they beat their breasts, their fast
is perpetual, they do penance in flames, but too late. Penance in this World is
hard, but much more grievous in Hell.

2. The wicked rich man curses and complains that so many thousand years his
fervent thirst cannot obtain one drop of water: so small a matter, so long a
while, and in so extreme misery and in vain!

3. They are tormen ted one with another; and after judgment their bodies
shall be tumbled one upon another, and thrown like coals into a furnace. They
shall transmit the heat one to another, in such manner, that by the common
oppression, every one shall burn in the flames of all.

4. Tell me, have you a breast plate before your heart, able to withstand Gods
fury? Tell me the secret that gives you this assurance? we are most of us as it
were returned from Hell which we have merited, at present where are we!

Make often this visit to the Damned;; see them; speak to them, and learn by
their misery to fear God, and the danger wherein you are.

Luke 12.5. Fear him, who after he had killed, has power to cast into Hell,
yea I say unto you, Fear him.

The VI. Day. Of the Eternity of Hell.
1. TO have no company but that of Devils, darkness, rage, despair; and in a
word, never to see God, never to have one drop of pleasure or release; what is
this? Do I believe it rightly? How do they who suffer it, apprehend it; alas I
cannot endure the flame of a Candle one minute at my singer, what then will
this be?

2. O Eternity! The time will come, that a damned person, after the succession
of many ages, shall have shed more tears, though he should shed but one a day,
more tears I say, then would make all the Rivers and Seas in the world: and
when he has done so; he shall begin again a Hundred Thousand times, and shed
as many more: not once only, but as many times as there are sands in the Sea:
and at the end of all this it shall be accounted nothing; the pricking of a
thorn though never so little, if it should last to eternity would be
intolerable: Alas then, etc.

3. Eternity, always before their eyes, charge every one of their evils with all its weight, they count all the coals which shall burn them; all the fiery
stripes which shall tear them, all the remorses of conscience which shall gnaw
them, etc. Of all our tears (say they) might be made an Ocean, in comparison of
which, all the Oceans in the world would be but a drop: Of all our flames a
Furnace, etc. Of all our poisons, enough to destroy an infinity of lives: An
Eternity to burn; an Eternity to weep; an Eternity to howl; an Eternity to
rage, and rage, and rage, and never, never to behold the face of God.

See if you are in the condition of those who damn themselves, and leap smiling
into the midst of the flames: if you have no fear you are very insensible; and
if you have any, and yet provide not effectually against the future, you are a
great Fool.

To perish once, is to perish ever.

The VII. Day. Of Paradise.
1. I Hope by the grace of GOD that a I shall see one day, and for ever, him
whom whom my heart loves. My Lord that has so tenderly loved me. Ah, we have
but few days more of Exile and Pilgrimage, and then we shall be eternally with
Jesus.

2. Paradise, that great word, the best of words! the assembly of all good
things to be wished for, and that to Eternity! O what is that! What is the
earth and all its weak allurements, in comparison of such vast and solid
delights?

3. What matter is it that we are here below, so that we be eternally with
God? Have I reason to complain, that for one moment of pain I am made capable
of an eternity of good without measure; O most happy eternity! O life eternal!

E cite in your self a very great desire of seeing God, and suppress all the
vain hopes of the World, and all fears of ills in this life, with the thoughts
of Paradise.

S. Aug. in Psalm. 26. Let your heart transcend all things visible, and let your
intention transcend your usual carnal cogitations that arise out of corporeal
sense and imagination. Cast all this out of your mind; whatsoever you meet
with deny; say it is not that it seems, for if it had been that, it had not
been presented to me; so shall you desire some good as good, the best of al
good, etc. That which is purely good, whereby all things are good, etc. This is
that wherein the Lord delights; this is that we will contemplate.

The second week.
The VIII. Day. Of Faith.
1. I Believe (my God) that I am of the true Church; the greatest of my joy is,
that I hope by thy grace to dye therein: I would dye willingly with all Martyrs
for any one or the least of those truths she has taught me, because they all
invariably rest upon the authority of a God who cannot lie.

2. I make much more esteem of one truth of our faith, then of all Sciences and
Maxims in the world, and that which it condemns I condemn absolutely, in
despite of all the contradictions and repugnances that I meet with: I will
oppose from hence forward upon all occasions, where Faith instructs me what I
shall do; I will oppose this cursed world: God says thus; God did say it; so I
shall quiet all the interior murmurs that trouble me, and I will follow
faithfully this direction; O the great secret!

3. As for a particular instance; the world says this, and that, as that we
must suffer nothing, that we must set our selves out, etc. And what says God,
what does my faith teach me? etc. My God increase my faith! this is a prayer
which thou were well pleased withal, when thou were upon Earth, etc.

Say the Creed leasurely, as to make a solemn profession of Faith.

Tertul. de praescr. ad Haer. 14. Faith is appointed for a rule, etc. Let
Curiosity give place to Faith. To know nothing beyond this, is to know all
things

The IX. Day. Of trust in God.
1. SOoner shall Heaven and Earth pass away and be annihilitated, then God will
leave to protect a heart that trusts in him.

2. God nourishes and defends to the very Snail, and least root of Grass; to
Serpents, to Crows, and to his very Enemies; what then will his infinite bounty
do to those that hope in him?

3. A Man will trust his health to a Physician, his Process to a Lawyer; his
life, if he be blind, to a Child, and sometimes to a Dog that leads him; and a
wise man sometimes to his Horse, if he think that he knows the way, etc. And
we shall make a difficulty to trust our selves to the bounty and conduct of
God.

4. The Crown of the Motives of our hopes, is the example and love of Jesus.
Let us therefore with him repose our trust in the communications of his heart
to his Father: And since he is wholly with us and for us in this union, and
under this shelter, what can we fear?

Examine here your heart, to see if truly it conside in the bounty of God, and
in the merits of Jesus Christ, and if we have confidence worthy of two such
strong upholds.

S. August. Tract. 49. in Joan. 11. Behold, O Lord, he whom thou love is
become infirm; it is enough that thou know it, for thou do not love and
leave.

The X. Day. Of love to God.
1. IF God could have given us any thing more then his life and himself,
without doubt he would have given it us; and is not our love dear enough, that
is bought at this price?

2. To what end should I distract my heart, in pursuit of so many created
goods? let us satisfy our selves once and for ever with the love and
possession of God; If it be just to love a mean finite goodness, why should I
not love a beauty and goodness infinitely amiable? For being infinite does it
cease to be amiable?

3. He commands me to love him with all my heart: do I comprehend this
obligation rightly? he that says al, leaves nothing: and whatsoever part I
give, if I give not all, I give not that he asks: and he does not hold himself
loved, think we that we should love him, like a Husband, like a wife, like a
child, like a friend, like our selves, like the goods of the world which we
love with so much passion? O what comparison!

4. If Eternity could have an end, there could not be too much of Hell in the
judgment of the Devils themselves, to obtain this inestimable grace of loving
God. Ah, of the damned there is not one, but at the expense of dying eternally
if he could, or at the expense of suffering in time all he should suffer in all
Eternity, but would think after this that he obtained God at an easy rate; and
at present he is mine, and I may love him; what right, and what power!

Apprehend rightly here the infinite merit of God, and make it al your whole
study to love him above al things, and disavow al other love.

S. Aug. Confess. 13.8. Thee it is that I love, and if that love of mine be too
little, do thou make it more, etc. This I know, that I am never well but in
thee, not only in things without my self, but even within my self; and all
that abundance which is not my God himself, is to me but extreme poverty.

The XI. Day. Of our acknowledgment to Christ.
1. NEver was any thing bought so dearly as my soul: and though I did not
belong to God as my Creator, yet I should to Jesus as my Redeemer; Satan and
all his Creatures clemand vengeance for my crimes; he rather harkened to the
voice of his own heart, that said unto him, he should have pity of me, and has
redeemed me; I am truly his; his servant; the use of all that I am belongs to
him; he is the King of my goods, of my sense, of my soul, of all; I avow with
my whole heart this dependence.

2. Then what a horrible deplorable shame will it be, for him that appears
before the tribunal of Jesus, having lived threescore years in quality of his
servant, not to be able to produce one day, nay perhaps not one good hour of
faithful service: not able to say that he has truly loved him: what will then
become of me?

3. I give a Dog a bone that to me is worth nothing, for this nothing he
flatters me and keeps to me, and does me a thousand services: Jesus gives me
his heart, his blood, his life, and all his treasures, and I am insensible of
it: Learn, learn ungrateful, see thy Dog, thy Judge, go to school to thy Dog,
he may be thy Master, to instruct thy reason and inform thy heart.

4. Finally, there is not one hour, nor one moment in which we are not
indebted to Jesus Christ for an eternity of good, or for preserving us from
falling and losing it, and for giving us grace to obtain it: were not he worse
then a bruit beast, that would not esteem these things, and thank and love him?

Examine seriously, if in your heart there is a true love to Jesus: and what
assurances you have of it. If there is none, what are you? How hard!

S. Aug. Ep. 52. Of that Wisdom which alone is true, what I have, I have from
God, etc. Not incredulous of that which he has not given, nor unthankful for
that which he has given.

The XII. Day. Of Conformity to the will of God.
1. THat which GOD wills or permits, is willed, permitted, and done, out of a
most particular design of his glory, and with resentments of infinite goodness
toward us. I believe this (O my God) most firmly: And how can it be
otherwise: that thou should be (as thou art) our most dear Father, if thou
did use us otherwise?

2. All things should be alike to us in God; why should not we loye even his
Judgments, which are good and amiable? why should we separate our selves from
them by bitter thoughts, which make us afraid, and to them are injurious? Let
us put our selves on his side, and his judgments will please us; our disquiet
comes from this, that we will that God be, and our selves also: there must be
but one, God, and we in him. To will this, and will that, as if it were ours
and our business, is to make something of our selves besides God; that will must
perish; there must be none but that of God.

3. I will then only what God wills; I have nothing to say or except against
any thing in the world: all is to my liking: see, am I more wise, more clear of
sight, and better then God who governs all? I am on his side: I will never say,
O unhappy time, it is too hot, it is too cold: all things praise God, why
should I find fault? What is it to me? My little Bark is not so difficult to
steer; and if it were, God could well manage it, she will get to the Haven in
spite of the tempest. to conclude what ever happens, though he should take
the sword to kill me, I know his hand is guided by his heart, and that heart
loves me: ought I not therefore to live content?

Put your self in the posture that is requisite to conform your self to the will
of God. But give it not over til you find your heart turned straight and even
toward him, and in quiet.

S. Aug. in Psalm. 122. He only securely pleases, who pleases God; and who is
it that pleases God? He that is pleased with God.

The XIII. Day. Of Imitation of Christ.
1. NO Man that is predestined but ought to wear the Livery of Jesus Christ:
and above all, his Humility and Cross: Our eternal Father has set him before
us as a Pattern: Though I should have all other perfections that can be
imagined, if I have not this, I cannot please him; this is a necessity
undispensable: He that is not for him, is against him.

2. But what a misery is it, and how deplorable, that so many souls study the
fashions of the world to conform themselves to them, and so few cast their eyes
upon the incomparable Model of al virtues Jesus Christ! We should be Images of
him; Ah, the Image, if it were capable of sense, would it not be ashamed, not
to be like its Prototype?

3. What wrong do we do the Son of God: to his Wisdom, as if he could not
choose the best life? to his Goodness, as if he should counsel us to that which
is the worst? to his Power, as if he had commanded us, without fortifying our
weakness? what a reproach is it, to have Jesus go before us, and hardly one
follow him?

4. O what shall I say at the day of judgment, when I shall come to be
conferred with my Law and my Pattern Jesus? When my life shall be compared with
his; his Humility with my Pride: his Wounds with my Delicacy; his Sweetness
with my Anger? etc. Ah what a Monster! a Christian without Christianity, the
Slave of the Devil, under the Character of the Cross!

Well! I must choose one of these to be my rule, either my own sancie, or
Jesus: we cannot live with both, and we cannot live without both: what choice
shall we make?

See if there appear in you any resemblance of the Son of God: if he that
looks on you would take you for a Disciple of Jesus Christ: The same way that
the Head has gone, the other parts of the Body must follow: If the Head go in
at the Gate, the Arm goes not in at the Window.

John 12.26. If any Man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there
shall also my servant be.

The XIV. Day. Of Love to our Neighbor.
1. Who loves not his Neighbor cannot say truly that he loves God: if we do
all, and not love our Brethren, we do nothing: all the devotions in the World
without that, are but deceit.

2. This is my commandment (said Jesus our most amiable Savior,) that you love
one another as I have loved you. Though there were nothing to be loved in all
persons in the world, but the cordial desire thou have that I should love the^,
O Jesus I would love them with all my heart! But besides this, they are all thy
Children, all proceeding from thy bosom: I were very nice if I did not love
that which thou cherishest shest more then thy self or life.

3. Do I love my Neighbors (truly without exception of any) as Jesus loves us?
that is to say, to be ready to give my life for them and my own goods, etc.
This devotion is very rare: this is that which is proper to Jesus and his
Gospel.

Endeavor to possess your soul with such affections as Jesus Christ has for
all souls: to love them with tenderness, and not to have an indifference for
any.

S. Aug. Sermon. 42. de Temp. If thou love all mankind as thy self, there will
remain no gate for Sin to enter into thee.

The third Week.
The XV. Day. Of Love toward Enemies.
1. GOD did so love the world (though it was his mortal Enemy) that he gave his
only Son in testimony of his Love, even to the terrible death of the cross.
What a prodigious love was this? do I truly believe it?

2. Upon this JESUS commanded me, that for love of him I should love my
Enemies: to this example and command what can I answer?

3. As I forgive, God will forgive me, and not otherwise; I must then either
hate my self or pardon others: thus I am obliged by all Motives that can be
imagined to wish well to my Enemies; after all these reasons and allurements
can our Enemies be so odious in our sight? Shall we renounce God our selves,
and all, or shall we love them?

4. Two Christians, Enemies, seem as if they were not of the same flock, nor of
the same Religion; for what means is there to unite under the obedience of one
Law two souls that are rent asunder? And to join together in one belief at the
same altar two hearts, whose approach to one another is mortal, their sight
killing, and their remembrance execrable? we are not allowed to hate any but
the Devils and the damned, who hate one another.

Examine well if you have no bitterness toward any: and never suffer that
cursed passion to take root in you. There is no greater sign of reprobation,
then not to forgive; a soul that has this mark, is marked for Hell.

S. Aug. c. 74. Enchirid. If you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will
your Father forgive your trespasses, Mat. 6. He whom this great thunder awakes
not, is not asleep^, but dead.

The XVI. Day. Of Example.
1. IL example has damned an infinite number of Souls. If we could search
hell, we should hardly find any but say, such a Man or such a Woman has damned
me; what an account! we are commanded to love our Enemies, why then should we
massacre souls that do us no hurt?

2. They who have destroyed any, had best look to their consciences; we scarce
ever see such come to a happy end: what can we hope of Jesus Christ, having
ravished from his hands and his heart that which cost him so dear?

3. O. Fathers and Mothers! it were better that your Children had been stifled,
or that they had never been, then to have had you for Parents, and for Masters,
who instead of life have given them death, eternal death by your example! when
they shall accuse you of their loss of Paradise at the day of Judgment, what
will you answer?

4. Let us put on Jesus Christ says S. Paul, that we may be known by his
Livery, so as all that see us may remember him; at present Jesus is
dishonored, and as it were despizable in the impurity of his Images; he is
disfigured in his Members; Christians show themselves no longer Christians; to
see them one would take them to be clean contrary to what they are. O my God
pardon me the sins of others which I have been cause of, and grant that
henceforth none of my actions may contribute to the damnation of any.

Consider whether you do any thing, the sight whereof may make an ill
impression upon others? Are not our own sins enough? Let us not make our selves
guilty of the sins of others.

Salvian. lib. 4. de Provid. He who by sinning causes others to blaspheme, is
guilty of a crime above humane limits.

The XVII. Day. Of distrusting our selves.
1. THE greatest Saints, that defied Tyrants and persecutions, have trembled
only at the thought of the estate of their heart before God; whereof they saw
not any thing. They have been heard to sigh and sob at the hour of death in
expectation of the dreadful sentence of Gods justice upon the estate of their
conscience, not knowing what they were, not what should become of them. And I,
alas, etc.

2. But our frailty is much more extreme then our ignorance; there is no
creature be it never so little, that cannot encamp before our heart, assail it,
make a breach in it, and take it. One sigh, one tear, one penny, etc. Man of
himself without staying to be summoned or assaulted is very ready to run to his
ruin; becomes all eyes to deceive himself, all hands to enslave himself: is
betrayed by those very actions which he does to secure himself: what is Man but
a Man? Lock up a Glass in a Trunk, it will be there a thousand years without
breaking; but shut up a Man as long as you please, you shall never hinder him
from falling and losing himself: see if you have studied as much as is
necessary, to know you are your own Enemy?

3. To add to our weakness, our selves raise engines against our selves, all
our senses and passions are continually employed in secret conspiracies. And
they whom persecutions and temptations could not overthrow, have found in
themselves an enemy that has destroyed them. So that we are more prevalent
against our selves then Tyrants and Devils: and we should in some sort fear our
selves more then we fear God: we should be more afraid of our own weakness
then of the infinite power of God. The Angels fell: Adam sinned: Judas
betrayed, and S. Peter renounced his Master. Hostus fell into Sensuality,
Tertullian into Heresy, Origin into Idolatry. O be always in fear of your
self.

Here you must make provision against dangerous occasions.

Micah 6. 14. Thy casting down shall be in the midst of thee.

The XVIII. Day. Of care of our salvation.
1. O What great fools were the Caesar's, the Pompeys, the Alexanders, the
Princes, the great ones of the world, that destroyed so many lives, spilt so
much blood, and those at present who spare none, leave nothing unexecuted to
acquire a little vain honor, etc. And have neither the wit nor courage to save
themselves. What does it profit a Man to gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul?

2. All Creatures ^re made to further our salvation: So that as many drops as
there are in the Sea, etc. as many crumbs of bread as I eat, are so many
obligations to my salvation, all this being made for the good of my soul: And
from the very moment that a Man cease to work for his salvation, the Sun
should be eclipsed, the Heavens should give over their motion, etc. All
Creatures cease to be profitable to the World for us, when we make them
unprofitable to this end.

3. And for the most part we aim at nothing less; we will do all, and do all
very well, and save all but our own souls; this ground must be ploughed, this
money put out to interest; we would have al thrive and do well, and we
complain of all losses but this; we find by our account great expenses laid out
upon our bodies and the world, so much for a garment, so much for a Feast, and
nothing for our salvation; and if our soul were not ours, as if it were the
soul of one of our mortal enemies; so ill we use it; or rather as if it were
the soul of some beast, which has only sense and appetite, not pretending to
any thing further. Nay some there are who are afraid (one would imagine) of
being saved; so unwilling they are to think of it, to be touched by God, to
endeavor it; what bruitishness!

4. We must make account but of two things in the world; to love God and our
own salvation; and who does not, is as mad as unhappy: If I had two souls, said
Benedict the fourth, I would give one for Philip, (a King who asked something
of him against his conscience,) but having but one I will not lose it.

Search whether your desire of salvation be absolute or imperfect. A traveller
that when he should go on the right hand goes on the left etc.

Salvian l. 3. ad vales. What madness is it to undervalue your own souls, which
even the Devil accounts precious? etc. They who neglect their souls, have
less esteem of themselves then the Devil has.

The XIX. Day. Of the presence of God.
1. THE eyes of God consider me at present and always, as attentively as if I
were alone in the world; yea he is in me, and every where like an infinity of
eyes, an infinity of ears, an infinity of understandings; he sees with the
same sight wherewith he comprehends himself, and with as strong an
application of spirit, as if he left the contemplation of himself to reach me
with all his beams, to study the depth of me, and to comprehend me: I believe
this; I adore God who is present with me, searching the bottom of my soul!

2. Ah, it is a thousand times more shame for me that my disloyalties are seen
by God, then if they were represented upon all the threatres in the world, and
in an assembly of a Million of Kings, his only sight and approbation or
condemnation is more to be valued then the judgments of all Creatures
together: Ah, that we should nevertheless so much fear the eyes of the world,
and not those of God!

3. Then, when we would offend him, let ut find Curtains to hide us from his
eyes; ^or if he see us, ah what ^mpudence is it to con^pire against him, before
him, and by himself, and in his bosom, (...) the place where he ^^rms and
pronoun^eth actually the sen^ence of my Predesti^ation or Reprobati^n? Were not
I out ^ut of my wits and de^perate? O the great ^ye of God; he sees ^s, let us
be upon our Guard.

Endeavor to accustom your self to this pious contemplation, of the presence
of God. To respect and love the eyes of God is the mark of a predestined
Person.

S. Aug. Sermon. 46. De verb. Dom.

If thou will sin, seek out a place where God may not see thee, and do what
thou will.

The XX. Day. Of the account we must give of Gods graces
1. WE have not the least sense of God and of our salvation which JHSUS bought
not with his blood, and requested especially for us of his Father, when he gave
up his soul on the Cross. Consider hereupon what obligation we have to make
good use of it, we manage his designs and traffic with his blood.

2. Yea, we are indebted to God for all the Graces which he intended to have
given us, if we had not hindered him: we are obliged to him, since the fault was
not his; the Sun shines, we shut our windows, we are no^ the less beholding t^
him for his light.

3. It may be tha^ this ten or twent^ years God has inspired me with things
that I have not yet had the heart to execute: So long at the School of the Holy
Ghost and to have learnt nothing yet? So often solicited, touched, threatened,
and to have done nothing? Let us remember that God is a Creditour whom none can
make Bankrupt: and though he do not constrain us so soon to the payment of all
our debts, he will ask us interest for them: and besides there is a measure
which being filled to the top, God will withdraw himself: Alas, when we would
we shall not then be able!

If our souls be pure never so little, and the ear of our heart attentive, God
never cease to speak to us: Hearken now what he demands of you, and execute
it.

S. Greg. lib. 18. Mor. c. 7. God first calls mildly, then rebukes terribly,
and lastly, damns irrevocably.

The XXI. Day. Of Fervor.
1. LEt us have such desires as God has, of our advancement: God is always
soliciting us, without omitting any moment or the least occasion to furnish us
(out of his infinite affection) with all things needful for our progress in
his love; Is it not a monstrous poorness of spirit to cool in the midst of so
many flames.

2. When I work coldly, I profess that God does not merit much, and that his
recompenses are slight matters; what can we think of a Master whom his servants
even in his presence neglect to serve.

3. One act done for God, be it never so little, is worth more then all the
Victories and Triumphs of Alexanders and Caesar's, and of all the Men in the
world. In this employment therefore you must stir up your self with honor and
courage.

4. Sin surmounts all in this life, outbraves all, subsists even in the flames
of Hell without altering or consuming; what an abominable constancy? The
servants of the Devil, of what stamp are they, not to spare themselves not to
complain, whatsoever they suffer for offending God, and for the World, and
never to change; Ah Hell shall be my School and my Academy, to love God as the
Devils hate him, is it too much? To serve God as they do the Devil and the
World; is not this pattern reasonable.

Question those actions wherein you are most remiss, and stir up your self to
do them better.

Isaiah 31.6. Turn ye unto him from whom the Children of Israel have deeply
revolted.

The fourth week.
The XXII. Day. Of the use of the Sacrament.
1. THE Sacraments are the Fountains of Grace, the most necessary and
important that concern our salvation, and when we abuse them, we render our
salvation impossible.

2. How comes it that there are so many Communions, which make so little change
in hearts? To dip so often in the blood of Jesus, to eat that divine food, and
nevertheless to live always in the same languishments in the service of God,
the same ties to the world? No virtues? Thou have these ten years confessed the
same sin, etc. after a thousand confessions not to have plucked away one hair of
vanity.

3. O without doubt the fault cannot come from Jesus, next the bosom of his
Father: he has no retreat more agreeable then our Hearts; and he communicates
himself to us, with infinite desire to do us good; therefore there cannot but
be an invincible resistance on our part, or some malignant Hectick-Feavour
which renders us incurable; we approach the Sacrament without purity, without
apprehension, without great desires, without generous resolutions, without care
to hear God, and to apply his graces to opportunities and occasions.

He that has communicated but once, has done that for which he is in this
life; I have done it so often, what has Jesus Christ operated in my soul? Let
us reflect a little seriously upon our selves: Ah, Lord, why should thou spil
the divine unction of thy blood upon a heart so hardened? What horror, when we
must make amends to the blood of Jesus Christ, and pay the interest of that
infinite debt? And instead of eating the fruit of life, we shall find that we
have eaten our own judgment, and incorporated our selves in eternal damnation.

He that has communicated worthily, is strong enough to sustain Martyrdom; Do
you find such courage in your self: Examine the most notable defects of your
Communions.

S. Aug. Hom. 49.50. To Penitents I say, What does it profit you that you are
humbled, if you be not changed.

The XXIII. Day. Of our condition of life and employment.
1. WE are here by the will of God, let us be well persuaded to that, and at
present we can do nothing more agreeable to God, then to acquit our selves well
of our obligations and charges; it is the work of the Lord, cursed be he that
does it negligently.

2. One of the greatest unhappinesses in the world is the loss of time; the
time of this life is so short, our last hour is so near, and for all that we
live with as little care, and as unprofitably, as if this life would never have
an end, or as if we had nothing else to do.

3. Alas, if a damned person had but one moment of the many that I lose, how
would he profit by it! as many minutes as I let slip fruitlesly, so many
blessed eternities I might gain: we omit no occasion to divert or accomodate
our selves, and we neglect the great employment of time for Heaven.

4. The day that is best spent, is not that wherein you have gained most, as to
the Interest of the World, but that wherewith God is best pleased, so order it,
that at what hour so ever you meet with any one, if he ask what you do, you may
say, I work for God. and for my soul, I gain my living, eternal life.

Renew the principal intentions of the state of your life, and remember that
every action which is not conformable to the will of God, or done for him, is
at least of no value.

Not how long, but how well.

The XXIV. Day. Of Suffering.
1. What a sweet ease it is to our pains to be assure that no ill comes unto
us, but God our good Father opens the door for it; and that it is for our good!
Let us then chang the names of things, let us speak no more after the fashion
of the world, afflictons should not now be called miseries, since they come
from so good a friend, and conduct us to felicity, they cease to be
afflictions, and put on the nature of that good whereunto they lead.

2. Ah! what do we think we are Christians to be rich, to make a show and take
our pleasures? there needed not for this any Christianity, nor that God should
come down upon the earth and shed so many tears, so much blood: there needed no
more then to let the World go on; the world, without any thing else; to let
loose opinion, passion, etc. A Christian is a Christian under another form of
life; and unless he renounce his Baptism, and the Gospel, and belly his faith,
he must resolve to humble himself to suffer, etc.

3. But in what Christian Country is that profession made: the Gospel speaks,
read; nothing more express; the Books of all Saints what say they? Yet this
now seems an unknown barbarous language, no more understood then that of
Indians, who run to Martyrdom and triumph in Persecutions; but we must blot
that Article out of the Gospel of Europe, it is very little now in use: See!
our felicity is to weep to suffer; who believes it, etc.

Endeavor to put your heart into this disposition, oblige it to love your
crucified Lord, to account all days of vain delight, days of Reprobation, to
fear nothing so much, as that God should give over afflicting you.

Matthew. 10.38. He that takes not his Cross and follows after me, is not
worthy of me.

The XXV. Day. Of Alms.
1. What an infinite favor thou have done us, O Jesus, in substituting the
poor of this Word in thy place, to whom we may do good as to thy self: The
naked represent thy nakedness, the prisoners the bands wherewith thou were
bound, the sick thy cruel pains; Let us look upon them so; Ah, who would not
see them willingly in this precious relation. If we love the Son of God, let us
not show our selves strange to him in his Images.

2. O happiness without comparison: That I can give with my own hand to Jesus
a piece of bread, a piece of silver, a garment; that I can give him a good
word; I resolve that I will give alms in this sense and no otherwise, and I
will consider that in refusing it, I refuse it to Jesus Christ, who will have
cause enough one day to blame me for it.

3. As on the contrary at the day of judgment when Jesus shall see himself
clothed in my clothes, in a poor indigent person, comforted in one that is
sick, lodged in a stranger, when he shall wear my clothes, hold my money, my
bread in his hand, what can he say to himself opposed to himself? He that is
merciful shall have mercy.

Here you must examine whether you discharge your obligation toward the poor
in this point; whether you give what you can, and as well as you can.

James 2.13. He shall have judgment without mercy, who has showed no mercy.

The XXVI. Day. Of humane respects.
1. THE World speaks; speech is but a little noise, which at the worst only
hurts the Ear, and kills not; let a hundred thousand in the world speak; can
they hinder you from being reasonable, or dispense with your obligation to
follow the rule of your Conscience? A holy action is propounded, will you
suffer your self to be reduced to that pass, that you shall not dare to do
good, for fear Fools should say that you are wise? What will they say? This is
the Drum and the Trumpet of antichrist in the world, which scandals and carries
away all souls: Take heed to your self.

2. To blush at the doing of a good thing for fear of what the world will say!
nothing is more contrary to Christianity which wears the Cross in her forehead,
and is holily confident: To profess a Religion, of which they that are of it
are ashamed? And to take rules of life, maxims from the world, the Enemy of
Jesus Christ is not this to renounce our faith, and to declare our selves
Apostates to the Gospel? That being wicked, we are not afraid to appear such;
that the meanest Artisans make open profession of their Trades, and yet we are
ashamed in the very heart of the Church to appear Christians.

3. Have you any thing my adorable Savior of which we may be ashamed? Is your
name infamous? They are not ashamed of being Adulterers, Blasphemers, nay they
boast of it, yet is it a reproach to your servants to declare that they are
yours; Oh, whatsoever they say this is true, the most honest Man in the world,
is he, that is the greatest servant of God.

Search all the corners of your soul, to see if this Bugbear, the World,
affright you.

Luke 9.26. Whosoever shall he ashamed of of me, and of my words, of him shall
the Son of Man be ashamed when he shall come in his own glory.

The XXVII. Day. Of not deferring.
1. I Defer too long to give my self to God, as if I endeavored to escape out
of his hands: is it a misfortune to be his? To morrow; to morrow; why not now?
Is it a shame to give over a shameful life? and this hour, is it not a good
one to make so happy an end? The morrow when it is come, will it not be like
to day? And the heart of to morrow will it be stronger then the heart of to
day? O, it is either very blind, or very ill disposed!

2. What is it that makes me afraid, that I defer so long to follow the voice
which calls me? If there be any thing to be feared, is it not the delay and
remisness wherewith I requite the Holy Ghost, and my abuse of so long a
patience: There is a great deal of difficulty in changing our life to the
better; I will do it; but can that be reasonable, an excuse for a Christian
who adores a crucified God, and hopes for a Paradise?

3. To defer? is the future mine? Is it a bottom whereof I am master? God
stays for me, it is true, this is in the holy Scripture; but how long I shall
live, and how soon I shall dye, that is not; he has not promised me so much
as the morrow; and if he had, should I fear, beginning to day, to have a day
more of good life? we must have no Buts. Let us do sin no more the honor to
excuse it, and to say that it is reasonable; nor God the wrong to avouw, that
he merits our heart to day, yet put him off to the morrow.

Examine what there is that you have refused God a long time; to say I will, I
will mend, and not to do it, is to be virtuous in imagination, and vicious in
effect.

S. Aug. lib. 3. de lib. arb. This is the most just punishment of sin, that he
who when he has power will not do well, when he would, should lose that power.

The XXVIII. Day. Of the Passion of our Lord.
1. AH my good Master, is not the rigorous justice of God weary of taking
vengeance of my sins upon your person, equally innocent and adorable, even to
the drawing of the last drop of blood out of your veins; and as for me, I shall
be infensible and stupid, yet my continued sins, and neglect of correcting my
self, not weary out your mercy. It is time that I belong to none but thee, and
that my conversion be constant; there is a term to thy benefits, as well as to
the number of my sins.

2. They tie him feet and hands to a pillar, which they force him to embrace:
Ah my Savior, cries S. Augustine, what sweet dying it were in thy arms! why
do thou not embrace me, and I thee, that thou might have been my Pillar,
and I might have received the stripes? How many wounds! one wound covers
another; blood on the Whips, blood on the garments of the Executioners, blood
on their hands, in the air, on the ground; my only Savior, are not my sins
laid upon thy shoulders? Is it not hither that thou carriest the burden of my
crimes?

3. What said he whilst this storm of blows was discharged upon his back; I
will Father; I am here in the place of a sinner; I do not repent it; who ever
saw the like Physician; to give his life for his Patient? He considered all
Men; what drop (Oh my Savior) did thou destine for me, during the effusion
of thy precious blood? Is it possible that I was then in thy thoughts?

We must not think that the only Son of God did resign himself to such excess
of torment, that we might resign our selves to pleasure; if I cannot be
crucified, I will at least dwell under the shadow of the Cross, steeping my
pleasures in his pains.

Isaiah 53.4. He has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows.

The XXIX. Day. Of the Son of God as Savior.
1. IF you had been present at his Crucifixion, you had seen the fairest and
most innocent of all Men dye, condemned not only by the judgment of Earth, but
of Heaven for your sake; what thought then would have moved your heart?
Infinite Majesty, why did thou not stay in thy inaccessible light? what need
had thou of Men, and of me in particular, whom thou have brought thrust out
of nothing by thy breath? Why do thou not blow them back again into nothing
if they are unworthy of thee? Is not this a new Subject for thy anger? Thou
made us so excellent O eternal Father, and we bring thee to this sad
condition: Ah, it is without question because he will bear the title of Savior
before that of Judge: He will have me to be the fruit and conquest of so many
torments; Oh how dear art thou to me in this estate? Since it is by this that
thou have shown me so much love, how dear I am to thee! But shall I ever be
thee and thou me?

2. My Savior permit me not to have any other judge then thy self; since thou
know the price of my Soul, thou have summed it up, thou have paid for it: my
only Redeemer suffer me not to be engaged in that unhappy eternity where
thou art not loved, where thy holy Name is blasphemed, where in a word thou art
no more acknowledged a Savior.

3. Shall I be so miserable as to be told one day, since the blood of God was
not profitable to thee in thy life, it shall never be profitable to thee?
Though the blood of the Son of God profit me nothing, yet will the Creatures at
least profit me? No, nothing at all, It is true, can it be possible that I
shall one day be told, that through my own fault, for a trifle, for a moment,
my Savior shall be no more my Savior, but changed eternally into my Punisher;
the mildest and most patient of al men toward all others, shall become justly
terrible and irreconcilable to me: The Lamb shall be turned into the Lion;
what an eternal change! never more shall I call him my Savior.

Such as I mean to have him to eternity, such I must endeavor to have him
during life.

Tertul. contra Marcionem. The first goodness of God is according to Nature,
the latter Severity, according to the Cause.

The XXX. Day. Of fidelity to God.
1. GOD has not delivered you once only from great danger: from how many
perils which might have destroyed your soul or your body, you know: has he
brought you up and consecrated you as one of his eyes, to the end that you
might do him most dishonor, dedicating to the World, and to the service
thereof, that which he loves most dearly? God cannot endure that his servants
should go to another Master; what dislike have you found of God? has not he
enough to satisfy your heart, without seeking wherewithal to fill it amongst
his Enemies?

2. In a miserable condition is a soul greatly advanced, from which God
withdrawes himself, and says to it for ever, thou please me no more.

3. You know the design of God upon you; would you be rebellious? He does you
a great deal of honor to make use of you; should you give to others that which
God has designed and reserved for himself? By the experience you have of his
conduct, do you find it ill? do you retreat? Have you forgotten your fidelity?
You remember to keep it well to Men who pass away, but the God of to day is
the God of Eternity: How great are the designs of God upon us if you do not
hinder them? And you are an enemy to your self if you do.

4. Enter generously into the designs of God, and go nobly whither you are
called; to God, to God, who does you the favor to tell you that he loves you
with the love, wherewith he loves the children of Election: do nothing
unworthy the love of God and of Jesus, knowing how good he is to you: One good
faithful soul alone is worth a Million whose languishing lives are interwoven
with relapses and penitencies, with life and death.

It had been better to have never known God, then having known him, to forsake
him. As long as he loves that which he gives, he will hate those who despise
his gifts.

Tertul. de Poenitent. It is dangerous to despise a benefit which is known; he
refuses the giver, who casts away the gift.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
Week I.
Med. 1. OF the End of our Creation. Page 1 Med. 2. Of Sin. Page 6 Med. 3 Of
Death. Page 11 Med. 4 Of the last Judgment. Page 16 Med. 5 Of Hell. Page 20
Med. 6 Of the Eternity of Hell. Page 24 Med. 7 Of Paradise. Page 29
Week II.
Med. 8 Of Faith. Page 33 Med. 9 Of trust in God. Page 37 Med. 10 Of love to
God. Page 42 Med. 11 Of our acknowledgment to Christ. Page 48 Med. 12 Of
conformity to the will of God. Page 54 Med. 13 Of Imitation of Jesus Christ.
Page 60 Med. 14 Of Love to our Neighbor. Page 66
Week III.
Med. 15 Of Love toward Emies. Page 70 Med. 16 Of Example. Page 75 Med. 17 Of
distrusting our selves. Page 80 Med. 18 Of care of our salvation. Page 86 Med.
19 Of the presence of God. Page 93 Med. 20 Of the account we must give of Gods
graces. Page 98 Med. 21 Of fervor. Page 103
Week IV.
Med. 22 Of the use of the Sacrament. Page 108 Med. 23 Of our condition of life
and employment. Page 114 Med. 24 Of Suffering. Page 119 Med. 25 Of Alms. Page
125 Med. 26 Of humane respects. Page 130 Med. 27 Of not deferring. Page 136
Med. 28 Of the Passion of our Lord. Page 142 Med. 29 Of the Son of God as
Savior. Page 149 Med. 30 Of fidelity to God. Page 157
FINIS.

