Three Excellent Tragoedies. Viz.

THE RAGING TURK, OR, BAJAZET the Second.

THE COURAGEOUS TURK, OR, AMVRATH the First.

AND THE TRAGOEDIE OF ORESTES.

WRITTEN, By THO. GOFF, Master of ARTS, and Student of Christ-Church in Oxford;
and Acted by the Students of the same House.

The second Edition, carefully corrected by a friend of the Authors.

LONDON, Printed for G. BEDELL and T. COLLINS, at the middle Temple Gate
Fleet Street. 1656.

THE RAGING TURK, OR, BAJAZET THE SECOND.

A Tragedy Written by THOMAS GOFF, Master of ARTS, and Student of
Christ-Church in Oxford; and Acted by the Students of the same House.

Monstra fato, scelera moribus imputes,
Det ille veniam facile cui venia est opus.
The second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for G. BEDELL and T. COLLINS, at the middle Temple Gate
Fleet Street. 1656.

TO THE No less ingenious then zealous favouorer of ingenuity, Sir RICHARD
TICHBORNE Knight, and Baronet.
SIR:
THis Tragedy, a manuscript, with another of the same Authors, came lately to
my hands; He that gave them birth, because they were his Nugae, or rather
recreations to his more serious and divine studies, out of a nice modesty (as I
have learnt) allowed them scarce private fostering. But I, by the consent of
his especial friend, in that they show him rather Omnium scenarum homo, to his
glory then disparagment, have published them, and do tender this to your most
safe protection, lest it wander a fatherless Orphan, which every one in that
respect will be apt to injure with calumnious censure. Now if you vouchsafe to
receive and shelter it, you will not only preserve unblemished the ever-living
fame of the dead Author, but assure me that you kindly accept this humble
acknowledgement of

Your most obliged and ready real Servant, RICH. MEIGHEN.

The Names of the Actors.
Bajazet, Emperor. his Sons. Mahomates Achomates Corcutus Selymus Thrizham
Mahomet
Achments a General, Cherseogles Vizerory of Greece. Basses. Isaac Mesithes
Mustapha
Solomon Selymus son. Cajubus, Achmates son. Alexander Bishop of Rome. Zemes,
Bajazets brother. Tartarian King. Armeni^ King. Asmehemedes Mahomets followers.
Hamon Bajazets Physician, Jewish Monks. Herald. Dwarf. Nemesis. Cap^aines.
Ambassadors. Janissaries. Soldiers. Nuncius.
THE RAGING TURK, OR, the Tragedy of BAJAZET, the second of that name.
Actus 1.
Scena 1.
Enter Bassaes, Isaac with a Crown in his hand, Mustapha with a Scepter,
Mesithes with a Sword, they Crown Corcutus youngest son to Bajazet. Isaac. LEt
the world feel thee, and those Demigods,
Proud with the name of Kings, debase themselves
To honor thee; this Crown commands as much
He crowns him. Wherewith I do invest thy happy brow,
Happy indeed, if that succeeding times
Shall set up virtue, so to lessen crimes.
Thus from the ashes of dead Solomon
Is raised another Phoenix, great Corcutus;
Live equally adored: when Princes bend
To better courses, all their subjects mend.

Must. Crowns make not Kings, nor can that glittering show
Perfect thine honor, take another sign
(...) Of thy Imperial dignity, it is thine.
Gives him the Septer. That adds a God-like grace unto thy brow,
This binds due honor, that prostrates every knee
Before thy throne: then live, and may that arm
Secure thy subjects from all foreign harm.

Mes. What seasoned knowledge, learnings prudent Queen
Has blessed thee with, must now initiate thee
In the paths of war. All studied Arts
Are but degrees unto some wished end,
And steps of hope whereby we do ascend
Unto the top, and level of our thoughts.
But Kings then prove most happy when they are
Watchful in peace; and provident in war.
Those are their utmost ends, which that they may
Overtake, Art and the Sword make fairest way.
The Muses nours'd thee up, and thou did draw
The pleasant juice of learning from their breasts
In thy first nonage; here then we bestow
The second help, to which good Princes owe
Much of their welfare; Swords are the first ground
Of peace and war; they both defend and wound.
Thus are we vowed to thee, let thy dread fame
Thunder amazement through the spacious world
That when thou lifts thine arm, thy foes may say
Showts 3. Not Jove, but great Corcutus rules the day.

Cor. Which that applause has crowned, and with it
Will ever, spite of traitors, joying sit
As now we do; nor shall my watchful care
Be wanting to you, whilst this subtle air
Feeds mine industrious spirits; I shall fill
The good with joy, by cutting off the ill
Corrupted rags of men; Jove let me stand
An object in thine eye, when thy swift hand
Fails in the stroke of Justice: Virtue, return
From thy sad exile, I will purge the walls
From spotted vice, and make this city free
To entertain so fair a Queen as she.
Then (Bassaes) I embrace what you have thrown
Upon me, and these signs of honor thus
Gives them back We re-bestow; their power still stays with us.
Could this vast body of the Common wealth
Stand fast without a soul, each man should see
I am not greedy of this dignity,
This burdenous weight which some must undergo:
The gods are busied with diviner things,
And put Earths care into the hands of Kings.

Actus 1. Scena 2.
After some clamors of applause. Enter Chersogles, and Achmetes at several
doors. Ach. And is Bajazet arrived?

Che. So fame reports
Yet how he does digest Corcutus Reign,
That every Bird sings not; but sure with pain.
A Turkish Bajazet and suffer wrong,
May for a time conceal his grief, not long.
Eagles soar high, and scorn that shorter Plumes
Should reach the clouds, which their proud wings can touch
Corcutus must not reign to keep the right
Due to his father, nor will he if he might:
Enter Isaac He Is learned, therefore just; Arts not allow
To wear a Crown due to another hrow.

Isa. Dare thou oppose his greatness? is not Greece
Already wrackt enough? have thy proud Towers
reard up their lofty spires? which steeped in blood,
threw a reflex of red back to the clouds,
and blush't at their owe ruins? are thy crude wounds
already stopped, and is that day forgot,
in which the Turkish Mavors Ottoman,
wielded a sword of death within thy Walls?
Charon grew weary with hurrying souls to hell,
when threescore thousand Greeks in one day fell.

Chers. We know their force, and sad experience says,
Move not again. Greece welters still in blood,
and every crackling thunder of the heavens
speaks the shrill echo of the Turkish drums.
Then are we drawn by you, so let it be,
about these great affairs as you decree.

Ach. This phrase becomes the Greeks, submissive states
must bend, the Conqueror must rule the fates.

Chers. And such are you, our vanquished hearts must bend,
but bad beginnings have a fatal end.
Me thinks I see great Bajazet in arms,
spreading his fearful Ensigns in the air,
like some prodigious Comet: we may fear
speedy revenge, unless some quick advice
works a prevention of his future hate.
It Is he must sway the Scepter, or we shall hear
a dreadful defiance ratled in our ear:
he is strong in friends, and power; we must descend
to our just duty, or our latest end.

Ach. Renowned Viceroy, thy persuading thoughts
Have predivin'd most truly these effects,
and we applaud thy Counsel: let us three
join our best strength, that these ensuing jarres
may be composed without the stroke of wars:
Corcute is wise, and mild, and being so,
he hates the rumor of a public foe.

Cher. Nobly resolved (Greece sings) if the event
Pr^ve but so happy, as honest the intent.

Enter Bajazet. Baja. Am I not Emperor? he that breaths a no,
damnes in that negative syllable his soul,
durst any god gainsay it, he should feel
the strength of fiercest Giants in mine arms,
mine angers at the highest, and I could shake
the firm foundation of the earthly Globe:
Could I but grasp the Poles in these two hands,
Il'd pluck the world assunder; drop thou bright Sun,
from thy transparent Sphere, thy course is done,
great Bajazet is wronged, nor shall thine eye
be witness to my hateful misery.
Madness and anger makes my tongue betray
the Chaos of my thoughts: under this breast
an heap of indigested cares are pressed.
What is it that I doubt! through every joint
dances a trembling ague, this dull blood,
that courses through my veins, divines no good.
shouts of joy within. Ha, shouts of joy, at dead men's obsequies?
I Am in a maze of woes: what thou will throw
on me, Jove, let it come. I Will stand thy blow.

Che. Live happy Bajazet.

Baja. Happy in my fear!
that word sounds sweet in my distracted ear.
He turns aside to them. Happy in what?

Ach. In thy friends,
that grieve to see thy wrongs.

Baja. My wrongs!
there sticks the string my thoughts did harp upon.
But who has wronged me in this high content?
the fates do sometime frown, yet bless the event
and sequel of our woes; it cannot be,
I should de thwarted in my jollity.
But if I can unfold it -- for the more
I know them not, the greater is my sore.

Chers. In that read all thy woes, take there a brief
Contract of all thine ills, sad lines of grief.
He gives him a paper Contract of all thine ills, sad lines of grief.

Baja. How Is this? my youngest son advanced to my seat?
Corcutus Imperator! sure I dream:
These are but empty apparitions
Feigned by the god of sleep to vex my soul:
Were they not so -- ere this black night
Had thrown her fable mantle ore the heavens
To hide me from my shame-but is it so?
I do but flatter up my self, they are true
And real griefs, my Passion says they are.
Isaac, Achmetes, are they not?

Ach. Too true
Great Bajazet:

Baja. Corcutus Imperator!
reads again Would I had seen thy name writ in the book
Of dark damnation, rather then these lines.
Cracked not mine eye-strings when I viewed this text?
See how each letter spreads abroad in pomp,
As if they scorned my tears! how I could dwell
On these two words, Corcutus Imperator!
Hither repair, the watchful paper-wormes
That scan old records over to a line:
Here in two words imprinted shall you see,
The model of a doleful history;
Virtue dishonored, breach of filial love,
Right shouldered out by wrong; nor can you feign,
A crime, which these two words do not contain.
But now I rail, not grieve: O nimble air,
Let my plaints vanish as they spoken are.
Off with this womanish mildness, I will find
A shorter trick then this to ease my mind.
Pluto beware, I come to reign in hell,
about to kill himself. Fates bid me rule, and birthright to excel.

Chers. Stay Bajazet, that arm can break a path
Unto thy earthly monarch, ere thou come
To bless the banks of sweet Elysium
With thy wished presence: Mahomet forefend
That thou should seal a Kingdom to thy son;
By this untimely death Corcutus reigns.
But at thy better pleasure, when he shall hear
Thou art ariv'd, then he will twixt joy and grief
Start from his throne, and nimbly run to meet
Thy pomp, and throw his Scepter at thy feet:
If he but slack that duty, here are by,
Achmetes strong and bold, Isaac and I,
Devoted to your service. Yet the world stands,
On wavering doubts, ready to clap their hands.

Baja. My desires are crowned,
And from the gate of Limbo, where I sat,
I feel my spirits knock against the heavens.
Achmetes? In that name I hear an ease
Of all my griefs pronounced; he shall suffice
To banish usurpation from my throne:
Did furyes guard it round, he is able well
To reach my Kingdoms from the gripes of hell.

Ac. My sword and life, both which are vowed to thee
Are still at thy command: walk but along,
Corcutus shall resign, thou have no wrong.

Exeunt Bajazet, Chersogles, and Achmetes: Manent Isaac, and Mustapha. Actus
1. Scena 3.
Is. Death, and the furies plunge the obsequious slaves,
Would he have joined with us? we would have kept
Corcutus high, and honored, where he sits
In spite of a whole boast of Bajazets.

Must. Me thinks your power might have bin greater sarre
Over Achmetes, one adict to you
By no less bond of duty, then the son
Is to the father:

Isa. Mustapha, I Will tell you,
Had not my daughter been espoused to him,
I had named his death, and by some plot
work't him a quick destruction long ever this.
Now let us temporize with Bajazet;
yet keep thy nature ever, and be true
to thine own profit; Fortune may advance
some other Prince, worth both thy love and mine.

Musta. Weel stay her leisure.

Isa. See more Harpies gathered to catch a Crown,
O it is a charming bait!

Exit uterque Enter Mahomet, Achmetes, Selimus. Mah. Me thinks these City walls
smile on our entrance,
as if they knew great Bajazets three sons
were come to grace their beauty.

Sell. But We should frown
on them which harbor such black treasons. Well,
were I great Bajazet, I Would ring a noise
of spightful horror, that should make the ground
tremble beneath their weight at such a sound;
A younger son enthroned an Emperor!

Ach. Brother, contain your self, come lets away,
to see the end that waits on this sad day.

Exeu. As they go Trizham and Mahomet, two other Sons of Bajazet go to meet
them. Sell. What Mahomet?

Ach. And Trizham? here is a sight
of one man's issue, Noble Bajazet:
brothers we have jumpt together.

Sell. All save one,
and he is a great deal better so alone.

Tri. Corcutus it is you mean, who though he reign
above us now, yet must fall back again
into our rank; it is Bajazet must rise,
and he descend, such a report there flies.

Exeunt. Actus 1. Scena. 4.
Enter Corcutus, Cherseogles, Mesithes. Corcu. Did not he frown, and storm?

Chers. It moved him much,
and wrought strange passions in him, when he read
your name, and found your name so entitled.

Corcu. Cling to my temples thou blessed ornament,
be ever unremov'd, though all the gods
chide me in thunder for this insolence.
Am I in heaven, in state, placed on the sphere
of eminence, but barely to appear
with faint and borrowed luster, then descend,
rankt with the vulgar? heads first let me feel
the Titian vultur, or Ixions wheel,
and the worst torture hell it self can bring,
to scourge my soul: o let me die a King.
But stay, I must bethink me at what rate
I purchase these fair trappings: ha? the curse
of him that got me! start my danted spirits,
shall I usurp a throne and sit above
my father, whilst the gaping pit of hell,
with wide stretched jaws, yawnes for my fall; O I
am struck with horror, and the slaves of Stix
already sting my wounded soul.

Cher. Will you fair Prince reject all future hopes
of just succession, and afflict your Sire,
by your unjust detainment of his Crown?

Corcu. I am distracted, and me thinks I burn
under these robes of State, a boiling heat
runs from them through my veins, Joves hardy son,
when he bewrapt himself in Nessus shirt,
felt not more bitter agonies, then I,
clothed in the trappings of my majesty.
I am resolved; Bassaes, go meet our father,
allure him home with this: I am begun
to be no King, but a repentant son.
Exeunt Mesithes and Cherseogles. Pallas, I ask thy pardon, I have straied
A graceless trewant from thy happy schools,
Whither I Will now return; there is not a rank,
Place, or degree, can sort us out true bliss
Without thy temple, there my dwelling is:
Amongst the sacred monuments of wit,
Which Classique authors carefully have writ
For our instruction, I will wast my time;
So to wash out the spots of this sad crime.
Court honors, and you shadows of true joy
That shine like stars, till but a greater light
Drown your weak luster, I adjure your sight
Even from my meditations, and my thoughts
I banish your entising vanities,
And closely kept within my study walls,
As from a cave of rest henceforth I Will see,
And smile, but never taste your misery.
I but as yet am floating on the waves
Of stormy danger, nor am sure to escape
The violent blast of angry Bajazet.
Blow fair my hopes, and when I touch the shore,
I Will venture forth on this rough surge no more.
Enter Bajazet, Cherseogles, Achmetes, Isaac, Mesithes, Mustapha, Mahomet,
Achomates, Selymus, Trizham, Mahomet, Zem^s disguised. See where he comes, oh
how my guilty blood
Starts to my face, and proves my cause not good!
Our duty to our father,

kneeles. Baja. Ours to the Emperor.

kneeles. Cor. Why kneels great Bajazet? I am thy son
Thy slave; and if thy wrath but frown, undone.
Why kneeles great Bajazet? heavens hide thy face
From these proposterous doings.

Ba. What, not ashamed
To circle in thybrow with that bright crown,
Yet blush to see me kneel? though filial rites,
And moral precepts say, the son must bend
Before the Father, yet your high degree
and power bids you rise, commands my knee.

Corc. These ornaments be thine. Here Bajazet,
I Crown thee Monarch of the spacious West,
Asia, and Africa: if ought be mine,
greater then these, I here proclaim it thine.

Omnes. Live Bajazet our mighty Prince,
live, rule, and flourish.

Baja. Is this your zeal? is it? Did every voice
breath out a willing suffrage? I am crowned,
my joys are fully perfect, and I feel
my lightened spirits caper in my breast.
Rise thou starre-bright mirror of thine age,
To Corcutus kneeling by thee our iron days prove full as good,
as when old Saturn thundered in the clouds.
Be an example to succeeding times,
how sons should use their Parents: and I vow
(when I shall fail) this honor to thy brow.
Attend us Bassaes, I Will lead on to joy,
never was Father blessed with such a boy.

Exeunt omnes, manet Corcutus. Corcu. Freed from a princely burden, I possess
A Kingly liberty, and am no less
Princely; observance wait on him, on me
thoughts undisturbed, I shall then happy be.

Exit. Actus 1. Scena 5.
Enter Zemes the brother of Bajazet alone. Zemes. Scarce had I set my foot
within these walls
in expectation of a solemn hearse,
due to the wandering Ghost of Mahomet;
but loud alarmus of abundant joy
ring in mine ears, and every servile groom
Congratulates the coronation
A showt within. of Bajazet: hark how they roar it out.
A cold disturbance like a gelid frost
settles my blood withinme, and I hate
his cheerful triumphs, more then mine own fate.
It Is true, indeed, I proved not the first fruits,
an elder offspring of my Fathers breed,
yet was it so that Bajazet and I
both tumbled in one womb; perhaps the Queen
of women's labors doted at our birth,
and sent him first abroad, or else I slept,
and he before me stole into the world;
must I then lose my glory, and be hurld
A slave beneath his feet? no, I must be
An Emperor as full, as great as he.

Exit. Actus 1. Scena 6.
Enter Isaac alone. Isa. Divorced my Daughter? fond and insolent man
I Will crush thee into nothing: if I can
endure the noise of my disgrace, I know
how to return it; I am a flame of fire,
a chafing heat distempers all my blood.
Achmetes, thou must cool it, when thy limbs
are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
and thy stained blood enchanted from thy veins,
then shall I be appeased, mean while I live
thy mortal foe: But stay, let me contain
mine anger undiscovered. Friend, how is it?

Enter Mesithes. Mesi. Know you not Isaac?

Isa. What?

Mes. The flight of Zemes hence to Armenia?

Isa. Of Zemes?

Mes. Yes, he walked about the City disguised, and unseen till his escape.


Isa. It Is strange and full of fear.

Mes. We meet him frequent in the vulgar mouth.

Isa. Zemes is valiant, and Armenia strong,
here is Bajazet, he must beware the wrong.

Enter Bajazet. Ba. What is it thou murmurest? Bajazet and wronged!
something it is thou know concerning us:
Take thee fair leave and speak it.

Isa. Yes, I know
matters of weight, such as concern thy life.

Baja. Such as concern my life! Speak out thy tale,
we are so flesht in joy, bad news proves strange,
and touch my sense too harshly.

Isa. But you must hear.
Your brother Zemes, when swift winged Fame
told him your father Mahomet was dead,
flew quickly hither, first to celebrate
his funeral pomp; then to assume his State,
his Crown, and Scepter: which he rightly knew,
unto your hand, and head both to be due.
But when applausive joy, and peales of mirth
sounded loud Music in his troubled ears,
of you enthroned; then he began too late
to brawl at heaven, and wrangle with his Fate.
So he went hence and cried, revenge be mine:
quake thou great City of proud Constantine
at my fierce anger: when I next return
with clouds of misty powder, I shall choke
thy breath, and dull thy beauty with it is smoke.
Thus posted he hence to Armenias King,
there to implore his aid, which he will bring
to front thy power: nor does he yet despair,
to dispossess, and fright thee from thy chair.

Baja. First from my body shall he fright my soul,
and push me into dust.

Isaac, make have
to muster up our forces, strike up our drums*
let them proclaim destruction through the world.
Clear up your dusty armor, let it cast
such an amazing luster on the Foe,
as if Belbona danced on every crest.
The bright sun of my glory is eclipsed,
till Zemes be extinct: he must not shine
to dull my beams, since the whole heaven is mine.
Call forth Achmetes, his unconquered arm
shall keep us safe from this intended harm.

Isaac. My Liege, you have forgot Achmetes oath,
in which he vowed never to draw his sword
in your defense.

Baja. I had forgot it,
but now I remember, such was the vain
heat of my youth: but I recall again
what ever I protested, tell him so.
Rash words must be dispensed with.

Isa. Then I Will go.

Exit. Baja. My Father once in ordering of a Camp,
preferred me to be Captain of a wing,
so when the battails joined, and life and death
where struggling who should win power of our breath,
our Armies proved the stronger; only my guide
failed, and a base repulse fell on my side;
at which my Father stormed, and in my place
seated Achmetes, for which black disgrace,
I vowed a swift revenge, even by his shame
that wore mine honor, to redeem my fame;
which when Achmetes heard, he deeply swore,
never with wit and strength to guide me more.
But now he must, see where he comes, and armed.
Enter Achmetes. What strange device is plotting in his brain?
Honored Achmetes.

Achme. Royal Emperor.

gives him a sword. Baja. Thine arm must then uphold my Royalty.
Why lies thy valor prostrate at our feet,
when like firce lightnings it should run and meet
my harms, and like a rock unmoved, oppose
the course, and headlong torrent of my foes?

Achm. I am a man of peace; mistake me not.
I made a vow, nor can it be forgot,
till you revoke your oath.

Baja. Which here I do,
great Mahomet be witness, that I mean
sincerely what I speak, Achmetes now
we are friends, and thus, I nullify my vow;
gives him his sword again. heavens on this concord lend a gracious smile.
Achmetes I have placed thee in my bosom,
gave thee an honored title in my love;
and of as lasting constancy, as is
the sun, which looks so cheerfully on us.
Go fit the Janissaries to the wars,
kindle new fire of valor in their breasts,
Thou art their Genius, even the breath they draw;
Raise then thy plumes, and keep thy foes in awe.

Achm. Sood there a Pluto at thy city walls,
and with a band of furies had besieged
thy people; I would conjure them away,
and send them back to hell: so thou shall stand
as fast as in the skies, under mine hand.

Baja. I am Crowned in thee, nor can I fall,
whilst such a valor breaths within our wall.
Zemes depose me! he must be more strong
then Mars, that can do Bajazet that wrong.

Exeunt. Actus 1. Scena 7.
Enter Zemes, and the King of Armenia. Arm. We hate thy brother, therefore
lend thee aid,
it is not our duty to expostulate
thy right unto the Crown: on to your wars,
thrive in your projects; I shall joy to see,
a quarrel fought twixt Bajazet and me.
I Will second thy encounters, and we two
like the two Roman thunderbolts of war,
will with the flashes of our fiery swords
keep their composed ranks, that they shall stand
aghast, to see two Scipioes in one band.

Zemes. Thanks great Armenian King, and when I am
wheeled to that height, which now my brother holds,
I shall requite these benefits, and vow
that kindness, which I can but promise now.

Arm. Come let us away, our armies are well set,
ready to march: now tremble Bajazet.

Exeunt Actus 1. Scena. 8.
Enter Achmetes in his Generals coat, and Caigubus his Son. Ach. Caigubus,
public dangers call me forth,
and I must leave thee now unto thy self.
My son, thou see unto what height of fame
we are ascended, yet the sun shines clear,
and not one dusky cloud of discontent
dimms the unspotted brightness of our joys:
Not Bajazet is more beloved than I.
Such strict observance is there showed to me
by all that know my worth, and hear me named,
as if I grasp't Joves thunder in mine hands.
By all my hopes I fear some tragic scene
will trouble our calm fortune. Son beware:
The top of honor is a narrow plot
of ground, whither we have already got:
It Is brittle and uncertain, if thou tread
one careless step aside, thou fall'st down dead;
the shute from thence is deep, and underneath,
ruin gapes wide, thy body to receive.
Stand firm Caigubus: though thou start'st not away,
yet blasts of envy often force aside
the weariest footstep: these, where ever they shall
blow strong, will make them stagger if not fall.

Caigu. I shall forget to sleep, to breath, to live,
sooner than these thy precepts: they are fixed,
and printed in my thoughts.

Ach. Enough, no more
That Isaac Bassa, trust him not too much:
I have divorced his daughter from my bed,
for her adulterate looseness, hence he hides
a mass of fretting rancor in his breast,
which he has varnish't yet, and gilded over
with colored shows of love; but he is false,
and subtle as a Serpent, that will wind
into thy breast, stinging thee ere thou find
or once suspect his hatred: I must away, Trumpets sound. Exit. Exit.
hasty alarms call me hence, thus, farwell,
envy grows greater, as our states excel.

Caig. Father, adieu.

Actus 2.
Scena 1.
A dumb show: Enter Zemes, and the Armenian King, Trumpets and Ensigns,
Soldiers pass over the stage, and in a solemn march. Exeunt. Actus 2. Scena 2.
Enter Bajazet, and Trizham and Mahomet his two sons Baja. Already marched so
near! Zemes makes have
to death, as if he longed our wrath to taste.
Trizham and Mahomet, it concerns you now,
to fly hence nimbly to your Provinces:
Zemes is come too near us to escape,
he cannot fly the ground whereon he treads,
but through your countries: have then, if the wars
crack not his thread of life, his flight will be
when you may intercept it; if we presume
only one bold Achmetes, and our selves
in beds of down supinely sleep at home;
Zemes may escape the tempest of our wrath.
Then we hope best, when each event we see
thwarted with their preventing policy.

Trizh. Doubt not our have and truth, he shall as soon
break through the fiery fabric of the skies,
as through my Provinces.

Exit. Maho. Through hell as soon as mine.

Exit. Baja. Go, I have done my part; Mars and my fate
give fair success to my designed plot;
and Zemes is intrapt, already dead,
that hand secures me that strikes off his head.

Actus 2. Scena 3.
Enter Achmetes, Cherseogles, Mustapha, Mesithes, Drums and Trumpets. Achm. The
battle will prove great and dangerous:
but were their number double more then ours,
the justice of our cause bids us go on,
and like a cheerful drum, strikes painting fear
from every breast. Father, lead you the vangard,
the rearward be your charge, the right wing yours,
my self will guide the left: this day shall crown
your valor in full pride, Zemes must down.

Enter Zemes, Armenia, two Captains. Zem. Time has out-stript our have, our
foes do stand,
waving their golden plumes, as if the gods
were come to meet great Zemes in the field;
their armie's planted, and a distilling cloud
hovers about their heads, as if it wept
at their approaching fate. Armenia's King
lead you the vanguard; under your command
the reareward shall march on: the Phalance be
your care, brave Captains: as we are informed,
Achmetes rules the left wing of our foe,
I Will rule the right wing of ours: so when I meet
him in his pride, I Will prostrate at his feet.

Arm. Our men are ordered, Zemes lead the way,
the skies look duskie black on this sad day.

Exeunt. Trumpets sound to the battle, dumb shows in skirmishes, one of Zemes
Captains and Cherseogles meet, Zemes Captain prevails; his second and Mesithes
meet, Mesithes retires; the King of Armenia and Mustapha meet, Armenia
prevails, and pursues the battle. Enter Achmetes with his sword. Ach. Great
Queen of chance; but do I call on this
unconstant Stepdame? be thou propitious Mars,
rough god of war: steel up this weary arm,
and put a ten fold vigor in my bones;
what shall Achmetes fall, and in his loss,
great Bajazet be wronged! it cannot be.
Death comes to wound thee Zemes, I am he!

As he goes out, the King of Armenia meets him, they fight, Achmetes makes him
retire from the stage, and pursues him in his fury, enters again at the one
door, Zemes at the other: they meet, drums and trumpets sounding. Ach. Zemes!

Zem. Achmetes! Opportunely met,
here staggers all the fortune of the field;
this hour must bless me, and a single fight
purchase thee honor, and to me my right:
honor to thee, to die by Zemes hand,
my right to me, an Empire to command.

Ach. Brave Prince, I more lament thy case then can thy self
that runnest with such madness on the edg
of desperate ruin: thou art but young and weak,
manhoods soft blossoms are not fully spread
upon thy downy chin; but riper years
have settled the compacture of my joints,
and they are strongly knit: 'twill vex my soul
in the clear morn of thy up-rising hopes,
to wrap thee in a fatal could of death.
Submit thee to thy brother, thou shall find
me thy true friend, him merciful and kind.

Zem. Submit! had I a right to Joves high Throne,
and stood in opposition of his power;
should all the gods advise me to submit,
I would reject their counsel: much more thine.
Guard thee, Achmetes, I thy stroke abide,
I cannot gore thy Prince but through thy side.

They fight and breath: fight again. Achmetes takes away Zemes sword. Zem. The
day be thine, and Zemes stand thy Fate;
strike home, I Have lost the day: and life I hate.

Achm. Have at thee then.
Offers to run at him with both swords. not stir! Now by my sword
thou shall have fayrer play before thy death:
take back thy sword, in that I recommit
my forfeit to thy charge, thy life with it.

They fight again, and Achmetes wounds him on the head. Zemes falls. Zem. Oh!
hold thy conquering hand, and give my soul
a quiet passage to her rest; my blood
begins to wast, and a benumming cold
freezes my vital spirits: Achmetes go,
tell Bajazet that thou have slain his foe.

Ach. Farwell brave son of Mars, thy fame shall stay
with us, although thy soul flit hence away.

Zemes. I have not ly'd, Achmetes thou have slain
my hopes, and therefore me; my wounds are shallow,
but my state desperate: Ha! what shall I do?
Armenia's King is fled back to his home,
cold entertainment will attend me there;
the field is empty, every man retired,
only a few dead carcasses, and I;
then whither shall I bend my steps? to Rome!
To Rome then let it be: Bishop, I come;
thou art a religious thing, and I will trust
my life to one so innocently just.

Exit. Actus 2. Scena 4.
Enter Mahomates, Achomates, Selymus three of Bajazets sons. Sely. Indeed we
may be thought upon in time:
when there be countries more then there be men
we may get some preferment; sit at home
and prove good boys and please our father well.

Bajazet, aside My thoughts are too unbridled,
I neither can nor will endure thy curb;
my comprest valor like the strangled fire
breaks out in violent flames and I must rule.
Trizham and Mahomet are slipped in have
each to their several province, we must stay,
that are their Elders, for another day:
this Court will prove our scaffold, where we stand
placed in the eye of angry Bajazet;
who thwarts him in his fury is but dead,
and in that passions heat off goes his head.
I must not live thus.

Maho. I could be content.
He fears not death whose thoughts are innocent.

Sely. I thank you brother; then belike some crimes
lie heavy on my conscience, and I fear,
unless I shift my station, 'twill be known.
You think well of me kind Mahomates.

Maho. As well as of a brother I can think:
if by a rash applying to your self,
my words have been distastful, blam not me.

Sely. Can I apply them then unto my self?
am I so loose in manners? By heaven and earth
thou shall repent this deeply.

Acho. Stop that oath,
brothers agree, or walk hence but along
into my garden, where each springing herb
smiles on my fair content, there you shall see,
how flowers of one stock, so twisted are,
one in the others twinings, that they show,
one stands by the others help, both jointly grow;
these shall suffice your quarrels to remove,
and dumb examples teach a lively love.

Maho. Come let us go.

Exeunt Mahomates, and Achomates. Sely. Straight I will follow you.
Away fond wretches, o that every breast
were of so dull a temper as you two.
But who comes here?
Enter Corcutus Brother Corcutus, whither are you bent?
what from the court so soon?

Corcu. My father bids,
I go to undertake the charge his love
has thrown upon me. That Is rich Ionia.

Sely. You go to rule there?

Cor. Yes:

Sell. Heavens speed you well.

Cor. Dear Selymus adieu.

Sell. Brother farewell.
Exit Corcutus. Revenge and you, three furious twins of night,
ascend up to our theater of ill,
plunge my black soul twice in your Stygian flood,
that by it is virtue it may be congealed,
and hardened against remorse: Pluto enrich
my breast, with a diviner policy
then every trifling brain can reach unto;
I Will fill the world with treasons, and my wit
shall put new tracts to death: Charon shall see,
his waftage still in use, by company
sent thither by my care: o 'twill do well,
to blast the earth with want, and furnish hell.

Exit Actus 2. Scena 5.
Enter Isaac, Bajazet. Isaac. Tush, virtue makes men fools, Isaac be wise,
shake off the tender fetters of remorse:
and hug that chance, that opens thee the way
to ruinate Achmetes. Did he stand
on terms of conscience, neighbor-hood or love,
when he cashiered my daughter from my house,
and to the worlds broad eye, opened her crime?
No he was swift and bitter in his hate,
and so will I: he is but now returned
in triumph from the field, as full of pride
as I of envy: hence I Will ground my hate.
When fierce Bellona smiled on Bajazet,
amidst the fiery tumults of the war,
she offered Zemes to Achmetes hand,
they fought, Achmetes conquered, at his foot
fell the proud rebel, wounded but not slain;
there might Achmetes with a blow of death
cut off our fears, continued in his breath:
this shall incense the angry Emperor:
and crush Achmates in his fairest hopes.
True politicians work by others hands,
so I will by the Prince: my plot stands firm;
see where he comes, now sly Mercurius, whet
my tongue, to kindle hate in Bajazet.

Enter Bajazet. Baja. Isaac, how thrived Achmetes in his wars?
Fame is of late grown dumb of his renown:
surely unwelcome news clogs her swift wings,
else had she now bin frequent in our Court;
and we had fully known the chance of all.

Isa. We had: yet could not the event,
lie so concealed, but Isaac found it out;
which when I first discovered, straight it wrought
tempests of passions in me, joy and grief
reigned at one instant in the self same breast.

Bajazet. As how?

Isa. As thus. I joy'd that Zemes fell,
was sorry he escaped.

Baja. Fell, and yet escaped!

Isa. Beneath Achmetes feet the traitor fell.

Baja. And yet escaped! good Jove how may this be!

Isa. Thus it might be, and was so: when sad death
was glutted with the ruin of each side,
when slaughtring Mars had stained the field with blood
and cast a purple color o'r the earth
at length some milder providence desired;
an end of those hot tumults that were seen,
to last in Zemes breath; so that their fire
would be extinct, when Zemes should expire:
then from the middle skirmish forth were brought
he and Achmetes; being met they fought;
Zemes was vanquished by a violent blow
which struck him trembling lower then his knees:
now whether flattering, or present gifts
redeemed him from his fate, I cannot show;
something they plotted, what, none yet can know.

Baj. Can thou advise me (Isaac) how to sound
the depth of all his mischief?

Isa. Thus you may,
He being come from Zemes overthrow,
and yet lukewarm in blood and full of joy,
you may in way of honor and free mind
call him this night to banquet: Then being set
when the hot spirits of caroused healths
have spoiled his wit of smooth and painted tales,
and wine unlockt the passage for the truth,
bid him relate the manner of his war,
the chances and events; then when he comes
to Zemes, if he err about his flight,
his ends are bad, his bosom black as night.

Baja. Thou art my good Angel, Isack, I applaud
thy faithful plot. Achmetes, were thy soul
as dark as hell and thy enclosed thoughts
as subtle as a winding Labyrinth,
by such a guide as can remove each doubt,
and by a clue of thread I Would track them out.
But Isack; if we trap him in his wiles
how shall we kill the traitor? we have a trick,
already strange to catch him in the nick.

Isa. Easily, thus. Our laws allow a custom:
not used of late, yet firm still in effect
and thus it is: When there does breath a man
direfully hated of the Emperor,
and he in strickt severity of right
cannot proceed against him, then he may
orewhelme him in a robe of mourning black,
which we have called deaths mantle: that thing done,
the man thus used, is forfeited to fate,
and a devoted sacrifice to him
whom he had er'st offended, neither can
strength or entreaty, wrest him from his death,
both which are treason and inexpiable.
Thus then you may proceed, when banquets done.
and all their comic merriment run on
to the last scene, and every man expects
a solemn gift, due to Achmetes worth,
call for a robe therewith to deck your friend
and perfect all his glory, let that be
this robe of fate, in which ready at hand,
you may intombe the traitor and bewrap
his pampred body in a veil of death;
so let him die, dream not on the event,
vice is rewarded in it is punishment.

Baj. I will be fierce and sudden, Isaac invite
Achmetes to a feast; he dies this night.

Exit Baj. Isa. I shall. Would not a private warning serve,
but open penance must correct my child,
and a severe divorcement quite degrade
her of her honored matrimonial rights?
Were he as strong, as steel-like joynted Mars,
as much applauded through our popular streets,
as erst Dictator Fabius was in Rome,
or geat Augustus: yet the slave should feel
the wrath of an inflamed father light
heavy upon his soul: and that ever the next sun
appear, Achmetes all thy glorie's done.

Exit. Actus 2. Scena 6.
Enter Achmetes, and Caigubus his son. Caigu. I feared your safety and devoutly
prayed
the sword of justice, which your hand did sway
might be of conquering force.

Ach. Thy prayers were heard
and I am here as safe as I went forth,
untouched by the rough hands of desperate war.
Nor did I once spy danger in the field;
but when I fronted Zemes, then there met
two streams of valor, since on us was set
the chance of the whole combat, others stood
expecting which of us should lose his blood:
but heaven was just, and to compose the strife,
this sword at one sad blow took thence his life.

Cai. The heavens were just indeed, but who coms here,
Isaac, Mesithes, and Bajazets three sons.

Enter Isaak, Mesithes, Mahometes, Achomates, Selymus. Ach. They come to
gratulate my late success,
I see their errand foulded in their smiles,
how cheerfully they look upon my joys!

Omnes All happiness attend Achmetes.

Ach. Thanks Noble friends. How fares the Emperor?

Isaac. Well by your guard; and he has sent us now,
all to invite your presence to a feast,
we must be frolic, and this following night,
shall Crown your joy with revels and delight;
or else deprive thy soul of that good light.

aside. Ach. We must be frolic Captains, think not then
on my loud drums, and staring trumpeters,
such whose strong lungs roar out a bellowing voice
would make a man dance Antic in the fire:
weel have a choicer music, and my feet
shall tread a neater march, then such harsh strains
can teach them: with more pleasure and less pains,
since it has pleased the Emperor to grace
our slender merits thus: we shall be there,
to taste his bounty.

Mes. We Will lead on before.

Ach. I Will follow you.

Isa. Never to return more.

aside. Exeunt omnes, Manent Achmetes and Caigubus. Ach. I am happy above envy,
and my state,
not to be thwarted with injurious fate,
I could disburden all my jealous thoughts,
and shake that currish vice suspicion, off
from my sincere affection: I have worng'd
sure I have wronged thee Isack, thy chaste love
cloaks not intended mischief; black deceit
cannot lie hid under so pure a white,
but it would cast a colored shadow out
through such a slender vail; thy generous thoughts
nourish no base detraction; thy free love
thy professed actions say, it were no just fate
that good men's deeds should die by ill men's hate.

Cai. Pray heaven they do not.

Ach. Fear not, I am guest
to Bajazet, expected at the feast.

Exeunt. Actus 2. Scena 7.
Enter Bajazet, and Cherseogles. Baja. The day's far spent, is not Achmetes
come?

Chers. Not yet, great Emperor.

Baja. Viceroy of Greece, say now there were a man
whom my mind honored; and I should command
to cloth his body in a suite of gold,
studded with gems, worth all the Indian shore,
durst any tongue gainsay it?

Chers. Surely no.

Baja. What if I hated him, and should command
to wrap him in a sable colored black:
and sentence him to death?

Chers. Then he must die.

Baja. My thoughts are troubled.

Chers. What should these questions mean,
abrupt demands, one to confound the other?
My liege your guests are come.

Enter Achmetes, Isaac, Mahomates, Achomates Selymus, Mesithes, Caigubus.
Baja. Blessed be the hour in which I see Achmetes safe returned,
Bring in our banquet, soldiers: boys kneel round.
Enter a banquet, all kneel. A ring of braver lads nere blessed the ground:
supply us here with Nectar, give it me,
takes the cup. Achmetes, noble warrior, here is to thee,
a health to thy blessed fortunes, it shall run
a complete circle ere the course be done.

Ach, My duty bids me pledge it. I return
good health to Isaac, and in this we will drowned
all concealed enmities

drinks Isa. Jove split me with his thunder, if my breast
harbor one bad thought when this draught is past.
and so I greet thy son: Health to Caigubus.

drinks Caig. Mahomates the turn lights next on you.

drinks Mah I Will pledge it freely, Viceroy here is to you.

drinks Chers. Achomates, to you I must commen
the welfare of Achmetes in this cup.

drinks Ach. To you Mesithes thus I prove my love.

drinks. Mes. Young Prince, I do commit this health to you.

drinks. Sely. I am the last be prodigal in wine,
fill up my bowl with Nectar let it rise
above the goblets side, and may it like
a swelling Ocean flow above the banks,
I will exhaust it greedily, it is my due.

drinks. Omnes We Will drink with Bacchus and his roaring crew.

Baj. Already done, so quickly run about,
one health to me: faith, since you are set to it,
here is a carouse to all.

Omnes, we will pledge it round.

As they drink round, Bajazet rises and speaks aside. Bajaz. It Is the last
draught to some, or I shall fail
in mine intendments. Let a foe escape
when he was trampled down beneath his feet!
There must be treason in it: How my blood
boils in my breast with anger! not the wine
could work such strong effect: my soul is vexed.
A chafing heat distempers all my blood;
Achmetes, thou must cool it: when thy limbs
are emptied of that moisture they suck in,
and thy stained blood unchannel'd from thy veins;
then shall I be secure; a quiet rest
shall rock my soul asleep; it is thy last hour
must set a period to my restless fears.
What, are you merry friends? drink on your course,
then all arise: and now to consummate
our happy meeting, And shut up our joys,
discourse Achmetes of your finished wars;
After an age of woes, it proves at last
A sweet content to tell of dangers past.
Let Us know your whole events.

Achm. Great Emperor,
Scarce had the rosy day star from the East
displayed her silver colors through the heaven,
but all the watchful Soldiers ready armed
dimmed her pale cheeks with their transparent steel,
and added luster to the dull-sight morn;
so stood we in full pride till the bright Sun
climing the glassie pavement of the skies;
roused the slow spirits of the backward foe,
and urged them to the field; at length stepped forth
Zemes, in all the trappings of his state;
And like a well-taught Hector ranged his troops
into their several orders; all prepared,
Tiran being fearful, stepped behind a cloud,
lest when he saw our limbs bathed all in blood,
and purple streams gush't from our wounded breasts
like water from their springs, he in fear
should be eclipsed, or startle from his sphere.
The air was thick and dim; our armies joined,
the skirmishes grew hot; and angry Mars
enthroned upon the battlements of heaven,
left either side to tug with their own strength
till their oppressing multitude bore down
the justice of our cause; and our whole side
not daring to withstand, scorning to fly,
stood trembling on the utmost brink of hope;
then the propitious Gods singled me out
Zemes* the life and spirit of our foes.
We met and fought: Such was my happy fate,
that at the first encounter Zemes fell,
and I disarmed him; when in proud contempt
he spit defiance in the face of death,
opened his breast, and dared me to the stroke,
whereby I might have sent him hence to hell:
But I, in admiration of his worth,
armed his right hand once more and bad him fight.
Chance did direct my sword upon his head:
he fell before me, and cried, Achmetes hold,
I Am wounded to the death; and Captain, go
tell Bajazet that thou have slain his foe.
I left the dying Prince; our wars were done
and ceased with him by whom they were begun.

Isaak. The plot has took.

aside. Bajaz. Treason, by Mahomet:
I left the dying Prince!

Isaak Pursue the project.

Bajaz. Worthy Achmetes,
well we may give, but not reward by gifts;
and thank, but not requite thee. I would hate
that liberality which would abate
the worth of the receiver: thy true fame
out-strips the length of titles; and a name
of weighty honor is a slender price
to grace thy merits with: as for a voice
to crown thee after death, thou art the choice
of everliving glory: on thy crest
is her abode; and when the latest rest
of nature has betrayed thee to thy grave,
then shall she print in characters of gold
how brave a man thou wast, how great, how bold:
though we be dumb, yet shall the world uplift
thy name, and thou shall live without our gift:
Yet thy blessed fates have not created thee
so clearly God-like, but some other chance
may cross thy greatness, and thy high renown
the envy of some God may shoulder down:
then thus we will make thee happy; future events
never shall oppress thy worth; nor envious chance
blot thy ensuing fame. Achmetes know,
death, an immortal gift, we thus bestow.

He casts a gown of black velvet upon him, called the mantle of death. Caigub.
Treason, treason, O my Father, treason:
Help Janissaries.

Excurrit. Bajaz. Stop the furious youth.
Exeunt Bassaes. Bring in an Heads-man. Traitor, Zemes dead!
He lives to see this hand untwine thy thread.
Enter seven or eight Janissaries with swords drawn. What means this outrage?

Janiz. 1. Cruel homicide. 2. Ungrateful wretch. 3. Tyrant. 4. Meet hilts in's
guts. 5. First let his own hands take that Mantle off. Circle him.



Baj. Help! Treason, I am slain!


6. Help? why? From whom?
Is not thy Guard about thee?

Bajaz. Hemn'd in with death! my friends beset me round,
not to preserve my life, but murder me!
Blush you pale heavens at this abhorred fact,
that they may see their crimes, and be ashamed
of this unheard offense: Valiant Janissaries,
sheat up these weapons of rebellion;
print not that ugly sin upon your brow;
let my free pardon woe you to submit.
Keep your allegiance firm.

Omnes Ha, ha, ha, ha!


1 One word more damns thee.


2 How prettily he began to talk


3 Of sin and pardon! Bajazet, behold
here stands a man mild, honored, gracious,
valiant and faithful, gentle in command,
at home beloved, and feared amongst our foes;
yet has thy hand of cruelty assai'd
the hated murder of so dear a friend:
Blush, you pale heavens, at this abhorred fact,
that he may see his crimes, and be ashamed
of this new bloudinesse. Wicked Bajazet,
these admonitions fit the teacher well.

Bajaz. But hear me speak.


4 First set Achmetes free, then speak thy fill.


Bajaz. What, shall I be compelled?


5 And quickly too.


6 We cannot brook to see him stand thus clothed.


Takes of the Mantle. Baj. Your anger will have way: Achmetes go:
there take him: They have saved thee from this woe.
Exeunt showting and l^aping. Pernicious villains, they have crossed my plot;
'twas intercepted even in the last deed.
What should Achmetes mean thus to ingrosse
The best affections of my Janissaries?
Will he defraud me of my Crown and life?
My life I weigh not: but to lose my Crown,
were to be sentenced to a hell of woes.
I am full stuffed with choler. Slavish Peasants,
held I a sword of power in mine hand,
I would disjoynt them peece-meale; can I not?
Am I not Emperor? men call me so:
A reverend title, empty attributes,
and a long page of words follow my name,
but no substantial true prerogative. Enter Isaac.

Isaac. Good health to Bajazet.


Bajaz. Indeed that is nothing, since your council failed.


Isaak. Use your best patience, it may be regained.
Affection in your stubborn multitude
is a proud torrent not to be withstood.
Were you as sacred as their household gods,
Yet when you thwart the current of their will,
they will break the bands of duty, and profane
that holiness to which they bound their thoughts.
Mine eyes are witness with what lively joy
They bore him through the streets upon their necks,
Offering the use of their best strength.

Baja. No more.
I am already gone. Why did not then
his proud ambitious tongue bid them go fetch
My Crown, and with quick speed disrobe a wretch?
't was in his power: we are distracted Isaak,
lend us thy wholesome counsel to prevent
my ruin, and their dangerous intent.

Isaac. Mine is a blunt advice, and deep in blood,
to cut off those base Peasants that withstood
the force of your decree.

Bajaz. To cut them off?
Me thinks I see my self yet circled in
with their revengeful swords. Ha? cut them off
Could I but curse the Traitors from the earth,
or were my doom pronounced but of effect,
I Would rattle such new torments in their ears
should stagger their high courage; but my fears
strangle my furies; and my envious fate
forces my tongue to flatter where I hate.

Isaak Here lies the safest course to rid these griefs;
Give out you will go to war, so to enlarge
your territories: and to this end fetch home
those warlike Soldiers placed in Garrison;
let them remain without the walls: at last,
when things shall fit your purpose, lead them all
by night into the City, and in one stroke
strike off so many thousand perjured heads
as shall amaze posterity to hear
how many lives redeemed thee from thy fear.

Baj. The weight of all mine honor leans on thee:
that or some nearer course shall quell the pride
of strong Achmetes, and confound his side.

Actus 2. Scena 8.
Enter Zemes and Alexander Bishop of Rome Bishop If your intents be virtuous,
and desire
of eminent place quite banished from your thoughts,
my house shall be your Castle: that I deny
my men and Arms to aid you in your broils,
think it kind usage: Should my Holiness
feed your ambition, and make strong your hand
against your brother? 'twere too light a brand
of flaming hot dissension, and to set
the world in a combustion: all would then
quarrel by my example. No, sweet Prince,
Romes holy Bishop must not so transgress.
If you will dwell within my sacred roof,
settle irregular passions, and begin
a quiet life: repentance wipes out sin.

Zemes My waxen wings are melted: I will soar
against the Sun through such thick clouds no more;
the middle Region shall contain my flight;
your counsel swayes my wishes; my late deeds
were full of sin: now let my brother know
Zemes repents; (and that is the greatest woe.) Exit.

Bish. To man's aspiring thoughts, how sweet is hope
which makes them (like Camelions) live on air,
and hug their slender plots; till cool despair
does so benum his thoughts, that he falls dead
from his sublime height; and his lofty head
which levelled at the skies, does drop below
his humble feet! this has experience taught
in that man's headlong ruin, whose proud thoughts
aimed at the Turkish Diadem: but now cross fates
have forced his stubborn heart to bow.
Enter a Messenger. What speaks your entrance?

Messen. Health to Romes Bishop,
and peace from Bajazet, who commends his love
with this his Letter, and expects from you
a gracious answer. Gives him a letter.
He reads the letter.
Bish. "Let Zemes die by an untimely death,
"else for our love you shall provoke our hate:
"He Is not our brother, but our hated foe;
"and in his death you shall prevent our woe.
Return our service back: tell Bajazet
what he has given in charge, shall by my hand
be carefully dispatched.

Messen. Good peace attend you.


Exit. Bish* Imperious Turk,
Am I not Gods Vicegerent here on earth?
and dare thou send thy letters of command?
or speak to me in threatening menaces?
It grates my patience to obey this monster,
yet must I murder Z^mes, what do I know
whether my fathers soul did trans-migrate
into his breast or no? be dumb remorse,
the Turk is great and powerful, if I win
his love by this, it will prove a happy sin. Exit.

Actus 3.
Scena 1.
Enter Solymus alone. Solemn. Am I so poor in worth? still kept so low?
Was I begot only to live and dye,
to fill a place, move idly to and fro
like other naturalls? unmanly life,
the world shall take more notice of my fame,
else will I with the venomed sting of war
deface the beauty, of the universo.
Posterity shall know, once there did breath
a Selymus, a mortal diety,
a man at whose blessed birth the planets smiled;
and spent their influence to create a boy
as brave as Greece ever hatched, or Rome, or Troy.
Enter Isaac Here Is Isaac Bassa, he is already mine,
he courts my father, but intends for me,
and furthers all my counsels; Noble friend,
how stand our hopes?

Isaac. Great Sir, most happily:
the Bassaes murmr at Achmetes wrong:
seize on their wavering love, their breasts are open
to him that first will enter there is free scope;
drop dowre thy frank affection in their hands,
to bribe is lawful: and it is strongly proved
by good examples: Otho never was loved,
till he had bought the soldiers, that once done,
Galba grew out of fashion; so must we
addict them to us by a gaine-full fee:
Give freely, and speak fairly. I Will be gone,
stay here, the Bassaes will be here anon. Exit.
Enter Mesithes.
Sely. I shall observe thy precepts. Mesithes! welcome,
How fare you in these days of discontent?
my duty bids me ask, and wish you well;
I have been long a barren debtor to you,
At length I may prove thankful: wear my love,
it is yours without refusal, a slight gift, gives him a ring aside
Yet your looks tell me 'twill help out my drift.

Mesi. This courtesy exceeds my weak deserts,
sweet Prince; but when occasion calls me forth
to help you, I Am devoted to your worth.

Sely. Your kind acceptance of that recompense,
Binds me more strictly to you.

Mesith. Sir, farewell, Exit. and enter Mustapha


Sely. So one has took; see where another comes:
all health to Mustapha. Musta. Thanks gracious Prince,
your gentle pardon for my boldness, Sir.

Sely. Command my pardon, and commend my love
to thy bright daughter: tell her; I admire
her virtuous perfection; let that chain
gives him a chain make me remembered often in her mind.

Must. When my weak strength, or wealth shall stretch so far,
as to continue --

Sely. No Cynicke complement, good Mustapha.


Musta. Then I return you thanks Exit.


Sely. Health follow you,
and Honor me. Here is a third at hand.

Enter Asmehemides. Selym. Continuance to your health Sir.


Asme. Thanks gentle Prince.
Please you to use my service?

Sely. Yes, thus far.
Spend me that purse of gold. gives him a purse.

Asme. What means your Highness?


Selym. But to deserve your kindness, and avoid
the hated censure of ingratitude.

Asme. This is your liberal virtue, not my deeds;
but you shall find me thankful. Exit.

Selym. So I hope;
three steps are trod already to a Throne,
and I am rich in friends; these proffered gifts
conjure observance from their servile breasts.
Oh powerful gold, whose influence does win
men, with desire for to engender sin!
Isaak Bassa?

Isaak Even the man you wished:
What, did the golden lure work good effect,
and make the Bassaes stoop unto your mind?

Sely. Words are but empty shadows, but if deeds
answer their words, we cannot doubt their faith:
they stoop beneath my feet; I seem to be
as true as Jove, but slye as Mercury. Enter Mesithes.
Here comes Mesithes muttering back again;
but step aside, and we shall know his mind.

Mesith. But he is cruel, bloody, and his pride
unsufferable great. --

Selymus Ha!


Mesithes Proud Bajazet,
Thou have usurped a title thy descent
could never reach unto; thou wrongst the world
since thou detain'st the Crown, which heavens decree
due to a better brow: thou art defamed
with Tyranny and wrong; but Selymus
is void of blemishes, as truth of lies:
bad stocks must be cut down, the good must rise.

Sely. He daunted me at first, but now I find
the golds bright luster made his judgment blind.
Mustapha comes. Enter Mustapha.

Musta. Fortune has wheeled me up above the stars,
under a Monarch; I Will not sell my hopes.
Bold Selymus, I Will second thy designs;
and thou shall Queen my daughter; that being done,
with mine own splendour I Will eclipse the Sun.

Sely. Is It so? a while I Will feed thy airy hopes,
then dash thee into nothing.
Here Is a third. Enter Asmehemides.

Asm. A purse of gold! I can untie the knot:
the close aenigma says, I would be King.
Brave Selymus, I like thy mounting thoughts;
work out thy projects; thou can never need
or ask my help, but thou art sure to speed. Exit.

Sely. What we resolved, stands firm, but the event
be scanned when leisure serves: we will now prevent
my brothers hopes, and by a sudden fate
unto their lives and days give equal date
to compass a blessed end: now we begin
( Jove has offended, if it be a sin)
to throw a father down. Saturn did dwell
once in the heavens, Jove threw him down to hell.

Enter Bajazet and Achmetes, hand in hand, Cherseogles, Mesithes, Mustapha,
Mahometes, Achomates, Trizham, Mahomet, Asmehemides. Sely But stay: Achmetes,
and our fathers friends?


Bajaz. Achmetes, I have injured thy deserts,
subborn'd accusers, wronged my credulous ears,
and my rash censure undervalued much
thy noble spirits, when it first condemned
them of intended treason, rense thy soul
in the dull river of oblivion.
we halt beneath the burden of thy hate,
think my moved anger made me hot and wild,
I cannot sleep till we be reconciled.

Achm. The gods neglect my welfare here on earth,
and when I shall put off this mortal load,
let me be out-lawed from the Court of heaven,
if in this bosom there lie hid one thought
that does not honor Bajazet.

Baia. We know --
thy virtues make us happy: valiant Sir,
thy feet once more must tread a warlike march
under our fearful banner, thou shall pace
even to the walls of Rome, there dwells our foe;
where our half Moon, reared in the middle camp,
like a distempred Meteor in the air,
shall strike amazement in the cloistred monks,
and shake the Prelates Miter from his head,
till he yield Zemes up alive or dead.
When we have moved thee from thy Janissaries,
thou shall not travel far. aside

Isaac A subtle trick,
and well pretended, I admire thy wit. aside

Achm. Let me march hence, and Bajazet shall know,
how little I befriend my Princes foe.
I Will cast a ring of soldiers round about
The walls of Rome, if Zemes escape thence out,
cut of my breath: he that is deep in blame,
Must hazard boldly to regaine his fame.

Triz. What means our father, noble Bajazet,
to work untimely horrors through the world:
desolate ruin, public discontent
have printed deep impressions in our path,
danger and fear scarce emptied from our town,
the shaken members of our common wealth
yet stagger with their wounds; when discord shall
make but a second breach, they faint and fall,

Mah. Short peace has charmed your subjects all asleep,
and thrown a quiet slumber ore their eyes,
whilst with a sweet restorative she heales
their Martyred joints, and wipeth out their scarres
writ on their bosoms by the hand of wars.
Zemes is safely cloystred up at Rome,
the Prelate dares not aid him, all the gods
smile on the entrance of triumphant peace,
war lies fast bound, nor can she work our pains,
unless we loose the fury from her chains.

Baja. Our sons instruct us! must your pregnant wits
cross my command! Bassaes prepare for war;
and since your grave discourse argues a will
to stay at home, you shall; we will lay you up,
where no loud ecchoing drums shall break your sleep,
even in the bowels of your mother earth
I will entombe you: Put them both to death.

Omnes. What means great Bajazet?


Baja. To murder you, unless you strangle them.


Ambo. But hear us speak.


Baja. Stop up the damned passage of their throat,
Or you are all but ghosts. What! stare you friends?
Isaac and Selymus, a garter;
twist me that fatal string about his neck,
and either pull an end, strangle Trizham.
Mesithes come,
join force with me, by heaven y' were best make have,
Or thou art shorter lived then is that bratt.
Tugge strongly at it. strangle Mahomet.
So; let the bastard drop,
we have outlived our tutors: dunghill slaves,
durst they breath out their Stoicke sentences
in opposition of our strickt command?

Selym. So: things run well along, and now I find
Jove hears my prayers, and the gods grow kind.

Baja. Did not I send these to their Provinces
to hinder Zemes flight? and did not they
dejected bastards, give him open way?
Mine anger has been just.

Cherseo. None does deny't;
you may proceed in your edict for wars,
and make Achmetes General of the camp.

Baj. It is enough: Achmetes go to hell, stabs him.
the devils have rung out thy passing bell,
and look for thine arrival.
Shend me slaves. Exeunt omnes.
They fly before my breath like mists of air,
and are of less resistance; I Will pursue. Exit.

Achm. Oh I am slain! Tyrant, thy violent hand
has done me pleasure, though against thy will:
had I as many lives as drops of blood,
I Would not outlive this hour: fly hence vain soul,
climb yonder sacred mount, strive upwards there,
there where a guard of stars shall hem thee round,
build thee a safe tribunal -- I am gone. --
Oh tragic cruelty! -- behold -- the end
of two right Noble sons -- one faithful friend. moritur

Re-enter Bajazet in fury. Baj. Have all forsaken me? and am I left
a prey unto my self? did all their breath
pass through his organs? and in his sad death
have I abruptly cracked the vital thread
of all my Bassaes? Achmetes groans.
Ha! where am I now?
In some Gebenna, or some hollow vault,
where dead men's ghosts sigh out their heavy groans?
Resolve me, Mahomet, and rid me hence,
or I will spoil the fabric of thy tomb,
and beat away the title of a God.
Do thou not move? a trunk? a stock? to die
is to put on your nature, so will I.

Offering to stab himself, Cherseogles, Mesithes, Mustapha, Mahomates,
Achomates, Selymus, Asmehemides interrupt him. Omnes Hold, hold, and live.


Baj. How come these bodies dead?


Filii. Father, it was your self.


Bajaz. Let me revoke
my wandering sense: Oh what a stream of blood
has purged me of my black suspicion!
two sons, one valiant Captain hence are wrought
by mine own hand, to cure one jealous thought.
As it is, they are the happier; I outlive
them whom I wished to fall: only to grave
bear forth their bodies. Bassaes carry them out.
We were cursed in this,
and shall intomb with them much of our bliss:
indeed we had resolved to spend this day
in things of more solemnity, less woe.
Now our most wished council shall begin,
and bitter deeds weigh up the scales of sin.
Amasia is a province rich and strong,
Mahomates* it is thine, keep it as long
as I have power to give it; go, provide
for thy conveyance at the next fair tide.

Mahom. Farewell dear father.


Bajaz. Worthy son, adieu;
the love my dead sons wanted falls to you
as an hereditary good.

Selymus Then we aside.
may vail our heads in black, no mourners be.

Baja. Achomates, thy worth
deserves some trophies of our love,
which to let slip unmention'd, were to add
to this black day a fourth offense as bad.
Govern Manesia, now the people stand
dishfurnisht of an head; let thy command
be great amongst them, so; make speedy have.
Honor stays for thee.

Selym. Now the storms are past.


Achom. Father adieu; Exit.


Baja. Achomates, farewell.


Selym. Now to my lot, I thought 'twould never a fell.


aside Baja. Now Selymus, we know thy hopes are great,
and thine ambition gapes with open jaws
to swallow a whole Dukedom; but young Sir,
we dare not trust the raines of government
into the hands of Phaeton. Desire,
rashly fullfild, may set the world on fire;
Green youth, and raw experience are not fit
to shoulder up a Kingdoms heavy weight;
mix wit with stayed discretion, and spend
wild years in study, then we do intend
to settle more preferment on thy head
then thou can hope for.

Selymus Will thou envious dotard
Strangle my greatness in a miching hole?
the world's my study, Bajazet, my name
Shall fill each angle of this round-built frame. Exit

Bajaz. I know he grumbled at it; it is good
To calm the rebel heat of youthful blood
with sharp rebukes. Enter a Messenger^

Messen. Health to the Emperor.


Bajaz. What will your message?


Messen. Duty first from Rome,
commended by the Bishop to your service,
with a firm promise to dispatch your will
what ever it implied, and would but stay
till Times swift circle should bring forth a day
secure for the performance. Exit.

Bajaz. It Is enough.
Thanks for your care. This was to murder Zemes.
War with the Bishop! 'thad been pretty sport,
I knew my powerful word was strong enough
to make him do my pleasure: simple Priest!
only I used it as a trick to send
Achmetes from the City and his friends;
but Fate so smiled upon me, that I found
a shorter means, his life and hopes to wound
with my sententious sons, that when my foe
fled through their Province, finely let him go;
which being wholly finished, strait to please
my friends, I played a raging Hercules;
then to shut up the Scene, neatly put on
a passionate humor, and the worst was done.
But who comes here? A dumb show.
Enter Mahomates with store of Turks, he as taking his leave, they as
ceremoniously with great humbleness, taking their leaves, depart at several
doors I like not this, Mahomates beloved
so dearly of the Comminalty: ha!
He Is wise, fair-spoken, gently qualified,
powerful of tongue; why he is the better son,
not to supplant his Father. I mislike
the prodigal affection thrown on him
by all my subjects. I belied my hopes
when I presumed this day had freely rid
me of my worst vexation: I was born
to be a jade to Fate, and fortunes scoff,
my cares grow double-great my cutting off. Exit.

Actus 3. Scena 3.
Enter Caigubus Achmetes Son. Caig. If ever man loved sorrow, wished to grieve,
Father I do for thee. Could I deprive
my senses of each object, but thy death,
then should I joy to sigh away my breath:
be Godhead to my grief: then shall these eyes
with tributary tears bedeck thy shrine:
and thus I do invoke the: nimble Ghost
what ever or be of Heaven, what ever coast
affords thee present mansion, quickly thence
flit hither, and present unto my sense
thy self a feeling substance: let me see,
acknowledge and admire thy majesty.
Put off that ayry thinness which denies
me to behold thee with these duller eyes,
then shall they, sending down a powerful flood,
rence thy cold members from each drop of blood;
and so return thee back, that thou mai'st soar
up to the skies, much purer then before.
Had the just course of nature wrought thee hence,
I would have made the gods know their offense,
and back restore thy soul; but thou art dead,
and 'twas a fiercer hand that clipped thy thread,
fiercer and boulder, which did ever thrive
by mischief, and once coffind thee alive
up in deaths mantle, but then would not use
such open violence, nor durst abuse
one of such sacred worth, till fury struck
his reason dead, and made his treacherous hand
creepingly stab thee, both unseen and foul,
as if he would have stolen away thy soul.
But oh!

Enter Isaac. Jsaack, But oh indeed.


Caigub, Why, what?


Jsaack. As bad
a stroke attends thee as thy Father had:
Princes suspicion is a flame of fire,
exhaled first from our manners, and by desire
of rule is nourished, fed, and rores about
till the whole matter dye, and then goes out?

Cai. Unfold a scene of murders: Fates work on
we will make a path to Heaven: and being gone,
Down from the lofty towers of the skies
throw thunder at the Tyrant; will he press
the earth with weight of slaught'red carcasses?
Let him grow up in mischief, still shall her womb,
gaping, reserve for him an empty tomb.
We do but tread his path; and Bassa, since
it stands upon thee now to cure thy prince
of his distempered lunacy, go fetch
the instrument of death, whilst I a wretch
expect thy sad return.

Isaac. I go; and could
it stand with mine allegiance, sure I should
imply my service to a better end,
then to disrobe the Court of such a friend. Exit

Cai. He that is judged down from a steepy hill
to drop unto his death, and trembling still
expects one thence to push him, such a slave
does not deserve to live, nor's worth a grave
Then Lachesis, thou that divid'st the thread
of breath, since this days Sun must see me dead;
thus I Will prevent thy pain, thus I Will outrun
my fate; and in this stroke thy work is done.
Stabs himself. Eternal mover, thou that whirlst about
the skies in circular motion, hear me out
what I command, see that without control
thou make Heaven clear, to entertain my soul,
and let the nimble spirits of the air
Print me a passage hence up to thy chair,
there will I sit, and from the Azure sky,
laugh at obsequious base mortality.
Vanish my soul, enjoy, embrace thy fate
thus, thus thou mount'st above a Tyrates hate.

Stabs himself. dies. Enter Isaac with Executioners. Isa. We are prevented;
see the fates command
false deeds must dye, though by the Actors hand.
Return to Bajazet, and bear that corpse. Exeunt
So now I am alone, nor need I fear
to breath my thoughts out to the silent air;
my conscience will not hear me, that being deaf
I may joy freely. First thy hated breath
Achmetes vanished, next Caigubus fell,
thus we clime Throans, whilst they drop down to hell.
The glorious eye of the all-seeing sun,
shall not behold (when all our plots are done)
a greater Prince then Selymus; it is he
must share with Jove an equal Majesty.
But for my self his Engineer, I Will stand
above mortality, and with a hand
of power dash all beneath me into dust,
if they but cross the current of my lust.
What I but speak, it is Oracle and Law,
thus I will rule and keep the world in awe.

Sely. Noble assistant. Enter Selymus Mesithes. Mustapha, Asmehemedes.


Isa. Happy Selymus.


Sely. It Is thou must make me so, for should I stay
waiting my Fathers pleasure, I might stand
gazing with envy at my Brothers pride,
my self lying prostrate even beneath their feet.
Towns, Cities, Countries, and what else soever
can give high thoughts content, are freely theirs,
^, only like a spend-thrift of my years,
Idle my time away, as if some god
had razed my name out of the role of Kings,
which if he have, then Isaac be thy hand
^s great as his, to print it in again,
though Bajaz^t say nay.

Isaac. No more: I will;
an Empire be our hopes; that to obtain
we will watch, plot, fight, sweat, and be cold again. Exeunt

Actus 3. Scena 4.
Enter Zemes and Alexander Bispop of Rome. Bish. Cannot my words add solace to
your thoughts?
oh! you are gulft too deep in a desire
of sovereign pomp, and your high thoughts aspire.
All the unshadowed plainness of my life
does but contract thick wrinckles of mislike
in your Majestic brow, and you distaste
moral receipts, which I have ministered
To cool Ambitions Fever.

Zemes. Pardon Sir,
your holiness mistakes my malady,
another sickness grates my tender breast,
and I am ill at heart: alas I stand
an abject now as well in Natures eye,
as erst I did in Fortunes: is my health
fled with mine honor? and the common rest
of man grown stranger to me in my grief?
some unknown cause has bred through all my blood
a colder operation, then the juice
of Hemlock can produce: O wretched man!
look down propitious Godheads on my woes.
Phoebus infuse into me the sweet breath
of cheerful health, or else infectious death.
If there an Angel be whom I have crossed
in my tormented boldness, and these griefs
are expiatory punishments of sin?
now, now repentance strike quite through my heart
enough of pains, enough of bitter smart
have tied me to it. I have already bin
bolted from joy, content can enter in,
not at the open passage of my heart,
I neither hear, nor see, nor feel, nor touch
with pleasure; my vexation is so much,
my grave can only quit me of annoy;
that prevents mischief, which can bring no joy.

Exit. Bish. Now I could curse what mine own hand has don,
and wish that he would vomit out the draught
of direful poison, which infects his blood.
Ambitious fire! why it is as clean extinct,
as if his heart were set beneath his feet,
grief has boiled out the humors of vain pride,
and he was mere contrition. Enter a messenger.
What Is the news?


Messen. Zemes, as now he left you pale and wan,
dragging his weak legs after him, did fall
dead on the stony pavement of the Hall,
not by unhappy chance, but as he walked,
folding his arms up in a pensive knot,
and railing at his Fate, as if he stag'd
the wounded Priam, or some falling King,
so he, often lifting up his closing eye,
sunk faintly down, groaned out, I dye, I dye.

Bish. It grieves my soul: let Bajazet know this;
could our own shortened life, but lengthen his,
by often sighs I would transfuse my breath
into his breast, and call him back from death. Exit.

Actus 3. Scena 5.
Enter Selymus, Mesithes, Mustapha. Sely. Let not my absence steal away my love,
or local distance weaken the respect
which you have ever born me; I must fly
to shake the yoke of bondage from my neck:
my Fathers eyes shall not scan out my life
in every action; then when I am gone,
our love like precious mettle shall not crack
in the protraction, but be gently framed
into a subtler thinness, which shall reach
from either part, not crazed by any breach.

Mesi. Return with ruin painted in thy brow,
pale death triumphant in thy horrid crest,
danger limn'd out upon thy threatening sword,
the Turkish thraldom portrai'd on thy shield,
weel meet thee in thy horror, and unfold
our arms as wide as heaven to take thee in.

Sely. We trust you: if there lie unspoken love
hid in your bosoms, we must bury it
in silent farwells.

Musta. Noble Prince adieu,
since thy frank deeds have printed in our hearts
so true a pattern of thee, we will feed
our contemplation with thy memory.
When thou art really departed thus,
a better part of thee shall stay with us. Exeunt.

Sely. So the swift wings of flight shall mount me up
above these walls into the open air,
and I will tower above thee Bajazet.
Farwell soft Court; I have been kept too long
within thy narrow walls, and am new born
to golden liberty; now stretch out you heavens,
spread forth the dewy mantle of the clouds
thou powerful Sun of Saturn, and remove
the terminating Poles of the fixed earth,
to entertain me in my second birth.

Enter Isaac Bassa. Isa: Not yet rid from our walls! Fair Prince take heed,
treason's a Race that must be run with speed.
Aeolus beckons, and the flattering winds.
join all to help our project: quickly hence:
all is full of danger. Did your Father know
He Would stop your flight and breath at one deaths blow.

Exit. Sely Friend I am gone: thou hoary God of Seas,
smooth the rough bosom of thy wrinckled tide,
that my winged Boat may gently on it glide.

Actus 4.
Scena 1.
Enter Bajazet solus. Baja. How the obsequious duty of the world
hangs shivering on the skirts of Majesty,
and smells out all her footsteps! I could yet
never steal leisure to reform my thoughts,
since my pale brow was first hoop'd in with gold,
till this blessed hour: and now great Bajazet
empty thy breast of her imprisoned joys,
which, like the smothring winds, could with a blast
rip up a passage. I am crowned in bliss,
placed on the rocks of strong security,
without the reach of Fate* Envy shall gnash
and pine at my full pleasures; the soft feet
of laboring ambition shall quite tire,
ere touch the starry-height on which I stand.
Achmetes and his son with my two boys
are fallen, to clear the sunshine of my joys,
Achomates I fear not, Selymus
lives cag'd within the compass of mine eye,
all that I doubt is of Mahomates,
that blasing star once darkened, I will throw
the luster of my pomp from me, as clear
as if three Suns were orb'd all in one Sphere.
What news brings Isaac? Enter Isaac Bassa.

Isa. Unwelcome news.


Baja. Be quick in the delivery.


Isa Then thus.
Young Selymus is fled.

Baja. Fled!


Isa. Fled this night to the Tartarian King.


Baja. Would he had sunk
to the Tartarian deep. Isaac, thou art false,
and every hair dependant from thy head
is a twined serpent. Isaac, I say thou art false,
I read it in thy brow.

Isa. By heaven I am not.


Baja. Come; answer my demands, first, at what time
left he the Court?

Isa. I know not.


Baja. Know he is fled,
and know not when he fled! how can this be!

Isa. After our strict enquiry, 'twas our chance
to lite on one that saw him take a ship,
at the next haven.

Baja. On one; bring forth that one, Exit Isaac.
i will sound the depth of these villainies.
Enter Isaac with a dwarf. What Is here?
a barrel reared on end upon two feet?
Sirrah, you guts and garbage -- did you see
Selymus leave the Court?

Dwarf So please it your --


Baja. Please it! thou monster, are you now so pleasing.


Isa. My Liege hold in your fury: spend not one drop
of your fierce anger, on so base a worm,
keep it entire and whole, within your breast,
that with it is vigor it may crush the bulk
of him whose treasons move it.

Baja. So it shall,
Neptune reine back thy swelling Ocean,
invert the current of thy guilty streams
which further treacherous plots, mild Aeolus,
(that when a peevish goddnesse did entreat,
scattredst a Trojan Navy through the seas:)
now Bajazet a Turkish Emperor,
bids thee send forth thy jarring prisoners
into the seas deep bowels: let them raise
tempests shall dash against the firmament
of the vast heavens, and in their stormy rage,
either confound, or force the vessel back,
in which the traitor sails; now, now begin
or I shall think thee conscious of this sin.
What would this Monk? Enter a Monk.

Monk Only your blessed alms.


Bajazet I Am in a liberal vain --
Monk shootes of a dagge at Bajazet; Mesithes, and Isaac, kill the Monk.
Traitor I Am slain!
I feel the bullet run quite through my sides.

Isa. Great Mahomet has kept you safe from harm:
it never touched you.

Baja. Oh -- I am slain!
open the gates of sweet Elysium,
take in my wounded soul: Bring forth that Monk
i will make him my souls harbinger, he shall
fore-run my coming and provide a place
amongst the gloomy banks of Acheron,
then shall he dwell with me in those black shades,
and it shall be my bliss to torture him.

Isa. He Is gone already, I have sent him hence.


Baja. Fly then my soul, and nimbly follow him,
he must not escape my vengeance: Charon stay,
one waftage will serve both, I come away.

Isa. Let not conceit thus steal away your life.


Baja. Me thinks I feel no blood ebb from my heart,
my spirits faint but slowly.

Isa. Hear me Sir,
You are not wounded.

Baja. Ha! not wounded!


Isaac. Untoucht as yet:
His quaking hand deceived him of his aim,
and he quite mist your body: here behold
the bullet yet unstained with blood.

Baja. Now I believe thee: oh the baleful fate
of Princes, and each eminent estate!
How every precious jewel in a Crown,
charms mad ambition, and makes envy dote
on the bewitching beauty of it is shine!
Indeed proud Majesty is ushered in
by superstitious awful reverence;
but cursed mischiefs follow; and those are
treasons in peace, black stratagems in war.
But where is the dwarf? Isaac, go send him in;
bid bold Mesithes, and sage Mustapha
quickly attend us. Go. Exit Isaac.

Isa. I shall.


Baja. This hour,
has hatched a richer project in my brain,
whose wished event shall strangle envies breath,
and strike ambition dead in every breast.
Enter dwarf. Sirrah, draw hence the body to the ditch,
whither the filth of the whole City runs,
there overwhelm't in blood; go, quickly do it:
What do thou grin, thou visage of an ape?

he striks him. Dwarf. I Will rather hang my self then endure this.


Baja. Nay, come; be patient and I Will use thee well:
why -- 'twas a Scepter struck thee, and twill work
diviner operation in thy blood
then thou can dream of.

Dwarf. I Would rather be struck cross the teeth with a pudding
then cross the back with a Scepter.

Ba. A man would guess so, that over-views the dimensions.
But to thy business.
he caries out the course. Enter Bassaes. Bassaes stand ye round,
Stay: who comes here? sure I should know that stature,
observe him nearely. Enter Mahomates disguised.

Bassaes. It Is no Courtier.


Mahom. Mahomates it is time to look about,
Selymus fled! Achomates adored!
My name scarce heard of through the popular streets!
had that unhappy arm of that damned Monk,
not staggerd from the mark at which he aimed,
who ever sent him hither, I had leapt.
into the empty throne, and cropped the fruit
budding from treasons root; but I Will return
back to my Province, this unknown disguise,
shall search my Fathers closest policies. Exit

Isa. Mahomates disguised!


Baja. By heaven 'twas he.
He pryes into my counsels: let it be.
We Will forward in our business, which being done,
weel cool the hot ambition of each son,
as mine already is, quick moving time
has cast a snowy whiteness on my hairs,
and frosty age has quel'd the heat of youth;
mine intellectual eyes, which ever yet
gazed on the worlds rich gilded vanities,
are now turned inward, and behold within,
dismal confusion of unpardoned sin.
Ever since I first was settled on this Throne,
my cares have clogged the swiftness of the hours,
and wrought a tedious irksomenesse of life,
murders have masked the forehead of the Sun
with purple-coloured clouds, and he has blushed
at the blood-sucking cruelty of state.
There Is not one little angle of this Court,
whose guilty walls have not concealed a knot
of traitors, squaring out some hideous plot
against my safety; now at last I spy
the dangers of perplexed Majesty.
And were it not for a religious fear
of after-harms, which wretchedly might tear,
and spoil the body of this Monarchy,
here at this instant would I strike the sail,
and proud top-gallant of mine eminence,
hurl up my scepter, dis-inthrone my self,
and let the green heads scramble for the Crown.
Age has taught me a stayder providence
then my rash youth could reach to; I intend
to place this glittering babble, on the head
of some successor, ever I yet am dead,
So give it out; thereby I Will try the love
and favor of the people: whom they seem
most to affect I Will raise to that esteem.
How do you like the counsel?

Chers. As we could like
a voice of health sent from the careful gods.
This news will lay the fury of your sons,
and breed low duty in them all, in hope
of the reward proposed.

Exeunt Bajazet Cherseogles. Manent Mustapha, Isaac, Mesithes, Ashmehemides.
Isa. Awake preventions eyes, we must not sleep
if we would see proud Bajazet displac't,
and Selymus elated to his height.
Name him the people favors! -- he affects
Achomates: and knows, the multitude
wrapped with his heavenly wisdom, cry for him,
we must be quick and wary, here are keys
left, and laid up by Selymus, that store
shall visit empty, purses and inchaunt
the needy sort of men, that the ones wealth,
shall weigh up to others wisdom in the scale
of their light judgment; lend your best endeavors,
we will cross thee Bajazet, and thy hopes shall dye
by thine own ill-contrived policy. Exeunt

Actus 4. Scena 2.
Enter Bajazet, takes Asmehemedes by the hand, a Courtier belonging to
Mahomates. Baja. Leave us; we would be private with our friend,
it is thou must do it sweet Asmehemedes:
Mahomates and thou art two near friends;
he will suspect in others close deceit;
thee, for thy generous virtues he will stand
with obvious embracements to receive
into his bosom; whither when thou art
wound in, be sure to strike him through the heart.
I am offended, it is just piety
to sacrifice his body at the shrine
of my displeasure: do it, I am thine.

Asme. Were he as dear to me, as the half part
of mine own body, as the breath I draw;
I Would do this charge: we mortals must obey
when gods command, and Emperors are they. Exit.

Baja. So willing to be damned! had I adjoined
some virtuous office, surely he would then
have said, that good deeds are not deeds of men.
But let them go; Mahomates must dye,
and for my other boy fierce Selymus,
the boystrous hand of war must snatch him hence,
my other Son Corcutus lives immured
within Minerua's cloister, thus I clear,
a path through which Achomates shall run
up to my throne when all their hopes are done. Exit.

Actus 4. Scena 3.
Enter Achomates. Acho. The promise was direct and absolute,
to bless my Temples with a sacred Crown,
with protestations of a quick dispatch,
ere his own right were cancelled by fate;
so to cut off all rivals in my joys.
What intercedent chance has made his care
so slack in the performance? by heaven, I fear,
delays will prove delusions of my hopes,
and that homebred Mercurian Selymus
will split the expectation of my bliss:
forefend it Mahomet, or I shall be
a sad revenger of indignity.
How now! What speaks this bold intrusion?

Enter a Messenger. Messen. Health to Achomates from Bajazet.


Acho. From Bajazet! unfold thy welcome news:
How fares our Noble Father?

Messen. In full health:
and wills you thus by me, to muster up
your surest forces: and with moderate have,
repair unto the Court, where you shall find
employments worthy of a valorous mind.

Acho. To muster arms! can thou surmise the cause?


Messen. With confidence I dare not; but it is said,
against that haughty Noble Selymus,
who of the Tartar King implored aid,
to an uncertain end: himself gives out
to fight with Hungary, and stretch the bounds
of the old Turkish regiment: But fame
with panting voice bids Bajazet beware,
and whispers in his ear, he is the foe,
Proud Selymus intends to overthrow.

Acho. Enough, regreet our Father with our love;
tell him we shall not sleep to his command;
Exit. Fly nimbly back. Dares the audacious boy
trouble the world with his tempestuous arms?
I Will chastise him with iron whips of war,
if either strength or stratagems will serve
to spoil the gaudy plumes of his high crest,
I Will use the strongest violence of both;
I am swollen big with hate, and I could break
untimely passage with a wholesome stab
to vent the monster strangled in my womb.
Father I come, he that detaines a Crown
bequeathed to me, must thunder-strike me down.

Enter Corcutus. Corcu. Buzzing reports have pierced my study walls,
and clogged my meditations airy wings,
by which I mount above the moving spheres
and search the hidden closets of the heaven,
I cannot live retired, but I must hear
mine own wrongs sounded in my troubled ear:
What! will my father falsifye that oath;
In which he vowed successions right to me?
When I resigned my honors up to him,
he deeply swore, when the usurping Sun
of his bright-shining royalty had run
It Is complete course through the whole heaven of state,
and fainting dropped into the Western lapse;
my brightness next should throw it is golden beams,
upon the worlds wide face, and over-peer
the dusky clouds of hidden privacy:
and shall Achomates succeed! Shall he
shine in the spangled robes of Majesty?
then Bajazet is false, let it be so
I am secured from a huge mass of woe.
Yet I Will toth' Court, that when Achomates
shall spy me, and remember but my due,
'twill stain his luster with a blushing hue.

Enter Bajazet, Cherseogles. Baja. My cares are grown too great to be comprised
within the narrow compass of my breast,
Viceroy of Greece, I Will power into thy heart
part of my secrets; which being entered in,
lock them as close up, as thou would a sin
committed, yet not known: I must impart
things worth thy faithful silence.

Chers. Worthy Sir,
by the enclosure of my soul I swear --

Baja. I Will not hear out thine oath, in brief, it is thus,
the Bassaes are all false, and love not us;
Nor does my brain-sicke fury prompt me thus,
I read it in their gestures, conventicles,
actions, and counsels, my suspicious eye
has found a great breach in their loyalty.

Chers. Surely this cannot be.


Bajazet. By -- it is true,
each man that guards mine honor is my foe,
I Will shake these splendent robes of Majesty
from my ore-burden'd shoulders, and to ease
my self, bequeath them to Achomates.

Cherse. Achomates?


Baja. Even he, unless the voice
Of the whole City interdict my choice.

Enter Isaacke, Mesithes, Mustapha. Cherse. Here comes the Bassaes,
sure I see bad news
pourtrayed on the Index of their fronts.

Baja. Bad news? We have outlived good days too long,
we can expect no other: come, unclaspe
volumes of misciefes, and make deaf my ears
with an infused multitude of cares.

Bassaes. Young Selymus has crossed Danubius flood
and seized upon the Provinces of Thrace,
and with a Navy plowed the Euxine Sea,

Baja. Peace bellowing night-ravens; with how cheerful noise
their puffing lungs croke out the balefull note?
Are these the wars against Hungary? You powers
of heaven, brush off your cloddy patience;
If you but wink at these notorious crimes,
I Will say you dare not check our stubborn times.
Well, as yet I Will make use of his pretense.
Vize-roy of Greece, bear you this Embassy
to that suspected Traitor Selymus;
Tell him, the wars against the Hungarian foe
are full of dangers, and approved harms;
never attempted by our Ancestors,
without repulse or damage; bid him dismiss
his rough Tartarian youths: then if he stand
Unmoved and stiff, feign vengeance is at hand:
make thy best speed.

Cherse. I shall. Twill be well done
to reconcile a Father and a Son, Exit.

Baja. Thought he tumultuous uprores could deserve
the favors of his Prince? h'as troad awry,
and mist the path that leads to Majesty.
These bright Imperious ornaments shall grace
no rebell-monster, nor base runne-away;
my resolution's firm, it shall not be.
Bassaes, this day an Herald shall proclaim
in the worlds ear, my great successors name,
are you content?

Bassaes. We are.


Bajaz. Call forth an Herald.


Isaak. As our allegiance binds us we will obey.
Exit Mustapha, calls in an Herald. But what we grant, the Soldiers will
gainsay. Aside:
Thou shall not thrive in this, I dare be bold,
my golden hooks hove taken a faster hold.

Baja. Herald,
be my loud Echo, ratify my deed,
and say Achomates shall next succeed.

Herald. Bajazet the second by the appointment of our great Prophet Mahomet,
the only Monarch of the World, a mighty God on earth, an invincible Caesar,
King of all Kings, from the East unto the West, Governor of Greece, Sultan of
Babylon, Sovereign of Persia and Armenia, triumphant Tutor of Jerusalem, Lord
possessour of the Sepulcher of the Crucified God, subverter and sworn enemy
of the Christians, and of all that call upon Christ, proclaims Achomates his
second son next and immediate successor. An alarm of Trumpets


Within. None but Bajazet, none but Bajazet.


Bajaz. By heaven, they are corrupted: none but I?
It Is no love borne to me that moves this cry.

Mesith. Great Bajazet, the cause why they deny
this just proposal, rises from an use
and customary license long observed;
to wit, when their crowned Emperor is dead,
the interposed vacation is a time
of lawless freedom: then they dare to spoil
the Jewish Merchants of their traffic wares,
and prey upon all strangers: so that should
your Honor be conferred upon your son
Whilst you your self yet breath, then should they lose
their long expected gains; therefore refuse
what you proposed.

Bajaz. If that be all the cause,
we will give them such a Kingly donative
as doubly shall buy out those ill-got spoils:
five hundred thousand Ducats, if they please
with my free choice to crown Achomates,
Proclaimed to be their due. A flourish of Trumpets.

Herald. Bajazet the second, by the appointment of our great Prophet Mahomet,
etc. proclaims, that he will attribute five hundred thousand Ducats, if you
yield allegiance to Achomates his successor.


Trumpets sound again. Within. None but Bajazet, none but Bajazet.


Baja. Achomates I sent for, how he will digest
these gross illusions, I may justly fear:
by this I had discouraged Selymus,
and killed his hopes; by this I had cut off
the growth of hate, and choked discords seed. Exit.

Enter Mustapha with a Messenger to the other Bassaes. Mustaph. Bear this to
Selymus with thy best care.


Mesith. And this. Give him Letters.


Isaac. And this: fly, let thy winged speed
return a sudden answer, else we bleed.

Actus 4. Scena 5.
Enter Selymus, Tartarian King, Attendants. Tartar. Go on brave Prince; Lead
on thy marshaled troops,
degrade the Turkish Monarch, let him faint
at the deep wounds which thy revengefull hand
shall print upon the bosom of his land.
Go on; Me thinks I see Victoria sit
triumphant on thy steely Burganet.

Exit Tartarian King. Selym. Farewell: now I will meet thee Bajazet,
with a careere as free as if Heavens Jove
had bid me go: Bespeake the stoutest gods
to take thy part; tell them that thou must meet
a Selymus, who when the wars are done,
will scale the Forts and Castles of the Sun,
break up the brazen gates of Acheron,
and bury Nature with the world together.
Captains lead on; Now shall the sword and fire
by public ruins crown my just desire.
Sleep Hungary, I Will not break off thy rest
with the unwelcome Music of my Drums;
I Will turn the edge of my revengefull sword
upon the bosom of my native soil;
There dwells the motive of my Tragic wars,
whose ruthlesse sad Catastrophe shall wound
posterity in us: Infants shall mourn
over their Fathers tombs as yet unborne.
But who comes here? I Will meet him.
Noble Vize-roy. Enter Cherseogles.

Cherseo. Peace and health to Selymus.


Selym. Health, but not peace, whilst yonder light can see
mortals, whom Turkish force could never subdue.

Cherseo. Yet what if Bajazet, our honored Lord,
bid you roll up those flaxen signs of war,
and sheath the sword drawn forth against his foe?
when duty says obey, what shall say no?

Selym. My courage, and a proud contempt of all
corrivall Nations, could send back a no,
able to fright a Parliament of gods;
It could so: but if Bajazet gainsay,
my plumy valor flags, my thoughts give way.

Chers. Then thus; he wills you to discard your force,
and send the black Tartarians to their home;
withal averring, the Hungarian foe
(against whose power you have summoned Arms)
is full of strength and power, never opposed
without the bitter downfall of our side.
Nor would the worlds great Monarch Bajazet,
empaire his fame so much, as to be said,
he tamed a Foe by Tartars borrowed aid.

Sell. Ha! I am vilely non-plust. Courteous Vize-roy,
return our duty back to Bajazet,
even in the humblest terms wit can invent;
tell him, he has a son of that high spirit,
as does detest a cowardly retreat.
Were all the dead Heroes of our foes,
All that are now, and all that are to come
met in one age, I Would face them drum to drum.
Bid our dear Father be secure of me
and my proceedings: then true valor shines
most bright, when busied in the great'st designs.
Is not this answeer fair?

Chers. Most true: and yet
'twill prove distasteful.

Selym. No, it cannot be:
If there be too much valor in this breast,
blame him that placed it there, even Bajazet.
My virtues and my blood are both derived
from his first influence, and I must either hate
disgraceful calumn's, or degenerate.

Chers. All this I Will tell your Father; yet he will rest
as much unsatisfied as at the first,
he will expect the headstrong pride of youth
should strike low sail to his grave providence.

Selym. And so it shall: say Vize-roy, I obey,
and reverence his counsel more, then fear
an host of armed foes: tell him I Will come
to his Court gates with neither man nor drum.
Cherseo. I Will tell it him with joy, which when he hears,
he will be disburden'd of a thousand fears. Exit.

Selym. Remember my just duty: it is no matter,
I will retain that till I come my self.
I am not out-reach'd yet by all these tricks;
my hopes are farther strong, I Will to the Court
with a close march, in no submissive sort,
and steal upon them: Instantly I go
to meet my Father, but a subtle foe.

As he goes out, a Messenger meets him, gives him the Letters. Messen. Good
health to Selymus.


Selym. Good health! From whom?


Messen. Isaac, Mesithes, Mustapha salute you.


Selym. Those good Trium-virj, what is it they speak?


Opens the Letter^; Reads the first. 1. [To feed on hopes is but a slender
diet.]
It Is short, but full of weight: To feed on hope
is but a slender diet! Let it be. descants
I Will mend my table, though no feast with me.

Reads the second. 2. [Faire opportunity is bald behind.]
It Is true indeed, Mesithes. Never fear,
I Will twist my fingers in her golden hair.
What speaks the third? 'This writes more at large,
and comments on the prefixed principalls.

Reads the third. 3. [Your Father did proclaim who should succeed;
Public denialls nullified his deed;
Your have will be convenient; things concur
to bless your hopes. Fate bids you not demur.]
Yours Isaac Bassa
Isaac, I am thine,
and come to finish up our great design. Exit.

Actus 4. Scena 6.
Enter Achomates solus. Achom. Unquiet anguishments and jealous fear
fly from my thoughts, like night before the Sun:
I Am lifted to the highest Sphere of joy,
My top invelopt in the azure cloud,
and starry rich habiliments: my feet
set rampant on the face of Natures pride;
The rarest work weaved by her handmayd Art
clothes my soft pleasures; I Am as great as Jove,
Only I rule below, he reigns above.
Oh! the unspoken beauty of a Crown,
whose empty speculation mounts my soul
up to an heavenly Paradise of toughts!
Father, I come, that thou may crown my head,
whilst apprehensive reason stands amazed,
amidst the blisfull shades of sweet conceit.
Then I Will call back my wandering intellect
from dreams, and those imaginary joys;
I Will teach my soul to twine about a Crown,
to sweat in raptures, to fill up a Throne
with the bigge-swelling looks of Majesty;
I Will amble through a pleasures Labyrinth,
and wander in the path of happiness,
as the true object of that faculty.
Great Bajazet, I come. Thou must descend
from Honors high Throne, and put off thy right
to build me up an heaven of choice delight. Exit.

Actus 4. Scena 7.
Enter Mesithes, Mustapha, Isaac. Mesith. The Emperor begins to smell deceit;
I know by his ill looks and sparkling eye
that he affects us not.

Musta. I doubt as much.
Young Selymus has wronged our loyalty
in his so slack proceedings; we were rash
and indiscreetly-forward in consent,
when we joined on to raise his government.

Isaac. Peace, it is too late to chide at what is done,
we have so deeply waded in the streams
of those procellous plots, nor can revoke
repentant footsteps, or securely creep
back to the Throne of safety: it is now good
to venture on, and swim quite through the flood.
Here comes the Emperor. Enter Bajazet and Asmehemedes

Baja. Attend us Bassaes.
Ar't sure he is dead?

Asm. Mahometes is dead.
There Is nothing moving of him but his soul,
and that robbed of his body by this hand.

Baja. Enough. That soul revives to see him dead
that wronged the body; Oh! my bloody heart,
Must in his frenzy act an horrid part.
Follow thy Prince to hell. Stabs him.

Asmeh. To death! Oh divellish ingratitude:
I Am slain. I dye. Moritur.

Baja. And justly: would each foe
and Traitor to my state were thwarted so.
Bassaes, convay this hated body hence,
the sight of that damned villain moves offense:
They carry him out. Now pause a while my soul, and reckon up
what obstacles are yet to be removed.
Achomates must stay the peoples leisure.
Corcutus dally with Minervaes Nymphs.
The last and worst, proud Selymus shall dye.
Thus I le compose a firm security.

Enter Bassaes with Cherseogles. Baja. Arrived already, noble Cherseogles?
You Are careful in our cause: but speak the news
from our pert Soldier. What means Selymus!

Cherseo. To track the path backward from whence he came,
to strip himself of martial ornaments,
and to fill up the duty of a Son,
come visit you in low submission.

Baja. These are too fairly promised, to be meant,
ambition has already chained his soul
too surely in the captive bonds of pride,
then that he now should cloth his stately hopes
in the plain sordid weeds of penitence;
He does but varnish over some treacherous plot
in this smooth answer: come, we will lead along
to our Imperial seat of Constantine,
that is strongly fortified, we need not fear
the weak attempts an homebred foe can dare.

Exeunt Bajazet and Cherseogles. Mesith. Ha! we are sweetly plunged, if cold
despair
benumme his youthful courage, and he faint.

Mustaph. Would I were fairly rid of all these cares.


Isaac. Dejected Cowards: are you not ashamed
thus to give up the goal of dignity
to heartlesse fear? Here comes the Messenger.
What news from Selymus?

Messen. Even nothing certain:
ambiguously he promised to be here
as soon as I.

Mesith. Is It even so?


Musta. We are quite dash't -- undone.


Isa. Lift up your downe-cast spirits. Who comes here?


Enter Selymus. Mesith. Who? Selymus?


Musta. Where? sweet Isaac, do not tell him,
that we were sending forth faith's latest breath.

Isaac. Enough, I will not. Happy Selymus.


Bassaes Long live great Selymus.


Sely. We thank you friends:
Your care has fostered up our infant hopes
beyond the pitch of expectation.
We hear that Bajazet is going now
from hence to Constantinople; my men
lie closely ambusht in the middle way,
close by a ruinous city, there expect
a sudden onset; but till then farewell,
When we meet next, our ensigns waved on high,
shall shine like Meteors blazing in the sky. Exit

Isaac. Fortunes best care go with thee.


Mesith. Brave boy, in faith.


Musta. I shall adore him whilst I breath for this.


Isaac. Again in heart?
Let Us follow Bajazet, come lads, away,
the sun of all his glory sets this day. Exeunt

Enter Selymus with soldiers. Selym. Come on, the honored youth of Tartary,
my brothers, and joint sharers of my woe,
draw forth the weapons of inflamed revenge
against this horrid monsters Tyranny;
I seem like Romes great Caesar, when, oppressed
with Pompeys grating malice, he led forth
his noble Frenchmen through the snowy Alps.
I have my Curio Isaac in the Court,
and Cherseogles, like grim Catoes ghost,
soothes the rough humor of fierce Bajazet.
These men's examples, were we faint and loath,
would set sharp spurs unto our slow paced wrath,
and whet our dull-edg'd anger: but I see
in your smooth brow perfect alacrity.
We stand to thwart the passage of a fiend,
through whose wide yawning throat has coasted down
the blood of Princes, in continual streams;
has fed and pampered up his appetite
with the abhorred destruction of his own,
and glutted on the blood of innocents.
Stood we like marble statues in his way,
and had no use of policy and wit,
our Irefull Prophet Mahomet would send
sense, life, and valor through our stony joints,
that we might ruinate this ghastly bore,
made by some hellish fury to confound
the order of this wondered Universe.
I Will grapple with the monster, he is at hand;
If you stand firm, the Common Wealth may be
a slave to Bajazet; but I Will live free.

Enter Bajazet, Cherseogles, Isaac, Mesithes, Mustapha. Baja. No Drum nor
Trumpet has disturbed the air,
within the reach of mine attention.

Isaac. And I admire it; 'twere a miracle
if that ambitious boy intend no harm.

Omnes. What noise is that?


A confused noise of exclamation within, arm, arm, arm. Soldiers. Help
Bajazet, the vauntgard's almost slain;
the Tartars lay in ambush.

Baja. What? so near?
Set up our standard, I Will give battle here;
hang out defiance, scorn, and proud contempt
write in the blood-red colors of your plumes:
summon our Army Enter a drum
from these skirmishes,
speak out the traitors doom in thine alarmes.
Thought he to daunt our courage?
Drum sounds. Enter soldiers severally, dropping in sweating, as from fight.
Valiant soldiers,
when I behold the manner of this war,
when treason copes with awful Majesty,
a graceless son, with his own aged Sire,
me thinks to bid you fight, were full as vain
as to bid heavy clouds fall down in rain:
but when I view the Chaos of the field,
and wild confusion striking valor dead,
I called you, not (as Captains do to boys)
to read a lecture of encouragement;
but that your ancient virtue may be shown
in this my last defense: I wish to dye
revenged, that death sorts best with Majesty.

Drums sounding; A confused noise, with clashing of armor. Excurrunt Bajazet,
and Selymus. Baja. Selymus?


Selym. Bajazet?


Baja. Jove lend me but a minutes patience.
Unnatural son!

Selymus. Uncharitable Father!


Baja. Father? My sword shall hew that title off;
and cut in twain kindreds continued line,
by which thou can derive thy blood from mine.
Abortive monster -- thou first breath of sin,
we had but slender shadows of offense,
till thou creptst forth to the offended light,
the very mass, and stock of villainy.
Crimes in all others, are but thy influence.
Nature has planted viprous cruelty
In thy dark breast, the scandal of her works,
her error, and extract perfection
of vices; the first wellhead of bad things
from whence the world of ills draw their weak springs.

Sell. Then hear me speak too: you have bin to me
no Father, but a sour Pedanticke wretch;
one that with frosty precepts strived to kill
the flaming heat of my ambitious youth,
as vainly as to strangle fire with straw:
you sit so daily hovering on your Throne,
as if youl'd hatch new Monarchies to feed
the hungry gulf of your unbridled pride;
You Have surfeited on titles, you have ingrost
honor, you are the moth of eminence,
and liberal fortunes answered your desires;
You had deflow'rd th'infinitie of Crowns
With your adulterate ambition;
You Are Soveraignties horse-leach, and have spild
the blood of State, to have your own veins filled.

Baja. Hold, hold thy venomed tongue, if there be hid
more of this kind un-uttred; I Will rip up
thy full fraught bosom; and to save mine ear,
mine eyes shall overview what I Will not hear.
Dare thou fight, Traitor?

Selym. Dare I be called a King?
Dare I unsheath my sword, or gather might?
If I dare ought of these, I dare to fight.

Baja. Guard thee, I Would not omit the sweet desire
and pleasure of revenge, were heaven my hyre.
They fight, Selymus is beaten off, Bajazet pursues, reenters at another door.
The slave has escaped the power of my wrath;
midst the dissever'd troops of scattered foes
I lost him in a smoky cloud of dust,
so thick as if the tender Queen of Love,
had wrapped her brat Aeneas from my sight.

Enter Isaac, Mesithes, Mustapha. Isaak. Joy to my Liege, of his last victory.


Mesith. The bold Tartarians flew like fearful Hearts
before the hunters rage.

Baja. So let them fly;
heaven rain down vengeance on their cursed heads;
it is our honor that the frighted slaves
owe their lives dearest safeties to their heels.
Enter a Dwarf How now, whence come you?

Dwar. From yonder hay-ricke, Sir.


Baja. Did thou see Selymus when he fled the field?


Dwar. No indeed, I was two far crept in.


Baja. O you are brave attendants.
Let Us forward in our journey; these affairs
Achomates must know; his golden wish
the people have delayed; perhaps heel frown,
and trample filial duty under feet
as this has done: but let them storm their fill
Virtue's not shipwrackt in a sea of ill.

Actus 5.
Scena 1.
Enter Achomates alone, with a bloody sword in his hand. Achom. An honored
Legate, an Ambassador!
as if that title, like Medaeas charm,
could stay the untamed spirit of my wrath!
Had he bin sent a messenger from heaven,
and spoke in thunder to the slavish world;
If he had roared one voice, one syllable
cross to my humor, I Would a searched the depth
of his unhallowed bosom, and turned out
his heart, the profane seat of saucy pride.
Slain an Ambassador! no less! it is done,
and 'twas a noble slaughter, I conceive
a joy ineffable to see my sword
bathed in a blood so rare, so precious
as an Ambassadors: must we be told
of times delays, and opportunities?
that the base soldier has gaine-sayd our bliss?
Thought Bajazet his son so cold, so dull,
so innocently blockish, as to hear
an Embassy most harsh and grossly bad?
the people to deny me! We contemn
with strange defiance Bajazet, and them.

Actus 5. Scena 2.
Enter Isaacke, Mesithes, Mustupha. Mesith. Mischief on mischief, all our
hopes are dead,
slain in the hapless fall of Selymus.

Must. I think the devils fought for Bajazet,
and all the infernal haggs; how could he else
with a confused army, and half slain,
break the well-ordered ranks of a strong foe?

Mesith. And unexpected too? -- Now Isaacke! what!
Sadly repenting for thy last misdeeds!
Plots and conspiracies against thy Prince!
Faith we must hang together --

Isaac. Good Mesithes,
it is nothing so: they say, Achomates,
disdaining to be mocked out of his hopes,
and most desired possession of the Crown,
has in contempt of Bajazet and all,
slain the Ambassador, and vows revenge
on every guilty agent in his wrong.

Mustaph. I looked for that, and therefore first shranke back,
when Bajazet made choice of one to send
on such a thanklesse errand as that was.

Mes. Grant the report be true: what is that to us?


Isa. Fame in mine ear nere blab'd a sweeter tale;
this shall redeem our low dejected hopes
to their full height. No more; be it my charge,
to chose out the event -- What Is this comes here?

Musta. Upon my life, the body of the slain
Ambassador.

Enter the Ambassadors followers with the dead body. Mesi. It Is so.


Isa. We greet you friends,
and your sad spectacle.

Followers. It Is sad enough
to banish peace and patience from each breast
that owes true loyalty to Bajazet.

Isa. And so it shall; lay down the injured corpse.
Achomates has wronged his Fathers love
too grossly, in the murder even of him
that bore his sacred person, and should stand
inviolably honored by the law
of men and nations.
But here comes Bajazet.

Enter Bajazet and Cherseogl^ Baja. A tragic spectacle! Whose trunk is this?


Follow. The body of your slain Ambassador.


Baja. Slain! by what cursed violence? what (...)
durst touch the man that represented me?

Follow. Achomates.


Baja. Achomates!


Follow. The same:
Highly displeased with the unexpected news
of a denial from the peoples mouth,
his reason slipped in fury and contempt,
has thus abused your gracious Majesty.
Withal, he threatened to maintain this sin
with force of arms, and so resolved to win
your Crown, without such tarriance --

Baja. Oh! no more,
I am unfortunate in all my blood.
Has he thus guerdon'd my fair promises,
my daily sweat and care to further him,
and fix him in the Paradise of joy?
Nations cry out for vengeance of this fact,
I Will scourge this black impiety to hell.
Muster our forces to the utmost man;
once more I Will bury this my aged corpse
in steely armor, and my colored crest
like a bright star shall sparkle out revenge
before the rebels faint amazed eyes.
Lose not a minute; Bassaes hence, be gone,
muster our men, stay not; that from the tide
of our fierce wrath, no drop may ebb away
by causeless lingering.

Must. Whom speak you, General?


Baja. Whom but my self? whom does the cause concern
more nearly then my self?

Isa. My honored Liege,
bear your best care about you; it is a time
of double danger; but remove the one,
the other straight called forward: Selymus,
great in the favor of Tartaria's King,
is manned afresh with soldiers; his assault
threatnes as much as fierce Achomates,
and must be born off with your ablest forces;
then if you leave the City to subdue
one of these two, expect e're you return,
the other possessed and seated on your throne.

Baja. Distraction rends my soul: what shall I do?


Isa. Force out one nayl with the other of these two,
choose him you most affect, and best dare trust,
allure him farely home, wink at his crimes,
and then create him your high General,
to lead against his brother: since your self
cannot at once oppress two foes so stout,
try if one heat can drive another out.

Baja. Isaac, we like thy counsel: but of these,
which can we pardon? either so deboist,
so guilty of rebellion, so divorced
from pious loyalty, that my soul even both
with bitter hatred equally may loath.

Isa. First weigh their faults, the one a brainsick youth,
endeavored to supplant your Majesty;
the other in defiance and contempt
of God and man, profaned the holy rites
of an Ambassador.

Mesi. For which dire fact,
should it slip up unpunished, the name,
the fearful name of Bajazet would prove
the subject of each libel, and the scoff
of petty Princes.

Baja. Enough; we have decreed
Achomates shall quake beneath the stroke
of our fierce anger. Isaac, speed away
to Selymus, he shall confront the slave,
the best of two so bad; go, -- stay, -- yet go,
it is hard when we beg succor of a foe:
Beg! stay again -- first will I drop before
the sword of proud Achomates; -- go -- tell him,
upon his low submission we will daigne
to make him Champion to his Sovereign.
Exit Isaac. Enter Corcutus to his Father. My dear Corcutus welcome.

Corcu. Royal Father. Kneeles.


Baja. Arise thou only solace of mine age:
it was a night of harmless innocence,
of peace and rest, in which kind nature laid
thee in thy mothers womb: Right virtuous boy,
how have thou lived untainted with the breath
of that infectious vice, Rebellion!

Corcut. Right noble Father, it is a faithful rule
in moral rites, that who desires a good,
and most suspects his right to it, is bold
and turbulent, and eager in pursuit;
whereas the man to whom this good is due,
rests happily contented, till time fit
Crown him in the possession of his wish.

Baja. Well moraliz'd: I understand thee, Boy,
my grant shall melt thy prayers in full joy.

Exeunt. Actus 5. Scena. 3.
Enter Selymus and Soldiers. Sely. Once more (in hope to gain, and fear to lose
a Crown and Kingdom) we have marched thus near
the seat of a dread Emperor, to try
the chance of war, or resolutely die.
Fear no cross blow, for with this hand I move
the wheel of Fate: and each success shall run
even with our pleasures, till our hopes are spun
up to their full perfection: this days light
that looks so cheerfully, shall see as bright
as it, my crown and glory. Makes a stand.
As they march on, enter Isaac Bassa. What stranger's this? my blessed Genius
haunts me.
Isaac! I take thee in with open love.
What speaks thy Presence?

Isa. Good news to Selymus.


Sely. From whom?


Isa. From Bajazet.


Sely. It Is strange, if good.


Isa. And full as good as strange. March quickly hence,
I Will tell you as we walk; if constant Chance
smile on our project. e're this Sun go down,
we may salute you with a glorious Crown.

Sely. I follow even to death. Grand Mars to thee
I Will build an Altar, if thou prosper me. Exeunt.

Actus 5. Scena 4.
Enter Achomates and Soldiers. Acho. Revenge my black impiety; each brow
seems with a scornful laughter to deride
those empty Menaces of Bajazet.
And Bajazet is not our Father now,
since he has wronged the duty of a Son;
but a scorned Enemy, whose prostrate soul
shall make a step by which I will ascend
up to the radiant throne of heavenly State,
if you but lend your help and free consent.

Soldiers. Lead us along the mysty banks of hell,
through Seas of danger, and the house of death,
we are resolved to follow, one by one
to second each step of Achomates.

Acho. This resolution is as great as just,
continue it brave spirits: he is a slave,
that having sinned, dares not defend his sin.
The world shall know I dare: For though our cause
be wrong, yet we will make good the breach of laws.

Exeunt. Actus 5. Scena 5.
Enter Bajazet and Corcutus. Cor. Would I had slept with Trizham, and that hand
that strangled Mahomet had stopped my breath,
rather then live to see my self thus wronged.

Baja. Despair not sweet Corcutus, what I promised,
I Will keep most true, and here again I vow
when I am dead, this honor to thy brow.
I have called home that rebel Selymus,
only to tame a Traitor: And that done,
we have no other heir, no other son
beside Corcutus, to whose free command
we do bequeath the duty of this land.
Enter Mesithes and Mustapha. Is Isaac not returned?

Mesi. My Liege, he is.


Musta. And Selymus with him.


Baja. Let them approach.


Enter Selymus and Isaac, as they enter speak. Isa. Let your high spirit
shrink below it self
in a dissembled show of penitence.

Sely. Tush, I can bow, as if my joints were oyld,
and tumble at his feet.

Isa. Practice your skill.


Selymus falls at Bajazets feet. Baj^. Less show, and more good meaning,
Selymus,
Arise: these crouching feats, give slender proofs
of inward loyalty.

Sely. Right noble Father,
mine expedition to avenge your cause
upon the head of proud Achomates,
be my just trial.

Baja. Have then: May thy arm
by breathless treason raise up a full joy,
and turn that monster back unto the earth
from whence it leapt. A most prodigious birth!

Sely. We fly to the performance; who both dare
and will correct his boldness: now we tread
the path to honor, and methinks I hear
the peoples Vivat Echo in mine ear.

Exit Selymus with the Bassaes. Baja. New insolence: The Bassaes slipped away!
How the obsequious villains honor him,
as if he were their Godhead!

Cherseogles. I suspect
some plotted mischief, else they durst not leave
your person thus unguarded.

Baja. Plot and hang.
We weigh not all their treasons at a straw,
one must not rule too long, it is subjects law.

Exeunt. Pass over the stage Bassaes and Soldiers carrying Selymus aloft, and
crying out, Long live Selymus, Vivat Selymus, Magnificent Emperor of the Turks.
Exeunt. Enter Bajazet and Cherseogles. Baja. Hell and the furies vex their
damned souls.
What people? Ha! what Nation is it we live in?
Is It our State and Monarchy? Good gods,
two Emperors at once! Live Selymus?
Can slavish vassals thus supplant their Prince?
What Is this enshrines my head? a type for fools
to flear at, a divided ornament!
Fail not my sense and courage, let me live
to find my self again. Vize-roy of Greece,
did thou not see a Bajazet withdraw
and vanish hence? tell thou most faithful man,
what is become of that forgetful name?
or who has stole it from me? Selymus!
Oh that damned viliaine with his treacherous plot,
has robbed me of that glory, Death of sense:
I have a soul of Adamant or Steel,
else had that hated noise reft it in twain.
Enter Mesithes. What art thou? or whence come thou?

Mesi. From a Prince.


Ba. Yet I believe thee.


Mesi. From thine enemy.


Ba. Yet I believe thee.


Mesith. From the Emperor.


Baja. And I believe thee still; yet slave, thou lie,
these p^rts must know no Emperor but me,
unless base usurpation has stepped up
unto my chair of honor. Right, it is so:
it is so indeed. Well then, what will your Emperor?

Mesi. That by my hand you yield him up his crown.


Baja Traitor, his crown? so: now I am resolved.
I have forgone my self, else had this hand
tore out thy spottedheart, and that one word
of yielding, had been cause enough to spoil
thee and thy generation. Heartlesse slave,
why sneak'st thou from our presence? stay, behold,
here* commend this gorgeous ornament,
these trappings to thy Emperor, as full
bestead with curses as my heart with woes,
that it my clogge his ears, and vex his head
with daily terrors. Hence thy prince is sped.
Exit Mesithes. Vize-roy of Greece, to thee our last farewell,
thou worthiest, truest, best deserving man
that ever made us happy: if thy faith
respect me, not my fortune, do this charge,
fly to Achomates, and rather aid
him then this faithless Bastard Selymus,
the scandal of our race, the mark for heaven
to shoot revenge. But all in vain,
I strive to word away my inward pain.

Cherseo. Nor this, nor that I Will favor; may I speed,
Bajazet shall live to see both bleed. Exit.

Baja. Mask up thy brighthesse Phoebus; lovely night,
hurl thy thick mantle over all the heavens,
let this black day for ever be forgot
in the eternal registers of time:
which of you sacred powers are not ashamed
to see a Prince so sinfully abused
by his own issue, and unrevenged?
Enter Selymus and Bassaes. But stand we, who comes here? a face of brass,
else would it blush: now, thou Saturnine Jove,
thou God of great men, thunder, that the world
drenched all in sin, may shake and fear that noise,
that horrid scourge of villainies.

Sely. Father!


Baja. Slave,
avaunt: I feel a strong Antipathy
t'wixt thee and me; thy sight makes my dead heart
distill fresh drops of blood, and work new smart.

Exit. Sely. What, furious Bajazet, and raging hot?
I hug the amorous pleasure that I feel
creep through my joints. Observe our Father,
Exeunt Bassaes. else by some wilful murder he will prevent
my purposed project; I Would not lose the guilt
of his destruction for a crown: heaven knows
I love him better then to let him dig
himself a grave, whilst I may take the pains.
Now mount my soul, and let my soaring plumes
brush the smooth surface of the Azure sky.
Crown in his hand. With this I charm obeisance from the world:
thou golden counterfeit of all the heavens;
see how the shining stars in careless ranks
grace the composure; and the beauteous Moon
holds her irregular motion at the height
of the four poles; this is a complete heaven,
and thus I wear it. But, methinks, it is fixed
but weakly on my brow, whilst there yet breath
any whose envy once reflect on it;
and those are three: the angry Bajazet,
puling Corcutus, proud Achomates:
One of these three is cared for, that is Corcutus,
who, ere the blushing morn salutes the Sun,
shall be dispatched by two most hideous slaves,
whom I have bred a purpose to the fact.
The other rival, wise Achomates,
I Will bear a side by force of men and arms,
which ready Mustred, but attend the stroke:
Then attend our Fathers. Enter Hamon.
Here Is one deals for him,
shall send him quick to hell. It is decreed,
he that makes lesser greatness soon shall bleed.
Hamon draw near, most welcome, my dear Hamon,
what guess you of your patient Bajazet?
Is he all healthful?

Ham. No, my gracious prince:
Neither his body nor his mind is free
from miserable anguish.

Sely. A sad case.
Hamon I love him, and would rid him from't,
were I so skilled in naturals as you.

Ham. All that my art can work to cure his grief
shall be applied.

Sely. Unapprehending fool:
I must speak broader. Hamon, is he ill
in mind and body both?

Ham. Exceeding ill.


Sely. Then should I think him happier in his death,
then in so hateful life and so weak breath.

Ham. And that is the readier way to cure his ill.


Sely. (H'as found me now.) But Hamon, can thy Art
reach to the cure?

Ham. With easy diligence.


Sely. Then let it.


Ham. I Am yours. Exit Hamon.


Sely. Walk, and thy pains
shall be rewarded highly, with the like
as thou bestowest on Bajazet: the Court
makes it a fashion now, first to bring the event
about, and then hang up the instrument.

Actus 5. Scena 6.
Enter Cherseogles above disguised like a common Soldier. Chers. Thus
Cherseogles have thou wound thy self
out of thy self, to act some fearful plot,
by which the Authors of this public woe
shall skip into their graves. It is confirmed
a deed of lawful valor, to defeat
those of their lives, that robbed the world of peace.
On this side the false hearted Selymus
with his confederate Bassaes lie incampt,
just opposite the proud Achomates;
The Sun now sunk into the VVestern lap,
bids either part unlace their warlike helmes
until to morrow light, where both intend
the hazard of a battle: but you powers,
that with propitious cares tender the world,
and us frail mortals, help me to prevent
a general ruin by the fall of some;
assist my spirits in a deed of blood,
cruel, yet honest and austerely good.
Who? Selymus? as I expected. Enter Selymus.

Sely. What?
A soldier thus licentious in his walks?
a stranger? Ha! What art thou?

Che. A sworn friend, a servant to thy greatness.


Sely. Then return
back into thy ranks and orders, no edict
from me has ratified this liberty,
to scout at random from the standing camp.

Cher. It Is true, my honored Lord, nor have I dared
for some poor trivial prey thus to remove
my self, but for a cause of greater weight,
the ruin of our enemies.

Sely. How Is that?
The ruin of our enemies!

Cher. No less;
The quick fall of great Achomates
can work it.

Sely. Soldier, as thou hop'st to live,
mock not my thoughts with false and painted tales
of a supposed stratagem.

Cher. I swear --


Sely. What will thou swear?


Cher. By all the heavenly powers
I speak the truth, and if I fail in ought,
grind mine accursed body into dust.

Sely. Enough, unfold the meaning and the way
by which this happy project must be wrought.

Cher. It Is thus; at the 12th hour of this black night,
Achomates I have induced to walk
forth to this valley weapon'd, but unmand,
in expectation of your presence there;
where being met, he will urge a single fight
'twixt you and him: after a stroke or two,
I have engaged my self closely to start
from ambush, and against you take his part.

Sely. Then thou art a traitor.


Cher. Worse then a devil, should my heart
have made that promise with my tongue;
but heaven bear witness, that my inward thoughts
labor his welfare only, whom you powers
have proved most worthy, therefore only yours.
Meet but this foe, whom I have flattered thus,
to his destruction; and great Selymus
shall see my strength employed to offend
Achomates, and stand thy faithful friend.

Sely. Oh were thou faithful --


Cher. If I shrink in ought
that I profess, death shall strike me to the grave:
so thrive all falsehood, and each perjured slave.

Sely. Thou Have won our credit, bear a noble mind
about thee, then to find me forward trust;
this night when sleep triumphant has subdued
her wakeful subjects, and the midnight clock
sounded full twelve, in this appointed place,
expect my presence, and till then adieu,
our next shall be a tragic enterview.

Chers. The first is cared for -- here a second comes.
Enter Achomates. Assist me thou quick issue of Joves brain,
and this one night shall make their labors vain.

Acho. It shall be so, my fears are too to great,
to join all in one onset: a strong band
shall with a circle hem the traitor round,
and intercept the passage of their flight;
How now? from whence come thou? what art thou?

Cher. A Liege-man to Achomates.


Acho. To me?


Cher. Yes noble Prince, and one whose life is vowed
to further your desert, and therefore yours.

Acho. We thank you, and pray you leave us.


Cher. I can unfold an easy stratagem,
would crown the hopes of great Achomates.

Acho. What means the fellow?


Cher. to secure your state
by Selymus his fall.

Acho. What is it thou breathe?
speak it again, for many careful thoughts
possess my Soul, that every blessed voice
steals in the passage twixt my ear and haste.
By Selymus his fall, to secure my state?

Cherse. I can.
Achom. Delude me not, and I will rain
such an unmeasured plenty in thy lap,
heap such continual honors on thy head
that thou shall shrink, and stagger with the weight.

Cher. Judge of the means: This night I have induced
young Selymus to walk forth in this grove,
at the twelfth hour, in hope to meet you here;
where having urged a combat and both met
in eager conflict, I have pawned my vow
to rush from yonder thicket, and with him
join against you.

Acho. Villain!


Cher. And Devil, had
my heart made promise with my tongue;
but heaven bears witness that my soul affects
none but Achomates. Try but my faith,
and meet this foe, whom I have bayted thus
with golden hopes, and you will find my deed
(in your defense) all promise shall exceed.

Acho. I Am resolved, soldier; when day is past
and the full fancies of mortality
busy in dreams and playing visions,
at the sad melancholy hour of twelve,
I Will meet thee in this plain.

Cher. And you shall find
me here before you.

Achom. Be so; who denies
to strike in time, can seldom hope to rise. Exit.

Cher These two will meet, and I must take does parts,
Now for a trick to send them both to hell
in the full growth of expectation;
Heavens know they have deserved it; then 'twould be
an happy murder: and behold the men Enter Bassaes.
whom I have decreed should do it. Once again
I must betake me to my former note;
Health to the friends of our great Emperor,
the three strong pillars that uphold true worth.

Isa. Sir, your intrusion is unseasonable.


Must. And your salute, impardonably bold.


Che. Perhaps the news I bring, may frame excuse
for both these faults.

Mesi. Speak out thy mind in brief.


Cher. Then thus: to night here present on this plain,
you may encounter two fierce enemies,
Achomates, and Cherseogles both
at the full stroke of twelve.

Isa. How (Mesithes) we are blessed!


Must. This night at twelve of the clock?


Cher. Upon my life --


Omnes What shall we do?


Cher. But meet me on this plain
at the appointed hour, and I will place
you three aside, from whence you shall oppress
your foes at unawares.

Mesi. Is it a match?


Isa. It Is done, at twelve a clock.


Must. See thou prove faithful.


Cher. If I shrink in ought
that I profess, death strike me to the grave:
So thrive all falsehood and each perjured slave.
Exeunt Bassaes. How easily base minds are drawn to strike
their foes at least advantage! -- Beauteous moon,
pale witness to a thousand deeds of sin,
vail up thy light, that darkness may help on
these black stratagems, and unhallowed hands
strike in mistaken bodies, even the soul
themselves adore, and cheerfully defend.
But time grows fast upon me, hit all right,
two Princes, and three Bassaes dye this night.

Actus 5. Scena 7.
Enter Corcutus with his Lute. Cor. Heaven, whither run these projects? is the
thought
of man so senseless, void of wit, yet fraught
with threatening ambition? to what end
does this distempered madness headlong bend?
Bless me, my Genius, from these hated toils
of murdering warfare, and these sweating broils
of watchful policy; Phoebus, let it be
that I may know no other god but thee.
Learned experience says, ambiguous fates
vex eminent fortunes, and he only stands
without the beams of envy, whom the hands
of some propitious power has rankt below
those short delights that troubled thoughts do know:
A Crown's a golden mark, which being hit,
falls not alone, but often the head with it:
honors are smoaky nothings; then let the Queen
of learning, great Minerva, and the nine
chaste sisters, that adorn the Grecian hill
devote me to themselves; but let me still
within Apollos sacred Temple sit,
and spend my body to increase my wit;
Reign Selymus, for I shall never thee hate,
thy supreme power, nor envy thy state:
Corcutus stands divorced from a life
engaged to vain ambition, factious strife,
and empty power of Kings. He Is great in fame,
not who seeks after, but neglects the same.
Since thou have grieved me Phoebus, free my wit,
that I may ease my grief by speaking it;
if thou deny'st, fond god, 'twill be in vain,
sorrow can sing, though thou not tune the strain.
Sings to his Lute. Then thou sweet Muse, from whence there flows
words able to express our ill,
Teach me to warble out my woes,
and with a sigh each accent fill:
Infuse my breast with doleful strains,
Whose heavy note may speak my pains.
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night deprives my woes with sleep.
The pleasing murmurs of the air,
that gently fan each moving thing,
I having heard, straight do repair,
and bear a burden, whilst I sing
An heavy burden, doleful song,
The fathers grief, the subjects wrong.
O let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
The grieved Flora hangs the head
of every youthful plant and tree,
And flowery pleasures are stark dead
at my lamenting melody;
Then all you Muses help my strain,
To reach the depth of bitter pain.
Oh let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguiles my woes with sleep.
Me thinks I hear the singing spheres
tune their melodious strains to mine,
The dewie clouds dissolve in tears,
as if they grieved to see me pine;
Thus each thing joins to see my moan,
Thus seldom come true sighs alone.
Then let me sigh, and sighing weep,
Till night beguile my woes with sleep.

He sleeps: Then enter two murderers who slaying him, bear him away. Exeunt.
Actus 5. Scena 8.
Enter Cherseogles. Cher. A dark and heavy night, as if the gods
winckt at our projects, and had clad the heavens
in a propitious black, to bless my plot!
Revenge, to thee I dedicate this work;
and I will pamper thy wild appetite
with blood and murder, thy dull, slow-pac't feet
shall caper to behold our fearful scenes
drencht in a scarlet Ocean.
It Is full twelve --
I hear a quiet foot-pace, and it beats
directly toward. It Is Selymus,
joy of expectation. Enter Selymus.

Sely. Thou Queen of shades,
bright Cynthia, and you starry lamps of heaven,
what sphere has told you? oh you are envious all,
and therefore hate to grace the time, in which
I ruinate my latest foe: this is the sand
on which I am to wrestle for a Crown,
and I am entered full of greedy lust,
to meet my adverse champion; here is my god
whom I adore with greater confidence
then all those beauties, Sun, or Moon, or Stars,
that with malicious absence have disrobed
this gracious hour of i'ts due respect.
Oh thou the silent darkness of the night,
arm me with desperate courage and contempt
of gods-lov'd men: now I applaud the guile
of our brave roarers, which select this time
to drink and swagger, and spurn at all the powers
of either world. Blessed mortals, had that mother
strangled her other infant, white faced day,
and brought forth only night! my limbs are stiff,
and I must bath them in my brothers blood;
I Will steep this grass in a red purple goare,
scatter the carcass peecemeale, and that done,
I Will rear a lasting monument, I Will sign
a trophie, which inscribed, shall speak my deeds
to after ages, that is my chief intent:
He Is coldly praised that is written innocent.
Whose there? my soldier?

Che. Soldier and slave, great Prince at your command.


Sely. I will enoble thee, place thee my second self
in all my power for thy rare faith.
Where Is our Achomates?

Cher. I heard one softly track full hitherwards,
and think it is he; it is needful that I meet him,
and give some proof that I continue his,
else jealous of my faith, he will return,
and we be both deluded; when you are met,
parley before you fight, till I prepare
my self to run upon him unaware.
Mean while I Will go to meet him. Exit.

Sely. Go make have.
But if this base raskal should deceive
my trust! a trifle -- my nerves are plumped up,
and filled with vigor, strong enough to fright
a million of such big backed, drowsy slaves;
I hear them both approach.

Enter Cherseogles and Achomates. Cher. See where he stands, I shall not be slow
to second your encounter; being met,
parley before you fight, till I prepare
my self to run upon him unaware,
mean while I Will withdraw -- now for my Bassaes.

Exit Acho. A time of dismal blackness, and my soul
is dull and heavy, as if envious night
strived to subdue my fatal watchfulness.
But I have rushed upon my foe: whose there?

Sely. Answer thy Prince first; I say, what art thou?


Acho. He that usurp's, has title of a villain.


Sely. But he that wears it is a Saint, and such am I.


Acho. Thou Art a treacherous slave.


Sely. Achomates thou lie, this night shall prove
I shrink not to unmaske what I have done.

Acho. Oh heavens, so impudently bad!


Sely. Good brother, we know your virtues, one that
gains country, gods, and men;
slew an Ambassador, which here we must revenge.

Acho. Hark in thine ear,
I Will whisper forth thy mischiefs, lest the heavens
should tear and snatch them hence from my revenge,
in greediness of wrath -- They whisper.

Enter Cherseogles, Isaac* Mesithes, Mustapha. Cher. See where they stand.


Isaac. Achomates and Cherseogles?


Cher. Both:
They are two; we sour lets run upon them;
It Is very dark, be certain in your aim,
and all strike home.

Omnes. A match.


Mesi. Isaac and I will take the nearest.


Musta. And we the other.


Cher. Strike home, and sure, and here is at them.


Stab him. Sely. I have the Crown, and I will, -- Oh, oh, oh!


stab him. Acho. Oh, o o, O villain, I am slain. uterque morit.


Cher. It is not Cherseogles we have slain.


Isa. Not Cherseogles, villain! whom then? speak.


They confer. Cher. Achomates and Selymus.


Isa. Ha!


Cher. None other.


Isa. Have thou betrayed us so?


Cher. Be silent, hear me.
There lie the Captains of both Armies dead,
breathless: and you so stupid to neglect
the use of opportunities!

Isa. What use?


Cher. Are you not rich, wealthy in powerful gold?
go whilst the Soldiers lie thus destitute
of any Leader, frankly bribe both parts,
buy their unsettled love at any rate,
and creep into their bosom; then in this
dead want and dearth of Princes, they will cleave
to Isaac, and at length salute --

Isa. Me Emperor?


Cher. You apprehend it right.


Isa. What blessed angel art thou?


Cher. It Is no time for idle complements.


Isa. Thy counsel's good.
I would not let slip this sweet occasion,
for all the precious plenty of the world.
come let us away.

Cher. First make some quick dispatch with these now rivalls.


Isa. True, they will not endure my Sovereignty.
Have no sudden wits how to remove them both?

Cher. No wile but strength; are not we two?
They are no more; we must encounter them, it is man to man:
the match no whit unequal.

Isa. I am thine:
I hate to have copartners in my state:
There shall not breath a man whose envious eye
dares look a squint on my dread Majesty.

Mesi. They that bring news first, are still most welcome.


Musta. Experience speaks it true.


Mes. Let us have. Now Selymus, we come to gratulate.


Isaac. Stay --


Cherseo. Stand.


Mes. How?


Mustaph. What means this?


Isaac. Fate to your lives.


They fight, Isaac is slain. Musta. Sweet doings!


Isaac. It Is no less Sir, witness this,
traitor I Am slain. Moritur.

Cherseog. Cross fortune, wicked chance:
but I must make the best of it. Is he dead?

Mes. Villain he is, and thy bad turn is next:
what devil did incite thee, to incite
Isaac against friends? Injurious slave.

Must. Urge him to no confession till the rack
force from his closest thought unwilling truth,
He shall be doomed for this notorious fact
unto continual pains,
hunger, oppression, want and slavery.

Mes. That struck me full. -- Have at thee:
hold thou art victor I have met the price
of treason, death; and as I hoped to rise
by blood, I fall, so have I mist my scope,
delusion is the end of lawless hope. Moritur

Cherse. Mesithes stay one moment, art thou gone?
I am not far behind I feel the blood
by slow degrees ebb from my fainting breast,
I am heart struck, and wounded even to death,
a Scene of slaughter this! -- O just heavens!
still I plighted faith to each of these,
I wished that if I failed in one, I vowed
death should thus strike me. I have gained my wish,
Then you imperial Fates that intercept
the brittle courses of frail mortality,
continue this firm justice, and enact
a constant law that all false meaning hearts
that think of oaths as of a puff of wind,
may as I do, thus sink into the grave,
my dying wish, so thrive each perjured knave.

Moritur. Enter Soldiers. Soul. 1 The night overblown, and five a clock!
I wonder at their absence; what are these?
our Generals murdered, our dear Selymus,
with his three Bassaes, and Achomates!
Whose bloody hand is guilty of this fact?

Soul. 2. A trembling shakes me, 'twas some power
that frowned at our proceedings.

Soul. 3. Bajazet is newborn to his Sovereignty.


Soul. 4. Let Us take their bodies, bear them hence in
unto their greatness, and advise the foe
of their slain General, stern Achomates:
sound peaceful rumors; we must resubmit.
to Bajazet, so heaven has thought it fit. Exeunt.

Actus 5. Scen 9.
Enter Bajazet and Haman with a book and candle. Baja. Set down the book and
candle, go and provide
the Potion to prevent my Feaver-fit,
till when I mean to study: go make have.
Exit Haman Fortune, I thank thee, you are a gracious Whore,
thy happy anger has immured a prince
within the walls of base security.
Farewell thou swelling sea of Government,
on whose bright crystal bosom floates along
the gravelled vessel of proud Majesty.
Ambition empty all thy bag of breath,
send forth thy blast among the quiet waves,
and work huge tempests to confound the Art
of the usurping Pilat Selymus.
Treason and envy like two bickering winds,
shake the unsettled fabric of his State,
that from my study windows I may laugh,
to see his broken fortune swallowed up
in the quicksands of danger, and the sail
puffed with the calm breath of a flattering chance,
by furious whirl-winds rended into rags,
and peece-meal scattered through the Ocean:
But peace my chiding spirit; come thou man
Takes the book. of rare instinct, blessed Author of a book
worthy the studies of a reading God:
thou do present before my wearied eyes,
Tiberius sweating in his policies,
dull Claudius gaged by dull flattery,
Nero unbowelling Nobility,
Galba undone by servants hardly good,
Otho o're-whelmd in love, and drencht in blood,
Vitellius sleeping in the chair of State,
Vespatian called to government by Fate:
still as my Muse does travel over their age,
a Princes care is writ in every Page.
Thus I unfold the volume of thy writ,
the chiefest solace of my moving wit,
Caedes eo fuit nobilior, quia filius He reads
Patrem interfecit. Tacit. Hist. lib. 20.
Avaunt thou damned wizard, did thy god
Apollo teach thee to divine my fall?
What has thy cursed Genius tract my steps
through the Meanders of dark privacie?
and will he dwell with me in these close shades
to vex my banished soul, banished from joy,
removed from the worlds eye? I am accursed,
and hated by the Synod of the gods,
a knot of envious deceits: the day will be
when they shall smart for this indignity.

Enter solemn Music, the Ghost of Mahomates, Zemes, Trizham, Mahomet,
Achmetes, Caigubus, Asmehemides, with each a sword and burning Tapers, led in
by Nemesis with a sword, they encompasse Bajazet in his bed. Nem. Triumph my
Plantiffes, Nemesis your Queen
is pierced quite through with your continual groans.
See, see, the prostrate body of a King,
clad in the weeds of pining discontent,
lies open to your wrath, and doleful hate:
But I conjure you not to touch his skin,
nor hurt his sacred person, those three Fates
(those frightful sisters) told me they decree
for Bajazet another destiny:
But vex his soul with your deluding blows,
and let him dream of direful anguishments,
each in the proper order of his Fate,
vent the comprest confusion of his hate

One after another strike at Bajazet with their swords, Nemesis puts by their
blows. Exeunt in a solemn dance. Neme. Awake, awake thou tortured Emperor,
look with the eye of fury on the heavens,
threaten a downfall to this mortal stage,
and let it crack with thee; thy life is run
to the last Scene, thy Tragic part is done. Exit.
Bajazet awakes in fury; arises. You meager devils, and infernal haggs,
where are you? Ha! what, vanished? am I found?
Did I not feel them tear and rack my flesh,
and scramble it amongst them? Heaven and earth,
I am deluded; what thin ayrie shapes
durst fright my soul? I Will hunt about the world,
search the remotest angles of the earth,
till I Have found out the clymate holds these fiends,
or build a bridge by Geometrick skill,
whom lineal extension shall reach forth
to the declining borders of the sky,
on which I Will lead mortality along,
and break a passage through the brazen walls,
from whence Jove triumphs over this lower world:
then having got beyond the utmost sphere,
besiege the concave of this universe,
and hunger-starve the gods till they confess
what furies did my sleeping soul oppress.
Ha! did it lighten? or what nimble flame
has crept into my blood? me thinks it steals
through my distempered joints, as if it feared
to urge me to impatience.
Hamon, accursed Hamon; stand my soul
above the power of these envenomed drugs:
Am I in hell alive? the Stygian flames
could not produce an heat so violent
as burns within my body: Oh I feel
my heart drop into cinders, I am dust;
Jove, for thine own sake Jove, confine my soul
within these walls of earth: for in the sky
when I am there, none shall be Jove but I.
Still, still I boil, and the continued flames
are aggravated: He is done, subdued
(by the base Art of a damned Emperick)
whose empty name sent terror through the world:
Is not the heaven bespangl'd all with stars,
and blazing Meteors, whose bright glimmering flames,
like ceremonial Tapers should adorn
my solemn Hearse? what, does the golden Sun
ride with it is wonted motion? are the waves
bridled within their narrow Continent?
No deluge? not an earthquake? shall a Prince,
an Emperor, a Bajazet decease
and make no breach in nature? fright the world
with no prodigious birth? Are you asleep,
you thundering Beggards that so awe the world?
I Will hasten to revenge this strong neglect
of my deceasing spirits: mount my soul,
brush off this cloddy heavy element:
So Jove I come, excorporate, divine,
immortal as thy self, I must contest
with thee, proud god, with thee to arm my mind,
only my soul ascends, earth stays behind. Moritur.

Enter the Ghosts as before, and bear him out. Actus 5. Scena 10.
Enter Solymon as newly Crowned. Soldiers, Attendants, warlike Music. Soly.
Is Selymus deceased?


Sold. He is my Lord.


Soly. Who Selymus? what Fate durst be so bold:
Oh, I could act an holy frenzy now.
Selymus deceased? What did not Atlus tremble
at such a burden? Can he support the Orb
that holds up Selymus? is not yet the Pole
cracked with his weight? do not the heavens prepare
his funeral Exequies? Jove, I invoke thee now,
command the heavens that the prone Chandler shops
command that idle Phoebus, that he exhale
matter from earth to make thy Funeral Tapers:
Or I Will make Torches of the universe
in stead of Comets; flaming Countries, Cities
shall be thy ceremonial Tapers:
Or if not this; I Will ransack Christendom,
Kings Daughters I Will embowel for a Sacrifice,
their fat with vestal fire will I refine,
and offer virgins wax unto thy shrine.
Start back bright Phoebus, let thy fiery Steeds
keep Holyday for Selymus. Tell thy host,
proud Neptune now expects another deluge,
that all the earth may weep for Selymus.
What do you smile, you heavens? are ye conscious,
and guilty of this execrable treason?
What, dare the fields to laugh to when I do mourn?
I Will dye your motly colored weeds in scarlet,
and cloth the world in black destruction.
Nemesis, I Will nayl thee to my greedy sword,
destruction shall serve under me a Prentiship.
Courage brave Selymus, with thy Princely boat
through Styx even all mortality shall float;
I Will leavy Soldiers through the Universe,
with which thou shall begirt Elizeum;
Thus barren Nature shall repent thy fall,
grieving that she did not the event fore-stall.
Death, I will hate thee: the world shall wear
thy sable livery embroydred with fear:
Thy Trophies every where the world shall gaze on:
Thy Arms in sable and in gules I Will blazon.

Soul. My Lord, this Crown entreats, you leave off these
ground-creeping meditations, and to think
of Majesty; wherefore we invest your brow
with this rich robe of glory, and do vow
to it our due allegiance: thus you shall
mount up aloft above your Fathers fall.

Soly. Thus our dear Father, those bright robes of state
for which so lately thou have sweat in blood,
thou wear'st upon my shoulders in thy stead:
thus are we crowned, and thus our labors be
made gainful unto thine, though not to thee.

Sold. Live then, and reign, most mighty Emperor,
whilst that our care and watchful providence
shall fence thy safety, and keep Sentinel
over thy sacred person; were black treasons
hatched in the Center of the darkest earth,
the massy element should be prospective
for all our piercing eyes; should Pluto send
his black Apparator to summon thee
to appear before him, by that Mahomet,
we would confront him boldly, and excuse
thy absence unto Pluto, by our presence;
death, we will disarm thee, if thou dare arrest
thy fury on our Solymon; or we will bale his person
with our imprisonment.
By our death thou shall live; our City walls*
may with warlike ruin be battered,
but our allegiance, that European Bull
shall never push from us with his golden horns;
nor shall his gilded showers quench our loves:
no golden Engineer shall undermine
the Castles of our faith, nor blow them up
with blasts of hoped preferment: were thy walls
but paper, were they made of brittle glass,
our faiths should make them marble, and as firm
as Adamant: Not walls, but subjects love,
do to a Prince the strongest Castle prove.
Behold great Prince, allegiance mixed with love
locked in our breasts: thou art the living key
to shut, and to unlock them at thy pleasure:
no golden pick-lock shall e're scrue it self
into these faithful locks, whose only springs
can be no other then our own heart strings.
Our greedy swords, which erst imbrued in blood,
did seem to blush at their own Masters acts,
and us upbraid with our most bloody facts,
though peace has now condemned to pleasing rust,
yet at thy beck we will sheath them in the breast
of daring Christians: thus in war we will fight
for thee, whilst thou do strive for victory.
Here to describe such Princely virtues, which
should more adorn thy Crown then Orient pearls,
were but to show a glass, and to commend
thy self unto thy self. Be gracious,
magnificent, courageous, or mild,
or more compendiously, be more thy self,
reign then, and Mahomet grant that thou may pass
Nestor in years, as much as now thou do
in wisdom and in valor; Herald proclaim
to the world his title, and let swift-winged Fame
second thy trumpet. Her. Long live Solymon, etc.

Solym. We thank you friendly Actors of our bliss,
our patience has at length tired out the gods;
our Empire has been rackt enough with treasons,
and black seditions, as if no Christians
were left to conquer; we weeld our Turkish blades
against our selves, embowelling the State
with bloody discord, by our strength we fall
a scorn to Christians, with our hands we shed
that blood which might have conquered Christendom;
thus while we hate our selves, we love our enemies,
and heal them with our sores, whilst we lie weltring
in bloody peace: the die of the public safety
has been already cast by the hand of war,
treasons have made a blot, which may provoke
the enemy to enter, and bear our men
to dark Avernus. Envy might have blushed,
though always pale, at all our projects: now
this bloody deluge is quite past, return
sweet peace with th'Olive branch, enough of wars,
it is thou must pour oil into our scarrs.
Fly hence Hereditary hate, discords dead,
let not succeeding enmities and hatred live,
let none presume to cover private sores
with public ruins, nor let black discord
make an Anatomy of our too lean
Empire, let it wax fat again; when peace
has knit herknots, then shall the wanton sounds
of bells give place to thundering Bombardes,
and blood wash out the smoothing oil of peace;
every Soldier I Will ordain a Priest
to ring a fatal knell to Christians,
and every minute unto earths wide womb
shall sacrifice a Christians Hecatomb:
Then shall we make a league with Aeolus,
the winds shall strive to further our proceedings,
then will we load the seas, and fetter Neptune
with chains that hold our Anchors; he shall quake,
lest he to Pan resign his watery Empire,
and three fork'd-mace unto my awful Scepter;
The Whales and Dolphins shall amazed stand,
that they shall yield their place to Bears and Lions,
Sylla shall howl for fear, when she shall see
the Sea become a Forest, and her self
mountainy; then let Sirens quake
for fear of Satyrs, then let the Christians think,
not that our Navy, but the Country it self
is come to move them from the growing earth;
Comets, fiery swords shall be my Heralds,
threatening to the world sudden combustion:
Let our arms be steely bows, our arrows
thunderbolts, and in stead of warlike Drumms,
thunder shall proclaim black destruction;
Vulcan I Will tax thee, exercise thy Forge,
prepare to me for all the world a scourge,
the Fates to me their powers shall resign,
which with this hand will rend the strongest twine
of humane breath. First for the Isle of Rhodes,
destruction there shall keep his mournful Stage:
The Inhabitants shall act a bloody Tragedy,
and personate themselves; Then for Nayos I Will,
death there shall keep her Court: then I will make
Vienna all a Shambles: yea gaping Famine
ever devouring, always wanting food,
shall gnaw their bowels, and shall leave them nothing,
besides themselves to feed on; their dead corpse
shall be entombed in their neighbors bellies.
There, every one shall be a living Sepulcher,
an unhallowed Churchyard; famine shall feed it self.
Then shall they envy beasts, and wish to be
our Jades, our Mules; Matrons shall strive to bring
into the hateful light abortive Brats;
the Infants shall return, and the lean womb
shall be unto the babes a sudden tomb.
Then shall they hoard up carcasses, and strive
only to be rich in Funerals; I Would rejoice
to see them stand like Screech-Owles, gaping when
their Parents should expire, and bequeath
to hell their wretched souls, to them their death.

All. Long live great Solymon our noble Emperor.


Soly. All this, and more then this I Will do, when peace
has glutted our new greedy appetites,
when it has filled the veins of the Empire full
with vigor; then, lest too much blood should cause
Armies of vices, not of men to kill us,
and strength breed weakness in our too great Empire,
then, then, and only then we shall think good,
with war to let the body politic blood.
Mean time we will think on our Fathers Funeral:
Oh, I could be an holy Epicure,
in tears, and pleasing sighs, Oh I could now
refresh my self with sorrow, I could embalm
thy corpse with holy groans from putrefaction:
Oh, I could powder up thy thirsty corpse
with brinish tears, and wipe them off with kisses:
and that I might more freely speak my grief,
these eyes should be still silent Orators,
till blindness shuts them up, were I a woman:
But I am Solymon, Emperor, the Turk,
blood shall be my tears, I Will think thee slain
amongst the Christians, and translate my grief
to fury; every member of my body
shall execute the office of a weeping son.
Thus in my tears an Argus will I be,
my head, heart, hands, and all shall weep for thee.
Oh that the cruel Fates were half so mild
as to drive streams of tears from forth the springs,
great sorrows have no leisure to complain;
Least ills vent forth; great griefs within remain:
See Selymus, sometimes a four-string'd instrument
feeding his Soldiers with sweet Harmony,
does now tune naught to us but Lacrymae.
Could n' Aeschulapius be found to tune
his disagreeing elements? treasons cracked
the string; which else an headache would untune.
Every disease is a ragged fort
to wear these strings asunder; treason did lend
death, which both age, and sickness did intend;
What then remains, but that his Funeral rites
with our Grand fathers, Uncles be solemnized,
that so black discord may be with them buried?
But noble Selymus, what Tomb shall I prepare
for thy memorial? shall a heavy stone
press thy innocent ashes? Shall I confine
thy wandering ghost in some high marble prison?
Or shall I hither fetch the flying Tomb
of proud Mausolus the rich Carian King?
No; Religion shall cloak no such injury;
no hired Rhethorick shall adorn thy coarse,
no prattling stone shall trumpet forth thy praise;
the world's thy tomb, thy Epitaph I Will carve
in Funerals; destruction is the book
in which we will write thy annalls, blood's the Ink,
our sword the Pen. A Tragedy I intend,
Which with a Plangity, no Plaudity shall end*

FINIS.
THE COURAGEOUS TURK, OR, AMURATH THE FIRST.

A Tragedy, Written by THOMAS GOFF Master of Arts, and student of
Christ-Church in OXFORD, and Acted by the Studens of the same house.

The second Edition

LONDON, Printed for G. BEDELL and T. COLLINS, at the middle Temple Gate
Fleet Street. 1656.

TO THE No less honored, then deserving, Sir WALTER TICHBORNE, Knight.
SIR,
THis with another Tragedy, entitled, The raging Turk, the issue of one man's
brain; are now come forth together from the Press, nearer allied, even as
Twins in this their second birth; They are full of Glory, Strength, and indeed
full of what not, that beautifies? The more apt to be soyled, opposed, and
disgraced; the rather, because the Auther has made his Exit hence. The intent,
and use of Dedication (as I have observed) is to no other end, then that
ignorance and spite, (sworn Enemies to ingenuity) should know upon their dull
or envious dislikes, whether to repair and recieve reformation. The
Fatherless fellow-Orphan to this work rests safe under the protection of
your most noble Brother, my much honored Friend, Sir Richard Tichborne, Knight
and Baronet; Now for these reasons, and that I might not make them strangers by
remote fosterings, but especially standing to you (most worthy SIR) equally
engaged, I this to you Present and Dedicate: Together tendering the Love and
unfeigned acknowledgements, of

Your most embounden Servant, RICHARD MEIGHEN.

TO THE AUTHOR, In that, Transcribing his Book, without his knowledge, I was
bound by promise to stand to his pleasure to keep it or burn it.
I Will not praise this Work, 'twere lost,
Rich Pearls best praise themselves; nor will I boast
To be possessed of more than India's wealth,
That were the way to lose't, since I my self
Distrust my self in keeping it, and stand
In fear of robbing by some envious hand:
Robbed of it, said I? Alas, that fate were just,
Since I am found first thief to you, who durst
Unbidden thus, ransacke your precious store;
This magazine of wit, so choice; nay more,
Steal from the chariot of the glorious Sun,
This heavenly fire. What shall I say, it is done;
I do confess the enditement, pity then
Must be my surest Advocate amongst men.
None can abate the rigor of the Law,
But the Lawgiver; but me thoughts I saw,
(Or hoped I saw) some watery beams of Mercy
Break, glimpsing forth of your imperious eye.
O let me beg reprive, your pardon may
By due observance come another day.
Here lo, I tender't back to bide the doom,
By promise bound to him, to him with whom
I would not break for all rich Tagus sands;
Now he the Prisoner at your mercy stands.
-- Ergo ibit in ignes
Hoc opus aeternum ruet, and tot bella, tot Enses
In Cineres dabit hora nocens. --
THE PROLOGUE.
Were not our present subject mixed with fear,
'Twould much affright us to see all you here.
One would suffice us, or no Auditor.
Each to himself an ample Theater,
Let rude Plebeians think so, but we know
All judgments here from the same Spring do flow;
All here have but one censure, all one breast,
All sons of the same Mother; but the rest
We preoccupate their Censure, and foretell,
What after may be said not to be well.
As in most decent Garments you may see.
Some gracious Ornaments inweaved be;
Which serve for little use; but on some day
Destined to please himself, the wearer may
Without a blush put on, when his best friends
Intend to visit him. So our hope intends
The sacred Muses Progeny to greet,
Which under our Roof, now the third time meet.
We will not open the book to you, and show
A story word by word, as it does go;
But give invention leave to undertake,
Of it is own strains, some benefit to make:
For though a Tragic Pen may be confined
W thin a studies private Walls, the mind
Must be unbounded, and with inventions steel,
Strike fire from the alient Flints --
So free we are from setting any price
On these our studied Vanities, that advice
Almost disdained the whispers of those tongues
Which, private first, though vented, public wrongs
To the Patient, Patient often. We'il here begin
To be a little peremptory. Oh that sin
Of wilful indiscretion; it is no bays
To make us Garlands of our own mouths praise.
Which who affect, may they so Laurel lack,
That slanders Thunders may behind their back
Blast them with Calumny; for we vow, they dear
Pay for their pains, that give attention here.
And since it is suffered with kind indulgence,
We hope that Kingly Parent's our defense;
Who would not have his dandling love be known,
But unto those had offspring of their own.
And (for we are assured that here be
No brains so cursed with black sterilitie,
But of some nature they can freely call
Births more mature, and Caelestiall;
Their studies issue) they, like kindest Mothers,
With tender hands will swath the limbs of others.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Suppo'd Victory by AMURETH
Obtained in Greece, where many captives taken,
One among the rest, IRENE, conquers him,
For, taken with her love, he sounds retreat
Eternally from War: but after, moved
With murmur of his Nobles, in her bed,
Before his Councils face, strikes off her head.
Then ruminating former bloody broils,
He straight o'recomes all Christian Provinces,
Invades the Confines of his Son in Law,
Fires Caramania, and makes Aladin
With His Wife and Children suppliant for their lives:
At length appointed his great'st Field to fight
Upon Cassanae's Plains; where having got
A wondrous Conquest against the Christians,
Comes the next morn to overview the dead;
Amongst whom a Christian Captain, Cobelitz,
Lying wounded there, at sight of Amurath,
Rising and staggering toward him, desperately
With a short dagger wounds him to the heart,
And then immediately the Christian dies.
The Turk expiring, Bajazet his Heir
Strangles his younger brother: Thus still springs
The Tragic sport which Fortune makes with Kings.
THE ACTORS.
Amurath. Lala Schahin. -- Tutor to Amurath. two Turkish Captains. Eurenoses,
Chase Illibegge.
Cobelitz a Christian Captain. Lazarus the Despot or Governor of Servia.
Sasmenos Governor of Bulgaria. Aladin Son in Law to Amurath: and King of
Caramania. Two Lords with Aladin. Two Ambassadors. Bajazet, Eldest Son to
Amurath. Jacyl, Youngest Son to Amurath. Carradin Bassa A Governor under the
Turk. For the Mask. Jupiter Juno Mars Ve^us Hector Achil Apollo Pallas
Alexander Philoxenus Neptune Cupid
Women Actors. Eumorphe, Concubine to Amurath. Menthe, An attendant on
Eumorphe. Hatun, Daughter to the Lord of Phrygia, married to Bajazet. Aldines
Wife, Two little Boys with her.
Mutes. Men Christians taken, given to Amurath for Janissaries. Six Christian
Maidens presented to Hatun supposed to be Kings Daughters.

THE COURAGEOUS TURK, OR, AMURATH THE FIRST.
Actus 1.
Scena 1.
Enter as from War, Lala-Schahin at one door, with warlike Music,
Soldiers, a March. Enter to him at the other door, Amurath in State, with
Eumorphe his Concubine, attendants, Lords and Ladies. AMURATH. BE dumb those
now harsh notes, our softer cares
shall never be acquainted with such sounds.
Peace (our grand Captain) see here Amurath,
that would have once confronted Mars himself,
(Acknowledged for a better Deity)
Puts off ambitious burdens; and does hate
through bloody Rivers to make passages,
whereby his Soul might flote to Acheron.
Wrinckle your brows no more (stern fates) for we
scorn to be made the servile Ministers
to cut those threads, at which your selves have trembled,
esteeming us the fiercer Destiny.
Yet must great Amurath thank those sacred powers,
they have enricht our souls with such a price,
as had those Heroes, whose revengefull Arms
served Mars a ten years Prentiship at Troy,
ere dreamed succeeding times should be possessed
with such an unparalleled, unprized beauty as my Saint,
they would not have prevented so their bliss,
but been most humble Suitors to the Gods
to have protracted their then fond spent life
but to behold this object; which out-shines
their Helena, as much as does the eye
of all the World dazzle the lesser fires.
Jove, I Will outbrave thee; melt thy self in Lust,
embrace at once all starre-made Concubines,
I Will not envy thee, know I have to spare
beauty enough, to make another Venus;
And for fond Gods, that have no reward in store
to make me happier, here I Will place my Heaven.
And for thy sake, this shall my Motto be,
I conquered Greece, one Grecian conquered me.

Eum. But (gracious Lord) those streams (we see) soon ebb,
which with outrageous swelling flow too fast;
forbid (Lucina) this soon kindled fire,
should ere burn out it self. It Is a true Theme,
That nere lasts long, that seems most extreme.

Amur. Can this rich price of nature, precious jem,
give entertainment to suspecting guests?
Come, come, these arms are curious chains of love,
with which thou link'st my heart aeternally,
thy cheeks the royal Paper interlined,
with Natures Rhetorique, and loves persuasion
stands there attracting still my gazing eye:
This then I Will read, and here I now will feign,
that those all antique fables of the Gods
are writ in flowing numbers; first thy lip,
was fair Europaes, which they say, made Jove
turn a wild Heyfer: next, this sparkling eye
was the Aemonian Io's: then, this hand
Laedaes, fair Mother to those Star-made Twins;
Thus, thus I Will Comment on this golden Book:
Nature nor Art, have taught me how to feign;
Fairest, 'twas you first brought me to this vain:
In loving Combats, now I valiant prove,
let othets war, great Amurath shall love.

Scha. Brave resolution! O the fond thoughts of man!
awake Euno! I Will find stratagems:
There shall be Physic, to purge this disease:
light sores are gently used; but such a part
must be cut off, left it infect the heart.

Amar. Schahin, Our Tutor, we command this night
be solemnized with all delightful sports
thy learned invention best can think upon.
Prepare a Mask, which lively represents,
how once the Gods did love: that shall not teach
us by examples; but we'll smile to think,
how poor and weak their idle faining was
to our affection. Schahin, be free in wit,
and sudden: now come my Kingdoms Bride:
Hymen would wed himself to such a Bride.

Exeunt all but Schahin. Actus 1. Scena 2.
Schah. Nature, and all those universal powers,
which showed such admirable Godlike skill,
in framing this true model of our selves,
this Man, this thing called man, why do you thus,
make him a spectacle of such laughter for you,
when in each man we see a Monarchy?
For, as in states, all fortunes still attend:
So with a Kingdom, with a complete state
will governed, and well managed in him self:
both each man bears, when that best part of man,
(Reason) does sway and rule each Passion.
Affections are good Servants: but if Will
makes them once Master, they will prove Tyrants still.
No more King now, poor Subject AMURATH;
whom I have seen, break through a Troop of Men,
like lightning from a Cloud: and done those Acts,
which 'ene the Furies would have trembled at:
Treading down Armies, as if by them he meant
of dead men's backs to build up stairs to Heaven:
And now ly'th lurking in a woman's arms,
drencht in the Lethe of Ignoble lust,
appoints me for the wanton Engineer
to keep his so loose thoughts in smoothing tune.
Woman, enticing woman, golden hook
to catch our thoughts, and when we once are caught
to drag's into the public view of shame;
And there we lie bathed in incestuous pleasure
for all good men to laugh and scorn at once.
Bane to my senses! I could either wish
our birth were like those Creatures, which we say
Are bred from putrid and corrupted matter;
Then that we should acknowledge our dear being
with grass and flowers: for what else is our state
up to the top? But then the weight shall fall
upon their head that caused it. Work (my brain)
tush, blood, no^ water must wash off this stain.

Exit. Scena 3. Actus 1.
Enter Amurath in state with Nobles: Eumorphe with attendant Ladies: while
Amurath ascends his Throne, and places Eumorphe by him. Am. Shine here (my
beauty) and expel the night
more than a thousand stars that grace the Heavens:
Me thinks, I see the Gods inventing shapes
in which they mean to court thee. Jove he frowns,
and is more jealous, more suspicious
of thee, then all the painted Truls, whose eyes
bedeck the all ennamel'd Firmament.

Eum. Beauty (my Lord) it is the worst part of woman,
a weak poor thing, assaulted every hour
by creeping minutes of defacing time;
A superficies which each breath of care
blasts off: and every humerous stream of grief,
which flows from forth these Fountains of our eyes,
washes away, as rain does Winters snow.
But those blessed guiders of all Nuptial rites,
have wrought a better cement to make fast,
the hearts of Lovers; the true name of Wife
guilds over our thrones, with a more constant shape
than can be subject or to time, or care:
And in our selves; yea in our own true breasts
we have obedience, duty, careful Love;
And last and best of all, we may have Children,
Children are Hymen's pledges, these shall be
perpetual chains, to link my Lord and me.

Amur. Art thou a Woman? Goddess, we adore,
and Idolize what we but loved before.
What Devils have men been, whose furious brains
have often abused that Deity called Woman:
dipping their Ravens quil in Stygian Ink,
to blast such heavenly paper as your faces!
Were all the enticing lusts, damned policies,
prodigious fascinations, unsearcht thoughts,
dissembled tears, broke vows, loathed appetites,
luxurious and unsatiate desires;
Were all these of women equally weighed,
that virtue in thy breast 'twill out-balance all,
and recompense the ruin of all thy Sex.

Enter a Servant and speaks. Serve. So please your Majesty, L. Schahin's ready
for entrance with his Masque.

Am. Tell him, we are wholly bent for expectation.
Exit Serve. Sit, sit (my Queen) Music exceed your Spheres,
think I am Jove, and Godlike please our ears.

Scena 4. Actus 1.
A Masque. Enter from aloft two Torch-bearers, then Jupiter and Juno, and two
Torch-bearers more, then Mars and Venus, and two Torch-bearers more, then
Apollo and Pallas* and two more Torch-bearers, then Neptune and Diana. Whilst
they are descending, Cupid hanging in the Air, sings to soft Music this Song
following. Cupid sings. Gaze you mortals, gaze you still,
On the Gods now look your fill.
Jove and Juno are descending,
Yet her Jealousie's not ending,
Mars, stern Mars, he will not fight,
But with Venus when it is Night.
Daphne crowns Apollos head,
Whom she would embrace in Bed;
Neptune swells his frothy cheek,
Cause Diana is not meek.
Gaze you mortals, etc.

Jup. Come now my (Sister and Wife) we will begin
to court afresh! Nay, loure not (Heavens Queen)
here on this green we'll a Lavalto dance;
What if our hairs grow silver, yet our strength
Is young, and vigorous. Say (fellow Gods)
(Since we are full of Nectar, and our cares
Lie drencht in our Nepenthe) take your Queens, and be
All joviall; Mars for our Daughter Venus,
Apollo join with Pallas, Brother of Floods
embrace Diana; Gods sometimes merry be;
but in the night, when mortals may not see.

Each God as appointed by Jove, takes his Goddess, they dance a Masque dance,
and in the dance Juno observes Joves glances to Eumorphe, and at the end of the
dance, speaks thus. Jup. How now (wanton?) Can I no where go,
for recreation, but you follow me?

Jun. Is this your recreation? Fie! My Lord,
will you be wanton still! For here you came
Points at Eumorphe. For some new Harlot, some new Queen for you.

Jup. Juno, Wife.

Juno. Your Sister, (thunderer,) and not your Wife!
Banished from Heaven I am; and your Bed:
resign them both to Strumpets, Concubines.
Points at Eumorphe. And now you come to see a fresh new less,
in which Pole now, or in what part of heaven
shall she be stellified?

Jupit. Shall still sinister thoughts wrong our intent?
well (Juno) well, you will ever be a woman,
a very, very woman! But since she scolds,
Let Us hence (ye Gods) lest her infectious breath
blast the succeeding day; and mortals curse
her hel-bred jealousy: Calumnious woman,
Come, scold in heaven; For if Gods lived on Earth,
suspicious tongues would blame most innocent mirth.

Here all the Gods and Goddesses ascend; at the top of the ascent, Juno stops
and speaks. Jun. Well, Jove looked pale, I touched him to the quick;
it is some new Minion he came down to see:
Hark (jealousy) know Juno is a woman!
Am I not mad yet? Mistress Bride, adieu,
Jove shall not steal a kiss; My curse is past,
when thou sleep'st first a Bride, may sleep thy last.

Exit. Cupid. Fair Bride, I sang thy Epithalamy,
and left Elysium for thy Nuptials:
Juno here thundered 'against the Thunderer;
knowing how thy beauty dazles hers,
she durst not let heavens King once glance a look,
but threatened with her helbred incantations,
to metamorphise thine unparall'ell'd
and most caelestial shape into worse forms;
And more prodigious than ever poisoned charms
wrought on the fabled Concubines of Jove:
but know great Queen, my Mother Venus vows
her everlasting guard to save such beauty;
Lest if thou perish, Nature her self
lose her only parterne of serenity.
But I must have, Love, which the Gods protect,
can never be endangered by neglect.

Ascend't. Amur. Schahin, thine Art is excellent but say,
do Gods fall out for love amongst themselves?

Scah. My Lord, these are but fables: yet to make
the show more pertinent, and to grace your Queen,
conceit took leave to put the frown on Juno.

Eum. My Lords and friends, we shall be ever thankful
and rest a Debtor to your courtesy.

Schah. Not so, fair Queen, but durst I now entreat
the Kings detaining from the sweets of Bed,
there yet remains one thought upon conceit,
which you would doubly grace me to behold.

Amur. Our worthy Tutor shall obtain a night,
a night of us, in any case we can!

Scah. But then let me inform your Majesty,
that it is a warriors show, which once you loved,
but now are free from.

Amur. it is best of all, with greediness we will see it,
O how the soul does gratulate it self
when safely it beholds the dangerous state
of others, and it self security free!
Glad are we still to stand upon the shore,
and see afar off others tossed in the Sea:
or in a Gallery at a Fencers stage,
we laugh when mutually each one takes wounds;
Sit still (Eumorphe:) Schahin, thy show in have;
It Is best delight, to think on troubles past.

Scena 5. Actus 1.
Enter in Masque the Ghost of Hector and Achilles, to them Alexander the great
stands gazing on t em, whilst Fame speaks from aloft. Fame. Stay you most
worthy shades* brave Hector, stay;
And proud Achilles, know your massy Tombs,
which have so long orewhelm'd your valiant bones,
yawnes wide to let the imprisoned coarses forth.
I must afresh imbalme your sacred Trunkes,
and sweet your memory with most happy oil
of just report; the Gods awakt me Fame
from out the oblivious Sepulcher of sleep,
to drop that Ink into old Homers pen,
wherewith he curiously has lined your names,
enfolding them in Everlasting Cedar,
and make them live to all posterity.
Virtue to valor has his gift assigned,
great men may dye, yet deeds still rest in mind.

Exeunt umbrae Hectoris and Achilis, Manet Alexander looking after them,
reading in Homer. Alexand. (...)
most fortunate young man, whose worth is crowned
with everlasting Trophies of renown,
how has he set thee on the wings of fame
which soar in the middle region of high glory,
proposed to all, a never dying story!

Enter to Alexander, Philoxenus a Captain. Phil. May it please thee (Son of
Jupiter) to accept
a Present, which our fight enricht us with?

Alex. Is it a Band of stubborn Soldiers, Captain?

Philox. O no (my Liege) of exquisite formed Ladies,
Darius his wife, the wonder of her Sex;
Besides a Troop of such shaped Ganimedes,
that Love not equals.

Alex. Philoxenus, We thank thee. Yet hark,
there is a secret we would know of thee,
and you must tell Us: on your faith you must.

Phil. My Liege --

Alex. Nay, no Court oil (by your leave) no flattery,
we are but man, this very trunk of ours,
Is but a Vessel filled with humane blood,
and we trust not that Parasite like pen,
(...).
All the destroying vices of frail man,
I may be subject to; but what base looseness,
or supple Luxury, did thou ere observe
so to benumne our sense, that thou should think
we could be pleased with such effeminate Presents?
Know sir, our eyes shall have that abstinence
that will not look on them, on boys, or women.
Hence then, and present some coward with them.
Exit Philoxenus Give me a spectacle would please the Gods,
and make them bend their Ivorie brows to the Earth;
a man, a Soldier, strong with his wounds;
amongst fate and ruin, upright and unshap't,
his mind being all his guard, his wall, and armor*
and if he fall, still noble wrath remains
in his amassed Trunk: not all the darts
stuck in his sides, making him all one wound,
affright his courage; but wrath lending weapons,
himself does seem a new and horrid War.
Nor are those Milke-sops which beguile the time,
with stealing minutes from their Ladies lips,
such as the Gods do love; for as the Wind
loses it is force, if it be not opposed
with woods of strong and stubborn planted trees;
So Virtue, if it walk in trodden paths.
That breaks up honors gap, and makes the way
through paths of death: that flame burns strong
which is resisted: valor shines in wrong:
Of Alexanders Soldiers be this said,
war was as peace, when he the army led.

Exit. Fame. Brave Macedon, how truly have thou weighed
the reason of man's birth! who is equal borne,
for all the world, as well as for himself.
the world's a field too narrow for thy worth,
and allthough Nature has her enacted bounds
for Sea and earth, nay for the heavens themselves,
nor Sea nor earth shall coope thy valor up:
Valor of Nature ever this attaines,
that it breaks forth, far, and beyond her chains,
and this I Will trumpet out; The whole worlds Ball,
in which thou art so great, to thee is small.
When men want worlds to show their virtue in,
that is the crime o'th Gods, and not their sin:
It Is a decree of a true Soldiers mind,
to think naught done, when ought is lest behind.
On (valiant youth) for, know I will appoint
a Grecian Prince, who so shall steep his quill
to paint thy name in Wels of eloquence,
that this thy scorn of Lust shall be proposed
for Kings example to posterity.
Know mortals, that the men the Gods most love,
in hard and dangerous Arts they always prove
When men live brave at first, then fall to crimes,
their bad is Chronicle to future times:
For, who begins good Arts, and not proceeds
he but goes backward in all noble deeds.
Death consecrates those men whose awful end,
though most men fear, yet all men must commend.

ascends. Amurath seems troubled, yet collecting himself, dissembles his
Passion, speaks. Am. Scahin, the Macedon's heholding to thee,
and history shall pay you thanks for this,
which we rest Debtors for.

Scah. Great Prince, such kindness of acceptance pays
For things which are but for a Kings delight:
in seeing them, he amply does requite.

Am. Eumorphe, Love, Queen, Wife, le'ts have to Bed,
and may we wish this night eternal time.
Scahin, good night: good night, kind gentelmen.
Thus when we are dead shall we revive of the stage:
one hour can present a kings whole age.

Exeunt omnes. Actus 2.
Scena 1.
Enter Schahin, Eurenoses. Schah. Observed you not the Kings looks? Grew they
not pale?

Euren. O yes (Lord Schahin) you must be his Parent,
and snatch him out of the Gulf he is falling in.
That feigned speech of Alexanders wrought
like to most purging Physic; nights then black,
when it is compared with day: Boldness is clear,
when it is presented before bastard fear.

Schah. I Will tell thee, Eurenoses, thou art a Soldier,
and I am both a Soldier, and a Scholar;
And for these two Professions am both most glorious,
and most meritorious; Pallas is for both:
O what Tysiphon, what snaked scourge
can make a Scholar, that should never sleep,
but 'twixt the Pillowes of Pernaessus Hills,
and dip his lips in springs of Helicon,
make him by snoaring on a wanton breast,
and suck the adulterate and spiced breath
of a lewd famed woman?

Euren. And for a Soldier (Schahin,) let me speak:
We that do know, the use of swords and fire,
we that do know, halters can throatle us,
shall we ere venture on a Woman's cruelty?
We that endure no Lords, shall we endure
a woman to overcome us? Most true Demophoon,
I reverence thy memory: no pewling phrase
could so enchaine thee to thy Thracian Dame,
but thou would rather perish than she save thee.
I Will not declaime long on that common theme,
but they have lust lie in their fingers ends,
and whilst their sweet-hearts breath sticks in their sheets,
they will admit another Lucrece in the day,
to be a Thais, if the night will not gainsay.

Scah. Why (Eurenoses) why should we endure
a new Queen now? this Kingdom wants not heirs:
we know (should we have more) 'twere dangerous.
But hark! The Queens for Bed-inticing sleep
soft Music. with charms of Music: well, even such a Night
may yet prove dismal ere the following Light!

Eurenos. Scahin, let us in:
the first degree to purge such ils as these,
is to instruct the patient his disease:
that you have done.

Scah. Yea, and will yet once more
adventure a new stratagem. Just when the King
h'as rid his Chamber, and with covetous have
thinks for to clip Elisium, and drink deep
of his long wished delight, I having skill
and uncontrolled access, will in disguise
seem his deceased Fathers apparition:
and by all ties of children to their Parents,
bid him forsake that vile bewitching woman.

Euren. An easy Medicine does and sure will work,
to rub shrewd wounds, make them but fester more,
Foul Medicines we worse brook, than a foul sore.

Scena 2. Actus 2.
Enter Eumorphe as to Bed in her Night-robes, attended with Tapers and Ladies.
Menth. Madam make have, The King will be impatient
if he be from you long. O Happiness!

Emorph. Why Menthe! then thou deem'st us happy
thus to command a world of services,
to have a King my subject; and attended
with these harmonious sounds t'affect our ears?

Menthe. Yes (truly Madam) it is a happiness.

Eumorph. It Is, were 't Eternal: but I fear a power,
a woman's power, does but make sport with us.
Why, were we not once (Menthe) a Captive Wretch?

Menthe Yes Lady! now your happinesse's the more:
Riches please best, when there went want before.

Eum. That power which raised us from so base, so high,
can throw us down again as suddenly:
Me thinks my life is but a Players Scaene
in the last Act: my part was then to play
a captive creature, and a Queen to day.

Menthe. Your Morals (Madam) are too serious;
Me thinks these Ornaments should elevate
your dumpish spirits. Think this Bed a place,
in which no Icie slipping chance has power;
A Kings safe Bed is like a guarded Tower.

Eum. No (Menthe) no, it is not the Bed of state,
nor the free smile of a well pleased King:
it is not the embracing Arms of Emperors,
nor all the Gemmes that so inwreath the brows
can so allure Fortune unto their gaze,
as she should still be constant; O she is blind,
nor does she know her self where she is kind;
Those, those are Kings, and Queens, whose brest's secure,
like brazen walls, Lust's entrance not endure;
Where impotent ambition not intrudes,
nor the unstable talk of multitudes;
Fortune serves such, they happiness command
more than all Lybia's gold, all Tagus sand;
as heaven has given us no more conspicuous things,
than form or beaury: so like a forward spring,
Nothing more short.

Menthe. Madam, divine not of a change; Belief
is too too prone, in entertaining grief!

Eum. Our Lord attends, to enter in,
and surely sleep envyeth his delight,
for he sits heavy on my drowsy lids,
draw all our Curtains; sleep be guiles our ears.

Men. Madam, good night, time helps suspicious fears!

Exit Menthe. This Song is to be sung in the Music room to soft Music, now
when she looks, she is dreaming sent to Elisium. Drop golden showers, gentle
sleep,
And all the Angels of the Night,
Which do us in protection keep,
Make this Queen dream of delight
Morpheus be kind a little, and be
Deaths now true Image, for 't will prove
To this poor Queen, that then thou art he;
Her grave is made in the Bed of love.
Thus with sweet sweets can Heaven mix gall,
And marriage turn to Funeral.
Scaena 3. Actus. 2.
Enter Amurath in his Night robes, a Taper in his hand, seems much disturbed,
speaks. Amur. Turk, Amurath, slave, nay something baser,
King! For all airy titles which the Gods
have blasted man withal, to make them swell
with puffed up honor, and ambitious wind,
this name of King holds greatest antipathy
with manly government: for if we weigh,
It Is subjects, and not Kings bear all the sway.
Each whispered murmur from their idle breath
condemns a King to infamy, to death;
Were there a Metempseucosis of souls,
and nature should a free Election grant
what things they afterward would reinforme,
the vain and haughtiest minds the Sun ere saw,
Would choose it is Cottage in some Shepherds flesh,
nay, be confined within some Dog or Cat,
than (Antique-like) pranck in a Kings gay-clothes*
Were I no King, and had no Majesty,
I had more then all Kings, blessed liberty;
And without rumor might enjoy my choice,
not fearing Censure of each popular voice.
Poor men may love, and none their wills correct:
but all turn Satyrs of a Kings affect.
O my base greatness! What disasterous star
professed it self a Midwife at my birth,
to shape me into such prodigious States?
But hence regard of tongues! Were we a Saint,
some envious tongue would dare our names to taint:
and he from slander is at securest rest,
not that has none, but that regards it least.
Open you envious Curtains; here is a sight,
Draws the Curtain. that might commend the act of Love so Chaste.
Were now the chariot-guider of the Sun
weary o's task, and would entreat a day
of Heaven to rest in, here is a radiant Look,
that might be fixed in the midst oth' Axletree;
and in despite of dark conspiring Clouds,
she would outshine Sun, Moon and all the Stars.
O, I could court thee now (my sweet) a fresh,
mixing a kiss with every period;
Telling the Lillies how they are but wanne,
earth in the vernant spring is dull, and dark,
compared with this aspect! the Aeasterne air,
fanned with the wings of Mercury and Jove,
infectious, but compared with this perfume.
Hence then the ambition of that furious * youth, Alexis
who knew not what a crime his rashness was!
I might overcome more Kingdoms, have more dominion,
enthrone my self an Emperor oth' world;
I might, I might; Amurath thou might.
The Christians now will scoff at Mahomet;
Perchance they sent this wretch thus to inchant me!
O my perplexed thoughts! Tush, I Will to bed,
should the commanding Thunder of the Gods
prohibit me, or strike me in the act.
Talk on (vain rumor) fame I dare thy worst!
Call me a Lusty, Lazy, wanton, coward!
should I win all the world, my breath once fled,
my bad would still survive all good be dead.
Eumorphe, sweet, I come! you sacred powers
who have bestowed some happenssse on man,
to help to pass away this sinful life,
Grant me a youthful vigor yet a while,
full veins, free strength, complete and manly sense,
to know, and take a beauty most immense!

Scena 4. Actus 2.
Amurath makes haste to the Bed, on a sudden enter Schahin disguised like the
Ghost of Orchanes, father to Amurath. Scabin. Amurath, Amurath.

Amurath. Devil, Devil; what?
Dare thou appear before an Angel (Fiend?)

Scah. O Amurath, why does intemperate Lust,
raging within thy furious youthful veins,
burst through thy fathers Tomb? Disturb his soul?
Know, all the torments that the fabulous age
dreamed, did afflict deceased impious Ghosts,
heartbiting-hunger, and soule-searching thirst,
the never consumed, yet ever eaten prey
that the devouring Vulture feeds upon,
are not such tortures as our offsprings crimes:
They, they sit heavy on us, and no date
Makes our compassionate affection cease.
O thou hereditary Ulcer, hark,
by the name of Father, and by all those cares
which brought me to my grave, to make thee great:
Thou that have nothing of me but my crown:
My enterprise surpast the boundless Sea,
cutting the churlish Waves of Hellespont,
when the flood stood which wind for to obey!
Euxinum groaned beneath my burdenous ships:
I was the first of all the Turkish Kings
that Europe knew, and the fond Christians plague.
What coward blood ran flowing in my veins,
when thou were first begot, who marrest all
thy Fathers acts by thy untamed desires?
Wherefore with Stygian curses I will lade thee:
First, may she prove a Strumpet to thy Bed,
be her lips poison, and let her loose embraces*
be venomous as Scorpions: If she conceive
a Generation from thee, let it be;
as ominous as thou have been to me;
Rebellious to thy Praecepts, printing cares
upon thy aged brows. O may they prove,
as Faries for to lash thee in thy rest!
But Amurath, if thou can quench this flame,
if thou will cut this Gordian thread, and rend hence
that putrid Wenne which cleaves unto they flesh,
be all thine actions prosperous. Mahomet
shall be auspitious unto each design;
Fortune to show thee favor shall be proud,
Farewell. If what men do speak last before
they die take root, then dead men's should take more.

Exit Schahin. Amur. What, art thou vanished? Know (thou careful spright)
thou shall no sooner pierce the wandering clouds
with unperceived flight, than my resolve
shall expiate my former Vanity.
Look on thy son, thou airy intellect,
and see him sacrifice to thy command!
Now Titan turn thy breathing coursers back,
start hence bright day, a sable Cloud invade
this universal Globe, break every prop
and every hindge that does sustain the Heavens:
For straight must die a woman, I have named
a crime, that may accuse all Nature guilty.
The Sex wisely considered, deserves a death;
For think this, Amurath, this woman may
prostrate her delicate and Ivory limbs
to some base Page, or Scul, or shrunk up Dwarf,
Or let some Groom lie feeding on her lips,
she may devise some misshapen trick
to satiate her goatish Amurath;
and from her bended knees at Meditation,
be taken by some slave toth' deep of Hell!
Thou Art a brave Creature, were thou not a woman.
Tutor! Come! thou shall see my well-kept vow,
and know my hate, which saw me dote but now:
Schahin! Eurenoses! Captains, ho!

Scaenae. 5. Actus. 2.
Enter Schahin, Eurenoses, Chase-Illibegge. Our Tutor, Eurenoses, Captains,
welcome.
Gallants, I call you to a spectacle:
My brest's too narrow to hoard up my joy*
Nay, gaze here Gentlemen! give Nature thanks,
for framing such an excellent sense as Sight,
whereby such objects are enjoined as this*
Which of you now imprison not your thoughts
in envious and silent policy.
Scah. My Lord to whatsoever you shall propose,
my sentence shall be free.
Euren And mine.

Chase-il. And mine.

Am. Which of you then dare challinge to himself
such a pathetical Praerogative,
so stoically severed from affection?
That, had he such a Creature as lies here,
one, at whom Nature her self stood amazed,
one, whom those lofty ecstasies of poets,
should they decay, here't must nor barely dump
their dull inventions with similitudes,
taken from Sun, Moon, Violets, Roses;
and, when their ruptures at a period stand,
a silent admiration must supply.
Only name her, and she is all discrib'd.
Hyperbole of women, Color it self
is not more pure, and incontaminate!
sleep doates on her and graspes her eyelids close?
the sky it self has only so much blew
as the azure in her veins lends by refluxe.
Here Is breath that would those vapors purify,
which from Avernus choakes the flying Birds:
here is heat would tempt the numbed Athenian,
though all his blood with age were conjeal'd ye!
Now, which of you all is so temperate,
that did he find this Jewel in his bed
(unless an Eunuch) could refrain to grapple,
and dally with her? come! speak freely all.

Sch. Truly (my Lord) I came of mortal parents
and must confess me subject to desires;
freely enjoy your Love!
that were she mine, I surely would do no less.

Amur. What says Eurenoses?

Euren. My Lord, I say,
that they may rail at light, that nere saw day;
but had I such a Creature by my side,
were the world twice enlarged, and all that world
overcome by me, all volumes writ,
made clean and filled up by Rhetorique strains
of my great deeds, Historians should spend
their Ink and Paper in my sole Chronicle;
A thousand such alluring idle charms
could not conjure me from betwixt her arms.

Amur. Your sentence Ch^s-Illebeg?

Chas. What need your grace depend upon our breath?
I vow (my Lord,) if all those scrupulous things
which burden us with precepts so precise,
those parents, which when they are married once
and past their strength of years, think their sons straight
should be as old in every thing as they;
I say my Lord, did my head wear a crown,
that Queen should be the chiefest jem t'adorne it,
spite of all hate. That Is an unhappy state,
when Kings must fear to love least subjects hate.

Amu. Well spoke, three Milksops, Schahin. your sword,
Scahin gives him a Sword. Now, now be valor in this manly arm
to cut off troops of thoughts that would invade me!
Think you my mind is waxie to be wrought
int'any fashion? Orchanes, thy strength!
Here do I wish, as did that Emperor,
that all the heads of that enticing Sex
were upon hers, thus then should one full stroke
mow them all off.
Amurath cuts off Eumorphes head, shows it to the nobles. there kiss now
(Captains) do, and clap her cheeks:
this is the face that did so captive me:
these were the looks that so bewicht mine eyes:
here be the lips, that I but for to touch,
gave over fortune, victory, fame and all;
these were two lying mirrors where I looked
and thought I saw a world of happiness.
Now tutor, shall our swords be excercised
in ripping up the breasts of Christians?
Say Generals, Whither is it first?

A. For Thracia.

Amurath. On then for Thracia, for he surely shall,
that conquers first himself, soon conquer all.

Exeunt omnes. Actus 3.
Scena 1.
Enter Cobelitz solus. Cobelitz. Thou sacred guider of the arched Heavens,
who can collect the scattering stars, and fix
the Erratique planets in the constant pole!
O why should thou take such solicitous care
to keep the air, and Elements in course?
That Winter should uncloth our Mother Earth,
and wrap her in a winding sheet of snow;
that then the spring duly revives her still,
unbinds her sinews, fills her cling'd up veins
with living dew, and makes her young again.
Next that, the Nemean terror breathes her flames,
to parch her flaxie hairs with furious heat;
which to allay too, thou op'st the Chataracts,
and water'st the worlds gardens with blessed drops;
can thou, which can sustain the ponderous world,
and keep it in true poize, securely sleep,
letting a Tyrant (which with a fillip, thus;
thou might sink to earth) to baffle thee?
A warrior in thy fields, I long have been
To see if in thy sacred providence,
Thou meanst to arm me with thy thunderbolt,
Yet, yet, it strikes not; now he Giant-wise,
Dares thee again; pardon our earnest zeal
What ere's decreed for man, by thy behest,
He must perform, and in obedience rest.
Thou, like Spectators when they do behold
an hardy youth encountering with a Bear,
or something terrible* then they give a shout;
so do thou even applaud they self to see
Religion striving with Calamity.
Which while it often bears, and still rests true,
it is fence against all that after shall ensue.
Turk, i will oppose thee still; Heaven has decreed,
That this weak hand, shall make that tyrant bleed*
a man religious, firm, and strongly good
cannot oth^ sudden be, nor understood.

Exit. Actus 3. Scena 2.
Enter Amurath in Arms, Schahin, Captains, Soldiers. Amurath. Rise (Soul!)
enjoy the prize of thy brave worth:
Schahin, the Present that thou so professed,
should from the City of Orestias,
make proud our eyes! then tell me, Have thou slain
a thousand superstitious Christian souls?
made them stoop to us: O, I would bath my hands
in their warm blood to make them supple (Schahin)
that they may weild more Spears: our hands are dull,
our furie's patient! Now will I be a Turk.
and to our Prophet's Altars do I vow,
that to his yoke I will all necks subdue,
or in their throats my bloody Sword imbrew.

Schahin calls in his Soldiers, and each of them presents to Amurath the head
of a dead Christian. Scha. Then King, to add fresh oil unto thy hate,
and make it raise it self a greater flame,
see here these Christians heads; thus still shall fall
before thy fatal hand, these impious slaves:
so long as numbers 's wanting to the sand,
so long as day shall come with Sun, and night
be spangled with the twilight dawning stars,
whilst floods shall fall into the Ocean,
shall Christians tremble at Turks thundering strokes.

Amurat. So am I Amurath, the great King of Turks,
O how it glads me thus to pash their brains,
to rend their locks, to tear these Infidels!
Who thundered when these heads were smitten off?
Stars I could reach you with my lofty hand,
it is well, enough, enough, (great Amurath)
for now I sit in Orchanes great Throne,
and sacrifice due Rites to Mahomet;
yet why enough? I Will on, and dung the Earth,
with Christians rotted trunks, that from that soil,
may spring more Cadmean Monsters to overcome them.
Captains, what Countries next shall we make flow,
with Channels of their blood?

Euren. To Servia (my Lord) there are troops of arms,
gathered to resist Mohammedan.

Chase. At Bulgaria, there they set on fire,
the Countries as they pass, 'twere good we haste.

Amur. Why they do well! we like of their desire
to make the flame in which themselves must fry!
Ruin, destruction, famine, and the sword,
shall all invade them: Sun stay thou thy flight,
and see the sneaks in their own River drencht,
whilst with their blood our furious thirst is quenched!

Scena. 3. Actus 3.
Enter in arms, Lazarus Despot of Servia, Sesmenos Governor of Bulgaria. La.
Whither (Bulgaria) whither must we fly?
the Butcherous Turk's at hand. Blessed Sanctity!
if thou did ere guard goodness, wall our towers,
bring strength into our Nerves. For in thy cause
our Breasts upon their Rapiers we will run;
we'll with just hope confront the tyrants rage,
meet him in the face, fury will find us arms,
there is a power can guard us from all harms.

Ses. Let us be sudden: for we will not find scope,
to see our haps. Who most does fear, may hope.

Enter to them Cobelitz. Cob. Governor, Captains, have unto your arms:
the dangers imminent, and the Turk's at hand.

Laz. - (Cobelitz) must we still wade thus deep
in blood and terror?

Cob. Yes (Servia) we must, we should, we ought,
Ease and lucresse keeps baseness company.
Shall we not blush to see the register
of those great Romans, and Heroic Greeks,
which did those acts, at which our hearts are struck
beneath all credence, only to win fame?
and shall not we for that Eternal name?
To live without all credence, even to win fame,
is not to know life's chief, and better parts:
To us of future hopes: calamity
must help to purchase immortality.

Ses. Well spoke (trueChristian) they who still live high,
and snoare in praised applause nere know to bear,
a contumely, or check, or fate.
Wisely to steare a Ship, or guide an Army,
undaunted hardiness is requisite;
O then lets to our weapons! make him yield;
they which deny all right, often give't ith'Field.

Enter Christian Soldiers falling out among them-fighting confusedly. Cob. Why
(Gentlemen) we want no foes to fight,
nor need we turn our weapons on our selves.

One Soldier speaks as drunk. 1. You lazy rogue, what come in my Cabinet?

answer the other. 2. Conspiring slave, you murmured gan'st th'allowance,
and would persuade upon a larger pay,
to betray all Garrisons, and turn Turk.
Thou half Can-carousing rascal, I Will tear thee,
and those treacherous veins of thine. Will you see,
They all fall by the ears. Blew-Jackets, will you see your Corporal wronged?
well, since I fight for victuals, for company.
Use now your swords and Bucklers.

La. Treason, the next man that speaks or strikes a blow.

Sold. Then shall our Laundresses fight for us?

2. Why, Amazons! Baudicans, come help to scratch.

Enter some Truls on both sides, they fight and scratch. Sesm. O Cobelitz, what
way shall we appease them?

Truls scold confusedly: Thus 1. Trul. Out, thy Corporal (huswife) has the
itch,
you now will have foul washing. Drab, I Will tear your mouth:

2. An inch or two yet wider.

Cob. What, soldiers! think you each distasteful word,
given amongst your selves so strong an obloquie,
that revenge spurs you to each others death?
The General parts them with his sword. And will not seek to wash those
blasphemies,
in Seas of their foul blood, which are belcht out
by our approaching foes, against the Essence
of the Eternal!

Laz. Leave, leave, these factions; cease these mutinies
A Drum from the Turk's Camp. Hark, their Drums take advantage of these stirs:
let us oppose our strength against our foe;
and in our Camp let not one Soldier be,
who will not find, and strike his Enemy.

Cob. Now (blessed guider and great strength of arms)
if in thy secret and hidden decree,
thou have not yet appointed the full time
wherein thou meanest to tame this Tiger,
who dare murmur against thine hidden will?
Be we slain now, there is victory in store,
which when thou please thou 't give, and not before.
Give us still strength of patience, not to wish,
a funeral honor unto all the world,
when we are perishing, we will still believe,
those dangers worth our death we undergo,
whilst he, who is ours, is alike thy foe.
Should Fortune lose this day, when we are slain,
thou can give hands, and strength, and men again;
on thee we trust then, and on thee bear,
scorning for Heaven's sake to shed a tear.

Exeunt. Actus 3. Scena 4.
A March within, excursions, alarums. Enter as Conquerors, Cairadin Bassa,
Schahin, leading young men Christians, Prisoners. Schah. Bassa, we thank thy
valor and discretion,
in finding fit occasion to invade
the mutinous Christians! these Captives here
shall be good Presents to our worthy Master.

Bassa. General, now trust me these young slaves,
be full of Valor, they have metal in them.

Schuh. Yes: and to his Highness shall perform
a Service which I long have thought upon,
and when his Turkish Majesty requires;
they will fit to be a near attendant Guard,
on all occasions to the Emperor;
therefore they shall be called Janissaries,
by me first instituted, for our Princes safeties sake.

Bass. Their vigor and strong hearts becomes such service,
for to overcome them made our Soldiers sweat
much Turkish blood: the Servians kept the Fight
with stubborn hard resistance, The Bulgarians
left the right wing; there set I forward first,
and like a torrent rolled destruction on,
raising huge storms of blood, as does the Whale
puff up the waves against a mighty Ship;
me thinks, I see the Rivers of their gore:
their Leaders trampled on by Turkish Horse,
the Body of their Army quite dispersed,
themselves all floating in Vermillian pools,
with their own weapons hasting to their death,
and such a slaughter did we make of them,
as Nature scarce can ere repair again.
One hastening to others death, pulling to ground
him that held up, so they each other drowned.

Schah. Still are they confident upon a power,
they know not what, who (as they think) can snatch
their precise souls from out the jaws of death.

Bass. Yes, such a superstition does possess them;
for when they looked for nothing but their fate,
and danger stood in sweat upon their brows:
they yet scorned Mahomet, and profaned his Rites,
and naught but horror made them to believe
so many men were fighting on his side,
as might have changed my seat, and part in the world,
(though Nature stood against) to a new place:
or carry Sestos whereby Abydos stands,
or pull down Atlas with so many hands.

Actus 3. Scena 5.
Enter Amurath with Ambassadors from German Ogly, concerning Bajazet, Amurath's
Eldest son, and the Mahometans Daughter. Cairadin Bassa presents Amurath with
his Captives for Ianizaries. etc. Amurath. How like our Captains the last
Victory?
(if any can prophecy of future things)
me thought I did dream of this blessed hap.
How fortune did involve them in their ruin!
and flight from danger, brought them in their ruin.
each one astonished with a sudden fear,
knew not the danger that was then most near.

Bassa and Schahin presents Amurath with Captives for Ianizaries Bassa. To add
more triumph, I present my Liege,
with these young Rebels, which you may bring up
in all the praecepts of our Mahomet.

Scah. And, (for great Emperor, your person wants
a thing which much ore-Clouds your light of state,
attendant Ianizaries to a Prince:)
these may be so trained up, as to supply
the duty fit for such a Majesty.

Am. Bassa, we thank thy strength, Schahin your counsel
and to that end, let them have safe protection.
But we must treat now of a marriage (Lords)
the German Ogly, he whose Scepter swaies
the Phrygian confines in strong Asia,
by Embassy entreats that he may join
his Daughter Hatum to our Bajazet.
Ambassador, here to our Counsel speak
your Masters Message.

Emb. Please then your Maj. and these reverend heads
to be informed my masters will by me?
In wedlock if your prince may be combined
to the fair princess his sole daughter,
he freely gives the Phrygian territories,
and Bythinia to you for your dowry;
Cutas, Simon, Egregios, Sansale,
Abbettingon, the Ottomans estate;
which Ottomans, because he not endures,
the Noble Zelzucciom family protests,
to join with you in quelling their ambition

Sca. May't please your majesty to like mine advice,
it is good to have alliance with such friends;
Kings that combine themselves are like to shafts,
the ancient Sage proposed unto his sons;
which whilst together they were close compact,
arms, knees, and his whole strength, could never break;
take one by one, they with a touch were cracked:
so Kings may be overcome that stand alone;
but two such princes, knit thus hand in hand,
should Nations totter they would firmly stand.

Am. Yes Schahin, we'll approve what thou say,
then from us carry the great Asiaes Monarch
this our kindest greeting:
tell him, the gates of Prusa shall stand open,
and the glad air shall Echo notes of joy*
to entertain her who shall bless our Land
with hopeful issue; greedy thoughts expect
her soon arrival; and so (Ambassador)
inform thy princess, when she shall appear,
A lasting Starr shall shine within our sphere.

Scen 6. Actus 3.
Enter Sasmenos, Lazarus, Cobelitz. Sas. O Servia, our Cities are turned flames;
each strives to have his own and others death:
And as though heaven conspired destruction too,
that rains down scalding Sulphur on our heads,
here one that lies thick gasping for his breath
is choakt with blood that runs from's fellows wounds;
whilst others for the dead are making graves,
themselves are made the corpse that do fill them.
Nobles, and base, together perish all,
and a drawn sword sticks fast in every rib;
our stones are died Vermillion with our blood:
old creatures that are creeping to the grave,
are thrust on faster.
Infants, but in the threshold of their lives,
are thus kicked off: Oh most disastrous times,
to love our deaths, and make our life our crimes!

Laz. See, see, the ruins of our goodly Walls,
our Cities smoke hinder the sight of heaven:
The conqueror yet amazed measures out our Towns,
with eyes of terror, and does scarce believe
he has overcome us, yet among these fires,
our dead men are denied their funeral flames:
And those infectious carcasses do perform,
a second murder on the rest that live;
and all the hope of safety that we have,
is now to fix our flattering lips at's feet:
mercy (perhaps) may wearied slaughter meet.

Sas. Will you do so? speak, for I am determined --

Cob. No (worthy General) heaven avert
and arm you with the proof of better thoughts!
What though a Tyrant strives to terrify
all Christendom, and would not be beloved;
let not your fears give impious rage such scope,
as for to bring Religion to profaneness:
fortune and heaven will scorn to try a man,
that hurles his weapons hence and runs away:
How is he worthy of heavens victory,
that, when it frowns, dares not look up and see?
Me thinks we three are now environed round,
with hosts of Angels, and our powerful Mars
is putting bows of steel into our hands:
he does suggest our wrath, and bids us on.
O what an army it is to have a cause
holy and just; there, there is our strength indeed!
-- Tu mente Labantes,
Direge nos, dubios, et certo Robore firma.
If we must dye, the narrow way to bliss
shall be made wide for us: the gate's wide open,
and the spread Palace entertaines with joy.
Mean time, let us look like men upon our grief,
our frown fate Despot, Bulgaria, come.
Turk, once more at thee (Tyrant) mortals must
command heavens favor in a case so just. Exeunt.

Actus 4.
Scena 1.
Enter Aladin King of Caramania, son in Law to Amurath, with Nobles,
Ambassadors from Amurath. Alad. Sends our proud father-in-law this greeting to
us?
was our sword sheathed so soon to hear this answer?

Emb. My Lord, he bad me tell you that 'twas you
have made him leave off this great Prophets wars,
when he was hewing down the Christians;
therefore submission should not now appease him,
no, though your wife, his daughter, should her self,
upon her penitent knees be supplyant.
No sooner shall the Tycian splendid Sol
open heavens Casements, and enlarge the day,
but his horse hoofs shall beat your treacherous earth;
and that you may be warned of his approach,
murder and flames shall be his Prodromo's!

Alad. Confederate Princes, and my kind allies,
shall his proud nostrils breath those threats on us?

Emb. Moreover, my Lord will, or win, or raze,
Iconium and Larenda.

Alad. Iconium and Larenda? I? No more?
had best look first, how safe his Prusa stands.
Lords, I am moved, and will forget my Queen
was ere the issue of his hated blood:
My spleen is tossed within, mine entrails pant,
as, when the Sea is raised with Southern gusts,
the wind allayed, yet still the waves will tremble,
Princes, now bind your selves with such strong chains,
your faith and breaths can make; swear to me all,
to be as firm to me against Amurath,
as is the skin and flesh unto the Nerves; They all kneel, and swear upon his
sword.

Nobles. We all swear we will.

Alad. Then all here kiss my sword,
which shall be steept within the head-mans throat:
We Will make him know those will not fly in war,
which may in policy entreat a peace!
Have thy course (time) and soon reduce the year!
Lucan: -- Infestique obvia Signis
Signa, pares aquilas, and pila minantia pilis.
Ensigns may Ensigns meet, Carmania's King,
great Aladin, scorns to avoid a Turk.
Princes, and Neighbors, muster up your strength,
that we may meet him on his full Cariere;
and let it be Carmanian's pride to say,
to overcome him we ask no second day.

Scena 2. Actus 4.
Enter Amurath at one door with Nobles, Bajazet; Enter at the other, Hatum,
richly attended, they meet, salute in dumb shows; Amurath joins the hands of
the Prince and Princess; whilst this is solemnizing, is sung to soft Music,
this Song following. SONG.
Thine O Hymen, thine is she,
Whose Beauties verse Calliope,
Sing to Marriage ties an Io;
Io to Hymen.
Chorus. To thee Apollo is my suit,
Lend me a while thy silver Lute,
O what a woe it is to bring,
A Bride to Bed and never sing,
Io to Hymen.

Ambo. When she is old, still seems she young,
When she is weak, to her be strong!
Be Cyprus, both, and Paphos here,
Love, sing with merry cheer,
Io to Hymen.

Amur. You Gods of Marriage, sacred Protectoress
of lawful propagations, and blessed Love,
be most propitious to these grafted stemmes;
drop dewing showers of generation on them.
Think (Son) this day so prodigal of blessing,
as, that had Juno taskt thee (like Alcides)
to grapple with Stymphallides, or cleanse
Augean stables: or like the Trojan Boy,
sit like a Shepherd on Dardanias hills,
such a reward as this fair Queen repayes.
O thou hoped future offspring, spare thy Parent!
Hurt not this tender womb, these Ivory worlds,
in which a pretty people yet shall live
when you are born; O be within your limbs
the Gransire, Amurath, and fathers strength;
line their faces (Nature) with their mothers dye:
And let the destinies make the ensuing night
in their Eternal Books, with notes most white.

All. Grant it great Mahomet.

Hat. Most awful father, and my honored Prince,
although it be enacted by the heavens,
that in these bonds of marriage, such curse
attends on Princes above private men,
that no affection, nor home-nourisht Love
but state and policy must elect their wives,
which must be fetched from Countries far remot;
yet the protecting Powers have such a care,
both of their offsprings and their Kingdoms state.
That to what they ordain, they work in us
a sudden willingness to make's obey;
for in this breast, I do already feel
that there is a kindling a Diviner heat,
which disobedience never shall extinguish.
And if there be any felicity
from these united Loves to be derived
from the weak sex unto the husbands soul,
then may my Lord make his affection sure,
to be repaid with an untainted Love.
With soft and yiedling courtesy in all
he shall command, my willing arms shall still
be open t'enfold within a wives embrace,
if any comfort else there be in store,
(which modesty keeps silent to it self
cause only husbands and the night must know it)
my Loyalty shall ever all perform:
and though my Lord should frown, I Will be the same,
green wood will burn with a continued flame:

Baja. Princess, our ardour is already fired,
yet with no violent temerity;
such as might fear it is short and soon decaying:
thy virtue seems so to exceed thy Sex,
and wisdom so far to out-pace thy years,
that, surely (Princess) soon maturity,
argues in them hidden Divinity.
Expected Hymen here has bound our hands
and hearts, with everlasting ligaments:
Fortunate both we are, and have one bliss,
the want of which for ever does infect
with anxious cares the sweets of marriage beds:
our parents benediction and consent,
they are the truest Hymen's, and should be
to children the best marriage Deity.
Thus then attended with such sacred charms
our last day of content shall never come;
till we must part by th'unresisted doom,
with a pleased error we will age beguile,
all stars on us, an equal yoke, must smile,

Amu. Now (Lords) who will dance
a Turkish measure? Ladies our nerves are shrunk;
and you now fix the sign of age on me,
you, who have blood still flowing in your veins,
be nimble as an Heart: Caper to the Sphaeres:
O you are light, that want the weight of years! Music

Here Amurath ascends his Throne, the rest set down to dance, Bajazet with
Hatum, etc. the end of the dance, all kneel, Amur. begins an health, a flourish
with Cornets. Amu. And health to our Bride and her father:
O (Nobles) would this wine were Christians blood,
but that it would Phrenetique humors breed,
and so infect our brains with Superstition!

Enter Eurenoses with six Christian Maidens, richly attyred, their Hair
hanging loose, in their hands Cups of Gold with Jewels, etc. Eure. Auspicious
fortunes to great Amurath:
to open more springs to this full-tide of joy,
know (potent Emperor) I from Europe bring
six daughters of six several Kings,
whose Cities we have equaled to the ground;
and of their Palaces did torches make,
to light their souls through the black cave of death.

Am. Describe (good Captain) how the dogs were wearied.

Eure. So weary were they to endure our swords,
that by impetuous mutiny themselves
turned on each other, slew their Masters;
Childrens own hands tore out their fathers throats,
and each one strove who should be slaughtered first;
Here did a brother pash out a brothers brains,
some in stinking Quagmires, and deep Lakes
(which they had made t'avoide their excrements)
ran quick, and in the lake lay buried.

Am. Good Executioner of our most just wrath!

Eur. Nor did it leave till death it self was weary,
murder grew faint, and each succeeding day
showed us the slaughter of the day before.
Amongst carcasses and funerals we stood,
denying those that lived such Ceremonies
as in their Temples to the Indian gods,
with prayers and vows they daily offered:
Nor destiny, nor cruelty ere left,
till they had nothing for to work upon;
for, of so many souls that breathed of late,
these six are all remain: which as a Pledge
of my best service to your Majesty,
I here am bold to yield an offer.

Amu. Nor shall this present be unrecompenced;
for thy true service, on thee I Will bestow
all the rich gifts, which all these Asian Lords
brought to adorn these happy Nuptials;
on you fair Bride, great Princess, and our Daughter
do we bestow these Virgins (daughters to Kings)
for your attendance.

Hat. We are two much bound unto our Princely Father

Amu. No (Daughter) no, we hope thou art the spring
from whence shall flow to all the world a King.
Captains and Lords, to morrow we must meet,
to think of our rebellious son in Law.
Be this time all for comfort and delight,
short wedding days make it seem long to night. Exeunt omnes.

Scena 3. Actus 4.
Enter Lazartis and Cobelitz, bringing the dead body of Sasmenos. Laz. Here set
we down our miserable load,
O Cobelitz, with whom is it that we fight?
With Lybian Lions? Or Hyrcanian Bears,
which grind us daily in their ravenous teeth?
The Tyrant (as it were destructions Engineer)
helps Nature to destroy the worlds frame quickly.

Cob. Alas, my Lord, that needs not, every day
is a sufficient helper to decay:
Great workman, who art sparing in thy strength
to bring things to perfection: and to oreturn
all thy best works, thou usest sudden force.
when man's an Embrio and first conceived,
how long it is ere he sees his native light?
Then born, with expectation for his growth,
tenderly nourisht, carefully brought up:
grown to perfection, what a little thing
serves to call on his sudden ruining?

Laz. Come Cobelitz, amongst those demolisht stones
we'll sit as Hecuba, at those Trojan walls:
our tears shall be false glasses to our eyes,
through these we will look, and think we yet may see
our stately Pinacles, and strong founded holds:
that which one hour can delapidate,
one age can scarce repair.

Col. No sir, for nothing's hard
to Nature, when she means for to consume:
A thousand Oaks (which time has fixed in the earth,
as Monuments of lasting memory)
are in a moment turned to ashes; all
things that rise slowly, take a sudden fall.

Laz. What course now, Cobelitz? must we still be yoakt
to misery, and murder? We scarce have room
upon our bodies to receive more wounds,
and must we still oppose our selves to more?

Cob. Yes! We are ready still; a solid mind
must not be shook with every blast of wind.
Pollux, nor Hercules, had none other art,
to get them Mansions in the Spangl'd heavens
then a true firm resolve; the Adriatike Sea,
shall from his currents with tempestuous blasts
be sooner moved, than virtue from its aim.
Let us but think (when we so many see
enjoying greater quiet than our themselves)
how many have endured more misery;
Ilion, Ilion, what a fate had thou?
How fruitful were thou in matter for thy foe?
Thus we'll delude our grief, make our self glad,
to think of miseries that others had.

Laz. Ay, (Captain) ay; they that furnish thee
with sentences of comfort, never saw,
their Cities burnt, their Countries desolate.
It Is easy for Physicians for to tell
advice to others, when themselves are well.

Cob. Tush, tush (my Lord) there is on our side we know,
one that both can, and will our weak hands guide,
one that will strike and thunder; Giant then,
look for a dart! we must not appoint when;
mean while help to convey this burden hence.
Turk, though thy tyranny deny us graves,
corruption will give them spite of thee:
Nor do our corpse, such Tombs and Cavernes need:
for our own flesh, still our own graves do breed:
And, whom the earth receives not when they die,
heavens vault overwhelms them, so their tomb's ith'skie. Exeunt with a dead
Trunk.

Actus 4. Scena 4.
Enter Aladin as flying, an arrow through his arm, wounded in his forehead, his
shield stuck with darts: With him two Nobles. Alad. Besieged on every side?
Iconium taken?
Entrencht within my foes my self must lie
wrapped in my Cities ruin. Turks come on.

1. Nob. Nay but my Lord, mean you to meet your death?
let us have our flight, and trust more to our feet
then words, or hands --

Alad. Why so much of our blood
is already spilt, as should the glittering Sun
exhale it upward, 'twould obnubulate
It Is luster, else to fiery Metors turn.
some counsel (Lords) he that is amidst the Sea,
when every curled wave does threat his death,
yet trusts upon the oars of his own arms,
and sometime the salt foam does pity him.
A Wolf, or Lion, that has filled his gorge
with bloody prey, at last will lie to sleep,
and the unnaturalst creatures not forget
their love to those whom they do know their own:
My wife's his daughter; since we cannot stand
his fury longer, she shall swage his wrath.
The boisterous Ocean when no winds oppose,
grows calm: revenge is lost, when it has no foes.

2. Nob. Why then (my Lord) array your self in weeds
of a Petitioner: take the Queen along,
and your two children; they may move his eyes;
for, desperate sores ask desperate remedies.

Ala. Go (Lords) go: fetch some straight. O heavens!
O fortune, they that lean on thy cracked wheel,
and trust a Kingdoms power, and domineer
in a walled Palace, let them look on me,
and thee (Carmania;) greater instances
the world affords not to demonstrate
the frail estate of proudest Potentates,
of sturdiest Monarchies: high Pinacles
are still invaded with the prouder winds;
they must endure the threats of every blast;
the tops of Caucasus and Pindus shake
with evey crack of thunder; humble Vaults
are nere touched with a bolt: ambiguous wings
has all the state, that hovers over Kings.
Enter the 2. Nobles with a winding sheet, Aladin puts it on. I, I, this
vesture sits my misery!
this badge of poverty must now prevail,
where all my Kingdoms power and strength does fail.
Why should not a prophetic soul attend
on great men's persons, and forewarn their ills?
Raging Boots does does not so turmoile
the Lybian ford, as Fortune does great hearts.
Bellona and Erynnis scourge us on;
should wars and treasons cease, why our own weight
would send us to the earth, as spreading arms
make the huge trees in tempest for to split.
For as the slaughter-man to pasture goes,
and drags that Ox home first, whose Bulk is greatest,
the lean he still lets feed: disease takes hold
on bodies that are pampered with best fare;
so does all ruin choose the fairest marks,
at which it bends, and strikes it full of shafts;
ambition made me now that eminent Butt:
And I that fell by mine own strength, must rise
by professed weakness; Buckets full sink down,
whilst th'empty dance in the air and cannot drown.
Come (Lords) he out of's way can never range,
who is at furthest; worst nere finds ill change.

Actus 5.
Scena 1.
Enter at one door Amurath, with attendants; at the other door Aladin, his
Wife, two Children, all in white sheets, kneel down to Amurath. Am. Our hate
must not part thus; I Will tell thee (Prince)
thou 'ast kindled violent Aetna in our breast,
and such a flame is quenched with naught but blood:
His blood whose hasty and rebellious blast*
gave life unto the fire; should heaven threat us;
know, we dare menace it; are we not Amurath?
(whose awful name is even trembled at)
so often dared by Pigmy Christians;
which we will crush to air? what haughty thought
buzzed thy presumtuous ears with such vain blasts,
to puff thee into such impetuous acts?
or what, durst prompt thee with a thought so frail,
as made thee covetous of so brave a death,
as this known hand should cause it? know, that throat
shall feel it strangled with some slave brought up
to naught but for an Hangman: thy last breath,
torn from thee by a hand that is worse than death.

Alad. Why then, I Will (like the Roman Pompey) hide
my dying sight, scorning imperious looks
should grace so base a stroke with sad aspect;
thus will I muffle up and choke my groans,
lest a grieved tear should quite put out the name
of lasting courage in Carmanias fame.

Am. What? still stiff necked? Is this the truce you beg?
Sprinkled before thy face those Rebel Brats,
shall have their brains, and their dissected limbs,
hurld for a prey to Kites; for (Lords) it is fit
no spark of such a mountain threatening fire,
be left as unextinct, least it devour,
and prove more hot unto the Turkish Empier,
then the Promethean blaze did trouble Jove!
first sacrifice those Brats. --

All. Wife. (Dear father) let thy fury rush on me;
within these entrails sheath thine unsatiate sword,
and let this ominous, and too fruitful womb
be torn insunder, for from thence those Babes,
took all their crimes; error made them guilty,
'twas Natures fault, not theirs: O if affection
can work, then now show a true fathers love;
if not, appease those murdering thoughts with me:
For as Jocasta pleaded with her sons
for their dear Father, so to a Father I
for my dear babes and husband; husband, father,
Which shall I first embrace? Victoriors father,
be blunt those now sharp thoughts, lay down those threats,
unclasp that impious Helmet; fix to earth
that monumental Spear, look on thy child
with pardoning looks, not with a warriers eye:
Else shall my breast cover my husbands breast,
and serve as buckler to receive thy wounds.
Why do thou doubt? Fear thou thy daughters faith?

Amu. I fear, for after Daughters perjury,
all Laws of Nature shall distasteful be;
nor will I trust thy children or thy self.

Wife. No Father, it is I: fear you him, he you,
I both, but for you both, for both you war;
so that it is best with him that is overcome.
O let me kiss (kind father) first the earth
on which you tread, then kiss mine husbands cheek.
Great King embrace these babes, you are the stock
on which these Grafts were planted --

Amu. True, and when sprouts do rob the tree of sap,
they must be pruned.

Wife. Dear Father, leave such harsh similitudes:
By my deceased Mother, (to whose womb
I was a ten months burden:) By your self,
(to whom I was a pleasing Infant once)
pity my husband, and these tender Infants.

Amu. Yes, to have them collect a manly strength,
and their first lesson that their Dad shall teach them
shall be to read my misery.

All. Stern Conqueror: but that thy daughter shows,
there once dwelt good in that obdurate breast,
I would not spend a tear to soften thee.
Thou see my Countries turned into a grave:
my Cities scare the Sun with fiercer flames,
which turn them into ashes, and my self
so flickt and carved, that my amazed blood
knows not through which wound first to take it is way;
if not on me, have mercy on my babes, --
which, with thy mercy thou may turn to Love.

Amu. No sir, we must root out malicious seed:
nothing sprouts faster, than an envious weed!
We see a little Bullock, amongst an Herd
(whose horns are yet scarce crept from out his front)
grows on a sudden tall, and in the Field,
frolicks so much, he makes his Father yield.
A little Twig left budding on an Elm,
ungratefully bars his Mother sight from Heaven!
I love not future Aladins.

Alad. Threat all a Conqueror can, can threat but death,
and I can die: but if thou would have mercy! --

Wife. Let Us see your feet, we are proud with this hands kiss!
The higher those great powers have raised you,
press that which lies below with gentler weight:
to pardon miseries is Fortunes height:
alas, these infants, these weak sinewed hands
can be no terror to these Hectors arms!
Beg (Infants) beg, and teach these tender joints
to ask for mercy; learn your lisping tongues
to give due accent to each syllable:
nothing that Fortune urges to, is base;
put from your thoughts all memory of descent:
forget the Princely Titles of your Fathers:
if your own misery you cannot feel,
learn thus of me to weep, of me to kneel.

Al. Do (boys) and imitate your Parents tears,
which I (like Priam) shed, when he beheld,
Hector thrice dragged about the Trojan Walls.
He that burst open the Gates of Erebus,
and roused the yelling Monster from his Den,
was conquered with a tear. Great Monarch learn,
To know how dear a King does weeping earn.

1. Chapter Good Grandsire see, see how my Father cries!

2. Chapter Good Mother take my napkin for your eyes!

Wife. (Good father) hear, hear how thy daughter prays!
Thou that know how to use stern Warriers arms,
learn how to use mild VVarriers pity too.
Alas? Can ere these ungrown strengths repair
their Fathers battered Cities? Or can these,
these orethrown Turrets? (Iconium) what small hopes
have thou to lean upon? If these be all?
Not half so mild has our misfortune been
that any can ere fear us: Be pleased --

Am. Rise (my dear Child) as Marble against rain,
so I at these obedient showers, melt;
thus I do raise thy Husband: thus thy Babes:
freely admitting you to former State.
But Aladin, wake not our wrath again;
"Patience grows fury that is often stirred;
when Conquerours wax calm, and cease to hate,
the conquered should not dare to reiterate.
Be thou our Son and Friend.

Alad. By all the Rites of Mahomet, I vow it.

Am. Then, for to seal unto you this our love,
your self shall lead a wing in Servia,
in our immediate Wars; we are to meet
the Christians in Cassanoe's Plains with speed:
Great Amurath nere had time to breath himself,
so much as to have warring with new Foes;
no day securely to his Scepter shone,
but one Wars end, still brought another on. Exeunt.

Actus 5. Scena 2.
Enter Lazarus, Cobelitz, Soldiers, all armed. Cob. Let now victorious
wreathes ingirt our brows,
let Angels 'stead of Soldiers wield our arms
against him, who that our Cities might be his,
strives to depopulate, and make them none!
But look, look in the air (me thinks) I see
an Host of Soldiers brandishing their Swords;
each corner of the Heaven shoots thunderbolts,
to nail these impious forces to the Earth.

Laz. Soldiers stand to it, though fortune bandy at's,
let us stand her shocks, like sturdy Rocks in the Sea,
on which the angry foaming Billows beat,
with frivolous rush, and break themselves, not them;
stand like the undaunted countenance oth' sky,
or, like the Sun, which when the foolish King,
thought to obscure with a cloud of darts,
out looked them all, our lives are all enchanted,
and more invulnerate than Thetis Son.
We shall have hands and weapons: if the stone
of Fortune glide from under our weak feet,
and we must fall, yet, let all Christians say,
It Is She, and not the Cause, that wins the day.
We must believe Heaven has a greater care
of them, whom Fortune does so often out dare!

Cob. Gentlemen, Brothers, Friends, Soldiers, Christians,
we have no reason to command of Heaven
a thing denied to all mortality.
Nor should we be so impudently proud,
as in this weak condition to repute
our selves above the stroke of Lady Chance,
a caution must divine it, ever fixed,
that whilst her checks equally fall out,
community should ease their bitterness.
I could afresh now shed those Princely tears,
to think such sudden ruin should attend
Heroic spirits glittering in bright arms!
But if the Grecian (when he heard the dreams
disputed subtly by Philosophers,
to prove innumerable extant worlds)
was struck with pensiveness, and wept to think
he had not yet obtained one for himself;
what terror can affright a Christians thoughts
who knows there is a world, at liberty
to breath in, when this glass of life is broke?
our Foes with circling fury are intrencht;
Pelions of Earth and darkness shall orelade them,
whilst we shall mount, and these our spirits light,
shall be yet ponderous to depress them lower.
Nay, my Enthusiastic soul divines,
That some weak hand shall from the blazing Zone
snatch Lightning, which shall strike the snarling Cur
with horror and amazement to the Earth,
which Hell cannot oppose! Turk, Tyrannize,
stand, yet at length to fall my sacrifice.
Super Olympic vigor will (no doubt).
squeez all thy supercilious rancor out! Exeunt in a March.

Scena 3. Actus 5.
The Heavens seem on fire, Comets and blazing Stars appear, Amurath speaks. Am.
Who set the world on fire?
How now (ye Heavens) grow you
so proud, that you must needs put on curled locks,
and cloth your selves in Periwigs of fire?
Mahomet (say not but I invoke thee now!)
command the puny-Christians demi-God
put out those flashing sparks, those Ignes fatui,
or i will unseat him, or with my Looks so shake
the staggring props of his weak seated Throne,
that he shall find he shall have more to do
to quell one Amurath, than the whole Giant brood
of those same Sons of Earth, than ten Lycaons.
Do the poor snaks so love their misery
that they would see it by these threatening lights?
Dare ye blaze still? I Will toss up Buckets full
of Christians blood to quench you: by those hairs
drag you beneath the Center: there put out
all your presaging flames in Phlegeton.
Can you outbrave me with your pidling Lights?
Yawn earth with Casements as wide as hell it self. Vault opens.
Burn heaven as ardent as the Lemnian flames,
wake pale Tisiphon, spend all thy snakes;
Be Eacus, and Minos, as severe
as if the Goal delivery of us all
were the next Sessions. I Will pull Radamant
by his flaming furs from out his Iron Chair.

Whilst he is in his fury, arise four Fiends, framed like Turkish Kings, but
black, his supposed Predecessors dance about him; to a kind of hideous noise,
sing this Song following. 1. Fiend. Horror, dismal cries, and yells
Of these thy Grandsires thee fore-tels,
Furies sent of thee to learn
Crimes, which they could nere discern.

All. Furies sent, etc.

2. Fiend. O Amurath thy Father's come,
To warn thee of a sudden doom,
Which in Cassanoe's fields attends
To bring thee to thy hellish friends.

All. Which in Cassanoes, etc.

3. Fiend. Megaera and Ennio both do stand
Trembling lest when thou art damned,
Chief of Furies thou should be,
And they their snakes resign to thee.

All. Chief of Furies, etc.

4. Fiend. Terror, we a while will leave thee,
Till Cocytus Lake receive thee.
Cerberus will quake for fear
Where he a new Turks fate shall hear.

All. Cerberus will, etc.

Amu. Now who the devil sent my Grandsires hither?
Had Pluto no task else to set them too?
He should have bound them to Ixions wheel,
or bid them roll the stone of Sysiphus:
Beshrew me, but their singing did not please me!
Have they not been so drunk with Lethe yet,
as to forget me? They can portend no ill;
for, should the fates be twining my last thread,
yet none durst come from hell to tell me so.
Shall I be scared with a Night-walking Ghost;
or what my working fancy shall present?
Why, I can look more terrible then night,
and command darkness in the unwilling day:
Make Hecate start, and draw back her head
to wrap it in a swarthy veil of clouds.
Drop sheets of Sulphur, you prodigious skies,
Cyclops, run all thy Bullets into Aetna,
then vomit them at once; should Christians
couch to the bottomless abyss of Styx,
or hide themselves under Avernaes shade,
this arm should fetch them out. Day must perform
what I intend, wrath raines a bloody storm:
And now, 'gins rise the Sun, which yet not knows
the misery it shall see on Amuraths Foes!
Lords, Leaders, Captains -- Enter Schahin and others.

Scha. Your Highness up so soon?

Amu. He small rest takes,
that dreams on naught but bloody broils and death.

Schah. Your Grace seems much distempered: Beds of sweat
bedew your brows with never-wonted paleness

Am. Why; see you not? The heavens are turned Court Ladies,
and put on other Hair besides their own:
can guess (learned Schahin) what these flames portend?

Schah. My Lord, such things as these, we men must see,
and wonder at, and yet not search the reason;
perchance unwholsom fogs exhailed by the Sun
are set a blazing by his too near heat:
but it is not lawful that a mortal eye
should dare to penetrate Heavens secrecy.

Am. Does it not bode a Conquest?

Schah. Yes, against the Christians:
for, unto them it bends sinister looks,
and frowns upon their Army more than ours.

Amur. So, so: come on, ere Phosphorus appear
let us to it, and so prevent that sluggard Sol.
If we want Light, we'll from our Whinyards
strike fire enough to scorch the Universe;
Mine Armor there! Some go for his Armor.
Now (Mahomet) I implore
thy promised Aid for this auspicious day:
toss me aloft, and make me ride on Clouds:
If my Horse fail me, those fire breathing jades,
(which the boy Phaethon knew not how to guide)
will I pluck out from out the flaming Team,
and hurl my self against those condense Spheres,
on which I Will sit, and stay their turning Orbs;
the whole vertigious Circle shall stand still,
but to behold me: Mine Armor, ho! They bring his Armor.
So, help on here; now like Alcides do I girt my self
with well knit sinews, able to stagger Earth,
and threaten Nature with a second Chaos:
If one impetuous broyl remain to come
in future ages, set on foot this hour.
How well this weight of steel bents my strength!
Me thinks the Gods stand quivering, and do fear
(when I am armed) another Phlege^'s near.
Chiron shall see his Piadus at my feet;
And i will climb up to heaven, and pull it down
and kick the weighty burden of the world,
from off the Babies shoulders that supports it.
for I am safer Buckled against my foe,
then sturdy Jason, who by the enchanted charms
Medea gave, encountered Unicornes,
Queld Lions, struggled with fire-belching Bulls,
obtained a glorious prize, a Fleece. A Fleece
dipped deep in tincture of the Christ'ans blood
shall be my spoil; nay should they hide their heads
in their Gods bosom, here is a sword shall reach them.
Come they shall know no place is free from wrath,
when boiling blood is stirred in Amurath. Exeunt.

An alarm, excursions: fight within. Enter at one door a Christian, at
another a Turk; fight, both killed, so a new charge, the Turks kill most. Enter
Lazarus, Schahin kills him. Enter Eurenoses, Cobelitz, they fight, Cobelitz
faints, falls for dead. A showt within, a token of Victory on the Turks side,
a Retrait sounded. Scena 4. Actus 5.
Enter above Amurath, Bajazet, Nobles, to see the spoil. Schah. Here, mighty
Prince, take view of Victory,
and see the field too narrow for thy spoils.
Erynnus hides her head as if afraid,
to see a slaughter she durst never hope for.
Earth has the Carcasses: and denies them Graves,
and lets them ly and rot, and fat her womb,
scorning to be unto the slaves a Tomb.

Am. Where are become those ominous Comets now?
What? are those pissing Candles quite extinct?
leave their disacterous snuffes no stench behind them?
it is something yet, that their God sees their slaughter,
lending sulphurious Meteors to behold
the blessed destruction of these Parasites.
I knew the Elements would first untye
the Nerves of the Universe, then let me dye.

Here Cobelitz rises as awakt, amazed, leaning on his Sword, stumbling ore the
dead bodies, looks toward Amurath. Euren. See (King) heres's one worm yet
that dare confess
he breaths and lives, which once this hand crushed down.

Amur. Ha, ha, by Mahomet, and we are weary now:
Some Mercy shall lay Victory asleep.
It will a Lawreat prove to this great strife,
amongst all these murdered to give one his life,
so we'll descend. He goes from aloft.

Cob. From what a dismal grave am I awaked,
entombed within a Golgatha of men!
Have all these Souls prevented me in bless,
and left me in a dream of happiness?
But soft! me thoughts he said he would descend!
Then, Heavens, one minutes breath, that is all I ask,
and then I shall perform my life's true task.

Amurath descends on the Stage, Cobelitz staggers toward him. Amur. Poor
slave, would live?

Here Cobelitz is come to him, seeming to kneel, stabs him with a pocket
Dagger. Cob. Yes Turk to see thee dye.
Howl, howl, grim Tartar, yel (thou grisly Wolf)
force forth the blood from out thy gaping Wound!
Dii tibi non mortem, quae cunctis poena paratur,
Sed sensum post fata, tuae dent (impie) morti.

Amur. My spirit makes me not to feel thy weapon!
Hold, you cracked Organs, of my shattered life,
I 'm not touched yet; can I not mock my death,
and think it is but a dream tells me I 'm hurt?
Dare thou then leave me (blood?) Can be so bold
as to forsake these veins to flow on Earth?
And must I, like the unhappy Roman, dye
by a slaves hand?

Cob. Tyrant, it is known
He Is Lord of others lives that scorns his own.

Am. I that could scarce ere sleep, can I ere die?
And will none fear my life when I am dead;
Tortures and torments for the murderer.

Cob. Ha, ha, ha! Leaning on his sword.
I thank thee (great omnipotent) that I
shall here laugh out the lag end of my life!

Am. Villain, thy laugh wounds worse then did thy Dagger.
Are you Lethargick (Lords) in cruelty?

Cob. Nay, hear me (Turk) now will I prompt their rage:
Lock me up in the Bull of Phalaris,
cut off these eyelids, bid me then out-gaze
the parching Sunbeames; flea this tender skin,
set nests of Hornets on my rawest flesh,
let the Siconian Clouds drop brimstone on me,
power boiling Lemnos on my greenest wounds,
put on my shoulder Nessus poisoned shirt,
bind all these bloody faces to my face,
Rack me, Procrastes like -- The Lord that holds up Amurath offers to touch
his wounds.

Amur. Hell, oh! I cannot brook your smallest touch.

Cob. Ha, Ha! each groan is Balsome to my wounds:
I am perfect well. Bajazet offers to kill Gobelitz; a Nobleman holds his hand.

Schah. Rascal, dare deride us?

Cob. Yea? and while your witty furies shall invent
for me some never heard of punishment;
I see a guard of Saints ready to take me hence.
Take then free flight my new rewarded soul,
and seat thee on the winged Seraphims,
have to the Empyreum, where thy welcome
shall be an Haleluia, anthem'd forth
By the Chorus of the Angell-Hierarchy.
Pierce with swift plumes, the concave paths oth' Moon
Where the black air enlightened is with stars.
Stay not to wonder there at wandering Signs,
at bi-horn'd Gemini, or Amphions Harp,
at Arctos, or Boots, or the Bear,
(Which are to please wizard Astrologers:)
Soar higher with thy pitch, and then look down
to laugh at the hard trifles of the world;
Perchance some often have known a better life,
Never did one ere leav' it more willingly.

Am. Fear your death (Gods!) for I have lost my life,
and what, I most complain, my tyranny.

Cob. Soul, to detain thee from thy wished rest!
were but an envious part! arise, farewell:
To stay thee to accuse or fate or man,
would show I were unwilling yet to leave thee.
But dear companion hence: cut through the air
let not the grosenesse of my Earth ore-lime
thy speedy wings, fly without weight of crime. He dies.

Am. O, now have I and Fortune tried it out.
With all her best of favors was I crowned
and suffered her worst threats, when most she frowned.
Stay (Soul! a King, a Turk, commands thee stay.
Sure I am but an actor, and must strive
to personate the Tragic ends of Kings.
And so (to win applause unto the Scene)
with fained passion thus must graspe at death.
O but I see pale Nemesis at hand:
Art thou dull, fate, and do not overspread
Cimmerian wings of death throughout the world;
What? Not one Earthquake? One blazing Comet
T'accompany my soul to his Funeral?
Is not this hour the general period
to nere returning time! Last breath command
a new Deacalions deluge, that with me
the world may swim to his Eternal Grave.
Crack hindge that holds this globe, and welcome death.
Will thou not stay Soul? Friend, not stay with Kings?
Sink then, and sink beneath the Thracian Mount.
Sink beneath Athos, be the Brackish Waves
Of Acheron thy Tomb; I Will want a Grave;
So all parts fear, which first my Corpse shall have;
For in my Grave, I Will be the Christians foe,
here like a massy pyramide i will fall,
I Will strive to sink all the whole fabric with me:
quake pluto, for it is I that come
a turk, tyrant, and a conqueror.
and with this groan, like thunder will I cleave,
the timorous earth, whilst thus my last I breath. He dies.

Bajaz. O easy powers, to give us all at first,
but in their loss, they make us most accursed. Here all the Nobles kneel to
Bajazet.

Schah. The Taper of your Fathers life is spent;
We must have light still and adore a Sun.
that next is rising; therefore mighty Prince,
upon your shoulders must the pondrous load
of Empire rest.

Bajaz. Why (Lords) we have a Brother,
who, as in the same blood he took a share,
so let him bear his part in Government.

Sch. My Lord, within the selfsame Hemispheare
It Is most prodigious when two Suns appear.
One body by one soul must be informed.
Kingdoms like (marriage beds) must not endure
any corrivall. Rome was nere secure
whilst she contained a Pompey; and a Caesar.
Like as one Prophet we acknowledge now,
so of one King in state we must allow.
You know the Turkish Laws, Prince be not nice
to purchase Kingdoms, whatsoever the price.
He must be lopt, send for him he must dye.

Bajazet. O happy Bajazet, that he was borne
to be a King when thou wast Counselor.
Call in our Brother Jacup. Some go for him.

Here six men take up Amuraths Trunk on their shoulders. Baj. Why (Lords!) is
Amurath so light a weight?
Is this the Trunk oth' Turkish Emperor?
Oh what a heap of thoughts are come to naught?
What a light weight is he unto six men,
who durst stand under Ossa, and sustain 't?

Euren. My Lord, these Meditations fit not you:
You are to take the honor he has left,
and think you of his rising, not his fall! Enter Jacup.
Let your decree be sudden, here is your Brother.

Baj. Brother, I could have wished we might have met
at times of better greeting! Our father has
bequeathed to the Grave these ashes, to us his State.
Nor have we leisure (yet) to mourn for him.
Brother, you know our state has made a Law,
that, he that sits in a Majestic Chair,
must not endure the next succeeding heir.

Jac. Yes, we do:
And, Brother, do you think it is crime enough
to dye, because I am son to an Emperor?

Scah. My Lord, we know there breathes in him that air
of true affestion, that he does much desire
you should be equal in his Kingdom with him:
But still when two great evils are proposed;
the less is to be chosen.

Euren. My Lord, your life 's but one:
Kings are the threads whereto there are inweaved
millions of lives, and he that must rule all
must still be one that is select from all.
Although we speak, yet think them not our words,
But what the Land speaks in us! Kings are free;
And must be impatient of equality.

Jac. And is it eene so?
How have these Dogs fawned on me, lickt my feet
when Amurath yet lived! Felt all my thoughts,
and soothed them to the sight of Empyrie!
And now the first would set their politic hands
to strangle up that breath, a blast of which
their nostrils have sucked up like perfumed air.
Well brother well, by all men this is spoke,
that heart that cannot bow, may yet be broke.

Bajazet. Brother, you must not now stand to upbraid;
They which do fear the vulgars murmuring tongue,
Must also fear the authority of a King;
For rulers must esteem it happiness,
that with their gov'rnment they can hate suppress:
they with too faint a hand the Scepters sway,
Who regard love, or what the people say:
To Kindred we must quite put off respect,
when 't is so near it may our Crown affect.

Jac. Then name of Brother do I thus shake off,
for 't is in vain their mercy to implore,
when impious Statists have decreed before.
Yet King, although thou take my life away
see how I Will dye in better state then thou!
Who like (my Father) after his greatest glory
May fall by some base hand: The Minister.
'To take my breath, shall be thy self a King.
Here Jacup takes a Scarf from his Arm, and putting it about his neck gives
one end to Bajazet. Yet give me leave a while to Prophecy.
You that so Puppet-like delude your hopes,
and Wyer-draw the ancestry from Kings,
thinking, that fates dare not aproach your blood
till they do seize you, then you leave this Earth,
Not as you went, but by compulsion dragged;
Still begging for a morrow from your Grave,
and with such shifts you do deceive your selves,
as if you could deceive mortality,
No (Brother King) not all the Glow-worme state,
which makes thee be a Horse-leach to thy blood,
Not all the Parasitest' Minions thou maintainst,
nor the restorative Dishes that are found out.
Not all thy shifts and tricks can cheat mortality,
or keep thee from a death that is worse then mine.
Should all this fail, age would profess it self
a slow, but a sure Executioner.
O it is a hard thing well to temperate
decaying happiness in great estate.
But this example by me may you gain,
that at my death! not of Heaven complain.
Pull then, and with my fall pull on thy self
Mountains of burdenous honor, which shall curse thee.
Death leads the willing by the hand
But spurs them headlong on, that dare command.
Here himself pulls one end, Bajazet the other, Jacup. dies.
Bajazet. Take up this Trunk; and let us first appoint
our Fathers, and our Brothers Funerals.
the sense less body of that Caitiffe slave,
hurl to a Ditch. Posterity shall hear
Our less ill Chronicled, but time shall hear
these minutes rather, then repeat their woe.
Now Primacy, on thee I Will mediate,
Which who enjoy thee, are in blessed estate.
Whose age in secure silence fleets away,
Without disturbance to his funeral day;
Nor ponderous nor unquiet honors can
Vex him, but dies a primare ancient man.
What greater powers threaten inferior men,
a greater power threatens him again:
And like to wasted Tapers Kings must spend
their lives to light up others: So all end.
Exeunt bearing out solemnly the bodies of Amurath and Jacup.
FINIS.
THE TRAGEDY OF ORESTES, Written by THOMAS GOFF Master of Arts, and student of
Christ-Church in OXFORD, AND Acted by the STUDENTS of the same house.

The second Edition

LONDON, Printed for G. BEDELL and T. COLLINS, at the middle Temple Gate
Fleet Street. 1656.

The Prologue.
THe hushed contentment of two silent hours,
Breath pleasing airs on these attentive ears;
And since we see in this well furnished room,
All our best neighbors are so kindly met,
We would devise some pleasing talk, to spend
The lazy hours of the tedious night:
But for our own invention, 'twas too weak,
Whereon our young Muse durst not wholly lean.
We here present for the revive a tale,
Which once in Athens great Eurypedes
In better phrase, at such a meeting told
The learned Athenians with much applause:
The same we will retell unto your ears;
Whose Atticke judgment is no less then theirs,
We here as builders which do often take stones,
From out old buildings, then must hew and cut,
To make them square, and fitting for a new;
So from an old foundation we have ta'n,
Stones ready squared for our aedifice,
Which if in pleasing our weak skill offends
In making corners disproportionate,
Some room too narrow or some loft to a high;
Yet we well hope, if the whole structure fall.
Your hands, like props, will serve to bear up all.
Spoken by the Author himself: The Names of the Actors.
Agamemnon, King of Greece. Clytemnestra, The Queen. Tyndarus Clytemnestra's
father. Strophius; Father to Pylades. Two dear friends. Orestes, soon to Agam.
Pylades, soon to Stroph.
Electra Daughter to Agamemnon. Aegystheus, Adulterer with Clytemnestra.
Mysander, A Favorite; and Parasite. Ajoung Child of Aegystheus. Nurse. Two
Lords. Chamberlain. A Boy. Attendants.
THE TRAGEDY. OF ORESTES.
Actus 1.
Scena 1.
Enter as from war, Agamemnon, Clytemnestra, Orestes, Pylades, Aegysteus, cum
caeteris. Agam. NOw a fair blessing bless my dearest earth,
and like a Bride adorn thy royal brow,
with fruits rich Garland; a new married Bride
Unto thy King and Husband, who too long
Has left thee widdowed: O, me thinks I see
Turns to the spectators: how all my Grecians with unsatiate looks
and greedy eyes do bid me welcome home:
Each ear that hears the clamor seems to grieve,
it cannot speak, and give a (welcome King:
Come Clytemnestra, let not anger make,
his wrinkled seat upon my loves fair brow;
I have too long been absent from thy bed,
Chide me for that anon, when arm in arm
I shall relate those projects in love terms,
which when they first were acted, made Mars fear
to see each man turned to a God of war.

Clyt. O my dear Lord, absence of things we love,
thus intermixed, makes them the sweeter prove:
That your departure pierced my tender soul,
witness those Crystal floods which in my eyes
did make a sea, when you should go to sea,
those streams, which then flowed from the veins of grief.
at your return do overflow the banks.
But it is with joy.

Agam. Now these ears indeed
have changed their place: they which were wont to hear
no music but the summoning of war
blown through discords brazen instrument,
are blessed now with accents that do fill
my age-dry'd veins with youthful blood again.
These eyes which had no other object once,
but Hector twixt the arms of Greece and Troy,
hewing down men, and making every field
Flow with a sea of blood, now see's blood flow.
In my Orestes cheeks: heaven bless this plant
Orestes kneeles. sprung from the sap of this juicelesse oak;
Now be thy branches green, under whose shade
I may be shadowed from the heat of war.
Rise young Orestes, Oh how it glads my soul,
to see my Queen and Son, my Son and Queen.

Clyt. But come my Lord, true love still hates delays,
let no ears first be blessed with your breath,
till on my breast resting your wearied head,
You tell your war, where that the field's your bed.

Aga. My Queen shall have her will, see how times change.
I that last night thought all the world a sea,
As if our common mother earth, had now
shot her self wholly into Neptunes arms,
and the strong hindges of the world had cracked,
letting the moon fall into the swelling waves,
such watery mountains often did seem to rise,
and quite o'rwhelme us, all the winds at war,
banded the sea on to the others coasts,
Jove thinking Neptune began to strive for heaven,
sent a new sea from thence, and with his thunder,
bad silence to the waves; they uncontrold,
kept on their noise, and let their fury swell,
turning heaven, earth, sea, clouds, and all to hell.
Each Trojan that was saved then 'gan cry,
happy were they that did with Priam die.
It glads me now to think, that that night was
no star, no, not Orion there appeared;
But this night's turned to day, and here does shine,
for a good Omen, my embraced Queen.
With whom her Agamemnon still will stay,
till age and death shall bear him quite away.

Exeunt Agamemnon, Clytemnestra, cum caeteris. Scena 2.
Manet Egysteus. Aegyst. And that shall be ere long. Tush, shall be'sslow,
my vengefull thoughts tell me thou now art dead.
Fie faint Apollo, weakling infant-God,
why would thou let lame Vulcan's hammers beat
down those brave Turrets which thou help'dst to build?
Venus, I see thou art a woman now,
which here are like to take a double foil;
for we, that whilome revel'd in thy camp
in the sweet pleasures of incestuous sheets,
must leave our loved unsatiate desires:
But now begin, thou black Eumenides,
You hand-mayds of great Dis, let such a flame
of anger burn me, as does Etnas forge,
on fury, on, our hate shall not die thus:
I Will draw my poisonous arrow to the length,
that it may hit the mark and fly with strength. Exit

SCEN. 3.
Enter Orestes: Pylades. Orest. Come now my dearest friend, my other self,
my empty soul is now filled to the top,
brimful with gladness, and it must run o'r
into my dear friends heart: those silver hairs,
which time has crowned my Fathers brow withal,
do shine within mine eyes, and like the Sun,
extract all drossie vapors from my soul.
Like as the earth, whom frost have long benumbed,
and brought an Icie dryness on her face,
her veins so open, at a sudden thaw,
that all plants, fruits, flowers, and tender grafts,
kept as close prisoners in their mothers womb,
start out their heads, and on a sudden does
the sad earth countenance with a summer look.
So in this breast, here in this breast dear friend,
whiles Annus ten times circled in the world
ten clumzie winters, and ten lagging springs
has (with my fathers absence) frozen been
all thoughts of joy, which now shall make a spring
in my refreshed soul.
"Things that we daily see the affections cloy,
"hopes long desired bring the greatest joy.

Pyl. Nay, but dear Cousin, give not the reins too much
to new received joys, lest that they run
with so much speed, that they out-breath themselves:
your Father is come home; but being come,
should now some woeful afterclap of fate
(which Omen Jove forbid should come to pass)
but take him hence again, and cross your joy;
each spark of gladness which you now conceive,
would turn a flame for grief: still one extreme,
altering his course, turns to the diverse theme.

Orest. Tush Pylades, talk not of what may be,
we may, indeed in the clearest afternoon
expect a storm.

Pyl. Yes, and such storms often come,
and wet shrewd too, before we get at home.

Orest. O, but I Will be above all fatal power:
I that have such a Father new come home,
I that have such a friend, such too rare gifts;
who gave me these gifts, thought, no scowling frown
of angry fortune ever should throw me down.

Pyl. Call them not gifts Orestes, they are but lent,
mere lendings friend, and lendings we must pay,
when ever the owner shall appoint his day.

Orest. True, Pylades, but owners use to warn
their debtors when they must bring in their sums:
but heavens tell me with favoring aspects,
I still must keep their lendings, and possess,
with frolic joy, all their lent happiness.

Pyl. Trust not the heavens too much, although they smile,
good looks do mortal hearts too often beguile:
the heavens are usurers; and as often it is seen
a full poucht churl give a most fair good even
to his poor Creditor: who, trusting that,
has slackt this payment: on the morrow next
he has been rooted out by the tuskey boar,
which gave the fair good even the day before:
The heavens can do thus too --

Orest. Tush: mortals must
lean on the sacred heaven with greater trust;
but it grows far in night, come let us in
to morrow shall our joys afresh begin. Exeunt.

Scen. 4.
Enter Aegystheus, Clytemnestra; with naked daggers: Agamemnon lying in his
bed. Egyst. O Night, now only spread thy sable wings
over this climate, gather all thy fogs
that they may meet, and make thy face more black:
let horrid murder take thee by the hand
and come along: I have a prodigy
equal to all the murders, all the blood
that has been shed in all Troyes ten years siege.
He draws the curtain. So, snore returned King; good Morpheus hang
thy leaden weight upon his drowsy eyes,
let him not wake till he shall see himself
drencht in a sea of his vermilion goare:
Thou do no Trojan, now, no Hector fear,
but yet I Will show thee a new Hector here.

Clyt. See, I Will turn man too now, and to the hate
which women bear, I Will add a manly strength:
my mind does tremble, what I mean to do.
Breath forth your vapor's, O ye Stygian powers!
and listen to a hateful woman's prayers.
Pluto stand by me for to aid my hand,
I may strike home now, and perform an act
may make Medea blush she thought not of:
Could the old dry bon'd dotard ever dream,
now he had drawn forth all his strength abroad,
he could be welcome to lie bedridden here,
and supple his numbed joints in my fresh arms?

Egyst. Spoke like a queen, spoke like Aegystheus love!
Now great Thyestes Genius, which did prompt
me to this act; Come, be spectator now!
and see revenge for Athens bloody feast.
And thou wronged Clytemnestra call to mind,
how his unsatiate, lustful loathed desire,
doted on every female face he saw,
raped the Priests daughter, and so brought a plague
on all the Grecian host:

Clytem. Yes, yes,

Egyst. yes.
And raped young Briseis from Achilles bed.
Crowd all revengful thoughts into this hour,
now let thy sword let out that lustful blood.
Egistheus stabs him. Wound him Egystheus, kill him not at once,
we will be true Tyrants, let him feel he dies.

Aga. Help Clytemnestra, help me, my dear Queen.

Clyt. Yes dotard, I will help thee, thus, yes thus:
She stabs him. Remember the Priests daughter: this for her,
and this for Briseis:

Agam. See, my Grecians, see,
your King which you so gladly entertained.
Sol, hide thy self in everlasting night,
or when thou risest, let thy blushing face
make these to blush.

Clytem. Ay, so, curse on, curse on:

Agam. O Clytemnestra, O my once dear wife,
is this the entertainment that thou giv'st
thy new come husband? gratulates thou thus
my ten years absence? See these frosty hairs
would even move Hecuba to pity me;
Look on these aged arms which in this bed,
thought to have been blessed with thy kind embrace.

Clytem. Yes, mine or Cassandra's, old adulterer.

Agam. Kinsman Aegystheus; O my dearest wife
whom shall I call? me thinks you both are mine.
What Titius, what Megaera has put on
Aegystheus and my Clytemnestra's shapes?

Aegyst. Calst thou us friends?

Stabs him again. Agam. O be not so, and I Will not call you so:
Let not your coward weapons wound this head,
that erst did scorn to shrink at Priams blow.
O hew me not down thus for my sons sake,
dear Clytemnestra, for Orestes sake.
Is this the Trojan tale! how I should tell,
that here great Hector slew Antiochus,
and here that Meontiades was slain,
and poor Prothesilaus dear to Lacdamie:
I thought to tell how these men lost their blood;
and see my blood is thus let forth at home.

Aegy. Is your hot blood yet cold!

Clyt. breath dotard, do.
you shall have gaps enough to let your soul
find a free passage to his deserved flames.

Agam. No pity yet? O then, no pity light
on you, nor yours; but let dire revenge
come learn how she may after handle you:
O, I am drowned in blood, and now must yield
to murderers weapons; treason win's the field.
Alas this coming home has had small joy;
Argos has worser foes then ever Troy. Moritur,

Clyt. Now I am Clytemnestra right, now I deserve
to add one more to the three Furies, now
do I count this more then my nuptial night;
It Is mine, it is thine, Egystheus, and none else
shall share a minute of this right, but we.

Egyst. Me thinks I now go equal with the stars,
and my proud head touches the highest pole;
Hark, hell applauds me, and me thinks I hear A noise
Thyestes tell me, I have done enough:
And now I kiss my hands, whilst yet they bear
this tincture on them, and embrace my Queen,
now made my love; lets in, this night the Fates
have amply fed us with revengeful cates.

Exeunt Scen. 5.
Enter Orestes, as from his Bed, unbutton'd in slippers, a Torch in his hand.
What horrid dreams affright me? I see naught
that I should fear, and yet me thinks I fear.
Mine eyes scarce closed, my busy Fancy saw
a sight that dashed all comforts of the day:
me thought my Father lying in his Tent,
hateful Achylles, for his wronged love
comes in with Briseis, and they two let forth
streams of fresh blood from out his aged side,
with that his Echoed schrich did make me wake;
but I remembered then he was come home,
and yet I Will see him, still me thinks I quake.
Do I still dream? Are not mine eyes unclos'd?
He draws the Curtain. Is this a Torch? yea, it is, it burns, I see
I am awake, do not delude me Night!
Now stand on tip-toes Atlas, lift heaven higher,
I may have air enough to breath my woes in,
O let me yet recall thy posting Soul!
if Charon have not hurried thee too fast,
if yet thou have not drunk on Lethes Pool,
come back, and tell me who it is this night,
has done this deed far blacker than the night?
Ah! Art thou fled past call? Why, thou were old,
me thinks thou should not haste so fast away!
Was it for this thou swe'tst so often in Arms!
Was it for this that the froth swelling foam,
when thy Ships top touched heaven, and deep placed hell;
that thou must yet escape curled Neptune's waves,
to be a Palinurus in thy shore,
there drown thy aged locks in Crimson gore?
O, if one spark yet of thy Princely Soul
remain within this trunk, now let it shine
and light mine ignorant eyes to read the names
of these night vultures, whose devouring bills
have made a Titius of thy royal corpse:
who did not fear great Agamemnons sleep?
Arm, arm your selves all you all-potent Gods,
you which we term just Ministers of heaven!
shoot forked lightning from the marble poale,
let the all-seeing eye of heaven shoot flames
which may parch up the marrow from their bones,
should they lie coucht in the breast of the Thunderer,
or be entrencht with guards of furies fierce,
heaven, earth nor hell, should keep them from my sword.
Do thou sleep Jove! O, could thou snore so fast,
and let thy great vicegerent thus be torn?
Some of the immortal powers have had fathers,
and know what it is to have them murdered thus.
But I turn woman now: O, I rave out
my passions; do, grief, pour out thy self,
that thou may make room in my empty heart,
to fill it with revenge.
Scena 6.
Enter Clytemnestra, Aegystheus, in night-robes. Clyt. How now? what ails our
son, how now Orestes!

Orest. O some are come now to help me to grieve:
See, mother, see, your husband and my father,
the King of Greece, great Shephard of his Land,
see, see him here:

She faines her self to swoun, Egy. catches her falling. Clyt. O help me now
good heaven to keep my sex,
let me dissemble.

Aegyst. Help (my Lords) the Queen.

Clyt. Why hindered you my soul, that whilst he lived,
was linkt to his, and would too now have fled
with winged desire to have been with him!
What do I live for! Agamemon slain!
My Lord, my King, husband, wake my Lord,
what bloody Trojan followed thee from thence
to kill thee here? could he not one night
have let me rested in thy sweet embraces?
Must he for surenesse make so many holes,
for thy sweet soul to fly to be a God?
O let my tears be balm to these thy wounds,
let my lips kiss, and warm thy gellid lips;
let my hair wipe these clots of blood away
from thy age-honor'd side: O dry your tears,
join knees and prayers with me, awake ye Gods,
They both kneel. and send our vows, since we can send no wounds:
Come son, we women still know how to curse.
Let him that did it be an Adulterer.

Aegyst. Faith she begins well, sure she knows the man.

aside. Clyt. Let him be conscious, he has don a deed
deserves revenge, whether it fall or no:
Let him for ever bear in mind this night,
and who 'twas helped him in this bloody act.

Aegist. Yes, he will remember how you curse him now.

aside. Orst. If ever he have children, let them be
murdered before his face, that they may know
how nature binds a father and a son.

Aegyst. Now hands I thank you, now my soul grows glad,
had not he grieved thus, I had lost revenge.

Clyt. But come my son, now let us talk of graves,
of Epitaphs, and tombs, and's soul being fled,
Draw the curtain and carry him away. let us lap his Trunk up in a sheet of
lead.

Exeunt Clytemnestra, and Aegystheus. Manent Orest. Orest. Methinks I see a
Tragedy at hand,
to which this night has as a Prologue bin;
I Will make a prayer now worthy Atreus grandchild,
let the foul Adder sting me as I walk,
the poisonous toad belch her black venom forth
in my despised face, let it be thought
I never had a father, but some monster
bred by a slimy exhalation,
If my revenge fly not with ample wing:
till then rest soul, hate told, may lose his sting.

Actus 2.
Scena 1.
Enter Cassandra sola as a mad Prophetess. Cass. O ye dead Trojans leap
within your graves!
O mother that thou had lived this night!
Now thou'ldst be glad to have lost so many sons:
the Grecians are revenged upon themselves,
I thank thee soul, that thou keeptst here till now
to let me see Greece overcome it self;
I live, I live, I Am here, I live to see it:
I do not dream on it, no, I saw the blood
run from his side, whole Cataracts, all Greece.
Apollo, how am I bound now for this
that I do only see this happiness?
Hecuba, Priam, young Astianax.
Look Hecuba, Greece now does act your woes,
laugh Hecuba, for now Electra weeps:
and Tyndarus he knows not what to do:
Come little Cuz, come my Astianax,
Orestes is in a worse case then thou.
Still I had others for to weep with me,
but none are left to laugh now, but my self:
What should he fear at home? A conqueror fear!
It Is done, it is done, leave fighting Hector, leave,
the Grecians mean to fight against themselves,
from Tyndarus the first brand took fire
which burnt down Troy: and now an other here
kindles from him, to set a fire Greece,
Graia juvenca venit, quae se, patremque virumque
Perdidit, Io laetor, Graja juvenca venit.
Hellen, thy sister Hellen, nay she is thine:
who could have thought that Hector being slain,
old Priam made a sacrifice to death,
Troy turned to cinders, poor Andromacha
dragged by her hair to death; Astianax
sent out o'th world before he well came in,
Ha, ha, who could have thought after all this
Cassandra should have ever laughed again?
One hour of laughter following many years
of discontent, does help to sweeten tears Exit.

Actus 2. Scena 2.
Enter Aegystheus, Clytemnestra. Aegy. Fair morning to my Queen, nay more, my
love,
how likes my sweet her change of bedfellow?

Clyt. Look as an hallow leafelesse failing oak,
to whom, for that h'hath bin her weight too long,
the earth denies to lend him moisture, so
his sap fails, and he stands on a green
amongst sprouting Elms, that they may seem more fresh
whilst he is but held a monument of years.
Such one seemed Agamemnon; a dry tree:
thou like a sprouting Elm, whom I embrace
like twining Ivy, with these now blessed arms,
blessed whilst this treasure in them they hold locked:

Aegyst. O who'd not do a murder for a woman!
Heaven had but two things for the Gods reserved,
fire, and women: when with Giant strength
Promotheus had taken one, Jove in his rage
threw him the to'ther, bad him keep 'em both.
O they are rare creatures, they have such Meanders,
Their tears will come and go with such brave art!
Come now my Queen, one sweet Ambrosian kiss;
O Nectar! prithee had thou taught thy tears
how they should flow before?

Clyt. No, trust me love,
I knew my tears would soon be at command,
and faith the boy had almost made me weep
really once. Were not my curses rare?

Aegyst. Yes, all was woman-like: but yet that boy
he took it deeply; would he were with his father,
so gone, it skills not how; were he away,
we would act freely all our lustful play.

Clyt. O but my love! he is mine: Nor can the raven
dig her sharp beak into her own birds breast:
He will forget his father: woe will break;
it is not the greatest grief that most does speak.

Aegyst. O, but he will bear still a suspicious eye;
and who in bloody Scenes does act a part,
thinks every eye does penetrate his heart.
Nor can we ere be free, or I enjoy
true pleasures; we must be but thieves at most,
close in delights, and have a Pander still
to be a Factor 'twixt thy bed and mine:
this we could have before, what now we do,
the world should see done, and applaud us too.

Clyt. Why my dear Love, I that would set my hand
to stain my marriage sheets with husbands blood,
would let these hands, instructed now in ill,
not leave one arm of that uprooted tree;
Could but Aegistheus give me any hope,
that from this top there should one spreading branch
grow up and flourish.

Aegyst. Now thou art thy self;
yes, yes my love, there shall one spring from us
shall be a lofty Pine, let this be cropped;
murder must murder guard, guilt add to guilt,
after one drop, whole streams of blood be spilt.

walks away. Scen. 3.
Enter Pylades, Orestes, Electra, Strophius. Pyl. Dear friend, what mean you,
to o'rwhelm your self
in such a sea of grief?

Orest. Father! dear Agamemnon!

Pyl. Nay cease this tempest, thou have lost a father,
why, it is but change, my father shall be thine,
I Will be thy brother, nay, I Will be thy self,
weep when thou weep'st, and where thou go I Will go,
and bring thee on thy pilgrimage of woe.

Elect. Brother, look up; have not I lost a father?
yes, yes, and would a river of fresh tears
turn Lethes stream, and bring him from the wharf,
with a North gale of windy blowing sighs,
I would expire my soul, become all tears.

Stro. Come, you have lost a father, I a brother,
the Queen a Husband, all the Land a King;
yet all this but a man; therefore must dye:
Our woes may all be in one balance poys'd.
His book of life the Fates had over-read,
and turned the leaf where his last period stood.
Now an immortal wreath circles his brow,
and makes him King in heaven, who was before
at most a God on earth: Hence difference springs,
Kings are earths Gods, and Gods are heavenly Kings.

Orest. Let us join words then now, and Swan-like sing
the doleful dirge to a departed King:
Thou friend did of this misery divine,
therefore the burden of the song is mine:
words Orators for woe, which plead the cause,
when griefe's the judge, and sighs are all the laws,
each one a sob for Diapason bears,
our tunes shall drown the music of the spheres:
O what Hirudo with unsatiate thirst,
could draw the blood from out those Princely veins,
from whence flowed comfort to so many souls!
Spies his mother, goes to her. Mother, when wept you last? here take a scarf
dry your eyes: now by -- you need none,
what shine of comfort has dried up your tears?

Clyt. Our son's too saucy with his mother Queen:
Why, Sir, shall you tell us a time to weep?

Orest. Us? good: Who is it makes the plurality?
'Twas wont to be my father: does he live?

Clyt. Sir, curb this lavish speech, or I Will forget
you are my son, and make you but a subject.

Aegyst. Good Cousin add not disobedience
unto your mothers griefs.

Orest. My mother, no,
she is not here, no, she has hid her self
in some odd nooke, or angle unperceived,
she might not see this impious stygian world.

Cly. Aegystus, can thou still suffer thy dull sword in the sheath?
Take the rank head from this o'r-growing weed.

Stro. Remember Clytemnestra, he is your son.

Clyt. He is so, and I Will learn him to be so:
Had I a brazen bull, it should be heat
hotter then for the Tyrant: Disobedient!
More harsh then Adders hisses is thy voice,
Sir, you shall dye, but with a living death,
he still shall live, but live to know he dies;
who strait threats death, knows not to Tyranize.

Exeunt Aegystheus, Clytemnestra. Stro. What temper's grown on the distracted
Queen?
Has grief, conceived for her late husbands death,
brought her so far, she has forgot her self?

Orest. No Uncle, no, by -- I do suspect.
O, my prophetic soul divines much ill!
Well, I will fly. But hear this stratagem,
it shall be rumor'd in the ear of the Court
I was found dead, I Will put a new shape on,
and live alone, to hear how things go here.

Pyl. Nay, not alone Orestes, whilst I live,
should make thy bed upon the rigid Alps,
or frozen Caucasus, wrapped in sheets of snow,
I Would freeze unto thy side; we will tell tales
of Trojan warriers, and deposed Kings.
Tell of strange shipwreck, of old Priams fall,
how mad Andromacha did tear her hair,
when the wild horses tore brave Hectors limbs:
We Will think they all do come, and weep with us;
grief loves companions, and it helps woe,
when it hears every one groan forth his, Oh!
it eases much, and our plaints fall more sweet,
when a whole consort in one tune do meet.
The half-dead ship-man, which has shipwreck borne,
seeing many drowned, it makes him less to mourn:
It made Deucalion care the less to die,
when he had all the world in company.
Thus we will sit, and our tears turns shall keep,
thou for thy father, I for thee will weep:
If actors on the Stage having no cause,
but for to win an hearers hands applause,
can let fall tears, we will think we Actors be,
and only do but play griefs Tragedy.

Orest. O, but dear friend, should we but act a part,
the play being ended, passion left the heart,
and we should share of joy: but my whole age
must never move from off this woeful Stage:
But we must take our leave; Uncle, farwell,
remember what I spoke; and Sister, you
must tarry here, my thoughts shall busied be,
to find the man that let my father blood.
Can I but find Aegystheus did consent,
to spill one drop, O, I would pierce his heart
with venomed daggers, and so butcher him,
that all Apollos skill in physic herbs,
nor Aesculapius the Epidaurian God,
should keep his soul out of Enio's hand;
Come my dear friend; to all the rest farewell;
If heaven relate it not, I Will know it from hell.

Exeunt Pylades, Orestes. Scena 4.
Enter Aegysteus, Clytemnestra, Mysander, Strophius, Electra another way.
Aegyst. What, is Orestes fled? sure there is some plot,
if you dear Queen, but search Electra well,
you will find she knows whither her brothers gone.

Clyt. If in her heart there be but lodged a thought
unknown to me, this hand shall rip her breast,
and search her inparts, but I Will find it out.
Mysander, call Electra.

Aegist. O, were that moat taken from our comforts beams,
no cloud ever then could overshade our joys,
his life must be cut off without delay,
mischief, by mischief finds the safest way:
But here is Electra.

Cly. Why! how now Minion! what a blubbering still!
Huswife, pray where is your brother, where is my son?

Elect. Mother, pray where is my father, where is your husband?
Enter Stropheus, and speaks. Hail to my my gracious Queen, here is one at
door.
brings you a message, he will not relate
to any, but your self, he says it is sad.

Clyt. Why, the more dismal, the more welcome it is.
But as for you --

Elect. Good mother do your worst,
no plague can ever make me more accursed,
nothing is worse then death, that I Will not fly.

Clyt. Yes, life is worse to those that feign would die.
But where is the messenger?

Scena 5.
Enter Nuncius. What whirlwinde rising from the womb of earth
does raise huge Pelion unto Ossa's top,
that both being heapt, I stand upon them both
and with an hundred Stentor-drowning voice,
relate unto the world the saddest tale
that ever burdned the weak jaws of man?
Aegyst. Why, what portentous news? Amaze us not,
tell us what ever it be.

Nun. Were my mind settled, would the gellid fear,
that freeseth up my sense, set free my speech,
I would unfold a tale which makes my heart
throb in my intrals, when I seem to see it.

Clyt Relate it quickly, hold's not in suspense.

Nun. Upon the mount of yonder rising cliffe,
which the earth has made a bulwark for the sea,
whose pearelesse head is from the streams so high,
that whosoe'r looks down, his brain will swim
with a vertigo: The space remov d so far
the object from the eye, that a tall ship
seemed a swift flying bird: upon this top
saw I two men making complaints to heaven,
one's voice distinctly still cried, Father, King,
great Agamemnon, whose diviner soul
fled from thy corpse, exiled by butchers hands:
his friend still sought to keep his dying life
with words of comfort, that it should not rush
too violently upon the hands of Fate.
He deaf as sea, to which he made his plaints,
still cried out, Agamemnon, I will come,
and find thy blessed soul where ever it walk;
in what fair Temple of Elysium
so ever it be, my soul shall find it out.
With that his friend knit him within his arms,
striving to hold him, but when it was no boot,
they hand in hand, thus plunged into the maine;
strait they arose, and strived (me thought) for life,
but swelling Neptune not regarding friends,
wrapped their embraced limbs in following waves:
Until at last their dear departing souls
hastened to Styx, and I no more could see.

Stro. O 'twas Orestes, 'twas my Pylades,
which arm in arm did follow him to death.

Elect. O my Orestes, O my dearest brother!
It Is he, it is he, that thus has drowned himself.

Aegyst. Why, then if Agamemnon and his son
have brought their lease of life to the full end:
I am Thyestes son, and the next heir,
to sit in Argos Throne of Majesty.
Thanks to our Alpheus sea, who as 't'ad strived
to gratify Aegystheus, raised his force,
and gathered all his waters to one place,
they might be deep enough to drown Orestes:
But come my Queen, let us command a feast.
To get a kingdom, who'ld not think it good,
to swim unto it through a sea of blood?

Actus 3.
Scena 1.
Enter Tyndarus, Misander. Tynd. Our daughter sends for us? how fares she? well?
she mournes I Am sure for her husbands death.

Mis. My Lord, she took it sadly at the first:
But time has lessened it.

Tind. I, grief soon ends
that flows in tears; they still are women's friends:
But how is it rumord now in Argos, though,
that Agamemnon died?

Mis. Why, he was old,
and death thought best to seize on him at home.

Tynd. 'Twas a long home, he got by coming home:
Well, well, Misander, I like not the course,
the peoples murmr makes my cheeks to blush.

Mis. My gracious Lord, who trusts their idle murmur,
must never let the blush go from his cheek;
They are like flags growing on muddy banks,
whose weak thin heads blown with one blast of wind,
they all will shake, and bend themselves one way:
Great minds must not esteem what small tongues say.
All things in state must ever have this end,
the vulgar should both suffer, and commend,
if not for love, for fear; great Majesty
should do those things which vulgars dare not fee.

Tynd. O, Sir, but those that do commend for fear,
do in their hearts a secret hatred bear.
Ever learn this; the truest praise indeed,
must from the heart, and not from words proceed.
I fear some soul play: does Aegystheus mean,
then totally for to invest himself
in Agamemnons seat? Where Is young Orestes?

Mis. Why my Lord, he for the great grief conceived
being young, not knowing well to rule himself
with sway of reason, ran upon his death
and threw himself with my lord Strophius son,
into the midst of Alpheus, so was drowned,

Ty. How took my daughter that?

Mys. Why, wisely too,
and like her self; not being in despair:
her royal womb will bring forth many more,
shall be as dear as ever Orestes was.

Tynd. I fear heaven cannot look with equal eyes
upon so many deaths, but means to send
plague after plague; for in a wretched state,
one ill begets another dismal Fate:
But go and tell my daughter I will come,
and help to solemnize her nuptial night:
Her hasty wedding, and the old Kings neglect,
makes my conjectural soul some ill suspect.

Exeunt. Scen. 2.
Enter Orestes, and Pylades. Orest. If ever God lent any thing to earth,
whereby it seemed to sympathize with heaven,
it is this sacred friendship: Gordian knot
which Kings, nor Gods, nor Fortune can undo.
O what Horoscopus, what constellation,
held in our birth so great an influence,
which one affection in two minds unites?
How has my woe been thine, my fatal ill
has still been parted, and one share been thine!

Pyl. Why, dearest friend, suppose my case were thine,
and I had lost a father, would not thou
in the like sort participate my grief?

Ores. Yes, witness heaven I would.

Pyl. So, now thou have lost a father.

Orest. True, Pylades, thou putst me well in mind,
I have lost a father, a dear, dear father,
a King, a brave old King, a noble soldier,
and yet he was murdered! O my forgetful soul!
Why should not I now draw my vengeful sword,
and strait-way sheath it in the murderers heart?
Minos should never have vacation,
whilst any of our progeny remained.
Well, I will go, and so massacre him,
I Will teach him how to murder an old man,
a King, my father, and so dastardly
to kill him in his bed.

Pyl. Alas, Orestes!
Grief does distract thee: who is it thou will kill?

Orest. Why, he, or she, or they that killed my father.

Pyl. I, who are they?

Orest. Nay, I know not yet,
but I will know.

Pyl. Stay thy vengeful thoughts,
and since thus long we have estranged our selves
from friends and parents, let us think why it is,
and why we had it noised in the Court,
we both were dead; the cause was thy revenge,
that if by any secret private means,
we might but learn who 'twas that drenched their swords
in thy dear fathers blood, we then would rouse
black Nemesis in flames from out her cave,
and she should be the umpire in this cause.
Man's soul is like a boistrous working sea,
swelling in billows for disdain of wrongs,
and tumbling up and down from day to day,
grows greater still in indignation,
turns malcontent, in pleaselesse melancholy,
spending her humors in dull passion, still
locking her senses in unclosed gins,
till by revenge she is set at liberty.

Orest. O, now my thirsty soul expects full draughts
of Ate's boiling cup: O, how twoul'd ease
my heart to see a channel of his blood
streaming from hence to hell, that killed my father.

Pyl. I, but dear friend, thou must not let rage loose,
and like a furious Lion, from whose den
the forrester has stole away his young,
he missing it, straight runs with open jaws
on all he meets, and never hurting him
that did the wrong: Wise men must mix revenge
with reason, which by providence will prompt,
and tell us where is the mark, whereat we aim.
Till then, in Cinders we will rake up our grief:
fire thus kept, still lives, but opened dies;
from smallest sparks great flames may one day rise.

Orest. True, friend, but, O, who ever will reveal
this hideous act! what power shall we invoke?

Pyl. Yes, harken friend, I have bethought a means;
not distant far from this place where we live,
there stands a cave hard by a hollow oak,
in a low valley, where no Sun appears,
no music ever was there heard to sound;
but the harsh voice of croking ominous ravens,
and sad Nyctimine the bird of night:
There Is now a shed, under whose ancient roof
there sometimes stood an Altar for the Gods,
but now slow creeping time, with windy blasts
has beaten down that stately Temples walls,
defaced his rich built windows, and until'd
his battlemented roof, and made it now
a habitation, not for God, nor men:
Yet an old woman, who does seem to strive
with the vast building for antiquity,
in whose rough face time now has made such holes,
as in those uncouth stones she there has made
her self a cell, wherein to spend her age.
Her name's Canidia; great in Magic spells,
at whose dire voice, the gods themselves would quake
to hear her charm the second time pronounced.
One that can know the secrets of the heavens,
and in the air has flying ministers,
to bring her news from earth, from sea, from hell:
which, when thick night has compassed in the world,
then does she go to dead men's graves and tombs,
and sucks the poisonous marrow from their bones,
then makes her charm, which she nere spent in vain:
Nor does she come as supplyant to the gods,
but making Erebus, and heaven to quake,
she sends a spell drowning infernal thunder,
by which all secrets that were ever done,
in fair white parchment writ in lines of blood,
locked in the inmost room of hell it self
is brought unto her: and by her we may
have leave to look in Pluto's register,
and read the names of those most loathed furies,
which rent thy Fathers soul from out his trunk:
But she must see thy fathers dead bones first,
them we must bring her, for by them she works:
This if thou dare assay, I Will go along.

Orest. If I dare assay! yes, yes, dear friend,
were it to burst my fathers sepulcher,
and wake his Manes, show them Radamanth;
their iterated sight will burn my soul
with such a sparkling flame of dire revenge,
as Nessus shirt did burn great Hercules:
If that the scrowle which did contain their names,
were in a lake of flaming brimstone drencht,
I Would take it out, or fech't from Pluto's arms:
But come; if earth has such a creature as can tell,
twill save a journey (for this once) from hell.

Scena. 3.
Enter Aegystheus, Clytemnestra, Tyndarus, Mysander, Strophius, Electra, cum
caet. with a crown. Aegystheus ascends the throne, Mysander crowns him:
Clytemnestra great with child. Mys. All years of happy days, all hours of joy
so circle in thy state, as does this crown
wreath and combine thy princely temples in,
All speak, Jove still protect Aegystheus.

Aegyst. Thanks to my fathers subjects:
Now Argos swell up to the brim with joy,
and streams of gladness flow on Tyndarus,
Now made our father; see old King, see here is
my Queen does mean to make thee a grandfather,
see how thy royal blood shall propagate,
whose Kingly drops like heaven distilling dew,
shall add fresh life unto thy withered root.

Tynd. Yes, but Aegystheus, there were arms before
grew on this tree; but the Fates envious axe
has cut them off before they had time to sprout.

Clyt. O Sir, the Fates needs must have leave to make
ways for themselves to manage what they do:
Had Agamemnon and Orestes lived,
they could not then have blessed me with these gifts:
Still when the heavens and Fates do work their will,
they intend good, though sometimes there come ill.

Tynd. O but pray Jove the Fates now were not forced,
but deeds like words no man can ever recall,
be it good or ill; once done, we must bear all.

Aegyst. Come father sit we down, and make a feast,
They set to the feast. to glad our hearts; Heaven still does for the best.

Stro. O let my latter age not live to see
Aegystheus wear great Argos diadem.

Elect. Fear not good uncle, there will be a time,
to pull him down, although he yet does climb.

Tynd. Who ever trusted much on fortunes gifts,
on wife, on state, on health, on friends, on lands,
may look on Agamemnons coming home:
Fortune me thinks never showed her power more;
how quickly could she turn her Fatal sword
upon his breast, that thought himself past harm?
she that had used death like an angry dog,
holding him up, when that he should have bit,
when all the game was past, and's fury laid,
the king being past all danger, safe at home,
then he slip's collar, never until then,
and fortune she stood hissing of him on,
till he had torn the good kings soul away.

Clytemnestra seems to weep. Aegyst. Nay but good father let pass elegies,
you draw fresh tears now from your daughters eyes,
who shed enough before at's funeral:
let us talk who are to live, not who are dead;
and think what progeny shall spring from us
may bear your Image stamped upon the face,
this we must talk of now, not what griefs past
but of the joy to come. My Queen not well!
Clytemnestra rises from the table. Now good Electra look unto your mother,
Lucina be propitious to the birth;
why, will not now a young Aegystheus be,
as grateful as an old Orestes was?
Thou times good lengthener, age, posterity,
spread thy self still upon Aegystheus line,
help me to treasure up antiquity,
and from Thyestes loins let spring an heir,
shall ever sit in great Thyestes chair. Exeunt.

SCEN. 4.
Enter Pylades and Orestes, with his arms full of a dead man's bones, and a
scull. Pyl. Near to this shady grove, where never light
appears, but when it is forced with some charm,
Canidia dwells, in such a dusky place,
that the night goblins fear to come too near it.
Here let us knock.

Orest. Nay, Pylades, see here,
O give me leave to discant on these bones:
This was my Fathers scull; but who can know
whether it were some subjects scull, or no?
Where be these Princely eyes, commanding face,
the brave majestic look, the Kingly grace?
Where Is the imperious frown, the God-like smile,
the graceful tongue, that spoke a soldiers style?
Ha, ha, worms eat them! could no Princely look,
no line of eloquence writ in this book,
command, nor yet persuade the worms away?
Rebellious worms! could a King bear no sway?
Injurious worms! what could no flesh serve
but Kings for you? By -- you all should sterve,
had I but known't: What must my father make
a feast for you? O ye devouring creatures!

Pyl. Now some Archilocus to help him make
vengeful Iambicks, that would make these worms
to burst themselves: Passion must please
it self by words, grief told, it self does ease.

Ore. You cowardly bones, would you be thus unclothed
by little crawling worms! by -- I never thought
my fathers bones could ever have been such cowards:
O you ungrateful worms! how have you used him?
See their ingratitude! O ambitious creatures,
how they still domineere over a Kings carcass!

Py. How could they think when thou came to'the crown
that thou should bear, that these should eat thy father?

Orest. True, Pylades, should I not rend their maws,
devise new tortures? O most horrible treason,
that worms should come unto a great Kings face,
and eat his eyes! why, I would undertake
but at one stamp to kill a thousand of them:
and I will kill these:
Stamps upon them. Go you King-eating creatures: I will mar
all your digestion.

Pyl. Alas, where be his wits?
He stands declaming against senseless worms,
and turns more senseless then the worms themselves:
where is now the oracle you should consult?
The great Magician? now the Centaurs thought
shall be example to all future years;
and now transcend Proserpina's invention.
Ha, have thou found them out? ha, were they worms?

Orest. O prithee laugh not at me, call her, call her;
Pylades knock whilst I stand gathering up my fathers bones,
his dear dissected bones; O, I remember, here
ran the strong sinews, 'twixt his knitting joints,
here to this bone was joined his princely arm,
here stood the hand that bare his warlike shield,
and on this little joint was placed the head,
that Atlas-like bare up the weight of Greece:
here, here betwixt these hollow yawning jaws
stood once a tongue, which with one little word
could have commanded thousand souls to death:
Good hands endure this your weighty task,
and good eyes strive not to make moist his bones
with weeping tears:
What Scinis or Procustes ever could
have hackt a King into such things as these?
Alas here is every part now so deformed,
I know not which was his, yet all was his.

Sound infernal Music. Scena 5.
Enter Canidia, like an Enchauntresse. Orest. Protect us O ye Ministers of
heaven,
stand near me my good Genius, my soul has lost
his humane function, at this hellish sight.

Can. Who is it disturbs our cave? what messenger
has Pluto sent, that would know ought from us?
what are you? speak, Canidia cannot stay.

Pyl. Prompt us some Ghost.
Great fear of earth, and governesse of nature,
in whose deep closet of that sacred heart
are writ the characters of future Fate;
and what is done, and what must be thou know:
Whose words make burning Acheron grow cold,
and Jove leave thundering, when he hears thy name:
to thee we come: O turn thy secret book,
and look whose names thou there shall see inscribed
for murderers, read o'r all the catalogue,
until thou find there engraven those
which killed the King of Greece, great Agamemnon.

Orest. Yes, he that did owe these bones which worms have eat;
it is not now one of the meaner sort
that craves this boon, but it is the heir of Greece,
heir only now but to my fathers grave;
I not command, but my astonished soul
entreats to know.
If in thy book it be not yet put down,
command the gods to unlock the gates of heaven,
and fetch forth death, command him to relate
who 'twas put Agamemnon in his hands,
this is our business, this, great prophetess,
made us approach to thy most hallowed cell.

Can. Ho, ho, ho, I tell thee fond young prince,
a lesser power thou might have implored,
which might have urged the unwilling fiends to this;
our dire enchantments carry such a force,
that when the stars, and influence of heaven,
have sucked the lively blood from out men's veins,
I at my pleasure bring it back again;
I knew each hour in the Trojan fight,
what Grecian, or what Phrygian should die,
and fierce Achilles had no sooner pierced
great Hectors side, but Fate did send me word:
Earth, Sea, deep Chaos, all the stony hills,
will open themselves to show me prodigies;
Night will unmask her brow, to let me see
what black conceptions reem within her womb.

Orest. O then relate, great Mistress of thy Art,
the things we crave:

Can. What time of night is it?

Pyl. Upon the stroke of twelve.

Can. Strait when a cloudy even clappeth the Air,
and all light's drench't in misty Acheron,
when the black palpheries of the full cheekt moon,
have got behind this part of the Hemispheare,
and dark Aldebor, and is mounted high
into the sable Cassiopeias chair,
and night full mounted in her seat of jet,
sits wrapped within a cabinet of clouds,
when serpents leave to hiss, no dragons yell,
no birds do sing, no harsh tuned toads do croake,
the Armenian Tiger, and the ravenous woolf,
shall yield up all their tyranny to sleep,
and then none walk but hells disturbed spirits,
children of night, such as belong to me,
I Will show thee thy desire; give me these bones.

Orest. Here, take them Mother, use them gently,
they were a Kings bones once. O not so hard.

Can. Why senseless boy, do think that I respect
a Kings dead bones, more then another man's?
O they smell rankly; I, this sent does please,
Smells to them. but I must now to work: why Sagana.

Pyl. Look here thou King of Greece, fond Menelaus,
thou which did bring so many goodly shapes
into such things as these, and all for Helen:
Takes up the scull. Which when the worms bred of her dainty flesh,
shall have knaw'd off her tender rubie lips,
and left her gumlesse, look upon her then;
and thou would even disgorge thy self to see,
such putrid vermin to lie kissing her.

Orest. This head had once a royal diadem,
now knock it, beat it, and 'twill never cry treason.

Can. Why Sagana.

Orest There was a player once upon a stage,
who striving to present a drecry passion,
brought out the urn of his late buried son,
it might the more affect him, and draw tears:
But I, as if I had no passion left,
not acting of a part, but really
in a true cause having my fathers bones,
his hollow scull, yet crawling full of worms,
I cannot weep, no not a tear will come.

Can. Why Sagana, Veia, Erictho, know you not your time?

Scen. 6.
Enter Sagana, Veia, Erictho, three witches. Sag. What would you, Beldam?

Can. Has not triform'd Hecate put on
her Styx-dyed mantle, is it not now fit time
to work our charms in?

Veia. We here are ready against thy sacred charm.

Can. You two, sit by, and bear in mind this charge;
Who ever you see, who ever I present,
let your tongues be perculiss'd in your jaws;
stir not, nor speak not, till the charm be done.

Pyl. Fear not, it shall be chained with silence.

Can. Night, and Diana sacred Queen,
Which ever has spectator been
Unto our baleful hideous rights,
Never acted but in darkest nights,
Now in this fatal hears-bred hour,
Show to my rites the greatest power.
Erictho when my torch shall twinkle,
A vernal water thou shall sprinkle
About the room, now let us kneel,
Our heavy burden hell shall feel:
Lets all coin words, now we may see
Who 'twas did work this prodigy.
Omnes. Pluto, great Pluto, we command,
Thou send unto us out of hand,
The shapes of them that killed the King,
Great Agamemnon.

Infernal Music. Enter in a dumb show, Aegistheus and Clytemnestra, with their
bloody daggers, look upon the bed, go to it, and stab, and then make a show of
gladness and depart. Or. O'tis above my bearing! were I linkt here with chains,
I would like Cerberus draw Alcides back:
Stay, stay, by -- revenge shall take you here;
nay, I will follow you, should they take their cave,
where Etna vomits fire, I would in:
my mother! Clytemnestra! Aegystheus! was it they?
Nay, I will o'rtake them.

Can. O son, remember what I told you, son,
many a rockie hill and stoney mount,
many a sea, and vast Charybdis gulf,
stands betwixt them and thee, though they seem near.

Orest. O piety! O most prodigious nature!
What creatures have thou made to live on earth?
How have thou clothed black darkness with a scarf
of unstained purity, and put a godly face
upon portentous devils? Oh, how my mother wept!
How Clytemnestra! how that Hyena wept!
No more my mother, I abjure the name,
she did not bring me forth, I know she did not:
But I Will o'rtake 'em; show me (Canidia) where,
which way they went, where have they hid themselves.
Should they mount up to the chariot of the Sun,
and in his Car fly to the Antipodes,
or in the farthest nook of yonder sphere,
get up and place themselves 'twixt Taurus horns,
the fire-breathing bull, or Lerna's Hydra,
were there no entrance but ten Lions jaws,
I Would run through all, and make my way my self:
I Would fix them to the Axel-tree of heaven,
where their infectious carcasses should hang
a bait for flying spirits in the Air.
Canidia, I thank thee for thy pains,
still may thy sacred Art reveal such deeds,
still keep the gates of Orcus yawning open,
make the dark powers ready at command.

Pyl. But let us have dear friend, this vast worlds room
allows us none, but thy dead fathers Tomb:
here is naught but airs of death, no bed but stones,
(...) pillow's a dead scull, companions bones,
^^^s's all our comfort, if we needs must die,
(...) have a Grave prepared wherein to lie.

Orest. Now pale Tisiphone, O for thy Snakes!
(...) that renowned spirit, that more than man,
whom all the Trojan host could not o'rwhelm,
murdered! But what brave warrier wore a crown,
by guilding a dire sword in his dear blood?
Hector, nor Priam, no, nor Mars himself,
only his Wife was his Bellona now.
O miserable valor, to escape foes,
and come for to be murdered of his friends!
O shameful conquest! O most coward Fate!
that a weak Woman was competitor
in Agamemnons death: had it been any, yet
it should have been a Goddess at the least;
and yet she is but a Queen, a mortal Woman.
Were she a Goddess, I would make her mortal.
Dull coward that I am, and worse than all,
after so many wrongs, yet unrevenged:
their Palace now should fire o'r their heads,
and the huge beams dash out their guilty brains:
The roof, should fall on me, so't fell on them.
Begin revenge, and now perform an act,
may give a theme to all posterity.
ever to talk of, fraught so full of horror:
Aegystheus and my Mother, may wish their's,
yet none was ever greater: yes, my deed.
Revenge is lost, unless we do exceed.

Pyl. But a bad mother, friend, thou should not hurt,
the Law of Nature does forbid such thoughts.

Orest: Nor Gods, nor Nature, shall keep me in awe:
why toward my mother, by heavens Parliament,
who is most guilty, is most innocent.

Can. Shall I thus by some Magic Art, my son,
take both their pictures in pure virgin wax?
And wound the place where that the hurt should stand,
and so wound them?

Orest. Tush, this is too little.

Can. Shall I breed them hate?

Orest. Too little too.

Can: Shall I consume their children?

Orest. All this too little:
Hell and the Furies shall stand all amazed,
Alecto shall come there for to behold
new kinds of murders, which she knew not yet:
and Nature learn to violate her self.
I Will instantly to th'Court, and what I do,
my self will see done, yes, and act it too.
Thanks great Canidia, this black night being done,
Revenge now knows her game whereat to run.

Exeunt omnes. Actus 4.
Scena 1.
Enter in state, Aegystheus, Clytemnestra, Tyndarus, Strophius, Electra,
Nutrix; cum novo partu. Aegyst. NEver but when a royal offspring comes
from a Kings loins, can he be truly King.
Then does he sit firm, rooted in his state,
then is he truly man, and then the gods
he knows do love him, which when Kings do want,
the curse of Nature does deny them fruit,
and brands their bed with loathed sterility.

Tynd. Aegystheus, since the gods have blessed you so,
have care their blessings turn not to your woe.
Your joy, my daughters joy, and my joy too,
have care it be preserved, and brought up well:
And take heed, son, of Agamemnon's blood,
Pierce not with envy the Babes tender heart.

Aegyst. Tush Father, now, not without grief I speak,
all brooks which from the Princely Ocean ran,
are quite dried up, only Electra here,
our dear Electra, whose great weight of love
is in our balance equally so poys'd,
that she shall ever think her Father lives,
our heart shall be so parallel with hers.

El. Yes, great Aegystheus, were but our mothers will,
what she thinks good of, I must not think ill:
Besides, your love ever since my fathers death,
as if it came from his departing soul,
and forthwith had revived again in you,
has held a prospective for me, to see
his care redoubled, though the objects changed:
And, for I lost a brother, if you please,
that I may challenge in your royal blood,
here do I tie with all affections bands,
my self unto this Babe, which is as dear
unto my soul, as were Orest^s here.

Clyt. Daughter, your heart now with obedience strung,
makes a sweet music sounding from your tongue.
Nurse, Bring the Babe. Give it Electra; so,
you daughter shall have oversight of it.

Nutr. O, shall I part from't then?

Cly. No good Nurse, no,
Electra with her care, you with your pains.

Nutr. Now by Lucina, had it gone away,
I should have sit, and sob'd away my heart;
It Is the sweetest Babe that ever Nurse did kiss.

Aegyst. Look here good father, look my nobles here,
upon this Babe scarce crept yet out of earth,
for you shall grow an Autumn of ripe years,
when time has brought it to maturity.
Look on thy grandchild, Tyndarus, see, it is thine,
this came from thee, old man; see how it smiles
upon the Grandsire, as if wise Nature had
taught him his kindreds Names before he came forth.

Tynd. I see it Aegyst. and my aged blood grows warm,
as if my self were a new father made,
and all the blessings I can render it,
shall drop like golden showers on the head:
Me thinks it does recall my sliding age,
and makes swift time retire back again:
It does unfold those wrincles in my face,
which grief and years had fixed as their signs
upon my brow, and now it shall be seen,
although my hairs are gray, my joys are green.

Clyt. Long may our Father his opinion hold,
and you, our daughter, let not sinister thoughts
wrong your suspicious mind, though this being young,
it makes our Lord, and me to speak our joys;
yet our affection, and our natural love,
is not a whit to you diminished.
A Mother can be Mother unto many,
and as from one Root hid within the ground,
springs many flowers, that lends sap to all;
So from a Parents heart run veins of love,
which, though to many they without do flow,
yet from one heart, one Root, they all do grow.

Elect. I hope our gracious Mother cannot think
we do suspect her love; witness this charge,
which you have blessed my arms and soul withal:
and as your love committed it with care,
my care shall still defend it with my love.

Aegyst. We thank our daughter, come Lord Strophius, come,
grief still sits heavy on your sighing heart.
Be frolike, learn of us; in all the grace,
and pleasure our Court extends, you shall have place.

Stroph. I thank my gracious Lord, time has by this,
almost eat out the memory of our son,
and since the heavens let fall their dew on you,
and watered Argos with such springing hopes;
I will not seem a stock incapable
of such a general comfort, but revive
my buried thoughts, and for my Sovereign's sake,
old Strophius will a young man's person take.

Aegyst. We thank old Strophius, and if honor can
keep thee still young, our Princely hand is wide,
and freely shall extend all Graces on thee,
and you all our Subjects, which bear part
thus in our joy. And here I do proclaim,
and personally from my own Mouth pronounce,
sealing it with the Signet of my State,
A general immunity to all
Murders, Rapes, Treasons, Thefts, Conveyances,
which have been from the birth of our dear Child,
in all the Confines of our Empire done;
nor shall your license date be quite expired,
till the slow year seven times runs out his course.
Our self thus speak it; until then all is free,
Kings win their Subjects by immunity.

Exeunt omnes. Manent Strophius, and Electra. Stroph. Electra, you are happy in
your charge.

Electr. Yes, Uncle, and you happy in your favor.

Nur. Madam, Shall I stay here until you come?

Comes back. Electr. Yes, Nurse, sit down and sing, look to the Babe,
I Will only with my Uncle change a word.

Nurse sings. Lullaby, lullaby Baby,
Great Argos joy,
The King of Greece thou art born to be,
In despite of Troy.
Rest ever wait upon thy head,
Sleep close thine eyes,
The blessed gaurd, tend on thy bed,
Of Deities.
O, how this brow will beseem a Crown!
How these locks will shine!
Like the rays of the Sun on the ground,
These locks of thine.
The Nurse of heaven still send thee milk,
May thou ^uck a Queen.
Thy drink Joves Nectar, and clothes of silk,
A God may thou seem.
Cupid sit on this Rosean cheek,
On these rubie lips
May thy mind like a Lamb be meek,
In the vales which trips,
Lullaby, Lullaby Baby, etc.

Elect. You never heard from my brother, Uncle,
nor from your son! they have been long away!

Stroph. In troth, Electra, I am in despair,
almost of ever seeing them again;
Sure if Orestes live, and ever hear,
unto what pass Aegystheus brings his state,
seated him in the throne, and's mothers bed,
and like to leave Argos hereditary
to his Posterity, it cannot ever be born,
Orestes spirit will endure no scorn.

Elect. Uncle, his long delays make me surmise,
or he will never come, or come with prize;
He, if now come, he must not show himself,
but live unknown, unnam'd, or change his name.

Str. His name, Electra, yes, and's nature too,
which I do fear me he will hardly do.
But if we hear not from them now e're long,
I Will listen by some means about the land,
to hear of them; mean time you to your charge,
officious duty must our lives enlarge.

Elect. Come Nurse. Exeunt.

Scen. 2.
Enter Orestes, and Pylades. Orest. O, here is the Palace under whose kind roof
My tender years were gently softered:
But now the sight on it seems to strike my soul,
when I but think it holds within the walls,
the patrons of such lust, incarnate devils,
mere Pythonists, that facinate the world.

Pyl. Nay, but Orestes, think now of your self,
complain not of your wrongs, but seek to right them.
We might have lived in the woods still to complain,
and to that purpose we may turn again.
Whet up your former thoughts, and spend not time,
to rave, but to revenge this odious act.
We know they were their shapes, and no Chymera's.

Orest. O, Pylades, know I thou art my friend?

Pyl. I hope you think it.

Orest. I do, I dare swear it,
so I dare swear it was Aegystheus, and
the dumb Witch, the -- O, what thing's enough
to be an attribute to term her by?
The Clytemnestra, O, we saw her do it.

Pyl. 'Twas a black deed indeed, and past all thought.

Orest. O, Hell it self has not the pattern to it:
Some stench, some fogs and vapors stop their breath,
exhald from out the dampish womb of Styx.
Did ever foul, disastrous, fiendlike hands,
cast up so huge a heap of hell-bred mischief?
Were I to dive to the depth of Phelgeton.
or fetch young Gaenimed from the arms of Jove,
to rend Proserpina from Pluto's bed,
or take the vulture from off Titius heart,
and set it on my Mothers, I would do it;
I Will break open doors, and nail 'em to their bed;
hark, revenge calls me, I come, I come.

Pyl. Nay, still outrageous friend, good now contain
your heady fury in wisdoms reyn:
hearken to my advice.

Orest. I will, dear friend,
thou have played music to my doleful soul;
and when my heart was tympaniz'd with grief,
thou lav'dst out some into thy heart from mine,
and kepst it so from bursting; thou have tide
with thy kind counsel, all these loosned strings,
they should not crack asunder with their weight.

Pyl. Then listen now, the best plot I can think,
is this: We here will live a while unknown:
Orestes, thy Profession shall be Physic,
I as your friend t'company you at Court;
carry it neatly, learn a few strange words,
palliate your woe a while, and coope up grief,
you may in time so minister to the King;
Physics occasion fit revenge may bring.

Orest. Rarely invented, I Will speak Aphorisms,
sublimed Purgations, Quintessence distilled,
each Dose I give shall make a heart to bleed,
and prove a true Physician so indeed.

Enter Mysander, having o'r-heard their talk. Mys. 'Twas my good Genius guided
me here now,
to hear Conspiracy; wherefore I Will attach them.
Save you Gentlemen.

Ore. Save you too, if you please.

Pyl. Sir, 'twas small manners to interrupt our talk,
and give no warning of your being near.

Mys. Warning? you shall have warning, yes, I know
I heard you both, and understood your plot,
you will turn Physician, Sir, and give rare Clysters,
shall work like Stibium, to purge our hearts:
You thought to act well true Physicians parts.

Orest. Therefore on thee our Medicine first shall work.

Stabs him. Mys. Help, murder.

Orest. Nay Parasite, I Will gag you,
you shall not fawn again, or wag your tail,
when the King nods.

Mys. O help me, I am slain.

Pyl. Stop his breath quickly, if but he be dead,
we may escape the danger of the treason.

Orest. Nay he is silent; O, but we are beset.

Scena 3.
Enter a Lord and others at the outcry. Lor. Look out, me thought I heard one
cry out murder,
some voice I am sure did disturb the Court,
it was Mysanders voice, me thought that cried,
Spies him dead. and see, he is slain; one whom the Kings esteem
did rank among the best; there are the Murderers:
Fellows, how durst you thus abuse the Court?
Go, haste to' the King, tell him the men be here.

Pylad. Gentlemen, we as lovers to the Court,
came here as strangers, for to see the King,
this man being coming out, too soon for us;
and for himself used us uncivilly;
we have been Gentlemen, though our Fortunes now
have put on Beggars weeds upon our backs:
who answering in the same sort he proposed,
he struck us, and men cannot endure blows:
so thinking much to be struck again,
he grew so hot, he drew and made a Stab;
at which encounter both enclosing him
'twixt us he took a wound worse than we thought
to give, for we did think to have given none;
But since it is thus, we must appeal to the King.

Lor. Yes; and here comes his Majesty in person.

Scena 4.
Enter Aegystheus, with a Guard. Aegy. A Guard there on us, here is murder done.
What, is Mysander killed, our trusty servant?
Where are the vilians?

Orest. O hold good heart, hark, hark, he calls us villains.

Aegy. What is the matter? speak, how came he dead?
They shall die two deaths, that did cause him one.

O est. O I am now undone; he must sit judge,
to condemn us, that should massacre him.

Pyl. Nay, keep a temper, hold good friend a while.

Lord. My gracious sovereign, these two be the men,
which have confessed the deed:

Aegyst. Are you the men which thus abused our state?
Was It one or both? if both, you both shall die;
if one, that one: w're just in our Decree.

Scen. 5.
Enter Clyt. Tynd. Strophius, Electra. What, is my Queen come here, to hear the
Cause?
We'll then ascend, and judge them instantly.
Ascends the Throne. Or. O crack my ey-strings, let these balls drop out,
or the quick sights like darts fly to their souls,
and pierce their entrails; he King, my mother Queen!
The Briseis and Achilles, that in my dream.
We come to be condemned amongst our friends.
I will speak to them, Electra's there,
And Storphius, your old Father, Pylades.

Pyl. Show thy self valorous, overcome thy self:
If we be known, we surely are condemned.

Aegyst. Father, Lord Strophius, sit and hear the cause.

Clyt. Why, my Lord, what is it makes the business thus?

Aegyst. My Queen shall straitway know; Bring them away.
Although it is not fallen out of our mind,
of a free act of pardon of all faults
committed in the date of such a time,
our hand of mercy must not be so soft,
to cover over with gentle lenity,
such ulcerous sores as these; there is no place
for mercy left; murder must not find grace:
Therefore our doom is past, one needs must die,
blood still for blood unto the gods will cry.

Orest. Then, if thy doom be spent, great King here stands;
the man that did it, showing his guilty hands.

Pylad. O hold thy doom a while; it was not he,
His serious studies in the learned Arts,
hearing acute Philosophers dispute
'twixt life and death, and of a future state
would fain haste to it; but the man was I:
believe not him, 'twas his desire to die.

Orest. No King, it is he which in his desperate thoughts,
would loose the bands betwixt his soul and him;
ones self against ones self is witness store,
my self confesses, what would thou have more?

Pyl. Believe him not, upon my knees I vow,
Kneels. these hands are only branded with the guilt,
and for ones blood, let not two lives be spilt.

Orest. And on my knees I the like Oath do take,
I gave the stab, my Dagger's bloody yet.

Pyl. That was my Dagger, King, he took't from me.

Or. He does me wrong, by --, 'twas ever mine.

Aegyst. This does amaze us, I never yet saw two
turn Rhetoricians so to plead for death.
Would not the pardon of this odious fact,
like a foul stench, or an unwholsom air,
send an infectious vapor through the Land,
and choke up Justice; this fidelity
should for this one time set two murderers free.

Cly. Now good my love, methinks I pity them,
and prithee for my sake (I know them not)
abate thy edge of Justice for this once.

Orest. O what she spoke! to damn it had been better.

Aegyst. My love, thou know I never look too stern
upon a fault that could ask lenity.
But this is so transcendent, and so great,
it must not be slipped with impunity.
To do a heinous murder, and i'th'Court,
in the place of Justice, where the King might hear,
upon a chief attendant of the Kings!
Murder it self is past all expiation,
the greatest crime that Nature does abhor:
not being, is abominable to her;
and when we be make others not to be,
it is worse than bestial: and we did not so,
when only we by natures aid did live
a Heterogenious kind, as semibeasts,
when reason challenged scarce a part in us;
but now does manhood and civility
stand at the Bar of Justice, and there plead,
how much they are wronged, and how much defaced
when man does dye his hands in blood of man.
Judgment it self would scarce a Law enact
against the murderer, thinking it a fact
that man against man would never dare commit,
since the worst things of nature do not it.

Orest. O how his words now rail against a sin,
which beat upon his Conscious thoughts within!
His tongue speaks fair, his inparts, look on them,
and they like Jurymen himself condemn: Aside.

Pyl. But O great King, if justice must have right,
let me stand only guilty in thy sight.

Orest. No, it is not, King, 'twas I that did the deed,
and for my action, let no other bleed.

Aegyst. In troth this makes my Doom it cannot fall:
Will none of you confess? Strophius weeps.

Orest. Yes, I confess.

Pylad. No King, it is I confess.

Aegyst. How now Lord Strophius, what affects you so,
that makes your tears bewrayers of some passion?

Stroph. My gracious Sovereign, this strange spectacle
renews the Memory of my once great loss,
and my dear Queens, we once were blessed with two,
which so had linked themselves in bands of love,
as these men now do seem to me they have.
One stream of love did in two hearts so glide,
one with the other lived, with the other di'd.
And would my Queen be my competitor,
for our Sons sake my suits should join with her,
since Justice craves but one, and both will go,
even save them both, and right wronged Justice so.

Clyt. I, good my love, let Justice come and look,
if she can find in all her Statute Book,
two men for the same crime should rightly die;
she will not say so, Justice cannot lie.
And since they both will die, let ones love save
the others life, and so both life shall have.

Aegyst. In troth my Queen, and my old Lord have moved.
Well, since your loves are both so strongly tied,
and friendship like an old acquaintance sends
to her friend Justice that she should be mild,
and looks with eyes of Mercy on your fault,
considering our immunity proclaimed,
and such Petitioners as you both have got,
Death in our Sentence, now shall have no part;
whilst who should have done worst, confession strives,
too much confession thus saves two men's lives:
But now we must demand, what you made here?
What business or condition you profess?

Pylad. Great King, our duty owes to thee our lives,
and were we men that strived to set a cloud
before these gifts, Art has instructed us,
or we have purchac't at a most dear rate,
of cost and labor; yet thy clemency
commands us to lay open all to thee:
yet for my self I rather count my state
blessed that I lighted on this honest man;
whose accurate and watchful indagation,
has taught him for to heal the wounds of Nature,
by his exceeding skill in wholesome herbs;
one, that when I did think my shred of life
had been quite cut, did tie it up again,
and make it last: recalled my youthful days,
and made me Aeson-like, become thus young;
for which great practice I did owe my life,
and thence proceeded our late pious strife.

Aeg. Nay then I Am glad our mercy did extend
on men whom such rare virtues do commend;
our love shall then grow greater, and our Court
shall entertain you, and't may chance we will,
my Queen and I, make trial of your skill.

Orest. My gracious Sovereign, words must not have wings,
to pass and to out-flye the bounds of truth,
only to win the Elixar of opinion;
but for my friend, I here profess so much,
and for my life do stand so deeply bound,
that all my Art can never make recompense.
Please but your Graces self* and your dear Queen,
appoint the secrets of the safest room
to let me show my self to none but you;
though Nature dried up with too much time,
deny to spring in fruit from forth your loins,
or any other strange impediment;
our Art preserves from sickness ruining.
And 'twill be blessed to show it to a King.

Aegyst. Ha, prithee let me speak with thee apart.
Thou strik'st on tunes now, make me glad to hear,
we will commit our secrecy to thee.
Can water barren Wombs with such a dew,
shall make 'em flourish and wax green with fruit?
Although we cannot altogether blame,
that Nature has been too unkind to us;
yet we would plant each corner of our Realm
with springing Branches of our Royal self,
to compass in our selves, and we stand in the midst.
Kings in their Children do great blessing find,
and great men love to Propagate their kind.

Orest. Great Sovereign, boasting words shall never outweigh
the things I will perform, I speak not fame,
but what I have said, I will do the same.

Aegyst. We like thy temper well, and we will trust;
therefore this night we will appoint it so,
thou shall be guided to our secretst room,
and there shall use thy skill; which if it take,
our love shall honor thee for Physics sake.

Exeunt Aegyst. Clyt. Tynd. Orest. Good heavens I thank you, your effectual
power
has showed your justice in this blessed hour.
Now is occasion put; thus murder lays
the trap wherein it self, it self betrays.

Pyl. Old Lord, a word with you.

Orest. and with you Lady.

They take Stroph. and Elect. back. Pyl. Had not you once a Son loved the young
prince?

Stop. Yes Sir, but Fates envied my happiness,
and holds both Prince and Son away too long.

Orest. And had not you a brother (Lady) once?
When heard you of him last? He went to travel.

Elect. In truth I had, but I can hear no news.

They discover themselves. Stro. O see! my son! welcome my dearest boy.

Elect. Our Brother, our Orestes is come home.

Stroph. It Is they indeed; O how my blood revives!
Let me embrace them; O ye'r welcome home,
now is the Autumn of our sorrow done.

Elect. What silent place has smothered you so long?
Of what great Powers have you counsel taken,
concerning the great Plot you had in hand?

Orest. Uncle, and Sister, we must not stand now
embracing much, and bidding welcome home;
you see before I come, how things do stand:
My business hastens; and my friend, and I,
have yet a greater Project to perform:
Only Electra, we must have your aid,
to help us with their Child, for now is the time,
when blessed occasion strives to help revenge.

Elect. Why Brother, is the Child in any fault?
that was unborn when that our Father died:
And it is a lusty boy: O hurt not that.

Orest. Tush, I must have it, it shall have no hurt,
worse than my Father:

Elect. Shal't not, indeed.

Orest. Believe me, no worse hurt; but let us be gone.
I Will be a tripode Paracelsian.

Exeunt. Scen. 6.
Enter a Chamberlain, and a Boy to sweep the Room. Cham. Boy, sweep the room,
set each thing in his place,
the King and Queen take Physic here to night.

Boy. Sir, and you will help me, I am ready here,

They set a Table. Cham. Fetch them two Chairs.

Boy. Yes, Sir.
What Carpet mean you shall be spread a'th board?

Cham. That of red velvet, set the silver cups,
there may be use of them to take the potion:
Sets two bowls. So, now all is well, the room is well prepared.

Enter Orestes, like a Doctor of Physic. Orest. Is this the room, friend,
where the King must be?

Cham. Yes, this is the room Sir, it is the privat'st, this.

Orest. You must avoid it then, and tell his Grace,
that I stay here provided against he come.

Cham. His Grace shall know it. Exit.

Scena 7.
Enter Pylades, with a little boy in's hand. Pyl. I faith Orestes, prithee
spare the child,
it has no fault, but it is too like thy mother.

Orest. Like my mother, O most execrable!
had ranked the confused Chaos of all sins,
thou could not have found out a fault more black,
more stinking, more infectious to my heart.
Art like my mother, O transcendent crime!

Child. Some say I Am eyd like her, but in the face
I do resemble most the King my father.

Pyl. Poor babe.

Orest. The King thy father! yes, too like them both.

Child. Electra says, I Am somewhat like Orestes,
her brother that is dead.

Orest. How, like Orestes! when did see him child?

Child. Indeed I never saw him, but I love him.

Pyl. Alas, dear friend, see the pretty knave.

Ore. Would thou were not my mothers, I could weep,
but see, O see now my relenting heart,
must now grow flinty, see my father, see,
now to show pity were impiety.

Enter Agamemnons ghost, passing over the stage all wounded. Ghost. Why flaggs
revenge? see thy now yielding soul,
made me burst open my strong jaw'd sepulcher,
and rip the seare-cloth from my wounded breast.
O can a child smile blanke the memory
of all these horrid wounds, that make me groan,
in the dark caverns of the uncoucht earth?
from whence I come for to infect thy soul
with air of vengeance, may make Acheron,
yea, and our selves, at the performance quake.
Fruit of our loins, first vigor of our youth,
look on these wounds, as on the Gorgons head,
and turn thy heart to stone: hovering revenge
is fallen into thy hands, O grasp her close
by her snake knotted front, and make her do
things may incite a horror to her self.
Forget all mother, in that disloyal witch,
whose damned heat raging in strumpets blood,
so soon did condescend to murder me.
By all the rights of Father I conjure thee:
By Atreus, Atreus, he whose revengeful soul
is echoed through the world superlative;
do thou make Nemesis as great a feast,
and be enthroniz'd in her fiery chair,
in her triumphant chariot ever ride,
in which, Bears hurry her from the womb of hell,
and bear this Title as thy deserved hire,
the brave revenger of thy murdered sire.
Think on me, and revenge. Exit.

Orest. Stay, stay, and see it,
stay Sprite, thou strik'st no terror to my soul:
For unamaz'd I now would dare out-look
ranks of Medusa's, and the grim aspect
of the most frowning object hell affords.
Think on me and revenge! yes, those two words
shall serve as burden unto all my acts,
I will revenge, and then I Will think on thee:
I Will think on thee, and then again revenge,
and stab, and wound, and still I Will think on thee:
I have a dropsy now to suck up fumes,
and drink the reaking streams of vengeance foam:
Great Agamemnons Ghost, I will bedew
thy hearse with blood in stead of brinish tears,
and build a pile up of their murdered trunks,
to burn thy marrow-lesse consumed bones.
Arrows of forked lightening never flew
more swiftly from the awful arms of Jove,
then Nemesis black Scorpions from me.

Pyl. 'Twas a strange sight.

Ore. I, did thou see it friend?
all of those wounds will I stick in his breast.

Pyl. Alas, one will be enough for him?

Orest. I, but she shall have more. A while go by:
Pylades takes the child aside: Were all the world their lives, the world
should die.
Now Tragedy fetch out thy crimson robes,
and buckle sure thy purple buskins on,
steep't ten grains deeper in their scarlet die;
this night shall give me now a deep carouse,
of Clytemnestrae's and Aegystheus blood,
and Cerberus himself stand by to pledge me,
whilst to hells fire I shall sacrifice
three Hecatombs; it does the furies good,
when ever we wet their Altars with such blood.
And now ye fiends of hell, each take a place,
as 'twere spectators at a first days play;
raise all the hellish winds to expel nature:
Great Goddess give me leave now to forget
all strains of duty; all obedient thoughts
die in me quite: a mothers memory,
pious affections take no hold on me.
Be all my senses circled in with Fiends,
and let Erynnis hold her flaming brand
to guide my murderous sword; for all lights else,
vanish from out this Center, be this room fraught
so full of mischief, may make the Fabric crack,
and let no time now come into my thoughts,
but that dire night wherein my father died.
I Will only be a Doctor now in word,
each potion that I give shall be my sword.
But I must change.

Scena. 8.
Enter Aegystheus and Clytemnestra, in their night-robes. Aegyst. O Doctor, you
are busy for our coming.

Orest. My gracious Lord, I had no cause to fail.

Orestes looking on the cups. Clyt. Nay, but is this fit time for physic,
Doctor?

Orest. First, Madam, for the physic that I give,
now the diastal fabric of your pulse,
shows all your passions most hysterical.
Pleases your Grace sit down? on at each end o'th table.

Aegyst. Yes, must we sit? sit there my Queen.

Orest. Yes, now is Saturn, governor of nature,
in free conjunction with the planet Venus:
And just at this time Jupiter begat
great Hercules: Sol, Luna, Mercury.
in that Diameter, now favor propagation,
and now will my Alexipharmacon
stir the Analeptick veins and arteries:
If you outlive this night, you will live to see
a royal, strange, and Princely progeny.

Aegyst. Think thou so, Doctor?

Orest. Think it, nay, I know it.
Hem.

Clyt. Surely he means to work rare Art upon us.

Aegy. Pray God thy physic take.

Ore. Yes, it shall take.
Hem.

Pylades binds Clytemnestra to the chair: Orestes Egystheus: Pylades brings in
the child. Egy. Treason, we are betrayed.

Or. Nay, it is your privat'st room.
View me well mother, ha, do you know me yet?
Puts off his gown. Here, here is the drugs my Art has thought upon:
be pitilesse now Pylades, be my friend.

Child. O help me father, else these men will kill me.

Egyst. O my boy, my boy.

Orest. O ye'r fast bound.
Yes, he is thine, thy face, thy eyes, thy heart,
and would I knew where Nature had couchd most,
of thy damnd blood, I thus would let it out,
Stabs the child. and thus't should sprit in thy most loathed face.

Egy. O now the heavens rain vengeance on our heads.

Child. O mother, mother, save me, save me father.

Orest. Hold Pylades, be steadfast, for by --
he wounds me, that persuades me not to wound.

Clyt. O turn thy bloody weapon on my breast,
'twas this womb that brought forth this babe and thee,
If that be guilty, I have made it so.
Rip up this place which first did bring thee forth,
it is I entreat thee, it is thy mother, she
which gave thee hous-room here within this breast,
upon whose dugs thy infant lips did hang.

Orest. It was my father, he entreated you,
who many a time had clipped you in his arms,
who made you Queen of Greece, yes, it was he,
good Agamemnon, he did plead for life.

Egyst. Bath not thy hands in a poor infants blood,
nor in thy mothers, I deserve to die:
and yet remember how my doom saved thee,
how easily mercy did obtain her suit.

Orest. Nay, but Egystheus, you can aggravate,
to do a heinous murder, and in the Court;
In The place of Justice, where the King might hear,
upon a chief attendant of the Kings.
Murder it self is past all expiation,
a crime that nature most of all abhors,
and look how manhood and civility,
stand at the bar of Justice, and there plead,
how much they are wronged, and how much defaced,
when man does dye his hands in blood of man.
Now hearken King, I Will use thy Rhetoric,
thou did a heinous murder in the Court,
not which the King did hear, but which he felt;
when no petition could (good man) prevail,
therefore this dies, this first shall have his due,
Stabs it again, that the blood spirts in his face. this mischief done,
revenge shall prompt anew.

Aeg. O, the gods blush, and heaven looks pale at this,
a fathers face besmeared with his child's blood!

Orest. My have deceives my will; tush, all this yet,
may be called piety; you shall taste too, mother.
Turns it to her.
Clyt. O, why dos't banish nature from his place?
Look on thy mothers tears, worse then those groans,
and pangs she had, when she first brought thee forth.
When of thy friends or parents thou have wrong,
patience, not fury does to thee belong.
Is this the blessing that thy knee should ask?
Repay'st thou thus my kisses and my tears,
which flowed from me to thee in tender years?

Orest. O why did you so banish woman-hood,
when you and this damned villain, base adulterer,
made in my fathers side so many wounds,
and brought a brave old King into this state?
See here is his bones, my pocket can contain.
Pulls bones from his pocket. great Agamemnon; and repayd you thus
his kind embraces? all his loving signs?
Aegystheus, you are thirsty, you shall drink,
Fills two cups with the child's blood: gives it them yes, you shall clear your
throat, by -- you shall.

Aegy. O mischief above mischief! what Heniochus
bred on a stony rock, could ever endure
to see a fathers thirst quenched with such blood?
Have thou no measure, has revenge no end?

Ore. Who first does mischief, may keep mean in the deed,
but who revengeth, must all mean exceed.
Nay mother we will not bar you of your draught.

Gives one cup to her. Clyt. O Nature, see here all thy law infringed,
a mothers prayers prevail not with her son.

Orest. Pray with Thyestes, it shall never move me:
But first Aegystheus, Do thou haste revenge.

Stabs him. Aegyst. O, I am wounded, O when do thou end?

Orest. Nay, I have scarce begun. Now mother, you.
Sabs her So now, I Will stand and look, and on hell call,
nay, my revenge must not be usual:
One more for thee Aegystheus; only let out
the blood you drank before.

Aegyst. O, my heart feels it.

Orest. Now mother you, and your love the same.

Clyt. O kill me quickly, time prolongs my woe,
and since I must die, let me quickly go.

Orest. You know your sentence; Let him feel he dies.
who strait threats death, knows not to tyrannize.

Aegy. This brings ten deaths.

Or. Would twould an 100 bring,
one death's too little to revenge a King.
Hence, hence, adulterous soul to Tantalus,
and let hell know who 'twas sent thee thither: he dies.
Now, mother, you shall follow: but he first,
lest that like Lovers you go hand in hand.

Clyt. Why son, whose death is it thou do revenge?
thy fathers? but on whom? upon thy mother!
On her which brought thee forth, which took most care,
to bring thee up, from whom thou tookst thy self?
you are sure thou art mine, but do not know,
who 'twas begat thee.

Orest. Will It Bastardize me?
Yes, mother, yes, I know I was his son:
Alas! why, what are you? a senseless piece
of rotten earth can do as much to corn,
as you to me, bear it, and bring it forth;
but Agamemnon, he that seed did sow,
and only unto him my self I ow:
and for him thou shall die.

Clyt. O, I confess,
my conscience tells me, I deserve no less:
and thus thy mother from thee does depart,
leaving vexation to torment thy heart.

She dies. Orest. Now friend, I see my father live again,
and in his royal state at Argos Court:
This is the night in which he first came home,
O blessed powers of hell, divine Canidia,
Now am I satisfied, now has revenge perfection;
and nothing grieves me, but that Tyndarus,
my mothers father, did not see her die.
I Will in and tell him, my thoughts must reveal
those acts I do: this night who would conceal?
Now soul triumph, whist that my deed shall shine,
In The face o th Court, and all the world know it mine.

Actus 5.
Scena 1.
Enter Orestes in his gown: Tyndarus, Strophius, Electra, Pylades, two Lords.
Ore. My Lord, your daughters potion works most rarely;
the King's asleep, God bless his Majesty.
O, do not wake him, faith it is pity, la.

Tynd. What do I see? ha, blood, the little child
dead! my daughter bleed? Aegystheus killed?

Orest. Your Lordships eyes do fail, it is but spilt wine.

Tynd. Lay hands o'th villain, it is the Physicians deed.

Orest. Nay friends, hands off it is no Physician now:
Discovers himself. See, see, old Tyndarus, do thou know me yet?
Fetch me my Crown and robes, nay, I Will ascend:
Is not Atrides eldest son your King?

Tynd. What have thou done, foul Viper, to eat out
thy mothers bowels? what, was this thy deed?
Thy silence says 'twas thine. What Tanais,
Tygris or Rhenus, or what flowing sea,
should wash thee in the salt Meotis stream?
Or Tethis at full tide o'rflow thy banks,
still would the spots of murder stick on them.

Orest. Why Grandsire, I go not about to wash,
by -- 'twas all the fruit I thought to win,
to think all mischief here could be no sin.

Tynd. See, see, thy mother, look upon her now,
on her, whose eyes thou have for ever closed,
which eyes have often wakned at thy cry,
and hushed thee with a lullaby to sleep:
See, see, these hands, which often with so much care,
wrapped gently up thy unset tender limbs.
See, see, this face, wont at thy signs to smile,
when nature gave not leave unto thy tongue
to utter thy child's meaning.

Orest. See, see these bones, these nasty rotten bones,
which had so often locked his hands in hers;
here stood the tongue, which often had called her sweet,
dear Clytemnestra, and then stopped his speech,
and told his love in a more speaking sign.
Here stood those eyes, which fed upon her face,
and made her of thy daughter, a great Queen,
and she made him a dish for loathed worms.

Tynd. Suppose she did, there was but one yet dead,
and with ones death again should be repaid.

Orest. No, Tyndarus, had I desired but one,
I should have thought I had desired none.
Why, methinks, I should too have killed thee,
the number is too little yet of three.

Tynd. Into what land, what country will thou fly?
all earths, all lands, all countries will fly thee:
the heavens will look with a more cheerful brow
on Cerberus.

Orest. Why, let heaven look as 'twill, it is my crown,
that I have done an act shall make heave frown.

Tynd. O, what earth loves so much a guilty soul,
that it can bear thee?

Orest. Why, Sir, this is mine,
and this shall bear me. Am I not right heir?

Tynd. Thou heir to kingdoms! thou a subject rather,
to help to make a Players Tragedy.

Ore. Why, that will make me swell with greater pride,
to think my name shall drop in lines of blood,
from some great Poets quill, who well shall paint
how bravely I revenged my fathers death;
that is the thing I wished, and it is my glory,
I shall be matter for so brave a story.
But where is my Crown?

1. Lord. No murderer, we will rather join with him,
this old man here, to take away thy life,
then such a homicide shall frame us laws,
who has himself rac'd out the laws of Nature.

2. Lord. Yes, and we will set here Argos crown on him,
who shall enact some pnnishment for thee;
which although none can equalize this deed,
yet what our griefs can think, all shall be done,
and we will forget you are Agamemnons son.

Ore. Why, think you on your worst, I scorn to crave:
I had three lives, you but my one shall have.

Tyn. Then since vile wretch, thou have committed that,
which while there is a world, throughout the world
will be pronounced for the most horrid deed,
that ever came into the thought of man;
a thing which all will talk of, none allow:
I here disclaim that name of Grandfather,
and I must quite forget that in thy veins,
my blood does flow, but think it then let out,
when thou letst out my daughters. And since you,
kind Lords, commit the state unto my years,
years too unfit, heavens know, to bear a state:
My mind, methinks, contends for to decree
somewhat, which to my self I dare not tell.
Just conceived wrath, and my affection strives,
hate forbids pity, pity forbids hate,
and exile is but barren punishtnent:
Yet let me banish thee from out these eyes,
O never let thy sight offend me more,
all thy confederates, and all thy friends.
You, Pylades, which did so smoothly cloak,
the dam'nd profession he did undertake:
You, Strophius.

Strop. My Lord, I know not ought.
Yet since one foot is now in Charons boat,
if it please you, set the other too aflote.

Tynd. Not so, but I will banish you the Court,
and you Electra; come, I must forget
affection too toward you, you gave the child,
which you had charge of, to the murderers sword.

Elect. Why Grandsire, I herein no wrong do find,
since all these go, I would not stay behind.

Tynd. Nay, but no one shall company the other,
hence thou Cocytus, stream of this offense,
Strophius and Pylades, Electra, hence.

Exeunt Strophius, Pylades, Electra. Orest. Why farwell Grandsire, since thou
bidst, I fly,
and scorn companions for my misery.

Exit Orestes. Tynd. Unto this punishmeht this one more I add,
that none shall dare to give Orestes food,
and this decree shall stand; I speak with grief,
and here pronounce Orestes no relief.
Hence with these corpse; poor child, what had thou don?
thy Nurses prayers, that there might spring a rose,
where ever thou trod'st could not keep back thy foes.
Some plague he has; but such a matricide
should never die, although he ever died.

Scena 2.
Enter Electra and Strophius. Elect. Thus never less alone, then when alone,
where to our selves we sweetly tell our woes.
Thou Uncle, chief companion to our griefs,
and soul partaker of our miseries,
why do we live, when now it is come to pass,
it is scarce known that Agamemnon was?
He dies far easier, who at first does drown,
then he which long does swim, and then sinks down.

Stroph. Nay Niece, me thinks I now do see the haven
where my aged soul must leave this tossed bark,
made weak with years and woes: yet I commend
unto my son the heart of a true friend,
that is all the will I leave, and let him know
friendship should ever be, but most in woe.
And so I leave thee Niece, I first must die,
to have a period to this Tragedy.

He dies. Elect. O envious Fates could you not use me thus?
have I not grief enough to burst my heart?
Was my life's thread twisted and knit so strong
that the keen edg of all these miseries
can never cut it off? must I bear more?
It Is all my safety now not to be safe.
Are there so many ways to rid ones life,
and can I hit on none? They say that death
is every where, and yet I find him not:
Tush, but I seek him not: why my own hand
might grasp him to me, if I did but strive.
Now hand help ease my heart, and make a way
to let out grief, that has so long dwelt here;
Stabs her self. Now knife thou'st done good service, there lie by,
heaven well decreed it, nothing life can give,
but every thing can make us not to live.

Scena 3.
Enter Cassandra. Now Priams Ghost, haste, haste I say, to look,
with cheerful eyes on the sinister book,
and there to Hecuba my mother show
the tragic story of thy conquered foe.
And let Andromecha my sister see,
what Agamemnons race is come to be.
Now Troy may gratify that most sad doom,
conquered by those that thus themselves or'ecome.
let Greece so flourish still, let Argos be
puffed with the pride of their great victory.
Let it bear Soldiers, so withal it bear
Orestes too; now mother, never fear
Argos makes me to laugh, which made thee weep;
the Trojans in the grave now sweetly sleep;
their sorrow has the end, now these begin
to overflow themselves with mutual sin:
And after all, Orestes, we may see,
has lost his reason, man's sole property.
Scena 4.
Enter Orestes furens. Orest. By -- you shall not, nay, I am decreed:
do, tear, tear me; yes, I have deserved it.

Cass. O brave, O brave, he is mad as well as I;
I Am glad my madness has got company.

Orest. Mother, why mother, will you kill my father?
Then I Will kill you; tush, I have don't already.
Much patience will grow fury in time:
follow you me, you, beast, you damned Aegystheus.
I Will hew thee piece by piece, look off my mother.

Cass. I am she, or one loves thee well.

Ore. Out you witch, you witch.

Ca. Murderer, murderer.

Orest. Do. whisper with the devils to torment me?
O how they lash me with their snaky whips!
Why Megaera, Megaera, wilt not hold thy hand?
Are you there too, Erynnis? hey, all hell!
my Grandsier Atreus he stands fighting there,
but he will ha'th better on it; keep Cerberus, keep,
keep the gates fast, or all hell breaks loose.
Mother, I see you; O you are a whore.
Did I kill you, witch, do thou laugh, do: thou?

Cass. Why this is fine, my very looks do whip him.

Orest. Could I but get the stone from Sysiphus,
I Would dash thy brains out; O, are you there I faith,
Spies Strophius and Electra dead. a bed so close with your adulterer?
I Will stab your lustful souls with your own knives.

Stabs them with Electra's knife. Cass. O clap, clap, O rare beyond expectation:
hold good heart, do not burst with laughter.

Orest. Will you not wake, sleep, sleep then your last.
Look how they fly in the air.

Cas I see them, see them.

Orest. Why Jove, do mean to let them into heaven?
O thou art come down, and gone to hell;
Pluto, see Pluto, he is afraid of them,
O spare my sides, my sides, my sides, the blood!
O now you touch my ribs.

Cass. Hey, how he skips! O excellent, whips himself!
O sweet Catastrophe, does non see it but I?
Clap, clap, again, would all Priams sons
and daughters were here now to help me laugh.

Orest. Lash on, lash on. Canidia, art thou there?
why grandsire, would it were to do again:
nay Aeacus I fear no whipping posts,
lavgh'st thou, thou witch? I Will follow thee to hell.

Exeunt currentes. Scen. 5.
Enter Pylades alone. Pyl. Thus seeking others, I have lost my self,
my friend and father banished, and whilst I
wander to seek them for to ease their woe,
I here more grief proclaimed against my friend,
that none must succor, none must give him food,
and yet I Will seek him; and should all the laws,
that tyranny should think upon, restrain,
I Would draw my blood forth for to let him drink.
But O what is here? O I have found too soon,
one which I sought, my fathers wearied soul
Spies Strophius dead. in sighs has now expired out it self.
Now, O ye sisters, your great task is don,
you never untwine what you have once begun.
Thus obvious to our Fates, to our selves unkind,
we haste to seek, that which too soon we find.
Alas, why do our souls too greedy burn,
to hasten thither whence we nere return?
We run to it of our selves, 'sif death were slow;
should he come tardy, we too soon should go.
For the first day that gives us our first breath,
does make us a day nearer unto death.
All this huge world, which now on earth so strive,
to morrow this time may not be alive.
Great Troy is down, since Agamemnon fell,
since my dear father, which but now was well.
O art thou come dear friend, for thee I sought,
Enter Orestes. here is some food yet, in spite of all the laws.

Orest. Wilt bid me to dinner Pluto? ha, with what?
Give me no snakes, I, I go, I go,
up to Cythaerus top, I hate thy meat.

Pyl. Heavens! he is distracted, now does fury right,
when thus against her self, her self does fight.
It Is I (man) here, it is Pylades, not Pluto.

Orest. Ha, Pylades, I, they have banished him,
but grandsire look to it, I Will tear out your maw,
Pylades, Pylades I come. --

Pylad. Why I am he, look friend, do not know me?

Or. Yes, yes thou were with me when I killed my mother,
and see, the Furies now would whip thee too.
Alecto! look, look, here is Alecto too.
O Clytemnestra, hay, how the Lion skips,
and Taurus he would toss me on his horns.
Look on the Ram, see the Bear roars at me,
and Charon he would fling me into Styx.

Pylad. He fears the heavenly signs, nay then now time
has brought true punishment on every crime.

Orest. Dash out the puppets brains, the little boy,
the bastard, my mothers bastard: so blood spin,
my mother killed my father, killed the King,
but she got little by it, look on her breast,
it bleeds, it bleeds; so, so Aegystheus, so.

Pylad. O what a strange distemper stirs his brain!
Thou gentle Somnus, in whom care does rest,
kind father of cold death, and son of peace,
which comes to Kings and poor men all alike,
bind his disturbed brain, tie up his sense;
let him but live to die, now it is not long
before we both shall sing our funeral song.

Orest. Ha! must I sink? can I not keep aloft?
What is the stream so strong? why then I Will dive,
Falls a sleep. and come to hell the sooner.

Pylad. So gentle sleep,
thou gather'st up his wandering brains again,
this is but half dead, yet half dead he lies,
but it is not long, before he wholly dies. Music within.
Hark they play Music; O these sounds do harm,
enticing woe with their melodious charm.
These please not men in woe, these time do keep,
but miseries best falling is to weep.
Our stops are naught but sobs, our hearts we bring,
whereon we prick the sol-fa which we sing.
A song within, together with the Music. Weep, weep you Argonauts,
Bewail the day
That first to fatal Troy
You took your way.
Weep Greece, weep Greece,
Two Kings are dead,
Argos, thou Argos, now a grave
Where Kings are buried.
No heir, no heir is left,
But one that is mad,
See Argos, have not thou
Cause to be sad?
Sleep, sleep wild brain,
Rest rock thy sense,
Live if thou can
To grieve for thy offense.
Weep, weep, you Argonauts, etc.

Pyl. Peace Music, peace, our plaints have louder cries,
a heart that is sad can never harmonize.
Grief cannot keep his time, all time's too long,
sighs are best sem-briefs to his doleful song.
My ditties mournful, though thou sweetly play,
thus do we all even blow our lives away.
Orestes wakes. But do thou wake, Orestes? is rest fled?
sleep never dwells long in a molested head.

Orest. Hark, hark, the Furies entertain my mother,
Orpheus would fetch Euridice from hell,
see, he looks back, would venture so, thou fool?
I Would see my mother burnt before I Would go,
why should thou bring her? she would stifle thee,
stifle thee in thy bed as my mother did.

Pyl. Still harping on thy mother?

Orest. Harping, no,
let Orpheus harp: O, I, she was, she was,
a very, very Harpie.

Pyl. Thus madness plays,
and keeps a certain measure in his words.

Orest. O I sucked out my mothers dearest blood,
I did indeed, O she plagues me for it now,
O I must go lie down in Tytius place,
Ixion too, he Sir would fain resign.
I scorn your petty plagues, I Will have a worse,
O the vulture, the wheel, the vulture.

Pyl. See how his conscious thoughts, like fiends of hell,
do arm themselves, and lash his guilty soul!
He see's no vulture, nor no Scorpion strikes,
yet does his conscience whip his bloody heart;
he needs no witnesses, he has within
a thousand thoughts which testify his sin.
No punishment so strict, no deadly smart,
as private guilt, that smites on the heart.

Orest. I did, I do confess I did, I killd them all,
ripped up the womb that bear me; nay I did.
O Tantalus thy plague; some meat, some meat;
who pulls those apples hence? let them alone,
nay sink to the bottom, I will follow thee,
Lies down to drink. the rivers dry, my mother has drunk all.

Pyl. Alas, come, go with me, we will find drink.

Orest. Is Pluto's buttry open; his drink's too hot,
I doubt 'twill scald me, but I Will taste on it yet.
The Eumenides stand to whip me as I go:
Nay I will pass you, I will out-slip them all.

Exit currens. Pyl. See in his conscience lies hells punishment,
our own thoughts judges, none are innocent. Exit.

Scen. 6.
Enter two Lords. 1. Lor. We that have here been born to see this change,
may leave the Court, and tell our children tales,
of the dier fall of Inachus great house.
the young Prince mad, the Princess killed her self,
old Strophius dead for grief; and murder heapt,
corpse upon corpse, as if they meant t'invite,
all hell to supper, on some jovial night.

2. Lord. Nay but my Lord, this is most pityful,
that the young Prince should thus from door to door,
beg for his food, and yet none dare to give.
I saw him wandering yesterday alone,
flying from every Crow, or prattling Pie,
crying out mother, and as if there had
tormenting furies followed him with fraud;
and truth, I thought to tell old Tyndarus,
to move his ruthful years to pity him:
and will you join petitioner with me,
we'll tell the case, it is good to ease misery.

1. Lord. My Lord I like your motion, and will join,
for Agamemnons sake my honored Master.

Exit. Scena 7.
Enter Orestes, Pylades, with naked rapiers. Orest. My fury leaves me, now I Am
at my last,
and now me thinks thou truly art a friend:
now with undaunted spirit prevent my grief,
and let thy rapier drink blood greedily,
as if it loved it 'cause it is thy friends,
now rid me of my woe, thy friendly vow
never did truly show it self till now.

Pyl. Why then dear friend, I thus erect this arm,
and will be strong to thee, as thou to me,
we'll look upon our deaths with better face
then others do on life; come Tyndarus, see,
we scorn to live when all our friends are dead,
nor shall thy fury make base famine be
the executioner to my dearest friend,
whilst I can kill him, therefore spite of thee,
we will free our selves past all calamity.

Orest. Yes Pylades, we will beguile our time,
and make him search through every nook o'th world,
if he in all his race can ever spy,
two that like us did live, like us did die:
But we delay our death, now bravely come,
and the last parting word shall be, strike home.

They run at one another. Pyl. O bravely struck dear friend, yet once again.

Run again. Orest. Yes, at one thrust two friends must not be slain.
O, how I love these wounds! heaven dropping showers,
when the outrageous dog makes clouds of dust
upon the thirsty earth, come not more sweet,
then the blessed streams of blood thy rapier raines.
Hence weapon; for my loins now scorn all props,
but my friends arms, O, bear good legs a while;
the weight of murder sits upon my soul,
and bends my staggering joints unto the earth.

Pyl. Haste, haste, I faint, but O, yet let my strength be Atlas to sustain the
falling world;
Breathe, breathe sweet vapors of two trusty hearts,
and let our breaths ascend to heaven before,
to make a room hard by the frozen pole,
where that our winged souls shall mount and sit,
more glorious then the Concubines of Jove,
wreathed with a Crown of rich enameled stars,
leaving all ages to deplore our death,
that friendships abstract perished with our breath.

Orest. Fly thou best part of man, where Hecate
born on the swarthy shoulders of the Even,
sits in a grove of oaks, till gray eyed morn
bids her to throw off nights black Canopie.

Pyl. Will It die before me? Stay, stay, I come.

Orest. O grasp me then, our names like Gemini,
shall make new stars for to adorn the sky.
Is thy breath gone?

Pyl. O, yes, it is almost past,
then both together, thus we will breath our last.

They fall down dead, embracing each other. Scena 8.
Enter in have Tyndarus, Lords, with others. Tyn. Went they this way? my Lords,
you move me much,
could I find him now, I would seat him new,
in his right Kingdom, which does weigh down me.

1. Lord. I see my Lord, Orestes and his friend,
without your leave, have made themselves an end.

Tynd. Then now is Argos Court like to some stage,
when the sad plot fills it with murdered Trunks
and none are left alive but only one,
to ask the kind spectators plaudite,
all else have bid valete to the world,
the man reserved for that, is Tyndarus,
who thus has seen his childrens childrens end,
his Grandchild, a bad son, a most dear friend;
the Scene must now be overflowed with groans,
each man sits down to wail his private mones.
one for the Queen does weep, one for the King,
all taste the bitter waters of this Spring:
the Nurse bewails the child, that part she bears,
all have their subjects to bedew with tears;
each one yet have but one; but all of me,
challenge a part in griefs sad sympathy.
Orestes, Clytemnestrae I must call,
these all for mine, thus must I weep for all:
let none believe this deed, or if they do,
let them believe this punishment then too.
It Is vile to hate a Father, but such love,
as breeds a hate to the Mother, worse does prove.
Our life consists of air, our state of wind,
all things we leave behind us which we find;
saving our faults; witness Orestes here,
who was his own tormentor, his own fear;
Who flying all, yet could not fly himself,
but needs must shipwreck upon murders shelf:
and so his breast made hard with misery,
he grew himself to be his enemy.
Thus grief and gladness still by turns do come,
but pleasure least while does possess the room.
Long nights of grief may last, but lo, one day
of shining comfort slideth soon away.
He, whom all fear on earth, must fear a fate,
for all our powers are subordinate.
Three hours space thus well can represent,
vices contrived and murders punishment.
A Monarchs life can in this little space,
show all the pomp that all the time does grace.
His risings and his falls, and in one span
of time can show the vanity of man.
For none of us can so command the powers,
that we may say, to morrow shall be ours.
Now fortunes wheel is turned, and time does call,
to solemnize this friendly funeral.
No force so great, no so disaster wrong,
as can unknit the band which holds strong
united hearts: who since they thus are dead,
one room, one tomb shall hold them buried.
And as these friends joined hands to bear their Fate;
so we desire you them to imitate.
Who since they all are dead, we needs must crave,
your gentle hands to bring them to their grave.

FINIS.
These Books are printed for, and sold by GA. BEDELL and THO. COLLINS, 1656.
viz.
Books in folio.
THe Complete Ambassador, by Sir Dudly Diggs, containing the Letters and
Negotiations of Sir Francis Walsingham, the Lord Burleigh, and other Eminent
Persons: being a perfect Series of the most remarkable Passages of State, both
at home and abroad, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory. The
History of the Civil Wars of France, Written in Italian by D' Avila, Translated
into English by Sir Charles Cotterel, and William Aylesbury Esquire the whole
Fifteen Books. Idem, The Continuation alone, being Ten Books.
Sir Richard Bakers History of the Kings of England. Stowes Chronicle,
continued to the Year 1631. by Edmunt-Howes Gentleman, with an Appendix of the
Universities of England. Seldeni Eadmerus. Idem, His Mare Clausum. Idem, His
Notes or Illustrations on Palaealbion. Engl. and Lat.
The History of the Reign of King Henry VII. written by the Right Honorable
Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount S. Alban; unto which is annexed a very useful
Table. The Life and Reign of King Henry VIII, written by the Right Honorable
Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Orlando Furioso, in English Heroical Verse, by
Sir John Harrington, with the Addition of the Authors Epigrams. The Marrow of
the French Tongue, by John Woodroeph. Babbingtons Fire works, with Logarithmes.
A French English Dictionary, with another in English and French, compiled by
Mr. Randal Cotgrave: whereunto are added, the Animadversions and Supplement of
James Howel Esquire. Usserii Annals, in two Volumes in Latin. Devotions upon
certain Festivals, piously and learnedly expressed in Meditations, by that
Accomplished Gentleman, William Austen of Lincoln's Inn Esquire. Of Government
and Obedience, as they stand directed and determined by Scripture and Reason,
four Books, by John Hall of Richmond Gentleman. Daltons Country Justice,
Corrected and enlarged by the Authors own hand before his death; unto which is
Annexed, an Appendix or Abridgment of all the late Acts and Ordinances that
relate to the Office of a Justice of Peace, to the year 1655. by a Barrester
learned in the Laws. A Collection of Acts, in the years, 1648, 1649, 1650,
1651. very useful especially for Justices of the Peace, and other Officers,
with several other Ordinances of like concernment, by Henry Scobel Esquire then
Clerk of the Parliament: now Clerk of his Highness Council. In Co-partnership
with W. Lee and D.P.
Books in Quarto.
Cabala, five Scrinia sacra: Mysteries of State and Government, in several
Embassies and Letters, by the great Ministers of King James and King Charles:
Collected by a Noble hand. In two parts. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes. Clavels
Recantation, or Discovery of the Highway Law. Powels Search of Records. Three
Readings of the Lord Dyer, Brograve and Rysden, of Wills, Jointures and Forcible
Entry. The Arguments of the Learned Judges, upon the Writ of Habeas Corpus,
with the opinion of the Upper Bench Court thereupon, and Sir John Elliots Case.
Miscellanea Spiritualia, first and second Part, written by the Honorable
Walter Montague Esquire Barclayes Argenis, Englished by Sir Robert Le Grey's. The
Christian Man, or the Reparation of Nature by Grace, written in French by that
Elegant and Pious Author, John Francis Sennault, Englished by H. G. sometimes
Student of Christ's Church in Oxford. Potters Interpretation of the Number 666.
or number of the Beast The Perfect Conveyancer. An useful book of Presidents.
Shepherds Legal part of Tithes, or The Parsons Guide. The History of the Grand
Seigneurs Serraglio: Unto which is added the History of China. Ross against
Copernicus and Gallelaus, a learned Philosophical piece concerning the Earths
motion. Mr. Durhams Assize Sermon at Warwick before the Judges, 1651. Palmerin
D'Oliva, both parts complete. The Jesuit the Chief, if not the only State
Heretic in the World, or the Venetian Quarrel, by Dr. Swadlin.
Plays.
The Devils an Ass, by Ben. Johnson. in Folio. The Marriage of the Arts, in
Quarto, by Barton Hollyday. The Just General, in Quarto. The Bastard, in
Quarto. The Wits Written by Sir William D'Avenam, in quarto. The Plationick
Lovers Written by Sir William D'Avenam, in quarto. The Triumphs of Prince
D'Amour, a Mask. Written by Sir William D'Avenam, in quarto. The Faithful
Shepherdess, by John Fletcher Gent. The merry Wives of Windsor, by
Shakespeare, in quarto. Edward the IV. the first and second part, in quarto.
Michaelmas Term, in quarto. Fine Companion, in quarto. The Phoenix, in quarto.
The Combat of Love and Friendship, by Dr. Mead. The Martyr. In quarto.
Horatius. In quarto. The Hectors, or the False Challenge, in quarto. The Raging
Turk, or Bajazet the II. Written by Thomas Goffe, Master of Arts, and Student
of Christ's Church Oxford. Newly reprinted, in octavo. The Courageous Turk, or
Amurath the I. Written by Thomas Goffe, Master of Arts, and Student of Christ's
Church Oxford. Newly reprinted, in octavo. The Tragedy of Orestes, Written by
Thomas Goffe, Master of Arts, and Student of Christ's Church Oxford. Newly
reprinted, in octavo.
Books in octavo.
Horace englished, by Richard Fanshaw Esquire An Apology for Learning and Learned
Men, by Edward Waterhouse, Esquire Idem, His two Divine Tracts.
Shepherds Justice of Peace, reprinted with Additions, two parts: In
Copartnership with W. L. and D.P. Idem, His Book entitled, The Court-Keepers
Guide. Idem His Clerks Cabinet, or Presidents.
A learned Treatise of the Common Laws of England, by Francis White Esquire
Barrester of Grayes-Inn: in Co-partnership with W.L. and D.P. Lambard's
Archeion, or Comment on the High Courts of Justice. The Parsons Law. Ashes
Tables to the Lord Cooks Eleven Reports, in English. In Co-partnership with
W.L. and D.P. Davenports Abridgment of the Lord Cooks Institutes on Littleton.
The Nuptial Lover Two small Romances. Hyppollito and Isabella Two small
Romances. Brinsleyes small Copy-Books. 3 d. price. Calendarium Pastorale, by
Theodoro Bathurst, Latin and English. The Countess of Arundels Experiments. A
Synopsis, or compendium of the Fathers. The Triumphant Lady, or, the Crowned
Innocence: A choice and authentic Piece of the famous de Ceriziers, Almoner to
the King of France; newly made English by a person of quality, and newly
printed. An Essay upon the first Book of T. Lucretius Carus De Rerum Natura:
Interpreted and made English Verse, by John Evelin Esquire; Illustrated with
Historical Annotations. Newly printed. Observations touching Foreign
Ambassadors, written by Sir John Finnet, Master of the Ceremonies to King James
and King Charles: Published by James Howel Esquire. In Copartnership with H.T.
Books in 120. and 240.
Sir Henry Wottons Works, with the Authors Life. The Book of Oaths. Ross his
Cases of Conscience. Of Liberty and Servitude, in English, by J. E. Esquire.
Jacksons Evangelical Temper. Steps of Ascension to God, or a Ladder to Heaven;
Containing Prayers and Meditations for every day of the week, and all other
Occasions, by Edward Gec, Doctor in Divinity. Now the ninth time reprinted.
Balzacks Prince, in English, by H. G. Master of Arts, and Student of
Christ-Church in Oxford. Malvezzi's Politic Christian Favorite; or the Life
of Count d' Olivarez the King of Spains great Favorite: with Political
Observations. The State of France in English, published by John Evelin Esquire The
Life and Reign of Edward the VI. by Sir John Hayward Doctor of the Civil Law.
Supplementum Lucani, by Thomas May, Anglo. The Accomplished Woman, written by
the Right Honorable Walter Montague Esquire. Three accurate Sermons: The First, of
Scandal: The Second on Easter Day: The Third a Funeral Sermon, preached by the
Reverend and Learned Doctor Richard Stuart, Dean of St. Paul's London, and Clark
of the Closet to the late King Charles. Whereunto is added an elaborate Sermon
of Universal Grace, preached by the Right Reverend Father in God Samuel
Harsnet Lord Archbishop of York. Newly printed.
FINIS.

