Good and true News FROM REDDING, BEING An exact Relation of the proceedings
of his Excellence the Earl of ESSEX, since he advanced from Windsore, the true
estate of the Siege, what number of men slain, what Works his Excellency has
gained from the Enemy, in what possibility he is of taking the town, faithfully
related.

With a true Relation of the access of Forces to the Lord General, since his
going before Redding.

Printed at the desires of many, to un-deceive the People, from the lying
reports raised by Malignants.

LONDON Printed for J. G. to be sold at the Galley in Cornhill. 1643.

True intelligence from the Siege at REDDJNG.
WE have now at last quitted our old Quarters, and hope to give the world
notice, it was reason and judgment that kept us so long at Windsore, and not
cowardice, or ill will to the Cause; and though perhaps some Officers have been
fauity (as what Army is free) yet as true it is, that those failings have been
presented through the multiplying glass of envy, jealousy and fear, and you
may well believe there has been a strong malignant influence fomenting and
imbittering these jealousies and repinings which you have been too much guilty
of: our enemies know well, if they can but make us suspect our friends, they
have laid a good ground for division, and you know the Proverb, Divide and
reign. But I know it is News, not Counsel you expect from a Leaguer:
wherefore I shall satisfy you of the true state of our Army here. When my
Lord General removed from Windsore, it was generally given out we were to go
for Oxford, which we believed; because my Lord in his march seemed to pass by
Redding, which, it seems he did to busy their heads in taking care to provide
for Oxford, that so Redding being neglected, he might take them less provided
for a siege, which fell out accordingly: for my Lord suddenly wheeling about
came before Redding, he summoned the town for the King and Parliament, but
Aston the Governor (a Papist, and one that is guilty of diverse murders)
answered very resolutely, He would keep the town or starve in it, my Lord sent
to them to have the women and children let out, which he refused, my Lord
seeing that the town must be carried by the Gun and Spade, and not by words,
went that way to work, and is very like to speed.

The Town is very strongly fortefied, many out-workes, commanded by some main
Bulwarks, more inward, the Garrison 3000. or more, besides the Townsmen,
there are near 22. pieces of Ordnance, to tell you the particular Quarters of
each Regiment were useless to you, being you know not the Town, only in
general thus, my Lord incampt on the West side of the Town, between Redding
and Oxford, the better to hinder any aid that should come from thence to the
town, he also took care to secure the River, that no relief should come that
way, then fell we presently to work with the Spade, to entrench our Quarters,
which work was carried on with more facillity and speed then could be
expected, the soldiers (herein right soldiers) (being willing to fight with
the Spade as well as the Sword) successively relieving one another, Night and
Day, the next work was to view the ground, for to make our approaches, to
which purpose eight went out, of which number the alworthy Major SKIPPON was
one the Enemy perceiving our intention, labored by their shot, and by setting
some Barns on fire, that by the smoke that so they might hinder them but yet
they did their work, and God kept them safe, only one a mean Officer received
a shot. Sergeant Major being returned, we began to make our approaches,
especially toward a hill called Causam-hill, which the Enemy had fortified,
being it commands the Town, by our aproaches we have gained most part of the
hill, and driven the Enemy to his more inward works, on this hill we have
raised some Batteries, that do much annoy the Enemy, we draw on our work amain,
to the Enemies remaining strengths, and have brought them in some places within
half Musket shot, in despite of the Enemies Musket or Cannon, which you may
think have not been idle, so that we hope to gain it in a short time, though
the Enemy have many Works one within another, they had planted some Ordnance
in a Steeple, but we have made them seek their Ordnance in the ruins of the
Steeple, the like we have done to some of their chief strengths, for our
Cannon has not rested, some slight sallies they have made out of the town, but
have been beaten in with loss, our men are very forward, and would carry the
town by an assault, but our prudent General had rather loose a little time to
gain it, then loose so much good blood, we hope to carry it in 3. or four
days; if not we believe my Lord General will advance toward Oxford, and
leave Major General with part of his Forces to take in this Town, our Works
being by this time finished, our soldiers have won some out works, which they
have left, as being no way useful to them, what ever lying reports ye have in
London, this is the truth, we have not lost above Fifteen men by the Enemy,
and ten or twelve slain and maimed by a Barrel of Powder that was set on
fire by a mischance, the Country comes in exceedingly, you may do well to send
as many of your Forces as you can spare, to surprise those Rascals, while my
Lord goes to Oxford, you must not expect long Letters from a Leaguer, but I
have been the longer, to contradict those false lies that we hear are among
you, you shall hear from me by the next, farewell.

From the Leaguer before Redding April 17.
From the Leaguer before Redding April 19.
SIr, I am glad you received my last, I wonder your malignants are so silly to
choose this place for the scene of their lies, where they may be so easily
disproved, but custom has hardened them in lying, and made them shameless,
believe it Sir there has not been 20. men killed by the Enemy since we lay
before this Town, we have now gained Causam-hill, have beat the enemy from the
Church in the bottom, and are now masters of that part of the town on this
side the Bridge, and hope to master the rest shortly, on monday the Governor
Aston offered to render the town, if he might march away with Bag, and Baggage,
it was answered that we came for the men, not for the Town, it is since
reported they would yield the town upon quarter, and leave to pass to his
Majesty without their Arms, which is said is denied, because they refused
quarter before, there are 7. broken Regiments in the town, in all about 3000.
men, we hope by this Siege to engage them to a Battle, of which there is some
probability, for the King draws his forces together, and the Parliament do the
like, Prince Rupert they say, and Hastings are come to Oxford, but it is certain
they were at Litchfield the 16. of this month, the Lord Gray is joined with
his Excellency, and has brought 7000. Horse and Foot, the Garrison and country
Volunteers with Colonel Goodwin are about 5000. 3. or 4000. volunteers are
come in to my Lord General, out of the adjacent Counties, so that it is all
the Camp talk, that if the Cavaliers come not out of Oxford to meet us here,
that we shall speedily find them at Oxford, except they run for it, for we
hope to play them such loud Music with our Camp Organs, as shall make their
best Bulwarks quake, we expect to meet Sir William Waller at Oxford with 8000.
men, be confident in a weeks time you shall see the scales turn: if we
remove from Redding. Sergeant Major Skippon shall be left to continue this
Siege, with sufficient strength. I pray God teach our hearts to pray, and our
singers to fight.

Vale.

