Good News from IRELAND Being an exact Relation of the late good success at
Sliggo Against the Irish Rebels.

Communicated to both Houses of Parliament on Monday last 12. January 1645.

Performed by Sir Charles Coot, Sir William Cole, and Sir Francis Hamilton,
with the particulars thereof.

As also diverse Letters of great Importance concerning the Estate of that
Kingdom and of the Kingdom of England, which were found in the Pockets of
their Commander in chief.

Together with a List of the Prisoners taken, the number slain on both sides,
and the names of all the Commanders.

Published by Authority.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 15. Jan.
1645.

A true Relation of the late success at Sliggo against the Irish Rebels.
Performed by Sir Charles Coot, Sir William Cole, and Sir Francis Hambleton,
with the particulars hereafter expressed.
ON Sunday the 17. of October 1645. the Irish Rebels having surrounded the
Town with 1000. Foot and 300. Horse, the Garrison seeing little hope of the
advance of the Vlster Forces (who were then near them at Bandron) though
unknown to them, conceived it absolutely necessary to hazard the fighting with
the Rebels with their own strength and Sir William Coals Troops, rather then to
starve themselves and lose their out-Garrisons which were blocked up, the Enemy
lying between them; Captain Richard Coot and Captain Richard Cole commanded
our Horse being two hundred, who charged the Rebels Horse very resolutely, and
fell in to the Sword pell mell, and beat them among the Divisions of their own
Foot, and routed them, which Lieutenant Colonel Saunderson recovered with the
Foot, and Sir Francis Hamilton came also with his Troop in the nick of time,
and had the execution of the Rebels for five miles, their Foot taking flight
upon giving ground of their Horse. In the pursuit their Commander and President
of that Province was flaine (the titular Archbishop of Tuain.) Our men took one
hundred and fifty of their Horses with Pistols, all their Baggage, Tents, and
Ammunition, there were two Wagons with rich Spoil and Money in them, they
took several of their Standarts and Colors, four and twenty Drums and
Officers of note, in number 48. who are now prisoners in Sliggo, about two
hundred of their men lay killed in he place, and many more had been, if
Plunder had not been preferred before Execution by our Foot; we had but one
killed of Sir William Coals Troop, and six horsemen (...), and some Horse.

Upon this defeat one thousand Foot and two hundred of the Enemies Horse more
that were on their march to Sliggo, friendly turned back with their fellows,
whom they met in great haste flying, and our Laggan Forces coming also to
relieve as, are now with us beleagering two strong holds of the Rebels near
our quarters. The Archbishop was a principal Agent in these wars, and one of
their supreme Council; diverse Papers and Letters of importance were found
about him; he had for his particular an Order from the Council at Kilkenny
for leavying the Arrears of his Bishopric, which Order and the Popes Bull and
Letter from Rome, Paris, and other foreign parts, and from several of this
Kingdom (in order to the Irish Affairs) relate, That the Pope would not at
first engage himself for the sending of a Nuncio for Ireland, until the Irish
Agents had fully possessed him that the restablishment of their Catholic
Religion was a thing feizable in this Kingdom: whereupon he undertook the
solicitation of their Cause with Florence, Venice, and other Estates, and to
deligate his Nuncio to attend the Affairs of this Kingdom. The said Nuncio
after some delays in France was expedited hence by the Popes express order,
and arrived at the River of Killimarre with twenty six Italians of his retinue
in a Friggot of one and twenty pieces, 22. October, and in his company
Secretary Beling, and diverse regular and secular Priests; the Irish are much
encouraged with the supplies, he has brought the List, whereof were found
about the Archbishop, Inprimus two thousand Muskets, four thousand
Bandaleers, two thousand Swords, five hundred pare of Pistols, and ten thousand
weight of Powder, which arrived in another Friggot before him at Crooke-haven
the tenth of October, together with six Desks and Trunkes of Spanish gold, the
sum uncertain. These Letters likewise inform us that all the Kings hope is
from Ireland, and if they desert him, he is likely to be undone very speedily;
several other things they contain concerning Prince Rupert, Col. Leg, the
Kings losses at Bristoll and Chefter, which are as particularly related as if
themselves had been in the place; something also there is concerning the Treaty
of Peace. Ormond (says one Letter) is found a Machavillan; Dillon, Muskery,
and Talbot are for peace, Conditionibus quibuscunque, which is, On any
conditions whatsoever; (says another) that their public affairs are in via
non termino: which is, in a fair way, but not brought home unto their end;
(says a third) the Propositions have their Answer slight and slow. There are
some mysteries of State in the business which cannot be committed there to
paper, yet more really certain it is there will be peace; also the Letters
express some differences amongst themselves between Muskery and Brown, in so
much that Brown departed from Dublin discontented to Killkenny, between
Castle-Haven and Preston, in so much that Father Beauchamp was sent from the
supreme Counsel to reconcile them. There is also a private Letter, some
suspicions informations against Dominico Spinila an Agent in Ireland, wherein
he is traduced to hold correspondency with the Queen of England in France, and
so to be a lover of their enemies.

Prisoners at Sliggo.
GReat Morogh ve Divo O Flaherty, Lieutenant Col. to Ric. Bourk, cosen German
to the Earl of Clanrickard and his next Heir. John Garye, Lievt. Col. to Sir
Tibbot Bourk, eldest Son to the Lord of Mayo. Richard Bourk Major to Ric.
Bourk the Earl of Clanrichard, Heir and Son to Sir William Bourk, brother
to the late Earl of Clanrickard. Captain William O Shaghuise brother to Sir
Roger O Shaghuise. Captain Garret Dillon, Son to Sir Lucas Dillon, who says
that his father was shot in the thigh. Cap. To. Castollogh. Killed. Edw. Brown
Cap. of 100. Muskiteers out of Galloway, brother to Jeffery Brown the Lawyer.
Three Lievt. of foot. Two Coronets. Three Ensigns. Killed. The Titular
Archbishop of Tuain the Rebels President of Connaught, a great Incendiary.
With several Prisoners of inferior quality both of Horse and Foot. Two or
three and twenty drowned.
FINIS.

