GOOD NEWS FROM PORTSMOUTH, DECLARING How Colonel Richard Norton Governor of
Southampton, met with my Lord Craford* and Colonel Ennis Regiments, routed
them, killed one Captain and Captain-Lieutenant, besides common Soldiers, and
took many prisoners, with the loss of only two men.

Sent in a Letter to his Excellency (from the said Colonel) and published by
his command, for the better satisfaction of such as desire to hear the truth.

Jan. 8. 1643.
It is his Excellencies pleasure that this Letter be forthwith printed.

John Baldwin Secretary to his Excellency.



LONDON, Printed for THOMAS GOULD, 1643.

GOOD NEWS From PORTSMOUTH.
May it please your Excellency,
THe occasion of this trouble, is to prevent or alter any mis-reports which may
be or have been raised upon me, because I heard it was reported even at my
own home, that I was routed, and my self taken or killed; the occasion of
this I shall relate unto you: when the enemy marched toward Sir William Waller,
though I could not spare men to his assistance as he desired, I marched after
them with about 130 horse on Saturday last, that I might see their march and be
ready to help him what was in my power. I marched far before I could get
knowledge where the enemy was, and at last by reason of the extreme soul
weather I took up my Quarters at a place within a mile of the enemies body,
where they were upon a hill undiscovered; I had not been long in my quarters,
but my Scouts brought me in word of a party drawing toward us; we immediately
drew out, and stood so long facing them, that (they still increasing from their
body) I saw it was not probable for us to escape if we should engage our selves
with them; upon this consideration I caused the rear to face about and march
toward Chichester, which they did, and I stayed with some 50 of my own Troop
to secure their march. The enemy either seeing them, or suspecting we would go
that way, made all the haste they could possibly to intercept us in our
passage; upon this I marched after the rest, but truly the enemy made such
haste that I feared they would get in between us, and then another party get
behind me; so I made a stand, and was feign to retreat, that I might get my men
into some order upon a Heath which was hard by; the enemy, it seems, thought
they had been forward enough to have intercepted us, came about, and came short
of my men that went first away, and they followed me very fiercely; I faced
about upon the Heath, and then they stood, but I saw (though peradventure I
might have been able to have fought with that party) that they increased so
fast that I durst not engage my men,) but I wheeled about, and made haste away,
lest the narrow passage should have proved prejudicial to me, if they should
have followed me too close. I had nor quite escaped this danger, but just in my
way, at the entering of a Town called Havant, I met with two Regiments (as they
say) of Dragoones under the command of my Lord Craford, and Colonel Ennis,
there was then a necessity of going forward, what ever the danger was, which (I
confess) I apprehended to be far greater then it pleased God to suffer it to
be; they stood and faced us with some of them while the rest marched by; for
they were coming out of a cross Lane, they stood till we came within half
Pistol shot of them, and when they saw that we were resolved to fall on them,
they fairly (trusting it seems more to their Horses then their Arms) run
away; we fell upon them, I think, with the more anger, having been crossed
before: and truly we spoiled (me thought) too many of them, they were most in
red Coats, but they were quickly all of a die: I think there were not many
killed, but I think there escaped few without broken pates. I hear, of
quality, they lost but a Captain and Captaine-Lieutenant; we brought away some
prisoners, and left the rest in the Town, into which the enemy followed us; I
hope I have not lost above two or three men; I do not yet know certainly:
those I have are safe at Chichester, and I am here at Portsmouth this second of
January,

Your most humble servant, R. Norton.


