OXFORDS LATIN RIMES TVRNED INTO ENGLISH REASON. OR Horrid Blasphemy made
excellent Divinity, thereby to give the Righteous assured confidence for ever;
That, though the Adversary (seems) to command the means, yet God commands the
end; and prayer commands God: Therefore, what ever the premises are, the
conclusion will be glorious, and the News very good from all those Quarters,
North, South, and West, where the Adversary boasts of his success: But from
Bristoll, and Gloucester, best of all, because there the Adversary has
blasphemed the Holy One, and is mad with rage against His Holy Ones.
Then shall the Lord be jealous for his Land, and pity his people,

Joel 2.18. Thou have seen it: The poor commits himself unto Thee, etc.

Psalm. 10.14. Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of
fools,

Pro. 19.29.
OBserving some picking in the dust-heaps; others raking the channells in the
streets and sinkes in the Kitchen, where they have found precious matter
sometimes, most times that, which has recompensed their labor: I must observe
herefrom, That no place, nor person is so barren, but may yield some fruit: Nay
nothing, no not that dung, which is most unsavory, because it is the
corruption of that which is best, but has virtue in it, more then is
ordinarily conceived, says a great Paracelsus says thus to an idle and useles
person; Thou art of much less use, then is thy dung: not worthy of that worst
excrement (in thy conceit) which thou voydest. Quae Calcantur, things we tread
under-foot, or leave there, would be of good esteem, if we knew the use of
them; this use is shown to the world, together with other excellent matters,
by Mr. Plats, whom I know only by his Books, a man of precious use and
abilities.
Scholar.

Let not the Reader then be discouraged at the sight of the Rimes, which shall
now be presented to his eye, though, indeed, they smell more of the Pot, then
of the Poet: and because, probably, they came from Oxford, from whence we can
expect no good; for there Satan has his Throne, and Iniquity has been
established by a Law. True it is, I have as vile an esteem of the Verses and
the Poet, as he has of his own dung; and yet, since there can be virtue
extracted thence, even out of that dung, The Reader need not doubt, but when I
have raked them to the bottom, I say to the bottom, I shall find some virtue
there, some excellent Truth uttered by him as a scorn, and as through a
Trunk, but making very much for the establishment of the Righteous, whom the
fool scorneth. I shall say more to the scorn, for that is my maine scope, no
more to the scorners but this, which is enough to make them tremble. Pro. 3.34.
Pro. 29.8
Surely the Lord scorneth the scorners, for they bring a City into a snare:
Nay they set a City on In flammant sufflant.
fire; The Lord will persecute them with his storm, and take them away with
his whirlewinde, if they repent not: So leaving the scorners, I come to their
scorn, which is wrapped up in these Verses, fifteen in number.

Extincta Castro fax pulchra novo est,
Nec nautae postea, nec militi
Sit noto Pharos. Auster disparem,
Haud tulit Casum: murus, cui addita est
Canina Litera, mersa est suis
Cum turmis nuper Leporis vado.
Euri (...) Bristonia
Leporinos Horrescens vortices.
Anglica Claudij timet Pares
Vrbs Casus: Haerois Teutonici
Myrmidones astant magno cum duce.
Pacata Thule est; nec Noto timor.
Popello aut Regi: Nihil relictum est
Brittannicum domare Caesarem,
Ni (...) preces gregis.
Haec Sphinges raptim Oedipo suo,
Julij 20. 1643. This last verse shows the Poet to be a merry Greek; but in
the close we shall say of his laughter, It is Eccl. 2.2.
mad. In my translation I shall render the words first, then the sense and
meaning; not to the Poets liking sure. I have not learnt of the Devil, his
Master, to play the fool, or the knave, or the madman. I thank God, who has
given me more grace, I have not sold my self to do evil, for then I could,
as he, and the Court Greek and Latin Poets tell us of one Mercury, a very
infamous person, a notable knave, a cunning thief, and a most notorious liar,
not his like in all the world; he was the Court-Mercury too; which may satisfy
the world touching the Court then, and this fellow, Syrnamed Mercurius Auli^us
now.
Mercury, upon the Ale-bench, make songs of David; I could (for I know their
way well enough) give-up my tongue, and my Pen, to the Devils forge, entreat
him to sharpen them against the face of the Righteous; The Devil would
gratify me so far, he would enable me, as well as them, natures bent being
that way, to lie and rail, and blaspheme; he would procure me also for doing
him service, some high degree in the Schools, good gain to my purse, happily
some place or title of honor, for such servants are in the only ready way to
rise in the world; But then I should render my self a fool, and a knave both,
and in every sober man's construction, mad also, as the news from Oxford once a
fortnight renders their Mercury there, and as these verses render the Poet
here; All of the easiest construction, especially the first, because of the
agreement it has with the English, wherein I had pretty skill ever since I
could read latin, for thus I could interpret this verse in Ovid, Tacturos
sydera summa putes, Thou shall put summer syder into tanckards. Such a
construction the child makes here, and yet he thinks he has proposed a
Riddle, which needs an Oedipus; no, it needs not, for

[Extincta Castro fax pulchra novo est; nec nautae postea, nec militi sit noto
Pharos;] Pulchra fax, is the Lord Fairfax, (a bright star indeed, but of that
anon,) and Castro novo is by Newcastle, he means the good Earl there, and his
meaning is very proper, for he has no more sense of God and goodness, then
have the timber and stones in that Castle; But we must not stifle the birth, or
the Poets witty conception, which is this; That the bright star in the North,
is quite extinct now by New Castle, and shall be of no more use to Soldier or
Mariner. Auster disparem haud tulit casum. As this in the North, so the like
disaster has befallen the Roundheads in the South; for Murus cui addita est
Canina litera, mersa est suis cum turmis nuper leporis vado: I have plowed with
the Poets heifer, and can read his Riddle; Sure Murus is a wall; So sure
Canina litera, is R, as they say in Oxford, where they make a noice like a dog,
and go round about the City. But here is a deep conceit, for as Castro
novo, in the first verse, is an Earl: so Murus, in the fourth verse, is some
excellent Person sure, precious in the eyes of God and men; for this shall be
spoken to the eternal reproach of Oxford, the Persons there; That they have
vilified and reproached those, whom God will honor; and they have honored
those with degrees in Schools, and titles of honor, whom God does account as
vile, as they can esteem their own dung; Had I heard no more but this, That
the man is blasphemed at Oxford, I must conclude presently, as every sober man
will; This is some excellent Person, he has done worthily, he is become
famous, I know he is, for he is infamous in Oxford; There the drunkards make
their songs of him, and there they make a noice like a dog. I proceed, Leporis
of a hare, vado in a shallow water, which you may ford-over; put together, it
is in Hare-ford, and the literal Interpretation; That the wall and all about
it, was drowned in Hare-ford: The Allegorical is this, and it is very witty in
the Poets conceit, That Sir William Waller, with all his Troops, were
swallowed up quick in Hare-ford, i. e. by the Earl of Hartford; And so the
Poet has added a letter to Murus, and that is ever an addition to a Blessing:
and has taken away a letter from his Lordships title of honor, which ever, in
sacred account, makes an addition to a curse. It follows,

Euri (...), Bristonia, Leporinos Horrescens vortices (i. e.) That shallow
water fordable but now, is now raised to such an height, that Bristol is
swallowed up by the proud swelling waters of Hare-ford. This interpretation is
literal too, and Allegorical; one word only is out of place, and improper,
for it fits not the Allegory, yet is it very emphaticall; (...) Bristonia,
Bristoll groans under cruel bondage; It does indeed, such as Israel never
felt under Pharaoh, and his Taskmasters; nor the Christian under the Turk;
(...) Bristonia, That City knows the sense of that word now.

Anglica claudij timet pares urbs Casus (i. e.) And Gloucester lies now at the
mouth of that devouring flood: for Haerois Teutoni i Myrmidones, The Myrmidons
[these were the most bloody Salvages, that any history makes mention of, so
hardened and brawned in villainies, and bloody executions, that they became a
Proverb; a very fit word here to declare unto us, what is clear enough, the
more then barbarous usages and insolences of those Rogues, Thieves, Robbers,
Murderers, Beasts in the shape of Men, the Souldiers] of the German Peer, have
begirt that City, with their great Duke. The Poet means those two, Brethren
in evil, whom he dignifies as he thinks fit, but God knows, they who are
highly esteemed in Oxford, are an abomination in the sight of God Their sword
has made women childlesse; It may be the Lord will be so gracious to them,
that their Mother shall not be childlesse amongst women. They have committed
lewdness in Isreal's land, Gods land: It may be their land shall prosper, and
they shall live to eat the fruits thereof. They have done their utmost to ruin
those, and their house, who laid out themselves, for the building up of the
Palatine house: This horrid ingratitude, this requital of kindness, is no sin
in Gods account; He is merciful; It may be, the Lord will build these men a
sure house: They shall live out all their days, and when they dye, they shall
dye as other men, and be buried as those, who are precious in Gods account. But
there is no trusting to it; we have not a word for it; against it we have, for
this is the word, and burden from the Lord, against all those that have shed
blood to their power; Ps. 55.23
Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; Thou shall not
be joined with them in burial, because thou have destroyed ( So we understa^d
the Possessive (Thy) and not that he laid his own Land waste, making it a
Babel. Isreal's kings did so, and the most Christian in name: as the Sacred and
French Chronicles tell us, and as our children will read more at large in
after times. These scriptures will add weight to the Burden and terror of the
Lord. Psalm. 5.6. Psalm. 11.5. Pro. 22.23 and 23.11. Isa. 49.12. Zac. 14.12
thy) land, and slain (thy) People Isa. 14.20.
[against whom the Lord was a little displeased, and Babylon helped forward the
Zech 1.15
affliction]. What the Poet says now is of small account, Thus says the Lord,
(as we have read) and this the Burden from his mouth, upon those great Captains
and their Myrmidones. I proceed.

Pacata Thule est; Scotland is quiet (says Oxford Poet, I shall say more to
that anon) Nec noto timor Popello aut Regi, nor is there any fear from the
North, but that all there abouts will come forth to the Kings foot, and be trod
under, as the mire in the streets; for (mark it) nihil relictum est Britannicum
domare Caesarem; There is no let in the world whereby to keep down Caesar
(the King) from [ascending above the height of the Clouds, and] being [like the
most High,] an absolute Monarch, whose Rule is his will [it had need be an holy
will, but such is only Gods will] nothing can hinder this now, now that
New Castle has put out the star in the North; Hare-ford has overflowed the
wall in the South, and the two Brothers are so prosperous in the West; nothing
can hinder now, but Preces gregis, the prayers of a poor flock [of sheep,
Armenta and Pecora, are great Cattle ever, Amo. 4.1
The Bulls and kine of Bashan, which oppress the poor, which crush the needy,
( Gregis is of a flock of sheep] (...), newly fallen mad; he means a poor
despicable, helpless, (I do not say hopeless) destitute, cast out,
fatherless People, a People vile in their own eyes, (but of high account with
God. These he means; Then his meaning is, nothing remains now that New Castle
is so fortified and strong; Hare-fords waters so risen, swelled so high, and
storme-like, swallowing-up, and storming all before it, and leaving no food
behind it; Now that the two Roaring Lions [the Lord calls them Zeph. 3.3
so, and I dare not think of a fitter expression] have their mouths wide open
to swallow-up Gloucester, the Inhabitants there, and all about; nothing
remains now to save these poor flock from these Devourers, Nisi, but, The
prayers of the poor of the flock, a poor, destitute, cast-out People. Well,
blessed be God, these people have, But their Adversaries allowance, and yet
they have enough! yes, enough and enough, for they have All, God and Genesis 33.11.
All; Enough then, though (which I will add) all the Adversaries Brethren, the
Kings good Subjects in Ireland, (these were called horrid Rebels an year and
half ago in a Court Complement) though these are called over to do their
King the like good service here, which they have done him in Ireland; yet these
people have enough, though but after their Adversaries allowance: and they can,
though they are, as Nehemiah and Daniel were, Neh. 1.4 2.1.
sad, faint, and Dan 8.27.
sick also, because of what they hear and see, yet they can recover
themselves, and rejoice in their portion. They have a God to go unto, (when I
have said God, I have said All) The wrath of man shall praise him; The
treachery of man shall advance his faithfulness, as the weakness,
foolishness, and wickedness of man does advance the power, wisdom, and
goodness of God. The Adversary with all their counsel and strength must fall
before the hand lifted-up, for it is lifted up to the most high God, God of
Hosts, King of Saints. They can pray unto him, commit all their concernments
unto the bosom of a Father, who is then nearest to his Children, the nearer
danger is. Prayers shall turn all this to the furtherance of the Gospel, and
the increase of the Churches joy. The Adversary may have so much power, as to
restrain Sea and Land both, and set open the gates of Hell against the Church;
He cannot restrain prayer, which opens the treasury of Heaven, and commands
God there, as we shall see presently. Blessed be God, the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; He suffers his peoples adversaries to carve forth his Childrens
portion, and behold it a large portion. The Adversary now has assigned a
Sanctuary to the people of God, a place of Refuge indeed, a strong Tower, the
Name of the Lord, the Righteous fly unto it, and they are Pro. 18.10.
safe. Nothing remains now, whereby to save these people from falling into the
mouth of the devourer, but the prayers of the destitute, that is enough, till
that Refuge fails, the hearts of the Righteous cannot fail; But that refuge
never fails; In the Lord Jehovah, is everlasting Isa. 26.4.
strength, an everlasting ground for everlasting confidence; "To establish the
Righteous now and evermore, on this foundation, That the issue or end will be
good; the wicked connot overruled there, the end is out of their sphere, that
God makes, He is Master James 5.11.
there. The King could pursue Israel with deadly hatred, he could speak Exo 15.9
proudly, but he could not overtake Israel. Another King, as proud as the
former, could, in his rage, command the furnace to be heated seven-times hotter
then Dan. 3.19. Ver. 25.
ordinary; he could not command the end, not make the fire burn, there God
overruled; The servants of the Heb. 11.34.
Lord quenched the violence of the flame. What ever the Premises are, which
the wicked have made, how agreeable soever to their sense and reason, yet they
can do no more, God will draw the Conclusion evermore by such a kind of
Logic, as sense and reason, the Philosophy of the world, is not acquainted
with, only God knows, and in his favor, he has made his Children know it, and
given them assurance touching that matter, and so they lie at Anchor in God,
confident under his shadow. Resolved fully at this high point, That God
commands the end, and Prayer commands God. And this bids the people of God,
expect good news from all Quarters, yea out of the West also, where the
Churches Sun seemed to set. Behold then, the Poet does belch out a double
Blasphemy; whence I shall draw a double Conclusion, and make it Christian
Divinity.

1. "That Prayers, which the Poet accounts a nothing, but (i.e.) a thing of no
account, are of high account with God, and the great Confidence of the godly.
2. "That those he accounts mad people, are the only sober men in the world. I
will enlarge upon the first, but first I will explain it.
Whereas I said, Prayers are of high account with God, and very efficacious to
bring to pass all the Churches designs, and to frustrate the Adversaries;
That is true enough, there can be no mistake there; for the Adversary means,
the Prayers of a destitute People, theirs I say, and he must say so too, who
have a Father to go unto, and an Advocate with that Father. It is very
notable; If they have a potent Advocate with an Adversary, they have an hope to
prevail: but having an Advocate with their Father, they can have no doubt; We
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 1 John 2.1.
Righteous. There can be no mistake there, Prayers are very prevailing, there
is in them an omnipotency, they command God, therefore are prayers the great
Confidence of the godly. But here we must be informed, prayers are so indeed,
not considered in themselves: Alas no, the good man's confidence must be that
which is perfection it self, complete, and perfectly perfect: There is nothing
so perfect, but Jesus Christ, and justification by him; Therefore to build our
Confidence upon Prayers, considered as a duty only, and no more, is to build
a Tower upon an Oaten straw. This then is the meaning, Prayers are a godly man's
great Confidence, as they close with a Promise, and make the soul cling and
cleave to Christ. As prayer puts the soul into a sure hand, the hand of a
Mediator, The Amen, The Faithful, and true Witness: Rev. 3.7.14.
He that is holy, He that is true, etc. In that hand the Soul and all her
concernments, all her prayers touching that matter, concerning her particular
well fare or the Churches, there the^ are safe, and thence they shall receive
Answer in the fittest time, a gracious, yea a glorious end. And so Prayers are
a godly Man's Confidence. And so much for Explication, and Confirmation of the
point. Now we will read the Experiences of the godly in all ages, touching this
matter, That we may see, that which is of the vilest account with vile men, is
of the highest account with God, and good men I gave my self to Ps. 109.4
Prayer, says David, (i.e.) he made prayer his work, when he was in a very
sad and unsettled case, Tossed up and Verse. 23.
down as a Locust (a very fit Emblem of the Church, the tides and changes of
her affairs, up and down) then he gave himself to Prayer, and this fixed
him, made him a quiet Is. 33.20.
habitation, who was before as unstable as a Grasshopper, and gave him assured
confidence, that the end must be good, so he ends with praise, I will greatly
praise the Lord, etc. David sets down two experiments he had made of this, I
will mention no more, because these are most notable, how he confounded
strength, and (that) Counsel (all for war) which was as an Oracle; 1 Samuel 17.
While his mighty Adversary cursed, David prayed, closed with an Almighty
Arm, So his Adversary fell before his face, and his own sword cut his throat.
At another time, a great Counselor disserted David (as the manner is) when he
saw that, he gave himself to Prayer, as his manner was, Lord says he, I pray
thee turn the Counsel of Ahitophel into foolishnes 2 Samuel 15.31.
No sooner asked, but it was done; The Lord defeated the good Counsel of
Ahitophel, 2 Samuel 17.14.
(good to bring about the horrid design against David, the dethroning of him)
and when he saw his Council was not followed, we know what followed, He
teareth h^mselfe in his anger, says Bildad, [but his application was wrong]
his own Counsel cast him down, etc. Job 18 4.7.8.
The Conclusion then stands firm, Prayers are a godly Man's Confidence (as
before expounded) he is assured fully these will wheel all about, turn the
Scene (where now we see nothing but drawn swords bathed in blood) the end
shall be gladsome, a glorious deliverance at the last. The poor People have
put up Prayers to their Father, they shall be delivered- out, sustained- in, or
preserved by the Judgment; For the Devourers mouth, which seemed to
swallow-up, did carry Jonah safe to land: I said, preserved by the Judgment,
delivered by that, which seems to the eye, an ^ter destruct^on. A few were
saved by water; 1 Pet. 3.20.
That water which drowned others saved a few. I know it does relate to
Baptism; but we may apply it to the waters of affliction, wherein the wicked
are drowned, but the Righteous are saved: The Lord will have respect to the
Prayers of his servants, 1 King. 8.28.
which they put up unto Him day and night I will make a short account of a rich
Treasury. I could say as much of Prayer, as is said of Faith; By prayer Abraham
obtained as much as he desired; So Isaac, so Jacob: Look how wide Faith opened
their mouths, so they were filled By prayer Moses tied Gods hand, Let me alone
Moses, says God, No, but he would not; A poor weak man overcomes the mighty
God. Moses did more then Ioshuah did, Josh 10 12.
he commanded the Sun and the Moon, (which is very notable) Moses commanded
God; He was pleased to be commanded so, Isa. 45.11.
to tell his People how commanding a thing Prayer is. It is the most
efficacious of any thing in Heaven or Earth; It has the quickest motion, and as
quick a return: I mean still, the prayer of the destitute, (a people loose
from, and forsaken of all humane help) for their prayer is powered forth now.
The eye is single toward God, steadfastly set Heaven-wards: The extremity is
great, the Adversaries pride at the highest peg, the people of God at the
lowest eb, in a perishing condition, Refuge fails, they are importunate, they
will give God no rest; then God hearkens and hears, then the return is quick
and speedy. For there is no help on earth. Now mark it evermore, He shall send
from Heaven and save me, says David Psalm. 75.3.
in his Mictham, words worthy to be written in golden Letters, when there is no
help in earth, He shall send from Heaven and save me; The Churches confidence
for ever. I will skip over a large Chronicle, and observe only one prayer
there, King Hezeckiah is greatly distressed, A proud Adversary has begirt the
City round; And now, There is but one thing remains, which the King can do
for his security, and that he does, he falls down upon his knees, Spreads the
Letter, the rebukes, the blasphemies, the great straights, he and his people
were in; all this he spreads beford the Lord, and he calls-in for help, sends
Messengers to Isaiah, tells him, there is but one way to take (a sure way) to
go to God by Prayer, O let us not neglect that way; Wherefore lift-up thy
Prayer for the remnant that are left. 2 King. 19.4.
Since there is but one way left open, let us presse-on in it, and weary the
Lord with importunity. Now what says the Lord? That which thou have prayed to
Me, against Senacherib King of Assyria, I have heard. 2 King. 19.20.
There was a quick Return, and the execution is as quick, for the next News
we read, is, "And when they arose early in the morning, behold in the Camp of
the Assyrians, they were all dead corpses. Verse. 35.
The time would fail me, else I could tell you of a Thundering Legion, That a
whole Army was like to perish for want of water; Nothing remained then, but
Prayer, and to prayer they went; Prayers reached Heaven presently, opened the
Clouds, so as they powered down rain in abundance. Though the fool makes but
a mock of Prayer, as if it were like his, an abomination, a mock-Prayer, yet I
could tell you, the Adversary has been so wise, and knowing touching this
matter, that she has professed, she feared the prevalency of Prayer, above what
a mighty Army could do, more the prevalency of one man, of whom you might say,
Behold he prays, then the power of an Army of many thousands. To draw-up
toward a conclusion, Prayer does all, at home and abroad, in private affairs
and in public; It keeps the house, it locks the doors, it makes two of one
mind in an house, it blesses the children, it makes all things thrive there,
it feeds the horse, plowes the ground, houses the corn, makes all things
prosper. What? Then the man may be lazy the while? No, that cannot be, it makes
a man most careful and conscionable in the use of all means, though he stays
and bottoms himself upon none; his rest is upon God alone in Christ, there his
Prayer fixes: So for the Private. For the Public now, see how prevailing and
serviceable this Ordinance is, it binds Gods hand; when the sword is drawn, it
sheaths it again; it stops the mouth of that Devourer; it binds Kings in
chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron; it makes wars to cease, and lets the
oppressed go free; it limits proud wrath, it sets unto it its bounds, as to
the raging Seas, So far and no farther; But it never limits the Holy one of
Israel, It ingages God to every business, and ingageth the heart to trust in
Him; and so there is an omnipotency in Prayer, etc. The servant of the Lord
writes upon every thing Asked of God, [for what soever is not so Asked, cannot
come to him as a Blessing] and the gift of God. And if it be a National
Blessing [for that his mouth is widest open, he is no body for himself, but as
the Church may prosper] this he calls Naptali, Genesis 30.8.
the child of my wrestling, for with the wrestling of God, fervent strong
Prayers has he gained this blessing] And as it is in the purpose of his heart
to seek God still, so he knows God hears Prayers still (i.e.) gives gracious
returns unto them. The Lord has spoken good words, and comfortable, and they
keep-up the Spirit of prayer always; so that his servants cannot be
discouraged and faint in their minds; Ask what you will, and it shall be done.
Joh. 14.13 15.7.
O what unspeakable grace is this! His servants ask nothing, but according to
their Fathers will (in reference and submission thereunto.) And it is their
confidence, 1 John 5.14
that their Father hears them: And if they know this, That they are heard in
whatsoever they ask, then they know they have the Petitions they desire of
Him. We must mark this with all observation, it will resolve us fully in all
that follows. Thus and thus it has fallen out to the Church in the North, thus
in the South, and so in the West, and is not all this a great disheartning to a
praying People? No, The contrary rather, all this puts heart into them, makes
their prayer more lively, and servent. It is with these servants, as it was
with their Master, the Lord Christ, the sharper the Agony, Luke 22.44. (...).
the more earnestly intended and stretched out are the prayers. But I will
answer first to our Common Prayers, whereto we exspect so present answer, for
we must note, that I am to speak here specially to those, that pray in Prayer,
are the poor of the flock, a destitute people in the enemies account, whom the
Lord, appearing in his Glory, Psalm. 102.16,17.
as now he does, (and he will be more glorious every day) does hear always,
even to their will and weal both, whereof anon: To our more common Prayers
first, for we pray now; And do we expect that God should come-off roundly with
us, and answer all at the first? Have we come-off roundly with him in point of
obedience, and good service? I believe the most upright amongst us cannot say,
Yes; Well then, and do we look, that God should turn to us the face
presently, and Answer us in every thing, when we have been so narrow-mouthed in
asking, so straight-hearted in believing, so slack in obeying, turning the back
upon God so long, and perhaps yet longer, even at this present time; Regarding
iniquity in our hearts even now, when we would have God regard our Prayers:
And would we be regarded? Expect we, that God should regard our Prayers now!
We might expect rather, that God should strike us dead upon our knees, and
that He has not done it, should be matter of wonder, and praise both. Has not
God waited when man would turn; and will not man be content to wait patiently,
when God will turn to him? Surely they, who Pray in Prayer, James 5.17.
indeed are a Praying People, these are a waiting People; They can continue on
their knees, or sit down astonished, not wondering, that God does not answer
them in every thing, but rather, that God does answer them in any thing, when
they look into themselves, and upon prayer as a prayer only, and no more but
a duty, which they have formed by their own strength: And yet God is the
hearer of Prayers, has heard their Prayers, and given a gracious return to
them, from time to time, so as they can say, they never sought God in vain. To
look no further back now than into these three years bypast, up to this
present day; What wonderful Providence! Marveilous rescues from the mouth of
the Lion, and paw of the she Bear! Admirable deliverances! strange
discoveries! What were all these, but Naptalies all, the child, the fruit of my
wrestling, does these praying People say.

^b.
But what will they say to these particulars, These discomfitures in the North,
and these in the South and West; What will they say to Bristoll? where was
their God then? These madmen will go near to say, these are their Naptalies
too, the fruit of their wrestlings, of their groans, and strong cries.

chaste to hear these Blasphemies: I will begin where the Rimer begins, with
the North, and so go compass, and yet end presently: That bright Star
there, the Lord Fairfax, has shone gloriously, and does shine, notwithstanding
all the forces of New Castle, all the fraud and treachery of the Father and the
Son, to force out that light yet that light does shine, and its luster is
set-forth by all this force and fraud, and thereby made more glorious. And what
is all this, but a Naptali, the fruit of the Churches wrestling with their God,
for and in behalf of his servants there, and here. We must not pass over
lightly how gloriously God has been and is seen in the North, an bearer of
Prayers there, and here. How has the Lord bent the hearts, inclined the soul
of the people to his Cause? What favor has He shown his destitute people in
the eyes one of another! England lifted up the hand, to the most High God for
Scotland, now Scotland for England; They will join hand in hand, "To stand
fast in one Spirit, with one mind, striving together for the Faith of the
Gospel. They will stand-up, knit together all as one man, against common
Adversaries, the Devil and his Hierarchy, with his Brutish Pastors. Two only
there were in the Assembly of Ministers, who withstood this Covenant, a proud
man, and as proud a Novice, neither of them cleared in Judgment touching
Popery and Prelacy (twins) by all that has been written and done these four (I
had almost said four hundred years, I will say fourscore) we know them, and,
we hope, they know now themselves, what spirit they be of; The one a man of
contention, The other a child, who will learn to hold his tongue, till he has
learnt how to speak. Pacata Britannia est, England and Scotland, these twain
once are one now, sweetly composed in their God, as a City Compact, and at
unity with it self, for they are in Covenant with their God, and each with
other; I am as thou art, my people as thy people: 2 Chro. 18.3.
All will stick together as one man, to withstand this common Adversary. What
shall I say of this? The tongue of an Angel cannot utter it. But it is a
Naptali, the fruit of the Churches strong wrestling. Thus has God don in the
North, as wonderfully in the South. How has he got himself a Name, and made
his Servant there a man of renown, even the Man of his Right hand! But then
indeed, for I must speak all, yet nothing to dishearten Prayer, or to the Man's
dishonor: We fools! we cannot have a glorious Instrument, but we must dote
upon it: We cannot have an excellent man to stand up for us, but we will make a
god of him; The Lord God of gods saw this, our folly, and was angry; and so,
when we would make man an Idol, God would break him to pieces. And what is all
this? A Naptali, a fruit of the Churches wrestling; we shall see it more clear
anon. But this is clear now, for now we are taught a great lesson, To cease
from man, Isa. 2.22.
and, To cleave to God, There-on to bottom our selves, and place our
confidence. And Bristoll too, the impoverishing of that, and doing more, the
forcing of that City so, as never City has been so forced (since there was a
City upon the Earth) by the fiercest Salvages and most cruel Myrmidons.
Indeed such villainies, outrages, notorious violences are committed there, that
I am at a stand what to say. But yet I will call this a Naptali, a fruit of the
Churches wrestling; for we must note, the Church does wrestle with her God,
entreats, that Deliverance may come to his People: But she does not limit the
Holy One of Israel; They do not bind him to their time, their instruments, and
manner of working: They pray as men, they leave Him to work, as a God, still
with submission to his will, still resolving all thither. And when they see
what is the will and pleasure of their God, who does all things well, they are
well content. It is the Lord, say they, as Eli said, Let him do what seems
him good. 1 Samuel 3.18
He has don it, His people, as Aaron in a sad Case, hold their Peace. Lev. 10.3.
And yet they are confident, God hears them always, and has heard them in all
that they asked, for they asked nothing, but according to his will, (mark
that,) Therefore they have a confidence, that all, even this taking, and
forcing of Bristoll shall be for the Churches weal, greatly to advance the
glory of their God, and the rejoicing of his People. Their losses shall be
their advantages, as to this time, so till time shall be no more. So the wise
God will order it, who (made a Chaos, a (...)) brings order out of the greatest
confusion, life from the grave, and glory from the Cross; They will trust God,
who would suffer no evil to be, but that out-thence He does produce good; He
will confound his Adversaries by all this, the Adversaries lifting-up shall
tend to his ruin; God gives him scope, lets out the raines (gives him rope, he
will strangle himself with it) puts power into his hands, which he does
exercise now with a rage, that reaches up to heaven; So high must his
judgment reach, even to the Skies. Jer. 51.9.
He has exercised proud wrath, he has dealt treacherously: Now he sees, as the
Ammonite did, That he stinckes before all Israel. There is a notable discovery
of the Adversary at Bristoll, his malice, his rage, his lust. The Inhabitants
there, some of them, are discovered too, the treacherous Lawyer, and the vile
Priest, with many more, a great mercy all this, and all this the fruit of
Prayer The Lord will discover his own right hand also: Surely He that does
nothing in vain, has brought light out of the womb of darkness, will work
gloriously here, for His manner is to make the most glorious light to appear
unto his Church, in that very place (the West) where it seemed to set. The
Churches light must rise in obscurity: her darkness must be as the noone day.
Isa. 58.10.
Doubtless, the Lord will work gloriously about Bristoll, and those parts, we
have a word for it, that so He will do, even a sure word of Prophecy, where
thus we read, Wherefore should they say among the People, Where is their God?
A clear intimation, that so an Heathen people will say, when God delivers his
people into their hands, they will do after their manner, as the Heathen have
done at all times, and now at Bristoll, reproach God and his People, saying,
Where is their God? Joel 2.17.
What then? Then it follows, Then shall the Lord be jealous for his Land, and
pity his People. Verse. 18.
Then! When? When the enemy is so proud, so lifted up, that he dare reproach
God, ask where he is? When they deal so proudly, as the Heathen did at
Bristoll: How dealt they there? I tremble to tell the manner how, worse then
the Heathen did before them, or their Fathers, who platted a Crown of Thorns,
and put it upon the head of Christ: These brutish men, worse then those
Soldiers, have plotted a worse matter, and cast a greater reproach upon the
Lord in Glory. When the Adversary is so proud, Then will the Lord, as we read
before, and as it follows, He will no more make you a reproach amongst the
Heathen And does not the Lord pity his People? Has he not begun to take away
their reproach? May it not be said, and for Gloucester, What has the Lord done?
The Adversary is proud, for he is very confident, he has an Arm like God, (as
Pharaoh before him) he said, I will take that City, my lust shall be satisfied
upon them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them. Observe, I pray
you, what the Adversary says; I will, and I will, All shall be as he will, he
never asks God leave: No, I warrant you, God is not in all his thoughts: Tell
him of God, and his will, he puffs at you. Note it by the way, that this is
an infinite disadvantage to the Adversary: He is upon a work, which he cannot
commit to God, he cannot advise with God about it, all the counsel he takes is
from the Devils Oracle, and he digs deep to hide it, even unto hell; Therefore
it is, that their design many times, proves abortive, like an untimely birth
in the wild of Kent: It discharges it self, through haste, like a poisoned
Piece of Ordnance, which flies off, but breaks all to pieces, and all about
it. But when the Adversary is successful and prevails, it is by treachery,
hellish devices, and contrivances, the depths of Satan: and so, prevailing by
treachery, they oppress the poor, who cannot resist them, they exercise proud
wrath upon them, as Devils incarnate, and as they did at It is notorious how
mischievous these spoilers were (their cruelty there, and every where, is
unutterable) they burnt as much wheat belonging to one man as was worth 700
pound.
Cicester, and Bristoll. Reader, I say again, this is of infinite use, if thou will consider this with it, the infinite advantage the Church has above her
Adversaries, She can Pray, while her Adversaries does Curse and Blaspheme that
worthy Name, by which (she) is called; she can take Council at Gods mouth,
enquire, as David, of the Lord, at every turn, strengthen, stablish, bear up
her self, upon an Almighty Arm still, here is an advantage, that cannot be
expressed; but take all; the Church (I mean still a poor People, rich in
Faith) have no will of their own, but what they have denied, and renounced,
they have resolved their wills into Gods will, and they say still, as they
ought to say, "If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or that; Jam. 4.15.
Not ours, "but the will of the Lord be done; Act. 21.14
So they cease evermore, as their Brethren before them, concluding all their
matters, and concernments under Gods will. Here is an infinite advantage, which
the Reader may note by the way, and pardon the digression. I return now to our
Adversaries, where we found them Blaspheming the worthy Name, and speaking thus
proudly, as we read, Go to now, say they, To day or to morrow, within a very
few hours, we will go into such a City (called Gloucester) and, (kennell
there, for they are dogs) continue there this Winter, where we will whore,
and drab, and curse, and blaspheme (God damn us) and shed blood to our power;
so proudly they said, so they will do, such a good will they have, and so
headlong it carries them. Now hear what the Lord will do; The Lord, who does
cast abroad the rage of his wrath, beholds every man, that is proud, and
abaseth him; Job 40.
does confound daring attempts, horrid rage, and cursed blasphemy; decks
himself with Majesty, and excellency, for the very purpose, to resist (to set
himself in Battle-Array against the Proud) James 4.6. (...).
He will show himself glorious in power now; the Right hand of the Lord will
dash in pieces the enemy. We know the Lord has done it, though we had heard
nothing touching that matter, for God does resist the proud; the God of Hoasts
sets Himself in Battle-Array against such haughty Persons; The lofty looks
of man shall be humbled: and the haughtiness of Men shall be bowed down,
says the Lord; Isa. 2.11.
and as He says, so He has done; And He alone shall be exalted in that day.
We will give now all, that is due unto man, to his courage, to his
faithfulness; but we must ascribe Salvation to our God: He has marched
valiantly; He saw there was none to help; Therefore His Arm brought
Salvation, He has repayed fury to his Adversaries, recompenses to His Enemies.
In whom the Church does trust; He will yet deliver; He will go on to show
favor, to complete His victories; He will take the matter into his own hands;
He will do, as his Adversaries said in their pride they would do; The Lord
will pursue, He will overtake; He will divide the spoil. These Balaams now are
Posting to another place, and they Boast still what they will do there, They
will do to -- as they have done to Bristoll, and as they would have done to
Gloucester: So they will do, they have a good will unto it, but God has them in
his chain, and has put a hook in their nostrells, and a Bridle into their
mouths, and He will send his men of war after them, carryed-on upon the wing
of Prayer, put up from all the corners of the world, and all his people there;
carried also upon the wing of Faith. The Church hopes, her people will not make
Idols of men any more; then they shall be broken in pieces no more. She
hopes, that her people are, if not fit, yet fitting for deliverance; and her
Adversaries rotten-ripe for destruction; if their iniquities not yet full, yet
filling up to the brim, now they have reproached the Lord, now their mouths are
so wide open to utter blasphemies, surely the Church sees now their day is
coming; It is at hand. But she has resolved all touching that matter, into
Gods will, she referres all to his time. If he will make more breaches upon
her, she is humbled, and can accept of her punishment, for she knows the time
is coming, even the set-time, when her Lord will make make up his Jewels, and
Build the Tabernacle of David which is fallen. And how ever the Lord may deal
with her for the present (it is His Prerogative Royal to deal with her as he
pleases: but mercy pleases him) If He suffer His people to be longer
tossed-up and down like a Grasshopper, it is to settle them the faster upon the
Rock. They know, God is Master of the end; What ever the Premises are, he makes
the Conclusion. So they have concluded, and this is their confidence, What they
loose in the world, they shall gain in Heaven: All their losses here, shall be
their Advantages here and there; What they miss of here below, they shall
find abundantly recompensed in Christ above; as their sufferings are, their
consolations shall be. In the mean time, they, as was said, limit not the Holy
One of Israel; They leave him to His own will, work, and time; They have
resolved their will into His good Pleasure; His will be done, Amen. Hitherto He
has done all things well, even when He broke His Armies to pieces, He made them
up again with advantage, two for one. Who would distrust this God? Surely the
Church will not. They will not forsake their confidence; They have Prayed, and
they have been heard still, and they will pray evermore, and are assured, that,
when things are lower then yet they are, or like to be, their Prayers will
wheel-up all again, and turn the Scene contrary to all expectation, but the
godly man's. The cause is Gods cause; the mannagers of it, His people; God will
maintain his own cause, and spare his People, according to the greatness of
His mercy, Amen and Amen.

I must add here; Whereas it is cleared now, what a mighty Instrument Prayer
is, how prevailing a weapon ever-more; And that it is the Churches weapon,
whereby she turns and wheels about things, when they seem to be gone, quite
fallen, and desperately lost; When this is cleared, This must not be concluded,
That this is the Churches only weapon, she must not use the Sword. Master
Calvin, Call Instit. li. 4. ca. 20. sect. 24, 25. etc.
who has said as much, I believe, as any man in the world, touching the sacred
Majesty of Kings, and obedience due unto them; When he has said all, as much as
can be said, and yet no more; but what we all say, who speak by the Book of
God, he adjoynes, De privatis hominibus semper loquor. Sect. 34.
All that I have spoken touching obedience to Kings, or suffering from their
hands, is spoken to private men; I do not mean the Ephori, who curbed the
Lacedemonian power; nor the Tribunes, who righted the Roman People, when their
Consuls did them wrong, etc. Nor the Parliament in England; And there he has
these words, Si regibus impotenter grassantibus conniveant, eoru^
dissimulatione^ nefarid perfidia non carere affirmo. 32
If the Parliament there, (or any where) shall wink at the Kings exorbitancy,
crushing the poor, and grinding the faces of the needy; If so, Then do the
Parliament deal treacherously, They betray the poor of the flock, and the
trust of the Kingdom. There is but one Section more, and but a word out of it,
which will stop their mouths, who flap us in the mouth with this still, That
they have sworn obedience to their King. You must ever except this here, says
Master Calvin; If it does not cross the Rule, and Gods command; That you may
satisfy men, you must not be so foolhardy, as to incur the displeasure of
God, the God of Gods and Lord of Lords. Calvin has a little more, but too much
for me to set down here; I would rather Kings did read it, for it highly
concerns them, even above their Crown.

Three lines more must be added, they will be of infinite use. The Adversary
here has carved-forth the Churches allowance, which she accepts, abundantly
thankful to her God. And now in this time of distraction, so full of bussel,
and confusion, the Church has but one work to do, which she attends with all
care and watchfulness; "Their keeping their Spirit clean, that their Prayers
may be pure; Their intercourse, and commerce to Heaven kept open; and their
Communion entire with the Father and the Son. This is their work, and they
give their heart unto it. And now, though the Earth be smitten, and stagger
like a drunken man; Though it open wide whilst she gives up her dead, and
discovers her slain, and vomits-up the Hierarchy, with all their Brutish
Pastors, who have been a burden to her so long, and cumbered her ground. Though
a great quaking fall upon the Kingdoms of the world, so as they be smitten
together, and broken to pieces; yet these People cannot be careful, not
greatly moved; There is a River shall refresh them in this drougth, and an hand
shall hold them fast in this Earthquake, while the Lord is performing his
whole work upon mount Sion, and on Jerusalem; While he is making an end, and
drawing the Conclusion, which will be to the heart of His People, gracious and
glorious, Amen. So much to the first Blasphemy, and the conclusion therefrom; I
will but name the other. 2. That these Praying People are newly fallen mad.

Not newly sure; they were anciently so mad as now they are; ever since they
could not run with those, that blaspheme them so, into the same excess of Riot
with them; 1 Pet. 4.4.
Ever since they did abominate Babylons Wine, which, indeed, has made all the
Earth drunken, and the Nations mad, as at this day; Jer. 51.7.
Ever since they kept their foot from the Path of the destroyer, and loathed
the way of Cain; ever since they served their God, according to the Rule of His
will; Ever since they could Pray indeed, (in the Holy Ghost) have they been
accounted a mad People. By those that are mad indeed, mad upon their Idols; mad
with rage [as your poor flock of sheep never are; But Armenta and Pecora, the
Kine and Bulls of Bashan, Nimrods, mighty hunters before the Lord, great
oppressors of the world, Beasts-like-men, these are mad, and so we say in
ordinary speech; But a mad flock of sheep was never heard off from the
beginning to this day] These are harmless, gentle, and meek, to a Proverb; and
so meek they must be and humble, for they are the poor of the flock, and God
has humbled them, He has meekned their hearts; for He has laid open their
hearts unto them, so they know themselves now, and have so learnt Christ, that
they are lowly, meek, and vile in their own eyes, and content to be more vile
and base in their own sight. But they bless God for this reproach above many,
for so they reproached Christ their Head; even so, He has a Devil, and is
mad. Joh. 10.26
This makes them leap for joy, because their Lord Christ was so reproached:
For as they are made conformable to their Lord Christ in their sufferings from
the hand and tongue; so shall they be made conformable to Him in their
consolations; They are as he was, so blasphemed in the world; they shall be as
He is, in Glory. 1 John 3.2.
What manner of Glory? Nay, had I the tongue of an Angel, I could not tell you
that, I can read it as you can, That, when the Lord Christ, shall appear,
these (poor of the flock) shall be like Him, and see him as He is; like him,
and as He is! I can say no more, but admire: O the weight of glory! Only, if
you are of the number of those destitute ones, the poor of the flock, take
your Fathers blessing before you go; Blessed are ye, when men shall revile
you, persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you, falsely for
my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, for
so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. Mat. 5.11,12.


A Postscript.
Here is a vacant place, I will tell two stories, and fill it up, one touching
a person, the other a Thing: All is heathenish, but we can make it Christian,
and very suitable to all that is said before. Sophocles, a grave Poet indeed,
lived a monastic life, retired, and much in meditation. He is a fool and mad
both said some, (they were his sons) and so in our common speech, they would
have begged their Father for a fool and a madman, fit to have a Guardian over
him, unfit to be a guardian over others; his sons were fitter men, they
thought: pretty youths! The father, after his manner, said little, but did
much, and yet held close to his work, and quickly showed it to the Judges:
"See, Sirs, said he, is this the work of a fool and a madman? The application
must be short, the best men are just so accused by (sons I will not call them)
bastards not sons, because they pray, they sing Psalms, they maintain
communion with their God. Aug de (...).
I assure thee, Reader, this was all could be charged against them in the worst
times, and by their fiercest enemies, these enemies themselves being Judges:
Well! they will keep to their work the closser for this. And when their work
shall be manifest, as one day it shall, and the thoughts of all hearts: Then,
what ever the wicked think now, they will say then* "These were the only sober
and wisest men: So much of the person.

Of the thing next, Archimedes had an Engine the strangest that ever was in the
world. Therewith he defended a City bigger then Gloucester, and defeated a
storming enemy there: To tell all in a word, This man thus boasted of himself
and this Engine, "Give me another earth, said he, whereon to set my foot, and I
will pluck-up this earth, and throw it like a ball, Sea and all. Truly I
cannot but smile at his conceit: As Diogenes said, "He would see how he could
drink out of his hand, before he would throw away his dish: So this great
Ingeneere would have sure footing on another earth, before he would cast away
this; but he did express the energie and strange working of his Engine very
well. There are a people, who have as strange an Engine as this: which we call
(nothing but) Prayer: I Will tell you what it will do, defend a City from a
storming Adversary: More then so; It will pluck up earth to heaven, and pluck
down heaven to earth: I have neither time nor space to say more, but so it will
do.

An End.

