Unheard Of CURIOSITIES: Concerning the TALISMANICAL Sculpture of the PERSIANS;
The HOROSCOPE of the PATRIARCHS; And the READING of the STARS.

Written in French, by JAMES GAFFAREL.

And Englished by EDMUND CHILMEAD, Mr. of Arts, and Chaplain of Christ-Church
OXON.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

The Testimony that Leo Allatius gives, in his Apes Vrbanae, concerning this
Book.
CUriosus hic Liber, intra sex menses, ter fuit editus: bis Parisijs; et semel
alia Galliarum in Urbe innominata. Suspicio est, nec fallit Conjectura,
Rhotomagenses Bibliopolas, spe lucri, semel, atque iterum, non sinetum Sensus,
cum Styli Corruptione, edi^^sse.

In English thus.

THis Curious Book was printed Thrice, within the space of Six Months:
Twice, at Paris; and Once, in some other City of France, not named in the
Impression. And it is suspected, and upon very good Grounds too, that the
Booke-sellers of Rouen, in hope of Gain, printed it more then Once; though not
without very great Corruption, both of the Sense, and Style.

To the Worshipful, my much Honored Patron, Edward Byshe, the Younger, ESQUIER.
Sir,
WERE Presents of this Nature, what they pretend to; and did not rather Engage,
then Gratify the Receivers; intitling Them to what Errors soever shall be
there committed: yet notwithstanding could not This of Mine expect to find any
such Entertainment, at Your hands. For, I bring not here a Gift; but, pay a
Debt; and, but Restore unto you, what was your Own before: Since this
Dedication is but an Account of some of those hours, which ought wholly to
have been Otherwise employed, in your Service.

Neither have you a Single Title to it only, as Coming from Me: But, so Great
is your Affection to Learning; and so Active, in Encouraging all, that make the
least Pretense to It; as that, were I a Stranger to you, I should account my
self Obliged to make my Addresses to You; and should think, all my Endeavors
were justly due to Him, that deserves so Well of Learning in General. Be
pleased therefore, Sr., to accept of this Mean Present, as a Testimony, not
so much of my Gratitude, as of your own Merit from Learning: and suffer me to
make my Hearty, though Weak Attempts of Deserving, in some small measure, those
many Favors, wherewith You have not ceased to Oblige

Your most Devoted Servant, EDMUND CHILMEAD.

To my Lord Bishop of NANTES.
SIR,
I Present these Curiosities to your Lordship, as to the most Knowing Man in
this Choice Kind of Learning, in the World. If any conceive the Subject to be
of too Daring a Nature, and Unfit to present a Prelate with; whose Profession
is only, To Know his Masters Cross; let them remember, that the most Pious
among the Ancient Fathers have not disdained the Curiosities of the Gentiles:
besides that, Preaching, wherein Your Lordspips Excellency is such, as that it
renders You Admired by All, as an Oracle; ought to be accompanied with
Whatsoever may conduce to the Knowledge of God: out of which number, These
Choice Pieces of Antiquity may not be excluded. All France acknowledges Your
Lordship to be as a second Saint Paul of Our Age: seeing that, since the time
of this Great Apostle, the Gospel has not been preached more Learnedly, nor
with greater Eloquence, and Zeal, by Any, then by Your Self, and Your
Disciples. So that the Height of my Desures can be but this; that These my
Conceptions, which I here present You with, may be but received by Your
Lordship as well, as Those that issue from Your Lordships Pious Breast are, by
all the World.

If I arrive but to This, I shall esteem my Self doubly Happy; having been
already long since so, in having the liberty to call my self,

My Lord, Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, I. Gaffarel.

The Author's Additions, and Advertisement to the Reader.
IT is not any Itch of writing possesses me, Courteous Reader, that I here
present thee with these Curiosities: those that know me, have found me very
free from this foolish passion. But a person of quality, whom to deny any
thing, were a great Crime in me, has forced them out of my Closet, whence
otherwise they never should have come: since I had resolved, after so many
Calumnies endured, never to adventure more into the Public View, having so
oftentimes sighed forth those words of a Roman Prince; Utinam nescissem
literas! But in fine, the Entreaties, and Commands of my friends have prevailed
against my own Resolution; and I am forced, I confess, to this Publication;
since I could not but foresee well enough, that my Enemies would not relish at
all this other Essay of my pen: notwithstanding after all this, I have
wherewith to comfort my self; since one of the greatest Prelates of our Age
has condemned their Insolence. Receive therefore favorably this Discourse,
Courteous Reader; and remember what we all are: I will not say, thou shall find
all things perfect here; for I am no Angel: and if there be any defects, we
must accuse our Mortality, which renders all Mankind subject to Error. But
above all, know, that I am no whit obstinate, or self-conceited, nor never was;
I take in very good part what Advertisements soever are given me: neither do I
account my self so knowing, but that I shall be very ready to learn of any
man: they are fools only, and vainglorious, that refuse to be taught; and the
Ignorant only say, They know all. As for my part, Courteous Reader, use me but
friendly, and I shall require nothing else.

If thou think it strange, that a man of the Church, as I am, should adventure
on so bold, and daring a Subject, as this seems to be; consider, I pray thee,
that many of my Profession have put forth things much more bold then these; and
even such as have been esteemed Dangerous too. Thus Trithemius the Abbot put
forth his Polygraphy, and his Steganography, where the Calling forth of Spirits
is plainly delivered; notwithstanding he makes other use of it, then our
Sorcerers do. Gulielmus Bishop of Paris has not only written of Natural
Magic, but he also both perfectly understood, and practiced it, as the Learned
Picus Mirandula reports of him. Another Learned Bishop also, Albertus Magnus by
name, has taught the grounds of it with admiration. Roger Bacon, and Joannes
de Rupescissa, both Franciscan Friars, have done the same. Petrus Cirvellus, a
Spaniard of the same Order, has published to the Christian World a Book in
Folio, of the Four Principal kinds of Divination, and all the Maxims of
Judiciary Astrology. P. de Alliaco, a Cardinal, and Bishop of Cambray, has
written of the same Subject: as also has Junctinus, a Priest of Florence, and
a Dr. of Divinity. And since we are fallen upon the Italians, have not Aurelius
Augurellus, and Pantheus, both Priests, the one a Venetian, the other a
Tarvisian, delivered the Fooleries of the Philosophers Stone, the one in his
Chrysopaea, and the other in his Voarchadumia? Marsilius Ficinus also, a
Priest, how full of Superstition are his writings? yea what Superstition is
there in the World, that he has not published to open View? Antonius Bernardus
Mirandulanus, Bishop of Caserte, has, after his example, maintained a world of
things, clean contrary to our Religion, in his book, De singulari certamine.
The Cardinal Cajetan de Vio has done the very same: and Giovanni Ingegneri,
Bishop of Cabo d'Istria, has newly busied himself in maintaining the Grounds
of Physiognomy. And before all these, Synesius, a Christian Bishop, wrote a
book of the Interpretation of Dreams, commented on afterward by Nicephorus
Gregoras, a Bishop also, or Patriarch, of Constantinople. I omit the
Superstitions of Joachimus Abbas; and of Savanarola, a Dominican Friar; with
Cardinal Bembus his Gli Asolani; Aeneas Sylvius (who was afterward Pope Pius
II.) his Lucrece; the book so full of all Lewdness of Poggius the Florentine,
who was Secretary to the Pope. Neither will I mention the Macaronick History,
put forth under the name of Merlin Coccai, but written by Theophilus Folengius,
a Benedictine Friar; nor an infinite number of other books, written by
Churchmen, with which, Kind Reader, if thou compare this of mine, thou will
find, if any blame me, they do it wrongfully.

And that thou may be fully acquainted with my purpose in this discourse,
know, that I give no more credit to any of these Curiosities, then the
Catholic and Apostolic Church permits; and that I have not published them,
at least some of the most nice and ticklish, but after many Christians of my
Profession; as thou may perceive by the Sequel. As touching Jeroboam's
Calves, I am not the first, who has said, that the making of them was Lawful,
and that this King was no Idolater: the Learned Genebrard has led me the way;
and after him, Moncaeus; and before them, Abiudan: and I shall be very ready to
withdraw my self out of their company, if I find there be any danger in it. If
thou object, that these Curiosities, ought not therefore to be called,
Unheard Of; seeing that they have been handled by others: I answer, that the
greatest part of them were Unheard Of, to Christians; since that I have
collected them out of the writings of the Jews; where they were delivered so
obscurely, that even those of their own Nation neglected them. As for the
Talismanicall Figures, they were so Unheard Of in our Age, that their very name
was not so much as known. Now that thou may have a more perfect
understanding of what is delivered in the ensuing Discourse, be pleased to add
this which follows.

In the First Part, Cap. 1. p. 7. I say, that I had not been able to discover
the reason, why Plutarch, Strabo, Trogus, Tacitus, and Diodorus had accused the
Jews of worshipping a Vine: I have since found, that it was, because they had
heard say, and even themselves seen, at least some of them, that in the Temple
at Jerusalem, there was a Golden Vine, with it is leaves, and clusters of
grapes, made against the wall; as it is described by Josephus. Interior porta,
says he, tota inaurata erat, ut dixi, and circum eam auratus paries, desuper
autem habebat aureos pampinos, unde racemi, statura hominis, dependebant. I
know very well, that many so understand the words of Josephus, as if this Vine
were not of Solid, Massy gold, but only gilded, after the manner of Phrygian
work. But the other Josephus, the Son of Gorion, contradicts this
Interpretation of the words: for, speaking in the same History (of the
Destruction of Jerusalem) both more clearly, and more at large, of this Golden
Vine, and it is bunches of Grapes, he says: Fecit insuper Herodes vitem de auro
mundo, and posuit in summitatem columnarum, cujus pondus erat mill talentorum
aureorum. Erat autem vitis ipsa facta opere ingenioso, habens ramos perplexos;
cujus folia, and germina facta erant ex rutilanti auro; botri autem ex auro
fulvo; and grana ejus, acini, atque folliculi facti erant ex lapidibus
preciosis: totumque opus erat fabrefactum opere vario, ut esset mirandum
spectaculum, and gaudium cordis omnibus intuentious ipsam. And presently after
he adds: Multi quoque scriptores Romani testantur, se eamvidisse, cum
desolaretur Templum. Now the forenamed Authors, Plutarch, Strabo, and the
rest, seeing that the Jews had in their Temple a Golden Vine, so rich, so
precious, and of so admirable workmanship; they were easily persuaded that they
worshipped it, in honor of Bacchus, who was the first that subdued the East:
and this is the Opinion of Cornelius Tacitus, who lived at the same time, when
this Beautiful Temple was destroyed. Sed quia, says he, Sacerdotes Judaeorum
tibia, tympanisque concinebant, hedera vinciebantur, vitisque aurea in Templo
reperta; Liberum Patrem coli, domitorem Orientis, quidam arbitrati sunt;
nequaquam congruentibus institutis: Quippe Liber festos, laetosque ritus
posuit; Judaeorum mos absurdus, sordidusque. But we pass by this Impious
Author, who makes a mock at the Religion of the Jews on all occasions.

In the Second Part, Chap. 4 page 86. where I render the Greek words, (...), by
these French words, Menues Pensees, Little thoughts, I have translated the
Greek word, (...) as it ought to be understood, which signifies properly,
Little, Delicate, and small: as we call one of the Greek letters Ypsilon, that
is to say, the Little Y. Now the Second Thoughts are Small, Fine, and Delicate,
because they consider things abstracted, and separated from Matter; which the
First do not: And therefore we say in French very elegantly, when we speak
of one that has brought forth any curious conceit, voila vne pensee bien
destiee.

In the following Chap. you may add these admirable Gamahes. At Pisa, in the
Church of St. John, you have, on a certain stone, an Old Hermit, perfectly
drawn by Nature only; but with so much exactness, that there seems not to be
wanting any thing that belongs to one of that sort of men. For he is
represented in a Desert, suitable to his profession, and sitting near a Brooks
side, with a Clock in his hand. This Natural piece of Picture, almost fully
answers That, they deliver St. Anthony in. In the Temple of S. Sophia, at
Constantinople, there is also seen, upon a plain white Marble, the Image of S.
John Baptist, clothed with a Camels skin; being only defective in this, that
Nature has drawn him but with one foot. At Ravenna, in the Church of St.
Vitalis, there is to be seen a Franciscan Friar, naturally drawn, upon a stone
of an Ash Color. At Sneiberg in Germany, there was found in the Earth, a
certain little Statue of a kind of unrefined Metal, naturally made; which
represented, in a round Figure, a man having a little Child at his back: and
whoever has any where seen the picture of St. Christopher, may easily
conceive the shape of this. It is not long since there was found, in the
Hercinian Forest, a Stone that naturally represented the figure of an old man,
with a long beard, and crowned with a Triple Crown, as the Pope of Rome is.
Observe likewise that many of these Stones, or Gamahes, are called all by the
same name, because they have always the same figure. So that, which represents
the Eyes of a man, is called Leucophthalmos: that which bears the figure of a
Heart, Encardia: that which has the shape of a Tongue represented on it,
Glossopetra: that which is figured like the Genitals, Enorchis: and if it
represent as well the secret parts of man, as of a woman, it is then called
Diphys, etc.

To the figures that are found in Plants, and Flowers, you may likewise add
those which represent some kind of Letters, or words: as the Hyacinth, on which
the Poet says, is written the Complaint of the fair Phoebus, for having killed
Hyacinthus; whom he afterward transformed into a Flower of the same name: and
this Complaint of his is expressed in these two Letters, (...), which make up the
word, Ai, which we frequently use in all kinds of sorrow.

Non satis hoc Phoebo est, (hic enim fuit auctor honoris:)
Ipse suos gemitus folijs inscribit, and Hya
Flos habet inscriptum, funestaque litera ducta est.
The Flower also that sprung, (according to the fiction of the same Poet,) from
the blood of the valiant Ajax, bears the two first letters of his name, Ai.

Litera communis medijs pueroque, viroque, Metamorph. lib. 13.

Inscripta est folijs, haec nominis, illa querelae.
As for the diverse kinds of Figures that we meet withal in beasts, (which we
have likewise examined in the same Chapter,) I have found nothing more worthy
our admiration, then what I have been lately informed of by Eyewitnesses:
namely, that it is not long since, that in diverse parts of Poitou it rained a
certain kind of little creatures, about an Inch in bigness; some whereof were
in the shape of Bishops, with a Rochet and hood, closed up in a shell, or skin,
so admirably, that one would have thought it to have been of burnished gold:
others were in shape like Friars, with a Frocke and Cowle: some were of a
certain horrid shape; and others like I know not what. It is a great wonder,
if this Relation come among the Dutchmen, if we have not very speedily some
strange Interpretation of the Revelation, such a one as Ananias Jeraucurius,
and Raphael Eglinus have given, (as we shall show hereafter) of the dark
Visions of Daniel, by the help of certain Characters found upon two Herrings,
taken up up-the coast of Norway. But to pass by these Fooleries.

In the Sixth Chapter, where I speak of diverse sorts of Talismans, and prove
their virtue, according to the opinion of the Eastern parts; you must take
heed, that you mix not all sorts of Characters, and figures, indifferently,
with these Talismans. For though many of them bear the Figures of the living
creatures described in the Heavens, which we usually call Constellations, they
are not therefore presently to pass for true Talismans; but either some kind
of Money; as that of the Duke of Brunswicke, whereon were engraven all the
Celestial Signs; and that of Augustus Coesar, on which he caused the Sign of
Capricorn to be figured; for no other reason, but only in memory that he was
born under that Sign. Or else these Figures are only some Mystical Emblemes,
under which the Ancients couched some certain Philosophical Secret. Such was
Nestor's Silver Goblet, in Homer, whereon the Pleiades were engraven: as you
may see here in the Translation of Natalis Comes, which is more Poetical then
that of Giphanius.

Poculum erat pulchrum, domo and id portaverat ipse,
Tansfixum clavis aureis, ac illius aures
Quatuor: hinc geminae complexae Liviae, at illas
Ex auro circumpascuntur, funda duo sunt.
Nec facile hoc quisquam poterat extollert mensa,
Quum plenum foret: at Nestor nullo ipse labor
Tollebat senior. --
Whoever therefore knows not the Mystical meaning of this Goblet, would,
without doubt, seeing the Pleiades engraven on it, be apt to conceive, that it
was made under some certain Constellation, as Talismans are: where as there is
nothing else in it, but a Philosophical Sense, thus darkly delivered by Homer;
as we may see in Alciat, who explaines the meaning of it thus.

Nestoreum geminis cratera hunc accipe fundis,
Quod gravis argenti massa profundit opus.
Claviculi ex auro; stant circum quatuor ansae,
Unamquamque super fulva columba sedet.
Solus cum potuit longaevus tollere Nestor.
Maeonidae doceas quid sibi musa velit?
Est coelum Scyphus ipse, colorque argenteus illi:
Aurea sunt coeli sidera claviculi.
Pleiadas esse putant, quas dixerit ille columbas:
Umbilici gemini, magna, minorque fera est,
Haec Nestor longo sapiens intelligit usu.
Bella gerunt fortes, callidus astra tenet.
The Poet Anacreon, who consulted with Bacchus, as often as with his Muse,
makes himself merry with this Goblet of Nestor; and entreats Vulcan to make
him one, without such a deal of Philosophy, enough to make one crack his
brains: For, what have I to do, quoth he, with the Pleiades, or
bright-shining Boots? Make me therefore, good Vulcan, neither Arms, nor
weapons: but make me a Bowl, as deep a one as thou can; and ingrave thereon
no Stars, neither Charles his Waine, nor the sad Orion; but carve me out a
Vine, with it is swelling grapes, and Cupid, Bacchus, and Bathillus, pressing
them together. His verses are thus translated by H. Stephanus, very elegantly.

Torno mihi labora
Argentum; and inde finge,
Vulcane, non quidem arma,
Nam quid Gradivus ad me?
Sed poculum mihi fac
Quantum potes profundum.
Insculpitoque in illo
Non astra, plaustrave ulla,
Tristem nec Orionem.
(Nam Pleiades quid ad me?
Quid lucidus Boots?)
Vitem sed, et racemos
Insculpe, cumque Baccho
Uvas simul prementes
Cupidinem, and Bathillum.
These verses have often made me doubt, whether or no, many of those precious
stones that we see in Ancient Rings, which are commonly taken for Talismans,
(such as was that of our Countryman Bagarris, whereof I make mention:) on which
we find Cupids, Bacchus, Vines, bunches of grapes, and vine-branches engraven,
were not rather the effects of some gallant Humor of some Philosophers, who
desired to wear on their fingers the Emblemes of Wine, rather then any other
figures.

In the same Sixth Chapter, where I speak of the power of Resemblance, I know
not how, in the 172. page, the word, France, has slipped in, instead of Italy.
For it is in Italy chiefly, where the Leprosy is so frequent, by reason of the
great quantity of Hogs flesh that is eaten there, more then in any other
Kingdom: and the reason that in France, we see some infected with this
disease, is, because that here, next to the Italians, they eat more hogs
flesh, then any where else. Neither do I say this, but according to the opinion
of Physicians, without the least purpose of offending any, either Strangers, or
those of my own Nation. In a word, Courteous Reader, I shall desire thee to
interpret in good part, whatsoever thou shall find in this Book; seeing that my
purpose is to deal clearly, as one exempt from passion.

In the 77. page of the same Chapter, my intent is not to rank Joseph's gift
of Interpreting Dreams with the Art of Conjecturing at the meaning of Dreams:
Nor yet to reject the order of the Commandments, established by the Church,
and to introduce that which is set down, page 291. for I there follow the
Jews manner of counting them.

Lastly, I must entreat thee to correct the faults of the Press; and use me,
as thou would be used thy self.

A TABLE of the Chapters, and their CONTENTS.
PART. I. Wherein the Jews, and other Eastern Men are defended.
CHAP. I. That many things are falsely imposed upon the Jews, and the rest of
the Eastern men, which never were.
THE CONTENTS. 1. THe Arguments brought against the Eastern men, whereon
grounded. 2. The Jews falsely accused, by Appion, Plutarch, Strabo, Trogus,
Tacitus, and Diodorus Siculus, of worshipping Asses, Vines, and the Clouds. 3.
Whence these Fooleries sprung. 4. The Syrians falsely said to worship Fishes.
Xenophon, Cicero, Aelian, Ovid, Martial, Artemidorus, and Scaliger, refuted. 5.
The Idol D^gon, not figured like a Woman, or Siren; as Scaliger would have it:
but in the form of a Triton. The Fable laid open. 6. The Samaritans no
Idolaters; no more then Aaron, and Jeroboam, for having made Calves of gold;
according to Abiudan. 7. The Cherubins of the Arc not made in the form of
Young Mea; against the opinion of all, both Greek, and Latin Authors, and the
greatest part of the Jewish too. 8. Arguments in defense of the Samaritans. 9.
The reasons brought by the Jews, and Cajetan, touching the figure of the
Cherubins, of no force. 10. The Jews falsely accused of burning their Children
to the Idol Moloc: Whence the custom of leaping over the Fire of St. John
has been derived.

CHAP. II. That many things are esteemed ridiculous, and dangerous, in the
Books of the Jews, which yet are, without any blame, maintained by Christian
Writers.
THE CONTENTS. 1. THat we ought not to rest on the bare Letter of the
Scriptures. 2. Authors that have treated of Ridiculous Subjects, without being
reproved. 3. The books of the Jews less dangerous, then those of the Heathens,
which yet are allowed by the Christian Fathers. 4. The Feast that God is to
make for the Elect, with the flesh of a Whale, how to be understood. 5. Ten
things created on the Even before the Sabbath, and what they were. 6. The
Opinions of the Ancient, and Modern writers, touching the end of the world:
what Fathers of the Church have been of the Jews opinion in this Particular. 7.
Diverse opinions concerning the number of years from the Creation to our
Savior Christ: and what we ought to conclude, as touching the end of the
world. 8. The Ancient Rabbis are falsely accused of speaking ill of our
Savior Jesus Christ. 9. The Third Objection in the precedent Chapter answered:
and an Enumeration of some Errors of great Importance in Our own Books.

PART. II. Of the Talismanical Sculpture of the Persians; or the manner of
making Figures, and Images, under certain Constellations.
CHAP. III. THAT the Persians are unjustly blamed, concerning the Curiosities
of their Magic, Sculpture, and Astrology.
THE CONTENTS. 1. THe evil custom of blaming the Ancients is noted. 2. The
Reasons brought against the Persians, and their Magic, examined, and found of
no force. The Errors of the Counterfeit Berosus, Dinon, Comestor, Genebrard,
Pierius, and Venetus, concerning Zoroaster. 3. The strange Statues of Laban,
and Micha, called Teraphim, perhaps allowed of God. 5. The Errors of Elias
Levita, Aben-Esra, R. Eliezer, R. D. Chimehi, Cajetan, Saints, Vatablus,
Clarius, Mercerus, Marinus, and Mr. Seldom, concerning these Teraphim. The
gross conceit of Philo Iudaeus touching this Particular. 6. A Conjectnre
touching these Statues, what they were; and an answer to what may be objected
against it. 7. Of certain Strange, Prodigious things, which have foretold
Disasters, which have been seen to come to pass; and which do yet foretell the
same. 8. The Conclusion of all before delivered.

CHAP. IV. That for want of understanding Aristotle aright, men have condemned
the power of Figures; and concluded very many things, both against this
Philosopher, and against all sound Philosophy.
THE CONTENTS. 1. ERrors in Learning, caused by the Ignorance of the Languages.
2. (...) signifies Specimen, and not Species. 3. The reading of (...) proved to
be full. 4. (...) ill translated; and hence the Question of Universals, not
understood. 5. The proper translating of (...). 6. The Errors committed in
these words, (...), and (...), and (...). The correcting of (...) rejected,
against Cicero. 7. It is falsely concluded out of Aristotle, that Fire is
moist; against du Villon. 8. That Aristotle is abused by Interpreters, by
reason of their not understanding the force of the word (...); and by reading
(...), instead of (...). 9. The false Interpretation of the word (...), given
by Stapulensis. 10. The word (...), rightly understood, condemns those that
deny the power of Figures. The proof of this at large.

CHAP. V. The power of Artificial Images is proved, by that of those that are
found Naturally imprinted on Stones, and Plants, commonly called Gamahe, or
Camaieu, and Signatures.
THE CONTENTS. 1. THe Division of Natural Figures, or Images. Gamahe, or
Camaieu, drawn peradventure from the Hebrew word (...) Chemaia. 2. Of diverse
rare Gamahes, or Stones painted naturally: and why they are more frequently
found in hot Countries, then in Cold. 3. Of other curious Gamahes not painted,
mentioned by Pliny, Nider, Gesner, Goropius Becanus, Thevet, and Mr. de Breves.
A new Observation on the Bones of Giants. 4. Of Gamahes that are Engraven: and
whether those places, where ever any Fish shells are found, have been formerly
covered with water, or not. 5. Certain admirable Figures, and Signatures, that
are found in all the parts of Plants. Many choice Inquiries proposed, on this
Subject. 6. The power of these Figures proved; and the Objections answered,
that are brought against it. 7. The Secret discovered, why a Scorpion, applied
to the wound made by a Scorpions sting, should not hurt rather, then cure it.
8. Of the Figures of Plants, that represent all the parts of the body of a man;
and that cure the same, when ill-affected. 9. The Forms of all things
admirably preserved in their Ashes. 10. The Ghosts of dead folks, that appear
in Churchyards, and after great slaughter of Armies, whence they proceed.
Certain choice Questions proposed, touching this Argument. 11. A new reason
given, of the Raining of Frogs, which has sometimes happened. 12. Of Figures
that are found in Living Creatures; and what power they have.

CHAP. VI. That, according to the opinion of the Eastern Men, Figures, and
Images may be so prepared, under certain Constellations as that they shall have
the power, Naturally, and without the aid of any Demon, or Devil, to drive
away noisome beasts, allay Winds, Thunder, and Tempests, and to cure diverse
kinds of Diseases.
THE CONTENTS. 1. THe insupportable vanity of some Pretenders to Learning, is
noted. 2. How these Talismanicall Figures are called in Hebrew, Chaldie, Greek,
and Arabic. The Etymology of Talisman uncertain, against Salmasius. 3. By what
means the power of Figures is proved: and who they are, among the Arabians,
that have defended it. 4. Of certain admirable Talismans, found at Paris, and
Constantinople: and what happened to these places, after the breaking of them.
5. What the Dij Averrunci of the Ancients were. (...), whence derived: and
whence the custom of setting up Figures, and Images in Ships came. 6. The
fable of the stone Bractan, in Turkey. discovered: and a Conjecture given,
concerning the Palladium, and the Statues mentioned by Philo Judaeus. 7. The
Golden Calfe, and the Brazen Serpent, falsely said to be Talismans: and why the
Serpent was made of Brass, rather then of any other Metal. 8. The Wonderful
Effects of 3. Talismans, spoken of by Scaliger, M. de Breves, and the Turkish
Annals: and of what virtue those other were, that were made by Paracelsus, M.
Lagneau, and diverse Learned Italians. 9. The Power of these Figures proved, by
the power that Resemblance is known to have, in all Arts, and Sciences: and
first in Divinity. Why the Ancients placed Images in their Temples. 10. In
Philosophy. Of the Power of Imagination. 11. In Physic. Of some Animals,
Plants, and Grains, that do good, and hurt, merely by Resemblance. 12. In
Astrology. A Certain Means of foretelling Evils to come, by the Color of the
Meteors that appear. 13. In Physiognomy. The manner how to know the Natural
Inclination of any man, according to Campanella. 14. In the Art of Divination
of Dreams. Examples, both Sacred, and Profane, touching this Subject. 15. In
Painting. Why our Savior Christ is oftener pictured Suffering upon the Cross,
then Sitting at the Right hand of his Father. 16. In Music Of some Diseases
that are cured by it. 17. The manner of making these Talismans. 18. The
Talismanicall Operations set down by Thebit Ben-chorat, Trithemius,
Gochlenius, Albinus Villanovensis, and Marcellus Empiricus, condemned. 19. What
power the Heavens have, ever things here below. 20. The reason of the names of
the Celestial Images. 21. What Influence the Heavens have upon Artificial
things.

CHAP. VII. That the Objections which are made against Talismanical Figures,
make not any thing at all against their Power.
THE CONTENTS. 1. VVWhence the custom of using certain words, and of applying
certain Characters, in the cure of Diseases, has sprung. 2. An abominable
Ceremony used by the Egyptians, for to cause Hail to cease. The reason of the
Command, given to the Jews, of not Graffing on a tree of a different kind. 3.
The Talismans delivered by Antonius Mizaldus, condemned. 4. The Objections
brought by Gulielmus Parisiensis, and Gerson, answered. The power the Sun
has within the bowels of the Earth. 5. A Fourth Objection answered. The
Stories of Sorcerers, and of the Images of Wax, of very little credit. 6. A
Fifth Objection refuted. Of the Weapon-salve, that cures the wound, by being
applied to the weapon that made it. 7. The Sixth Objection of no force. A
remarkable Story of two Twins. 8. The Operation of these Talismans proceeds not
from the secret virtue of the Stone. 9. Cajetan, and Pomponatius, defended,
against Delrio, touching the power of Figures. 10. The virtue of the Stars
descends as well upon a Living Scorpion, as upon its Image. 11. The forcible
reasons brought by Galeottus, in defense of Talismans. 12. The Objection,
brought against Franciscus Rueus, answered. 13. The Story of Virgils
Talismanicall Fly, and Horseleech a true one; against Naudaeus. Gervais his
book not fabulous; as is commonly believed. 14. Of some Admirable, and curious
Inventions of men, that seem more Incredible, then Talismans. 15. Certain
Objections, never before brought, against the power of Figures; with their
Solution.

PART. III. Of the Horoscope of the Patriarchs: or the Astrology of the Ancient
Hebrews.
CHAP. VIII. That Idolatry is falsely said to have sprung from the Astrology of
the Ancients.
THE CONTENTS. 1. THE Arguments against Astrology, ill grounded. And how, by
the ways, of Nature, it is possible to give judgment of the Good, or Evil
Fortune, of a Child. 2. The Resolution of Thomas Aquinas, in the behalf of
Astrology. 3. Gulielmus Parisiensis, and Paracelsus refuted. Astrology by whom
found out: the Error of Pliny in this Particular. 4. Astrology both Good, and
Evil; and how. Moses a Skillful Astrologer. 5. Idolatry whence sprung forth,
according to Marsilius Ficinus, and Bechay, a Jew. Hanni-Bal, and Hasdru-Bal,
compounded Names: and why. 6. The Opinions of R. Moses, and the Author of the
book of The Wisdom of Solomon, concerning the beginning of Idolatry. The
Conclusion of all before delivered. 7. Fires used to be made, by the Ancients,
to the Sun, and the Moon: and for what reason. 8. Reasons given for the proof
of the Innocence of the Ancients, in these Curiosities

CAAP. IX. Whether, or no, the Ancient Hebrews made use of any Mathematical
Instrument in their Astrology: and what the figure of their Instuments was.
THE CONTENTS. 1. What Instruments the Ancient Astrologers used. The Fable of
Atlas discovered. 2. The Hebrews Sphere described. 3. Certain Doubts proposed,
concerning the Fabric of it. The strange conceit of R. Moses, concerning the
number of the Heavens. 4. A Conjecture upon the Antiquity of this Sphere. 5. Of
the Dial of Ahaz, and its description, not yet seen. 6. Conjectures on the
figure of our Sun-dials.

CHAP. X. That the Astrology of the Ancient Hebrews, Egyptians, and Arabians,
was not such, as it is delivered by Scaliger, Augustinus Riccius, Kunrath,
Duret, and Vigenere.
THE CONTENTS. 1. THE Holiest things are often mixed with Fables. 2. The strange
Fancies, and Falsehoods of Duret, touching the Spirits of the Planets; and
touching the Astrologicall Cabale of the Jews. 3. The Fooleries of Carlo
Fabri, in his assigning of the Angels, proper to the Seven Electors of the
Empire. 4. The Strange Doctrine of Riccius, and Kunrath, concerning the
Planetary Zephirots. 5. The Stars, the cause of the diversities in Religion, in
the opinion of R. Chomer. 6. The Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ, erected
by Bechai, and Cardan. 7. The Astrologicall Pictures, or Figures, at the
Conjunctions of the Celestial Signs, falsely attributed to the Egyptians, and
Arabians, what they were; and by whom invented: against Scaliger.

CHAP. XI. What, in truth, was the course the Patriarchs, and Ancient Hebrews
took, in their Observations, at the erecting of a Nativity.
THE CONTENTS. THE Celestial Constellations were anciently marked with Hebrew
Characters. 2. How the Celestial Signs are figured in the Spheres, and Globes
of the Arabians. That of Virgo has a Mystery in it. 3. A new Observation on
the Hebrew names of the Planets. 4. A Table, by which the Jews erected their
Nativities. The use of it. 5. Demonstrative reasons, why the Days follow not
the order of the Planets. A Genethliacall Table of the Ancient Hebrews. 6. The
difference betwixt the Ancient's manner of giving judgment upon a Nativity, and
that of the Astrologers of our times. The Fable of Lucina laid open. 7. The
Moon, why called Lunus, and Luna; and the Heavens, Coelus, and Coelum. 8. A
new, and certain reason, why the Poets report, that Saturn eat up his
Children. 9. What Qualities the Ancients acknowledge to be in Celestial
Signs. 10. The Authors Judgment, upon the Astrologicall Writings of R. Abraham
Aben-Are, translated into Latin by the Conciliator. 11. What Planets were
accounted Benign, by the Ancient Hebrews. What Ceremony the newmaried man
used, toward his Bride. 12. This Astrology of the Ancients is proved, out of
the Holy Scripture. Reasons which prove, that (...) Gad (which was the name of
one of the Sons of Jacob,) is the Planet Jupiter. 13. The Egyptians the first
that corrupted this Astrology. It is false notwithstanding, that they were the
Inventers of the Characters of the Planets. Fables introduced into Astrology,
by the Greeks. 14. Athlon, a word in Nativities, used by Manilius, rightly
interpreted: contrary to Scaliger.

PART. IIII. Of the Reading of the Stars, and what ever else is seen in the
Air.
CHAP. XII. Whether it be possible to read any thing, in the Clouds, and in all
other Meteors.
THE CONTENTS. 1. HOw many ways this Reading by the Meteors may be performed.
2. Battles, and fearful Prodigies seen in the Air. 3. The Reasons they
give, who are of opinion, that these things are Supernatural. 4. Reasons given
to the Contrary. Angels, and Saints, how they have sometimes been seen to
appear in the Clouds. 5. A new, and quaint opinion, touching the diverse kinds
of figures that appear in the Clouds: and a conjecture upon the Secret,
mentioned by Trithemius, of conveying News a great distance off. 6. The
Author's Resolution, concerning Strange Sights in the Air. 7. The Raining of
Blood, in the Figure of a Cross, not Natural; against Cardan. 8. The Manna is
the Wilderness, marked with the Hebrew letter Vau, according to some of the
Rabbis: and what consequence we may hence deduce, against them. 9. Hail in
Languedoc, figured like Arms: Snow, like Stars in shape, spoken of by Kepler.
10. The Rainbow, the Hieroglyphick of Sorrow. 11. Diverse Opinions, concerning
the generation of Comets: and whether, they naturally presage some Evil to
come, or not. 12. Rules to know, what Pillars, Swords, Bucklers, Trumpets, and
fiery Arrows, seen in the Air, foretell. Hebrew Letters sometimes seen in the
Air. 14. What Letters have been devised, in Imitation of the Figures made by
Cranes in their Flight. Presages of Accidents to come, taken from Birds.

CHAP. XIII. That the Stars, according to the Opinion of the Hebrew Writers,
are ranged in the Heavens, in the form of Letters: and that it is possible to
read there, whatsoever of Importance is to happen, throughout the Universe.
THE CONTENTS. 1. THE Celestial Configurations, devised by the Greeks,
permitted by the Church, though dangerous. This New doctrine, of the Reading of
the Stars, no whit repugnant to the Christian Faith. 2. This Reading, proved
out of the Scripture. Diverse passages of Scripture, tending to this purpose,
interpreted. 3. The Opinions of the Ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, in
this Particular. 4. The reason, why so few Authors of these later times have
meddled herein. What our Modern Writers, as Reuchlin, Picus Mirandula, Agrippa,
Kunrath, Banelli, and R. Flud, have delivered, of this Subject. 5. Postelll's
Intention of bringing it into Europe. 6. The Stars ranged, not in the form of
Arabic, nor Samaritan, but of Hebrew Characters. The Superstition of the
Arabians, in the reading of some kinds of words. Their letters borrowed from
the Hebrews. 7. The Hieroglyphicall Living creatures of the Egyptians, placed
in the Heavens, are not to serve for Letters, The Constellations Imperfect. 8.
What things are to be observed, that one may be able to read the Heavens. What
the reason is, that New Stars often, appear, according to the Rabbis. 9. A
continued Enumeration of the several Means that must be used, for the
rendering a man capable of this Reading. The Star in the Tail of Ursa Major,
the Fore-shewer of the Change of Empires; and how. 10. On which side we are to
begin this Reading in the Heavens: and how we must interpret the words we find
there. 11. Of those Celestial Letters, that have foreshowne all the great
Mutations in States. The Fall of two Powerful Kingdoms of the East, read in
the Heavens, by R. Chomer. 12. The Author's Judgment, concerning this Reading
of the Heavens.

Faults escaped.
Page 4. lin. 14. read, these writers. p. 6. l. 18. r. this their Idolatry. p.
10. l. 29. r. abstained. p. 35. l. 6. r. Chapter answered, and. p. 49. l. 23.
r. years. p. 70. l. 7. r. these Teraphin. p. 81. l. 9. r. have kept
themselves. p. 111. l. 9. r. wholly Embossed. p. 122. l. 2. r. Rambure. p. 124.
l. 21. r. Figurarum, et. Ib. l. 25. r. fructuum p. 128. l. 25. r. within
stones. p. 157. l. 22. r. foolish Fables. p. 159. l. 25. r. touching these. p.
162. l. 4. r. were Adverse Ib. l. 29. r. of these. p. 182. l. 5. r for the
curing. p. 230. l. 13. r. of God. p. 296. l. 28. r. with the other. p. 308. l.
16. r. (...). p. 316. l. 24. r. it would die. p. 326. l. 26. r. (...).

UNHEARD OF CVRIOSITIES.
PART I. The Jews, and other Eastern men are defended.
CHAP. I.
That many things are falsely imposed upon the Jews, and the rest of the
Eastern men, which never were.
THE CONTENTS.
THe arguments brought against the Eastern men, whereon grounded

2 The Jews falsely accused, by Appion, Plutarch, Strabo, Trogus, Tacitus, and
Diodorus Siculus, of worshipping Asses, Vines and the Clouds.

3. Whence these Fooleries sprung.

4. The Syrians falsely said to worship Fishes. Xenophon, Cicero, Aelian, Ovid,
Martial, Artemidorus, and Scaliger refuted.

5. The Idol Dagon not figured like a woman, or Siren, as Scaliger would have
it: but in the form of a Triton. The Fable laid open.

6. The Samaritans no Idolaters; no more then Aaron, and Jeroboam, for having
made Calves of gold; according to Abiudan.

7. The Cherubins of the Arc not made in the form of Young men: against the
opinion of all, both Greek and Latin Authors, and the greatest part of the
Jewish too.

8. Arguments in defense of the Samaritans.

9. The reasons brought by the Jews, and Cajetan, touching the figure of the
Cherubins, of no force.

10. The Jews falsely accused of burning their Children to the Idol Moloc.
Whence the custom of leaping over the fire of Saint John, has been derived.

THey that publish to the world any new, and Unheard Of Doctrine; that they may
give it the greater Authority, and make it pass with the more credit, show
first of all the Integrity of the Man, that was the first Inventor of it: that
so, the good opinion that is conceived of the Author, may take away all
suspicion, or jealousy, from the things that shall be delivered. The choice
points of learning which we shall here lay down, are so new, that I have
adventured to call them Unheard Of. It concerns me therefore, for the better
securing them from suspicion, to take upon me the defense of the Eastern men,
and chiefly of the Jews, who are the Authors of them, and in point of Curious
learning, to defend their innocence, hitherto so much injured.

1. This nation is commonly abhorred for four reasons. The first is, The 3.
last Objections are answered in the following chap,
their Idolatry; which all Authors make them guilty of. The second is, their
foolish vanities, that their books are full of. The third is, by reason of
their blasphemies, they to this day vomit up against our Savior Jesus Christ.
And the last is, for the errors that they maintain, contrary to the Law. The
First of these conceits is grounded on a false persuasion: for, after that it
was once believed that the Jews worshipped the head of an Ass, Hogs, and the
Clouds; it was presently concluded, that consequently their writings could not
be free from these impieties. The second proceeds from the little knowledge men
generally have of the books of the Jews. The third, from the hatred men bear
to the Jewish Authors. And the fourth, from the Self conceitedness of those
that accuse them.

2. For the first of these Objections, Appion, as Josephus affirms, was the
first, that forged it out of his own brain: and notwithstanding that this
excellent Author of the Jewish Antiquities has learnedly confuted him; Yet
Plutarch takes it still up for a Truth, Symp. 4. c. 5. Hist. 5.
and Tacitus also, after him, brings it in, in his History, as a Prodigious
thing: in so much that the Fable at length passing for a Truth, it has gone
for current, even with the most serious Historians. Now this worship of the
Jews (say their Writers) was after this manner. There was an Altar erected;
under which having performed some certain ceremonies, a Golden Statue of an
Ass was set up upon it, (some make mention of the head only) then, the chief
Priest having censed it, all the People, putting their hand to their mouth,
bowed down and worshipped it. The very same Adoration, in a manner, they used
(as these Authors report) to the Statue of a Hog.

Judaeus licet and Porcinum numen adorat. Says Petronius: as also to a Golden
Vine; but with this difference, (says Plutarke, with Strabo, Trogus Pompeius,
and Diodorus Siculus:) that the Priests, when they Sacrifised to Bacchus, were
crowned with Jvy; and going with Flutes, and Drums, sounding before them,
they bowed down before this Golden Tree, which was religiously preserved within
their Temple. Concerning their worshipping the Clouds, the opinions are diverse:
some affirming, that the Jews had some Figures of them made in their places of
Devotion: others say, not. But these are mere Fancies. So that, to make it
appear more clear then the Noonday, that this Nation is no whit guilty of
these Crimes; even Tacitus himself, who had before accused them of Jdolatry,
forgetting what he had said before, adds presently after, Nulla simulachra
vrbibus suis, nedum templis esse: That they have no Images in their Cities,
much less in their Temples: So far are they from worshipping the Statues of a
Hog, or Vine, or the figures of the Clouds.

And yet see, what Juvenall reports of them. Sat. 14. l. 16.


Nil praeter Nubes, and Coeli numen adorant. Strabo writes the very same: and
in the Reign of Theodosius, and of Justinian, they were generally called,
Coelicolae; Cod. lib. 16. Tit. 8. leg. 18.
and for this very reason: as you may see in the constitutions of this Emperor.

But let us once teach the Ancients, The first Objection answered.
since they have so often taught us; and pretend, forsooth, to have delivered
nothing over to us but pure Truths. If it be true, that the Jews should have
given themselves over to the vanities of worshipping these Idols here spoken of:
how comes it to pass, that their true God should never, in all the Scriptures
which he has given them, lay this Crime to their charge as well as any other?
And here we cannot say of This, as we use to say of our own books: That a
thing may have been, and yet not have been spoken of. For, in this Law, which
all acknowledge to be most severe, the case is otherwise: For, in point of
Crimes, not so much as the least is omitted. Neither can any say, that Idolatry
has sprung up since the writing of the Old Testament: For, besides that, the
enemies of the Jews would have then cast it in their teeth, as most
abominable; The above named Authors affirm; that the Law forbidding them the
eating of Hogs flesh, had not been given them, but merely because they had
worshipped this Beast. But why then do they not, by the same reason conclude,
that this People had worshipped Conies, Hares, Camels, Ostridges, and Ravens:
Since the eating of these was also forbidden them?

3. We say then, that these are mere calumnies; or rather Fantastic Opinions,
grounded upon the Jews so religious abstaining from the flesh of this Beast;
in obedience to the Precept which was given them, for their better preservation
from the Leprosy; a disease they were otherwise very subject unto: and here
you see the Original of the Fable. As for the Golden Vine, and the Honors
they are said to have paid to Bacchus, I cannot discover, I confess, in any
Author, the rise of this error: and I conceive, the first that spoke of this,
might happily mistake the name of the Jews, for some other People; as we see
it usually happen in Authors, in the like case. Or else, some Apostate Jews
having been seen practicing these acts of Idolatry, it was consequently
concluded, that the whole Nation was guilty of the same.

But an account may more easily be given of the cause of the error, in the
business of their worshipping the Clouds; which might spring from that
miraculous Cloud, which was light on one side, and dark on the other, and was
guide to the Children of Israel in the Wilderness. Or perhaps this other
reason which I shall now give, why the Jews were called Coelicolae, Worshipers
of the Heavens, or the Clouds, may be more satisfying: Namely, because they
worshipped God, who is often called in the Hebrew tongue, (...) Schamaim, a
word, that signifies also, the Heavens.

As for their being said to worship the head of an Ass, those that impute the
beginning of this error to the great service the Hebrews had done them by
Asses, at their coming up out of Egypt, seem not at all to speak with any
probability. And yet Tacitus seems to me much more ridiculous, when he says,
that the Jews worshipped Asses, because, they found them out water in the
Wilderness. Hist. 1.5.
Sed nihil aeque (says he) quam inopia aquae fatigabat; cum grex Asinorum
agrestium, e pastu, in rupem nemore opacam concessit. Secutus Moses, conjectura
herbidi soli, largas aquarum venas aperit. And then presently he adds, that in
recompense of this benefit, Effigiem animalis, quo monstrante, errorem,
sitimque depulerant, penetrali sacravere. A pleasant Fable this; which yet is
confuted, by what the same Author himself elsewhere writes; as we have before
showed. I should therefore rather say, that the affection which every man
bears to his own Religion, is so eager, and violent; that in all ages, upon
all occasions, those of a contrary Belief have been very apt to fall foul
upon each other. The Jews therefore, either for having been bound up by so
many Commandments; or else, for having been so obedient to their God, might
have been called Asses: as Charles the fifth was wont to call the French, for
being so tamely obedient to their Kings. And even the Primitive Christians were
not free from this very injury; for their common Epithete was, Asinarij, as
Tertullian reports; till the time of that Emperor, whose excessive hate
against our Savior Jesus Christ carried him on to that height of unparalled
Malice, as that he caused a statue to be erected, bearing the shape of an Ass,
houlding up a book with one of his hoofes, with this inscription on it: Deus
Christianorum Ononychitis.

4. Now the Jews were the more readily believed guilty of all kinds of
Idolatry, because that, besides that they had been observed to have run
blindly after some sorts of it, they dwelt also near a People, that were very
great Idolaters. But neither is there any more truth in the imputation laid
upon their neighbors, then in that wherewith the Jews themselves are
aspersed: So true it is, that after a Nation is once cried down, their very
best actions are suspected. The Syrians were indeed justly accused for being
somewhat guilty in this particular; but that they ever worshipped the Fishes of
the Sea, neither Xenophon, (...). Symp. l. 3. c. 8. De. Not. Deor. 3. De.
Animal. l. 12. c. 11. Fastor. 11. Lib. 4. Epig. 43. Ouirocrit. 1. c. 12. In
Sphaer. Manil. fol. 343.
Plutarch, Cicero, Diodorus Siculus, Aelian; Ovid, Martial, Artemidorus, nor
among the Moderns, the learned Scaliger, (who to this purpose cites some verses
of the Poet Menander,) can, without doing them manifest injury, accuse them.
But they abstained, say they, from the eating of them: and if any were so
daring, as to eat of them, they were immediately punished with a swelling in
their bodies: Whence the Poet Persius took occasion to call Fishes, Dij
inflantes corpora. But, that we may disabuse those, that have been mislead into
this persuasion, and discover the true ground of this error; we confess that
the Syrians did indeed abstain from the use of some certain kinds of Fishes,
which by reason of their venomous nature, did really cause swellings in those
that eat of them. And we may daily observe, out of the Naturalists; See
Rondelet, in his History of Fishes.
that as the flesh of some Land-Creatures is dangerous, in like manner also it
is, in those of the Sea. Now the Fishes which the Syrians did abstain from,
Lib. (...). Chiliad. 9. Chap. 275.
were the Apua, and the Maenis; two very venomous kinds of Fishes; as you may
see in Plutarch, and Johannes Tzetzes. We may therefore conclude it merely
fabulous, which is reported of the Syrians; namely, that they abstain not
only from all Seafish, but also from that of Rivers; where the Apua, nor the
Moenis, are at all found. Erat is, (says the Interpreter of Xenophon, speaking
of the River Chalus) magnis, mansuetisque piscibus refertus; quos Syri pro Dijs
habebant, neque eos loedi patiebantur, sicuti nec columbas. As for the Doves; I
shall examine the truth of the report elsewhere: but for the Fishes, nothing
could have been spoken more false. For, if they would not suffer them to
receive any harm, as being the Gods they worshipped; why then did they carry
them to Jerusalem, and sell them to the Jews, for food? Certainly this had
been so unpardonable a Crime, as would have deserved to have been punished, not
with swellings only, but even with death. Tyri quoque, (says Nehemias,)
habitabant in ea, inferentes pisces, and omnia venalia, and vendebant filijs
Jehuda in. ipsa Jerusalem. Syntag. 2 Cap. 3.
You may see other proofs of this, in Mr. Seldom; who has retracted this
Error, but not the ground of it: but I shall speak of this hereafter.

But to show the vanity of this Fable yet another way: I shall demand of these
Authors above named, whence they have learnt, that the Syrians worshipped
Fishes, instead of Gods; and for that reason, abstained from eating of them? I
conceive, the answer will be given in these two words: Common Tradition. We
must therefore examine, what this Tradition is, that we may be able to judge,
whether it be true or not. Aratus, and Hyginus report out of the Ancients, that
an egg of a prodigious bigness, In Phoeinom. frag. Cap. de Piscibus. Lib.
Fabul. Cap. 197.
fell from Heaven into the River Euphrates; which the Fishes having by accident
cast up upon the shore, it was so warmed by the heat of a flight of Pigeons,
which sat upon it, as upon other eggs, that at the end of some certain
number of days it was hatched; and there came forth Venus who lived on earth
so virtuously, that being afterward taken up into Heaven, she entreated of
Jupiter, that those Fishes, which had preserved the egg, whence she came
forth, from shipwreck, might be placed among the Stars. Her request was
granted; and ever since, the Syrians, whom Authors usually confound with the
Assyrians, have had Fishes, and Doves, in great veneration. Others say, Vid.
Cicer. Tuscul. qu. 5. Virgil. Georg. 3. Arat. loc. citat.
that the Syrians did not begin to worship them, and to place their silver
Images in their Temples, till the time that the daughter of Venus, falling into
the Poole Boeth, was there turned into a Fish. And now see, what excellent
reason we have, to receive this Tradition for a true one. What learned people
we should be, had we no other Historians, but the Poets! I know very well, that
the Fable might possibly have taken its original from the History: but where
shall we find those can witness, that it did so? Whereas, on the other side,
we know, that these. Fables are as ancient with the Greeks, as Astrology it
self. We may therefore, from this very particular passage, conclude, what
manner of spirit reigned in the writers of this Nation; whose delight it
always has been, to put their foolish Fables upon the world, for Truths. And
here I shall adventure to deliver, what I have sometimes conceived, touching
the ground of this Error. Sidon, in the language of the Phoenicians, who are
Syrians, signifies a Fish, as Heurnius reports, after Justin. Now Sidon is a
part of Syria, Barbar, Phil. in Chald. f. 32. Notis in Math. fol. 16.
which in Arabic signifies an Inflation, or Swelling, as Kirstenius affirms.
I have therefore doubted, whether or no the Greeks, who turned all things into
Fables, might not possibly have forged this Story, of the Syrians swelling, by
reason of their Fish.

5. This other Conjecture is not, in my judgment, very far wide of the truth:
namely, that the Syrians were accused of worshipping Fishes, because they
worshipped the Idol Dagon; which some have conceived to have been half Fish,
and half Man, in the form of a Triton, or Siren: but with this difference,
that it had the head of a Fish. Idolum Dagon, (says Lyranus, after the
Rabbis) quod colebatur a Philistaeis, habebat caput piscis: ideo vocatur
Dagon; quia (...) dag, piscis significat. I am not ignorant, that there are,
that are of opinion, it was in figure like a young Damsel, covered all over
with cares of corn, which they conceive to have been meant for the Gooddesse
Ceres: For (...) Dagan signifies also, Frumentum. But these men's conjectures
are not so very well grounded, as we shall see hereafter. And here Scaliger, in
his Book de Emendatione Temporum, reproves Philo Bibliensis, for saying that
(...), was as much as (...); and will have (...), by all means to signify
(...), Piscator, or Piscosus, from the Hebrew word (...) Dagah, Piscis; and
that, by this Dagan, is meant the Goddess Derceto, and not any God at all. But
if one should ask Scaliger his reason, he could give no other then this; that
Dag, or Dagah, signifies a Fish. Be it so; but it also signifies Frumentum,
Corn: so that it concerns him to give a reason, why we should rather
interpret Dagah, Piscis, a Fish; then Dagan, Frumentum; Corn. If he allege
for himself, that some Authors affirm, that the Syrians worshipped not this
Idol for any other reason, but because that a certain Sea Monster; which was
seen to come daily from the Red Sea, taught them many secrets in the business
of Husbandry; but, being unable to endure long out of its proper Element, it
returned still in the evening to the Sea again; and in the morning always
came up again to Babylon: I answer, that this Story, besides that it carries
little show of probability with it, is not delivered for a truth, by any
Authentic Historian. I am therefore inclined to believe with Helladius, Phot.
Cod. 239.
in Photius, that this was neither Monster, nor Fish; but rather a Man,
clothed with the skin of some Fish, who made his retirements toward the Red
Sea; and by this means gave occasion to this Fable. So that Scaliger is
manifestly convinced of error, in maintaining that this Dagon, was the
Goddess Derceto, and not a God: for besides that all Greek Authors make Dagon
of the Masculine gender, and not of the Foeminine; Vid. los. Philon.
(...), Dagon qui est: and not, (...), quae est: Reason it self, which all men
ought to submit to, shows clearly that it was not a Woman, (whose sex
rendered her unapt for travel,) but some Man, that first showed the Syrians the
manner of tilling the ground: seeing that their country, or at least that of
their neighbors, was without controversy the first inhabited, either before,
or after the Flood. To this Reason we way add the Authority of Eusebius (...).
Dagon autem Frumenta invenit, atque Aratrum: ac ideo Jupiter Aratrius
nuncupatus est. You may also see Annius lib. 6. and Gyraldus, in his Syntagm.
Syntag. l. and 12.
So that this Idol Dagon might be, one half in the shape of a Man, covered all
over with ears of Corn; by reason of his having taught the Syrians the manner
of Tillage; and the other half in the fashion of a Fish; because of his
wearing a Fishes Skin, and his retiring toward the Red Sea. The passage of
Philo, which Scaliger endeavors to refute, is this. Patris regnum Coelus
possidens, Terram sororem in matrimonium duxit: Eusebius. de Prap. Evang. l. 1. c.
7.
quae sibi quatuor filios peperit; Jlum, quem et Saturnum dicunt; Boetilum;
(...), Dagona, qui et Frumentarius appellatur; ac postremo Atlanta. But to
return to my defense of the Jews: For I should not have troubled my self in
the justification of the Syrians, but only to let the world see, what liberty
men take to themselves, wrongfully to accuse the Eastern people. Not that I
undertake to clear them wholly from errors: I should in so doing, show my
self much more blind, then they: But only to make it appear, that of a
thousand crimes which they are accused of, they are not guilty of then.

6. There is therefore scarcely any one Author, either Greek or Latin, (that
I know,) save only Genebrard, and Moncaeus, which does not confidently
condemn the Jews, of being guilty of Idolatry; I mean those that revolted
from their lawful King. For, what can be more true, (say these men) then that
the Samaritans worshipped Golden Calves, seeing that God himself reproves them
for it? Who then can clear them, in point of Idolatry? Let us now lay down an
Antecedent like this, and then see, if we can thence deduce a like Conclusion.
Some Christians have been known to worship Idols, and God himself has
reproved them for it: Therefore all Christians are Idolaters. What a
Consequence here is! I shall therefore endeavor to clear this matter, and
make it appear that the Samaritans are unjustly accused, in the matter of the
Golden Calves.

The History, 3. Reg. C. 12.
which is the only true one in the world, teaches us, that after the death of
Solomon, (whom many very inconsiderately reckon among the Damned,) his Scepter
was put into the hands of his Successor: who being a young man, was utterly
unacquainted with the Rules of Governing well; which are consistent with Age
only. This new King therefore coming to the Crown, his subjects desired to
him the diminution of some certain great impositions, which his Father (who
could not in this deserve the name of a wiseman,) had charged them with. But
they were so far from being relieved, as that they had heavier Taxes laid upon
them; through the evil Counsel of the King, which is the readiest cause of
the subversion of Kingdoms, and the best-grounded Monarchies in the World. At
length his People revolt from him: and that with so great height of malice, and
with so unanimous a consent, as that of Twelve Tribes, there continued only
two; Judah and Benjamin, in their obedience to their lawful King: The rest
elected Jeroboam for their King; who made choice of Samaria for the place of
his abode; where by using such means, as might have become the most knowing
Politicians of the Ancient Law, he kept this People so pliant, and obedient to
his Commands, that they never afterward acknowledged the Scepter, from whence
they had revolted.

Now, one of the principal means that he made use of, was; that having
considered with himself, that there was nothing more likely to draw back the
hearts of this people toward Rehoboam again, than their conversation which
they were to have with the Two Tribes, which continued at Jerusalem: (for they
were necessarily to appear, three times in the year, before the Lord in
Jerusalem:) he resolved with himself, to establish the same object of
Adoration in Samaria, that was at Jerusalem. Now, in the Temple, there was the
Arc, and the Cherubins, which Moses had made, according to the Pattern which
God had showed him in the Mount. Jeroboam therefore makes the same in Samaria;
it not being necessary to make an Arc also: for you must note, the Arc was
made, only to hold the broken Tables of the Law; as you may see in
Deuteronomy. But what? Cap. 10. V. 5.
you will say; were the Cherubins made by Moses, fashioned like Calves, then?
Yes, most certainly: since that those which Jeroboam made, were but in
imitation of them. And had they been of any other figure, he had then imitated
that figure; and had not so much as dreamt of making Calves: seeing his purpose
only was, to retain his people in their obedience, by the same form of
worship, that they used at Jerusalem. Otherwise, how imprudent should he have
been, in going about to introduce a strange Religion, which they had never
before known? This would have been a means rather to have ruined himself,
and his designs; and to cause his new gotten Subjects to return to their old
Allegiance.

7. Now, that the Cherubins, which Moses made to the Arc, were in the figure
of Calves, that which Aaron made in the Wilderness, at the entreaty of the
children of Israel, proves sufficiently: for doubtless this High Priest did
nothing, but what he conceived Moses himself would have done, had he been
alive. (For he took upon him to do what he did, upon a presumption that Moses
was taken away by God; seeing he had not come down from the Mount, in the
space of full forty days: whereas, at other times, he had never tarried there
above a day.) He made therefore a Cherubin indeed; but it was after the
pattern that was showed to Moses, as also to himself, Exodus 25. Exodus 24.10.
and the seventy Elders. Inspice, and fac secundum exemplar, quod tibi-in monte
monstratum est. Now, in this Pattern, they saw the glory of God, in like
manner, as it was afterward seen by Ezekiel, and St. John: where God
appeared, sitting betwixt four Cherubins, whereof the first was in figure like
a Man; the second, like a Lion; the third, like a Calfe; and the fourth, like
an Eagle: And upon these visible Cherubins, as upon a Throne, were the Children
of Israel to find placed, the Majesty of the Invisible God, in their passage
through the Wilderness; according as he had promised them, by the mouth of his
servant Moses. Ecce Ego mittam Angelum meum, qui praecedat te. And then
afterward, explaining how himself would rest upon this Angel, called by the
name of (...), Elohim, Dij, a name common to the Angels too; he adds: Et erit
nomen meum in illo, and facies mea praecedet te, and requiem dabo tibi. These
Promises therefore having been so often made to the People by Moses; now that
they believed him to have been either devoured by some wild beast, in some
corner of the Mountain; or else, as the wiser sort amongst them thought, that
he was taken away by God; they required at the hands of his Successor, Aaron,
the fulfilling of these very Promises. Surge, said they unto him, fac nobis
Deum Elohim, or, Deos Elohim, qui praecedant nos: Moysienim huic viro qui
eduxit nos de terra Aegypti, ignoramus quid acciderit: as if they should have
said: We know not what is become of Moses, that should have made us this
Angel, that was to march before us: do Thou thy self therefore make it, that
so we may enter into the Land of Promise. Aaron therefore made them one of
these Cherubins, on which they had seen God sitting. Now, why he made this
Cherubin in the shape of a Calf, rather then in any other of the three Figures,
Abiudan, a Jew, speaking of this particular, (a Manuscript Copy of whose Works
Mr. Otho has brought out of the East,) says nothing at all. But Moncaeus, who
has likewise written of this Subject, gives the reason out of Dionysius the
Areopagite: In Vit. our. Cap. 5.
namely, that Aaron made choice of the Cherubin, that was figured like a Calfe;
because that being in the appearance more absurd, then any of the rest, the
Children of Israel would not be so apt to worship it. This Calfe therefore, or
Cherubin, was made by Aaron; not as if he had first cast the gold in a rude
Mass, and then afterward shaped it, working it in the same manner, as
Statuaries do, in rude Stones: as Moncaeus is of opinion. Nor yet, that this
Calfe came out by chance, without any purposed design of Aaron, in making it
in shape like a Calfe: as most of the Ancients have been bold to affirm: But
having first made a Mould, Et projeci illud (aurum) in fornacem, egressusque
est hic Vitulus: he cast the gold into it, and there came forth this Calfe. If
the People afterward provoked God to wrath thereby, it was not for making the
Calfe, but for worshipping it. For as Martial says,

Qui fingit sacros auro, vel marmore vultus,
Non facit ille Deos; qui rogat, ille facit.
Neither do we any where read, that Aaron was at all reproved of God, for
having made it.

8. So that the conclusion, which we may draw from hence, is; that the
Cherubins which were on the Arc, were really made in the shape of Calves: and
that according to this Doctrine, Jeroboam, in imitating them, could not in any
wise be counted an Idolater, but only a Schismatic, or Separatist from the
worship, that was performed in Jernsalem: notwithstanding that the same befell
him, that had happened to Aaron before him; namely, that though His Purpose was
good, yet nevertheless there were among the People, that worshipped them: and
this is the reason, they are reproved by God. Now that he had no intention at
all to set up Idolatry, by this Act, appears clearly in this; that the Kings
his Successors, who all were of the same Belief, are not any where reproved
for this crime, until the Reign of wicked Achab, who was seduced by his wife
Jezabell, the most Imperious woman that ever was. Thus we read in the History
of Kings, that Jehu did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; Yet
nevertheless, Non reliquit vitulos aureos, qui erant in Bethel, 4. Reg. 10.30.
and in Dan. And I would feign know, if this King should have worshipped these
Calves, how he could have done that which was right in the sight of God, who
never punished his people so severely, as when they had given themselves up to
worship Idols? And how Asa in like manner, King of Samaria, could have walked
in the ways of David, if he had been tainted with this horrible Crime? Et
fecit Asa rectum ante conspectum Domini, sicut David pater ejus: and yet
notwithstanding, Excelsa non abstulit, He took not away the High places, that
is to say, Vitulos, the Calves. As if the Author of the holy Scriptureshad
purposed to prevent the Objection which is usually made, concerning the
erecting of these Calves to an evil End: for these words seem to have been
set down so expressly, merely for the confutation of those men that are wedded
to their own wills, and for the clearing of the truth of that, which I have
here delivered: Cor Asa perfectum fuit cum Domino, etsi Excelsa non abstulerit.
Which is an Infallible Argument, that they acknowledged in these Calves, or
Cherubins, the same which they of Jerusalem did in those of the Arc; namely,
the presence of the Invisible God, sitting there, as on his Throne;
notwithstanding that many, out of simplicity, worshipped the bare figure of
this Work of Men's hands: And this is that, which God so often complains of. As
if this were the Literal meaning of this Passage; to wit: that the Kings of
Israel had indeed done that which was right in the sight of God, and had lived
according to his Laws: yet, that they might have done better, if they had
taken away these Cherubins, which were the cause of the destruction of many,
who made other use of them, then that for which they were intended. I remember
to have read somewhere to this purpose, of a Bishop of Marseille; who seeing,
that many of his people behaved themselves toward the Images, that are usually
placed in Churches, with so great respect, as that one day he observed some of
their actions that came within the compass of Idolatry; he caused them all to
be broken to pieces, leaving only a very few in some certain places of his
Diocese: So true it is, that we often abuse those things, which were instituted
only to good ends. I shall only add one word more, for the defending of the
Innocence of the Samaritans; which is: that, when Salmonazar had ransacked
their Country, he sent into it Colonies out of Persia; who falling to commit
Idolatry, as they had used to do in their own Country; God sent Lions among
them, to destroy them. For remedy of which calamity, 4 Reg. 17
they could find out no better expedient, then to send for one of the Jewish
Priests, whom they had lead away captives, for to instruct these Idolaters in
the Worship of the true God; which being done, they were freed from that
calamity: which is a certain Argument, says Abiudan, that all the Samaritans
were not Idolaters. This observation of Abiudan, Moncaeus takes no notice of;
yet He has also an Observation, which Abiudan passes by; (out of the hate, I
conceave, that he bare to the True Messiah, and because that the Testimony made
against himself;) namely, that when our Savior Christ uttered the Story, or
Parable of the Travailer, that fell among Thieves, the Samaritan is there said
to have had more pity on him, then the Priest of Jerusalem. I shall add here,
that the same God, being become Man, did not at all deny himself to be a
Samaritan, when he was called so by way of reproach: which doubtless he would
have done, if he had known this people to be wholly Idolatrous.

9. But now, in the progress of this Discourse, the Curious Critic, who uses
to leave nothing unsifted, may happily propose this Question to me. If the
Cherubins of the Arc were made in the form of Calves; what should move almost
all Writers to maintain, that they were in shape like young Boys? I confess,
I could willingly have put off the answering this Question (which neither
Abiudan, nor Moncaeus, have taken any notice of, or else have purposely passed
it by,) to some other time: But seeing that I write to the Learned, it
concerns me willingly to omit nothing, that makes for my subject; that so I be
not ranked in the number of those men, that when they write of any argument,
do voluntarily slip over the choycest things in it. I say then, in two words,
and without making any long discourse on it, (since that I handle this very
Question in another place,) that all the Authors, both Greek, and Latin, and
the greatest part of the Jewish too, as Aben-Ezra, Scelomoh, and the
Talmudists, who have attributed the form of young Boys to these Cherubins,
have done it upon such weak grounds; that we need but only to rehearse them,
to show their insufficiency. There is nothing, (say many of these last named
Authors, cited by Kimchi,) which more confirms the opinion, of the Cherubins
being made in the figure of Young Men, or Lads, then the Etymology of their
name. For (...) Cherub, is compounded of the servile Letter (...) Caph, which
signifies sicut, and of the word (...) Rabeia which signifies in Chaldee, a
Young Boy, or Youth; and in the plural number (...) Cherabaia, that is to say,
sicut Adolescentes, or Pueri. Very good, but Moses spoke not Chaldee, but
Hebrew: and therefore, if this controversy must be decided by the Etymology of
the name, why cannot I say with much more reason, out of the Hebrew Etymology
of the word, that these two Cherubins were made in the form of Saddles; seeing
that the word (...) whence (...) Cherub is said to be derived) by transposing
the letters into (...) Cherab, which signifies equitare, Cap. 15. v. 9. Cap.
22. v. 35.
is in Hebrew, a Saddle: as you may see in Leviticus, and in the first book of
the Kings. Or else we may say, that these Cherubins were made in the form of
Rain: seeing that (...) Cherabib, a word that comes very near Cherubin,
signifies sicut pluvia.

Let us now examine the Reasons brought by the Latins, and see whether or no
they are of any more weight, then these of the Hebrew writers.

Cajetan upon Exodus thinks himself to have found out the powerfullest
Argument, In 25. Exodus
that has yet been brought by any, for to prove that their Figure was like
that of two Young Men: because that in the Bible, where the Vulgar Translation
renders it, respiciantque se mutuo, Exodus 25. v. 30.
the original sounds thus in the Hebrew, and facies eorum vir adfratrem suum.
Whence he thinks, he has hit the nail on the head; and concludes, that for
certain these cherubins were of humane shape: But those that are skillful in
the Hebrew, will readily find this conclusion to be very infirm, and of no
force; or otherwise we may as well conclude, that the stars, the curtains of
the Tabernacle, and a thousand other things in the old Testament, were likewise
of Humane shape, since that Isatah, speaking of the stars, where the vulgar
Translation has, Neque unum reliquumfuit, the Hebrew Text says, and vir non
est substractus: and in Exodus, where speaking of the curtains of the
Tabernacle, the Vulgar says, quinque cortinae sibi iungantur mutuo, it is in
Hebrew, and quinque cortinae crunt conjunctae, mulierem ad sororem suam. So
Ezechiel speaking of the wings of the Beasts, where the Translation has, and
vocem alarm animalium, percutientium alteram ad alteram, the Hebrew is,
Mulierum ad sororemsuam. In Genesis, where mention is made of the parts of the
Sacrifice, where the Translation is, Et utrasque parts contrase altrinsecus
posuit, in Hebrew it is, and dedit virum, partem ejus e regione proximi sui.
And lastly in Isaiah, In Lexicis.
where it is Translated, Alter alterum non quaesivit. Many other examples of
this kind are collected up, In Lexicis.
by Kimchi, Munster Forsterus, and Pagnin. I shall omit whatsoever the rest of
interpreters have delivered, concerning these Cherubins; because that you may
see in Cajetan, that their reasons are as weak as his own, whatsoever Pradus,
and Villalpandus affirm to the contrary; who labor much to bring in another
sense, but are confuted by Oleaster. In the mean time I cannot but wonder very
much at these men, that have taken so much pains to hunt after empty sounds to
no purpose; not considering that they might as well at first have positively
affirmed that these Cherubins had a Humane shape, because that one of the four,
seen by Moses, Aaron, the seventy Elders, Ezechiel, and Saint John, was in
figure like a Man. This Conjecture might have passed for tolerable, had not the
truth been by us now brought to light. We may therefore by this means clear our
hands of these doubts; as also of that other, concerning the form of the
Cherubin that was placed at the entrance of Paradise, to keep out Adam, and his
posterity. For it may be answered in one word, that it was that of these four
Cherubins, which had the shape of a Lion; this form being the most proper for
such a purpose: seeing there is nothing in the world more terrible then a
Roaring Lion. And thus are all those difficulties cleared, Quest. 40. de
Paradiso. In 3 Genes. In Expos, Symb.
which have long since been brought in by Theodoret, Bar-Cepha, Procopius
Gazaeus, Jacobus Chius, and Theodorus Bishop of Heraclea; who, after a long and
tedious dispute, conclude, though not very rationally, that this Guard was not
a Cherubin, but some other thing of Power, like a Cherubin; just as we dress
up some frightfull Scar-crowes, and place them in Gardens, and Hemp-plots, to
fright away the Birds. And their reason is, because that Cherubins being
Spirits very highly exalted, and of the second Order of the First Hierarchy,
they are never sent on the Earth, but are alayes attending before the Throne of
God: notwithstanding, the Master of the Sentences, Scotus, Gabriel, Durand, In
2. Sent. did. 10. ibid. Tom. 1. disp. 1.
and Gregorius de Valentia, affirm the contrary. Now what the reason should be
of the Cherubins, seen by Moses, Ezekiel, and the rest, appearing in shapes so
different, and, as it may seem, so repugnant to the nature of a Blessed Spirit,
I must refer you, for satisfaction, to S. Dionysius, S. Gregory, and the rest
of the Fathers: since it is sufficient for me to have here proved, that the
Golden Calfe made in the Wilderness, and those other which Jeroboam made, were
fashioned according to this Divine Vision; so that the Ancients are by this
means cleared of the Crimes, which they are injuriously charged withal.

10. If I had not already exceeded the just length of a Chapter, I should here
answer to an Imputation, which is yet greater then all the rest, charged upon
the Jews: namely, that they of old burned their Children to the Idol Moloc. I
shall reserve the full handling of this point, till some other time; In Cap. 6.
Mis. Thor. tract. (...)
and shall only say this by the way, that R. Joseph Caro observes, that
throughout the whole Scripture, where there is mention made of this Idol, and
of the Sacrifice that was done unto it, it never uses any word that signifies,
to Burn, Kill, or Put to death, but, to Pass, and, to Offer. And indeed they
did no more, but caused their Children to pass over the Fire: which was a kind
of Adoration, and Service, showed toward this Element, Lib. de Philosoph. Barb.
in Chald.
and Introduced by wicked Cham. Ignem, (says Heurnius) in Ur, Chaldaeorum
Urbe, Abrahami patria, adorandum ponit; gravi poena in pertinaces promulgata:
where there is no mention made of any Command, to Burn, nor to Kill. And for
the clearing of this Truth, Comment. in Reg. and in Psalm. In Pentateuch. In
More Neb. Lib. 3. C. 30.
I shall refer the Curious Reader, (because I must not any longer dwell on this
point) to Kimchi, Salomo Jarchi, Abarbanel, and to Moses Aegyptius, who knew
more of the Customs of the Ancients, then any other Author that ever wrote.
Yet I deny not, but that the Persian Colonies of Sepharvaim, who came and dwelt
in Samaria, 4. Reg. 17.
did Sacrifice their Children to their Gods, Adramelech, and Anamelech: but,
that the Hebrews did the same to Moloch, will never be made appear;
whatsoever Mr. Seldom say to the contrary. And who can believe that Solomon
murdered little Children, or cast them into the Fire, because the Scripture
says of him, Colebat Solomon Astharten, Deam Sidoniorum; and Moloch, Idolum
Ammonitarum? He must not be Master of Common Sense, that can have any such
thought about him: So true is that, which we have already delivered; that they
only passed over the Fire. And this Unhappy Custom has so spread it self
ever since, throughout the whole World; that even in America, the Brasilians
do the same, as Johannes Lerius reports of them: Navlg. in Brasil.
and among Christians also, Mothets do yearly cause their Children to pass
over the Fire of St. John, to this day. Which Custom ought to be abolished,
seeing it has been anciently condemned by a Council held at Constantinople:
Syn. 6. in Trull. can. 64. In cap. 16.4. lib. Reg. Videantur Olaus Mag. in
Histor. Gothica. Leo African. in Descript. Afric. D. Ie. Chrysostom. qui in
Homil. de Nativitat. S. Ioannis, Solennes ejus honori (...) excitatas ait,
ipsumque diem Lampada appell^ium.
and Theodoret proves clearly, that this Custom of these Fires, is still a
rellick of the Ancient Abominations.

CHAP. II.
That many things are esteemed Ridiculous, and Dangerous, in the Books of the
Jews; which yet are, without any blame, maintained by Christian Writers.
THE CONTENTS.
1. THat we ought not to rest on the bare Letter of the Scriptures.

2. Authors that have treated of Ridiculous Subjects, without being reproved.

3. The Books of the Jews less dangerous, then those of the Heathens; which
yet are allowed by the Christian Fathers.

4. The Feast that God is to make for the Elect, with the Flesh of a Whale, how
to be understood.

5. Ten things created on the Even before the Sabbath; and what they were.

6. The Opinions of the Ancient, and Modern Writers, touching the end of the
World: what Fathers of the Church have been of the Jews opinion in this
Particular.

7. Diverse opinions, concerning the number of years from the Creation to our
Savior Christ: and what we ought to conclude, as touching the End of the World.

8. The Ancient Rabbis are falsely accused of speaking ill of our Savior Jesus
Christ.

9. The third Objection in the Precedent Chapter, and an Enumeration of some
Errors of great Importance in our own Books.

BUt be it so (may some say,) that the Jews are free from the guilt of these
Crimes, and their books not polluted with these Abominations: yet it cannot be
denied, but that they have vented in them many fooleries, more ridiculous ones,
The 2d. Objection.
then a man can imagine; and even some, that are very dangerous too: and that
therefore they are unworthy our reading; and the Curiosities found in them, not
to be valued at all. This is the second Objection, which was proposed in the
precedent Chapter. The Auswer.


If I were here to deal only with those that are free from Passion, it would be
easy for me to satisfy them in two words: but since that I may chance to have
to do with opinionative, self-conceited men; it will concern me to convince
them by the force of Reasons, backed with examples. I say then, that suppose
there are many fooleries, and absurd things found in the books of the Jews*
but why then do we admit of the books of the Poets, where you have nothing
else? For what can be conceived more ridiculous, then that men should be
transformed into Rocks, Rivers, Plants and Trees? or what more remote from
common sense, then that Stones should discourse, Flowers, reason, and trees
make their moan, and sigh out their afflictions? why were the Fables of Aesope
ever received, which attribute the use of Reason to all things, even the most
insensible that nature has produced? And to say the utmost in one word; Why
then do we admit of the Bible, which also make Trees, as the Vine, and the
Bramble, to speak? The Trees went forth on a time to anoint a King over them,
Iudic. 9.8.
and they said unto the Olive Tree, Reign thou over us. But the Olive Tree
said unto them, should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honor God and
man, and go to be promoted over the trees? And this Tree refusing them, they
then make their addresses to the Fig Tree, and afterward to the Vine, and at
last they are constrained to come to the Bramble. What a strange Metamorphosis
is here? If it be answered that these are Figures, Similitudes, and Parables,
which Ioathan made use of, to express to the people the Tyranny of Abimelech:
and that in like manner the Ancient Poets proposed their Fables, under which
was always couched some Philosophical secret, either Moral, or Divine: Why
shall not the same Liberty be allowed to the Jews also? Will they have them to
be less Rational, then the rest of Mankind? or more Brutish, then very
Beasts? Was there ever the like Peevishness seen?

2. If the Jews had busied themselves, in describing the War betwixt Frogs and
Mice; as Homer has done: or in writing the Commendation of a Tyrant, as
Polycrates has done: the praise of Injustice, as Phavorinus: of Nero, as
Cardan: of an Ass, as Apuleius, and Agrippa: of a Fly, and of a Parasiticall
life, as Lucian: The same has le S. du Belay done, in diverse of his Poems.
or of Folly, as Erasmus: we then should have them hooted at, for Fools, or
Madmen. Or had they made Epitaphs, or Funeral Orations, upon the death of a
Cat, an Ape, a Dog, a Didapper, an Ass, a Magpye, a Flea, as some of our
Italian Fantasticoes have done: we should no doubt hear them charged then,
with the finest, wittiest, Idolatrous Foolery, that ever men were guilty of.
And yet, the Authors of these Trifles, hear no one word of it. If they should
yet but have taken upon them, to set down the Rules of Divination, as many of
our Latin Christians have done: or to teach the manner of Interpreting
Dreams, as one has done in Gochlenius; Barth. Gochl. Introd. ad Physiog.
who tells you, that as soon as you are awaked, you must open a Psalter; and
the first Letter that is found, in the beginning of the Page, shall show what
shall happen. As for example; if it be A, it signifies, the Party shall be of a
Free Nature: if B, he shall be powerful in War: C, and D, signifies Sadness
and Death: E, and F, that he shall have (if he be married) a Noble Offspring:
G, denotes some sad accident to befall him: H, foreshewes the Love of Women: I,
a good and happy Life: K, Folly, and Mirth: and so forward of all the rest; the
very remembrance whereof makes me laugh: If the Jews, I say, should have
busied themselves with such Sottish Impertinencies as these, would any of the
Christians so much as have touched their Books? I shall pass by a thousand
Fooleries, wherewith our own Books are stuffed; and a thousand Fopperies,
which some people give credit to: as, that of Names, and Numbers, which is
copiously handled by Raimundus Veronensis, in his book entitled, Opera del l'
Antiqua and honorata scienzae di Nomandia: wherein a man shall see by the
Letters of his name, whether he shall live a long time, or not: whether of the
two shall survive, the Husband, or the Wife: What Preferments one shall rise
to: What Death a man shall dye:and a world of such like Propositions, which are
not only ridiculous, but dangerous also. And now let any man, if he can, find
fault with the Jewish Rabbis, whose writings are free from any such kind of
Follies, as these.

3. I shall add further, that almost all the Fathers have been of opinion,
that we might lawfully read the books of the Heathen Philosophers; Lib 2. de
Doctr. Christ. Cap. 39. and 40. Lib. 1. de curat. Graec. affect.
and such reasons are given for it, by S. Augustine, and Theodoret, as will
force the frowardest Critic to subscribe. Now every body knows, that the
greatest part of these books teach the Multiplicity of Gods; and some of them,
Idolatry also: But as for those of the Jews, who is he, that has ever accused
them of either of these Crimes; or that found any other Doctrine taught in
them, then that of the True God? And why then may not men of Learning read
these, since we permit the other to be read to raw Children, that are apt to
believe any thing? If there be many Fooleries to be found in them; as it is
objected by those, that never read them; there is yet much less danger in
These, then in Apostasy: neither is there any of them so Absurd, but that some
Good thing may be drawn from them; nor yet so barren, but that they afford
matter, to raise some wholesome Doctrine upon. Let us therefore take the Truths,
and pass by the Dreams: let us gather the Roses, and let alone the Thorns:
let us take up the Pearls, and cast away the Shells. In a word, let us do what
Damascene teaches us: Lib. 4. de fide Orthod. c. 18.
Si autem, says he, ab his quifornis sunt decerpere quippiam utile valuerimus,
non aspernabile est. Efficiamur probati Trapezitae, legitimum and purum aurum
acervantes, adulterimum autem refutantes: sumamus sermones optimos, Deos autem
ridiculos, and fabulas alienas, canibus nibus projiciamus.

4. We will now go another way to work, and show, that many of those things in
the books of the Rabbis, which are accounted ridiculous, by those that have
them only by hearsay, have not yet been accounted so, by Learned Christians,
and such as know the Ancients manner of writing; and that consequenly, they are
not to be rejected. We shall therefore make choice of some of the most
Mystical Passages that are to be found in their books; and show how those
strange doctrines are to be understood; that so by these, the Reader may be
able to judge of all the rest.

If there be any thing worthy to be accounted ridiculous, and absurd, that
doubtless appears to be the most likely, which the Ancient Jews have
delivered, of a certain Feast that God is to make the Saints hereafter. For
they write, that when God had created the world, seeing the bigness of a Whale
which he had lodged in the sea, Others speak of Two.
to be so prodigiously vast, as that he had not made any thing that was
sufficient to nourish him; he presently killed him, and salted him up, as we
use to do Flesh, purposing one day to feast the Elect therewith. Contribulasti,
says the Psalmist, capita draconum in aquis, tu confregisti capita draconis.
Possibly this Text may have given occasion of the Fable of Python, slain by
Apollo: and if so; this later story seems much more tolerable, then the other.
For, what madness is it to imagine, that God should afterward salt up this
Dragon, or this Whale called (...) Leviathan; (...) Leviathan signifies also a
Dragon.
and that it should be afterward kept, till the Last Day, to make a Feast for
those, that should then have no more need to eat? And what excellent
entertainment should God bestow upon his Children, when their cheer should
only be, of the flesh of a Powdered Dragon? This were one of the grossest
Fooleries that could be, were there no other Doctrine couched under this
Tradition, then what the bare Letter affords: and who can possibly imagine the
Jews to be a people so void of sense, as simply to believe this, without
looking after any other meaning of the thing? Let us rather hereafter entertain
a better opinion of this people; and esteem otherwise of those men, whose
wisdom the Christian Fathers have so deservedly admired. I will not say, but
that the simpler son of people among the Jews, may peradventure have believed,
in the Literal sense, this Mysterious Fable; as there are among us, that
believe the stories of Aesope. For there are found some old women so simple,
and I my self have seen such, that hearing tell, how the Lion talked with the
Fox, and he with his companions, that so he might devour the hens; they
really believed, that in times past Beasts did speak and discourse of their own
affairs; taking occasion from what they have heard at Church, of the speaking
of Baalams Ass. But as Aesope is very well known to have couched some
mysterious sense, under his Fables; In like manner did these wise Ancients, in
those which they devised. Scio (says Paulus Fagius) veteres Judaeorum Rabbinos
aliud mysterium hac de reprodere voluisse, qualia and alia apud illos
inveniuntur. In (...) impress. Isnae ann. 1541. fol. 61.
And then, that he might take off the vail from these Mysteries, and bring them
into the open light, he presently adds: Tu, per convivium, summam illam, ac
aeternam faelicitatem, quae justi in futuro perfruentur, intellige. Tum nimirum
edent, and devorabunt Leviathan illum, hoc est, Satanam; cum viderint illum,
cum omnibus ministris suis, in aeterna praecipitari Tartara. Insomuch that he
must be no Man, that sees not that this Doctrine is very little different from
that of our Savior Jesus Christ, who says: That, in his Kingdom, the just
shall eat and drink at his Table: understanding by these expressions,
Everlasting Bliss.

5. There is another Tradition found in the books of the Jews, that appears as
ridiculous as the former: which is; Ib. fol. 100. videatur and R. Moses Egypt,
in More Neb. lib. 1. c. 65.
that at the Creation of the world, on the Even before the Sabbath, there were
ten Miracles created. The first was, That Prodigious Opening of the Earth, that
swallowed up Corah and his Companions. The second, the Well, or Spring, that
issued out of the Rock, and followed the Children of Israel; and which (say
They) God granted unto them, for the merits of Miriam, Moses his sister: as
also the Manna, that went along with them; and the Miraculous Cloud, that
attended on Aaron and his fellows; after whose death, all these Miracles
ceased. The Third was, Balaams Ass: The Fourth, the Rainbow. The Fifth, the
Manna: The Sixth, Moses his Rod, by which he wrought so many Miracles: The
seventh, the little Worm, called (...) Schmair, which Solomon used, in the
hewing, and cutting of the stones, for the building of the Temple, that it
might be done without noise, though they were very great, and very hard: as you
may see in the story of this stately Building; 1 Reg. 6.
and also in the Commentary that Been Maimon has made expressly of this
Insect. The Eighth, the writing of the Tables of the Law: the Ninth, Moses his
Tomb: and the Tenth, the Ram that was sacrificed, instead of Isaac. Some add
to these the Devils, and Evil spirits. Now all these things seem very
ridiculous at the first sight, which yet are in effect very Curious, necessary,
and useful: as I shall in another place make it more plainly appear, In nostro
Cribro Cabbalistico.
it being too long a discourse to insert here. In the mean time let us rely
upon the judgment of Paulus Fagius in this particular, who says: In Pirke
Auoth.
Haec quidem aliquo modo in speciem ridicula, and stulta esse videntur; sed
quae certe non carent suis mysterijs.

6. I will next show you a point of Doctrine of the Rabbis, that is accounted
a very ridiculous, if not a very rash one. These knowing men, having considered
the Order that God observed in the Creation of the world; and how that, having
in six days perfected all his works, he rested on the seventh: they have
peremptorily concluded from hence, that, according to this Mysterious Order,
Talmud. tract. Sanhedr. in C. Helec. (...) Cseeset. (...) alaphim csanah
bagholam: sceue alaphim tohou: csene al^phim Thorah: csene alaphim jemot
Ham^sciach.
the world should last but six Thousand years; and in the beginning of the
seventh, and things should rest. Six Thousand years (say they) is the Age of
the world: Two Thousand, Void: Two Thousand under the Law: and Two Thousand
under the days of the Messiah. So that, according to this account, there being
One Thousand six hundred forty nine years passed, since the Nativity of
Christ, till this present; there should remain to the end of the World, but
three hundred fifty one years more: Quod furor est cogitare, says Malvenda:
and Genebrard also finds this opinion to be so strange a one, as that he cannot
acquit it of Folly. But see now, how careful it concerns a man to be, in
thoroughly examining all things, when he intends to accuse any one. I say then,
that if the Jews are to be accused, as guilty of Folly, for having prefixed a
time for the end of the World; we must also then in like manner accuse the most
Learned of our Christians; Vid. Hieronnym. Wielmium, in cap. 1. Genes. lect. 6.
and even some too, that shine, like Suns, in the Church. I shall not here say
any thing of Joachimus Abbas, S. Brigitta, Ubertinus de Casali, Telesphorus
Heremita, Petrus de Aliaco, Nicolas Cusanus, Jo. Picus Mirandula, Franeu Melet,
Ep. ad Bened.
etc. nor of those of whom Vincent Ferrier speaks; who held, that he number of
years from the death of our Savior Christ, to the end of the World, was to be
just so many, as there be Verses in David's Psalter. Neither shall I here speak
of the ancient Philosophers; as of Aristarchus, Apud Consorin. de die Notati
cap. 15.
who affirmed that the world should last but Two Thousand four hundred eighty
four years: of Aretes Dyrrachinus, who assigned for it is Duration, five
thousand five hundred fifty two; of Herodotus, and Linus, who allowed it ten
thousand eight hundred; of Dion, who said it should continue Thirteen Thousand
nine hundred eighty four years; of Orpheus, who believed it should last a
hundred and twenty Thousand years; as Cassander did, eighteen hundred
Thousand. I shall only show, what the opinion was of the Learned Fathers of the
Church, whose lives are irreprovable: as namely, of Irenaeus, who, according to
the opinion of the Jews, Lib. 5. advers. Haeres. c. 28.
says, that, Quotquot diebus hic factus est mundus, tot et Millenis annu
consummatur: et propter hoc ait scriptura Geneseos; et consummata sunt Coelum,
et Terra, et Omnis ornatus eorum, etc. and afterward he concludes: In sex
autem diebus consummat^ sunt, quae facta sunt; manifestum est, quoniam
consummatio istorum, sextus millesimus annus est. So St. Hilary; who,
expounding those words of the Evangelist, Et post sex dies transfiguratus est;
says, cum post sex dies gloriae Dominicae habitus oftenditur, namely, in his
Transfiguration upon Mount Tabor, sex millium scilicet annorum evolutis,
regnicaelestis honor praefiguratur. So St. Ambrose likewise; who, having the
same conceit with St. Hilary, In 17. Math.
expresses himself almost in the very same words. This was the Opinion also
of Saint Augustine, in his book de Civitate Dei, lib. In Epist expos. Ps. 89.
ad Cypr.
20. cap. 7. of St. Hierome; on those words of David; Quoniam mill anni, ante
oculos tuos, sicut dies hesterna quae praeterist; who says: Ego arbitror ex
hoc loco, et ex Epistola, quae nomine Petri inscribitur, mill annos pro una
die solitos appellari: ut scilicet, quia Mundus in sex diebus fabricatus est,
sex millibus tantum annorum credatur subsistere; et postea venire septenarium
numerum, and Octonarium, in qu^ verus exercetur Sabbatismus, et Circumcisionis
puritas redditur. In a word, it would ask it self a particular Volume, but to
set down all, that the rest of the Fathers have written, concerning the end of
the World, conformable to what the Rabbis had said before them. The Curious
Reader that would be more fully satisfied in this particular, may have recourse
to Georgius Venetus, Galatinus, Harm. Mund. Crnt. 3. ton. 7. cap. 7. Lib. 4.
cap. 20. Flag. contra Iud. 9. c. 11. Lib. 5. Annot. 190. Lib. de oct. Sph. In
l. 20. de Civ. dei. Lib. de Exust. mund. de praed. c. 11 De fine mundi.
Adr. Finus, Sixtus Senensis, Paulus Riccius. Lud. Vives, Hieronymus Magius.
Aegidius Columnus, and Fridericus Emstius.

7. The Objection that might, be made in this Point, would fall heavy, as well
upon the Rabbis, as upon the Fathers, who have followed them; but that we
shall be able to make it appear to be of no weight at all. For, say they, if
the World be to last but six Thousand years; then by consequence, the Day of
Judgment may be foreknowne, which contradicts the Holy Scriptures. I answer,
that those Learned men have not at all defined the days, but only the years:
Now, the number of the years, that are passed since the Creation, to this
present, is uncertain; therefore are the Days also uncertain. Now that the
number of years is uncertain, will appear evidently, by comparing the
diverse Opinions of these following Authors, who have with all possible
Diligence computed the years, from the Creation, until Christ; and yet there
is in their Computations, above a hundred years difference: Judge you then, what
the Consequence must be. Those of the Jews that have turned Christians, as
Hieronymus a Sancta Fide, Paulus a Sancta Maris, Lyranus, Brugensis, and
others, which are followed by Georgius Venetus, Galatinus, Franciscus Georgius,
and Steuchus, account from the Creation of the World, to the Nativity of our
Savior Christ, 3760 Paulus Forosemproniensis, 5201 Arnaldus Pontacus, 4088
Pererius, Bellarmine, and Baronius, 4022 Genebrard, 4090 Suarez, 4000 Ribera,
4095 Onuphrius Panvinius, 6310 Carolus Bovillus, 3989 Malvenda, 4133 Joseph
Scaliger, 3948 Sixtus Senensis, Massaeus, and many others. 3962 Jo. Picus
Mirandula, 3958 Peter Gallisard, 3964 Joannes Lucidus, and many others, 3960
Garardus Mercator, 3928 Jansenius, 3970 Paulus Palatius, 4000

Hence we may safely conclude, that neither the number of days, nor yet of
year passed since the Creation, can be exactly known, without some special
Revelation; notwithstanding the endeavors of the Learned Pererius to prove the
contrary; who, In Gone. lib. 1.
taking occasion from these words of the Wise man, dies seculi quis dinumerat?
affirms, that he speaks not here of the Years, but of the Days: and that,
though the number of These cannot be known, yet the Other may. Ergo, says he,
after a long Discourse, Numerus annorum Munditeneri potest, dierum autem non
potest. But he ought first to have reconciled these Authors among themselves;
and to show, how they have erred in their Computations. And when all is done,
the nearest that a man shall be able to come to the Truth, will perhaps be
about Twenty five, or Thirty years, over, or under; and no otherwise.

8. The 3. Object.
The third Objection, brought by those, that will not admit the Jews books to
be read, seems to have more Reason in it, then all the rest. For, if they be
indeed full of scoffings against the Life of Him, who has given Us Ours; if
they accuse his Actions, detest his Doctrine, and condemn his Memory, as
ignominious; in a word, if they are full of nothing but Blasphemies against
Jesus Christ, who is he that could endure to read them? And here Sixtus
Senensis triumphs over his Enemies, and reckons up all the Impieties the
Israelites were ever guilty of; and there is scarcely any one kind of
wickedness, or villainy, that he lays not to their charge. In a word, he
numbers up, as well all the erroneous points of their Belief, as their
Reproachful speeches which they vomit up against the Son of God: so that one
that had not read their books, and known the Truth of the business, would
judge them to have been written rather by Devils, then by Men. But this Author,
The Answer.
(who had not written against this Nation, but, as almost all others have done,
merely out of the hatred is generally borne, toward these Deicides,) thought
peradventure, that after the burning so many Jewish Libraries in Italy, and
after that himself had been an Eyewitness of Twelve Thousand Volumes burnt
to Ashes at Cremona, he thought, I say, that after so rigorous an Inquisition,
there could have been no more books left, by which we might have been able to
satisfy our selves, in the Truth of those things that are objected against the
Jews. But he had forgot to burn the writings of Galatinus too, or rather of
Sebondus: (for I shall make it appear in another place, that Galatine was
never the Author of that Learned Book, entitled, de Arcanis Catholicae
sidei:) He had, I say, forgot to burn these Learned writings too, which do
make it clearly appear, that the greatest part of those things that are
written in this Particular, is false; and prove, that the Blasphemies, which
the Ancient Rabbis uttered against Jesus Christ, were not meant at all of
Christ, our Redeemer, but of another Jesus, very far different from Ours. And
this is so known a Truth, that the most furious among the Jews dare not deny
it, unless they deny their Talmud. So that this Confession being so much the
more forcible, because it proceeds from the mouth of our Adversaries; it quite
overthrowes all that Senensis, and those of his Persuasion, have brought to the
contrary. I will not say, but that the Later Rabbis do more perversely handle
the Controversy, which is betwixt Them and Us; namely, Whether Jesus Christ be
the true Messiah, or not: and that, among the Heats of so weighty a Dispute,
they do sometimes speak irreverently of our sacred Mysteries: But, (which is
a very wonderful thing, and which ought to convince all the enemies to the
writings of these men;) among so great a number of Arguments that are brought
against us, by R. David Kimchi, and R. Joseph Alboni, (two Jewish Rabbis,
which were both very learned, and very zealous for their own Religion:) you
shall not find one Opprobrious speech uttered against Jesus Christ: as that he
was a seditious person, (as he was called in his life time,) or a Magician, or
an Impostor, or a Malefactor, or any other the like Blasphemous terms:
notwithstanding there is scarcely any of our Christian Writers, that have
written against the Jews, which give them not very hard language. They dispute
indeed, Whether the Gospel be a Law, or not: but not, Whether the Author of it
were a Wicked Man, or no. Nay, on the contrary, they rather confess him to
have religiously kept all the Commandments of the Decalogue. They say indeed,
that he was but mere Man, and not God: being blinded by the Confession, which
this God of Love made of himself: Ego sum vermis, and non homo: but they do
not say, that he was a Wicked, Perfidious Person. They accuse his Apostles
indeed of Ignorance, but not of Falsehood: as, when S. Paul says, that the
Israelites demanded a King of Samuel; who gave them the son of Cis, being
about the age of forty years; whereas the Scripture seems to say otherwise. As
also, when Saint Stephen said, that those that went down with Jacob into
Egypt, were seventy five souls in number; whereas in Genesis it is said, they
were but seventy in all. And so likewise in diverse other Passages, which have
been, long since, often reconciled, and cleared of Error. They deny indeed,
that in the Eucharist, a Great Body, with all its parts, can possibly be in so
small a Morsel: but they do not say, that the Institution, and use of it in
the Christian Church, is Diabolical, as the Heretics say. In a word, they
deny indeed, that Jesus Christ is the true Messiah; but the do not say, that
his Doctrine is against God. Those that desire to be more fully satisfied in
this Controversy, may have recourse to a Tract, written by Genebrard, against
those two Learned Jews above named. To conclude then, both against Senensis,
and all of his Opinion; I affirm, that the Ancient Rabbis are so far from
reproaching our Savior Jesus Christ, as that, on the contrary, they allow of
his Doctrine, and confirm the History, which is delivered us: as I do clearly
prove, in my Advertissement aux Doctes, touchant la necessite des langues
Orientales, which I shall, God willing, put forth very shortly.

9. The 4. Object.
I come now to the last objection, which is: that the Books of the Rabbines
err, in the Interpretation of the Law: and that being full of Vain, and
ridiculous, Traditions, and some that are dangerous too; they ought not to be
read by Christians, who are to seek after nothing, but the true Traditions of
Jesus Christ, and his Church.

I shall not take upon me to answer fully, and in every particular, to this
Objection: since that it cannot be denied, but that the Rabbis do err
sometimes, and that their Interpretations are sometimes wide enough of the
matrer. But that therefore they must presently be burnt, or not read at all, is
against all Sense, or Reason: for, otherwise, we were to proceed in the same
manner against our selves, and must condemn our own books also; which are
scarcely to be found, any of them, without their Errors: I speak even of those
very books, that are of highest esteem, and use, among us. So that if these
must all be committed to the Flame, we should speedily see-o^r Libraries Empty;
and, those which shall come after us, to be left to a most profound ignorance.
For, who knows not, that the works of Tertullian favor the Sect of the
Montanists, where he speaks of a new Paraclet, and a new Prophecy; as also,
where he condemns Second Marriages? If we but diligently peruse the Writings
of all the rest of the Fathers, we shall find, that those of St. Cyprian
maintain the Rebaptizing of such, as having abjured their Heresy, had been
formerly baptized by Heretics What Error is it, that the writings of the
Learned Origin are not polluted with? If any man out of Curiosity desire to see
a Catalogue of them, he may have recourse to the Learned Epistle of St. Jerome,
ad Avitum. Does not St. Hilary seem to detract much from the merits of our
Savior Christ, when he maintains, that his Sacred Body was not at all capable
of Suffering; and that Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, and the rest of Humane
Infirmities, were not Natural in him, but as the School speaks, Absumptae?
Neither did Epiphanius fall into less Errors then these, when he writes, upon
those words of Christ, Pater Major me est, that it was true also of his Divine
Nature; and that, in the garden of Olives, he spoke not these words seriously;
Pater, si fieri potest, transeat a me Calix iste; but only by way of
Dissimulation, to deceive the Devil. I pass by many things delivered by him,
touching the death of our Savior Christ, which the purity of Divinity cannot
allow of: as also, when in his disputation against Aerius, he affirms, that
one of the Precepts left by the Apostles, was, that, during the six days
immediately before the Passeoyer, we must eat nothing but Bread, with Salt. St.
Ambrose also, in his Allegories, in which he exceeds, is not always
blameless: for sometimes he lets fall such things, as are quite contradicting
the sense of the Holy Scriptures. As, for example, speaking of St. Peter's
sin, he holds, that this Apostle denied not Jesus Christ as God, but only as
Man: as likewise, when he makes it Lawful for a man, that has put away his
Wife by Divorce, to marry another woman, provided, she also had not been
divorced. St. Jerome runs as far into the other Extreme; for, pleading for
Virginity, against Jovinian, he does so cry out against Marriage, that he makes
it almost a sin to marry: and goes on so far, as to account Second Marriages
to be no other then mere Fornication, and a Trade of Bawdery. St. Augustine
has also had his many Errors: As, when he maintains, that the Eucharist
ought to be administered to little Children; and that, if they dye without
Baptism, they are Damned. You may find many other Errors in the Writings of
this Learned Father: But they are such, as we may truly call, Happy ones; since
that they gave occasion to the writing of that Excellent Book of his
Retractations; without which, a great part of the Learning of this most Knowing
Father, had been concealed from us. I could proceed to reckon up some Errors of
each of the rest of the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, for the proving of my
Assertion: namely, that we have the same reason to forbear the reading of
them, that we have against the books of the Rabbis: so that, we should at
length be reduced to this extremity, of having no other books, but only the
Holy Scriptures. And yet neither could these pass, if we should rest only on
the Bare Letter; since there are some things found there, that seem contrary to
Truth. Thus Cajetan has observed, 2. Reg. C. 21. 1. Reg. C. 12.
that in Kings 2. we read, Michol, instead of, Merob: as you may perceive, by
comparing it with the First Book of the same History. And the Learned have
observed, that in the New Testament, Math. 27.
St. Matthew, forgetting himself, has written Zachary, for, Jeremy: and St.
Mark likewise, upon the same mistake, cites a passage out of Isaiah, Marc. 1.
which is written in Malachi: and so likewise, when he says, our Savior
Christ was Crucified on the Third hour; seeing that St. John says, that he
was but only condemned by Pilat, the Sixth hour. Joan. 19.
So likewise, where St. Luke says, that Cainan was the Son of Arphaxad, Genesis
23.
and Salec, the Son of Cainan, he contradicts the place in Genesis, where it
is said, that Salec was not Arphaxad's Grandsonne, but his Son, no other
Generation intervening betwixt these two. And when he says also, that the
Cave, which Abraham bought, was in Sichem; which was indeed in Hebron: Gee. 11.
and that he bought it of the Sons of Emor, the Son of Sichem: whereas Moses
says, it was, of Ephron the Hittite. And so likewise, when he says, that Emor
was Sichem's Son, when as it is said in Genesis, Genesis 33.
quite contrary; that Emor was Sichem's Father, and not his Son. I shall not
here undertake to justify all these Passages: many great Personages, of former
Ages, have already done it very happily: so that we cannot any longer, without
manifest Injury, say, that there is any Error at all in them. As for the
Errors of the Fathers, I should rather think charitably of them, and say; that,
as St. Jerome complained in his Time, Ep. ad Pammac. and Ocean.
that the Writings of Origin had been corrupted by some Impostor; as St.
Augustine likewise complains, in those of St. Cyprian: so possibly, those of
the other Fathers may have been corrupted too. But this Excuse, which my
Charity has suggested to me, hinders not, but that we are to reject Their
works, such as now we have them, if we are not to read any of those, that have
erred.

PART II. Of the TAlismanicall Sculpture of the Persians: or, the manner of
making Figures, and Images, under certain Constellations.
CHAP. III.
That the Persians are unjustly blamed, concerning the Curiosities of their
Magic, Sculpture, and Astrology.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Evil Custom, of blaming the Ancients, is noted.

2. The Reasons brought against the Persians, and their Magic, examined, and
found of no force. The errors of the Counterfeit Berosus, Dinon, Comestor,
Genebrard, Pierius, and Venetus, concerning Zoroaster.

3. His Magic, what it was.

4. The strange Statues of Laban, and Micah, called Teraphim, perhaps allowed
by God.

5. The Errors of Elias Levita, Aben-Esra, R. Eliezer, R. D. Chimchi, Cajetan,
Saints, Vatablus, Clarius, Mercerus, Marinus, and Mr. Seldom, concerning
these Teraphim. The gross conceit of Philo Judaeus, touching this Particular.

6. A Conjecture, touching these Statues, what they were: and an Answer to what
may be objected against it.

7. Of certain strange, Prodigious things, which have foretold Disasters,
which have been seen to come to pass; and which do yet forctell the same.

8. The Conclusion of all before delivered.

1. THere is nothing in the whole business of Learning, which astonishes me
more, then to see, how many of the most Excellent Wits of this our Age, make it
their business, to find fault with the Ancients, and to load them with
injurious speeches: as if this evil custom had now grown into a Maxim with
them, that one can never pass for an Able man, nor appear to be Any Body,
without reprehending those which have gone before us, and from whose Learned
writings we have derived the most Curious, and Choice Points of Knowledge that
we have. The Persians, or, if you please, the Babylonians, that bordered upon
the River Euphrates, were the First, as Rabbis report, that found out the
secret power of Figures. The wonders that have been effected by them, have been
acknowledged by all the Ancients, and approved of throughout all Egypt: in so
much that, those, who were the first that have written of them, have
maintained, that there was not any thing of more Excellency, and Admiration,
within the compass of the whole Universe: These first Writers have been
seconded by all those that have come after them; even down to Our own Days,
and the Days of our Fathers; wherein we have at length seen this Secret
condemned, and the Persians accused of Sorcery: so that, to the end I may free
from suspicion, whatsoever I shall borrow from Themm, it will concern me to
show Their Innocence here, as I have already done for the Jews their
Neighbors: and shall ground my Defense of them, upon what I have found
written, in the Preface of a certain Persian Astrologer, translated into
Hebrew by Rabbi Chomer, a Modern Author: and I shall add to his Reasons, what
other I shall be able to find, among the Writings of both Greeks, and Latins,
to render them the more powerful.

2. The Curiosities therefore of the Persians, that is to say, their Figures,
and Magic, are usually condemned, for four Reasons. The first is, because
they are said to have been derived from the most Wicked person, next to Cain,
that ever was; that is, from Cham, otherwie called Zoroaster. The second is,
because the Learned men of this Nation acknowledged no other Deity, save that
of the Heavens, and the Stars; and, by consequence, their Doctrine must
therefore necessarily be very Dangerous. The third is, that they teach the
worshipping of Spirits, or Devils, that convey themselves into Statues. The
fourth is, that they made certain Figures, and Images, from whence they
received Benefits of all sorts, by the use of Witchcrafts, and Enchantments.

To the First of These, Hamahalzel, the Author of the Astrology abovenamed,
answers in one word, and says; that the constant and unanimous tradition in
Persia, is, that Zoroaster was so Good a Man, that the most Religious sort of
people of that Country are daily conversant in the reading of a Pious Tract,
that is said to have been of his Composing; the Title whereof is, Memlecheti
Halaal, that is to say, The Kingdom of God. But suppose, he was not the Author
of this Book; it is very false however, Vid. Bosium de hist. Grae.
says R. Chomer, that he was Cham, the son of Noah: and it is very Probable,
which he says; for if we inquire but after the Original of this Fable, we
shall find it to have had no other Author, but even the Counterfeit Berosus,
that Annius has foisted in upon the world. And that this is not the True
Berosus, and therefore not to be believed, besides many other reasons that are
brought to confirm it, this following is none of he worst; namely, that he
makes Mention as well of the Libyans, Almans, and Italians, as of the
Chaldeans, Lib. 1. contr. Appion. Apolog. 19. (...) Lib. 19. c. 19. Lib 7. c.
37. Lib. 1. Chron. p. 51. Hist. Scholast. Genesis 39. Harm. mu^d. ca^t. 1. ton. 1.
c. 8. Hierogl. 49. fol 354. Lib. 7.16. and 30.1.
or Babylonians: whereas the True Berosus delivers the history only of these
Last, in three books; as you may observe out of Josephus, Tertullian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Vitruvius. In a word, for a fuller satisfaction, that this is
not that Berosus, to whom, Ob divinas praedictiones, says Pliny, Athenienses
public in Gymnasio, statuam inaurata lingua posuere: you need but read the
Censure that Gaspar Vazerius has given of This Book. This Forgery of Annius
has also lead Genebrard, and Comestor, into the same error, of believing
Zoroaster to be the same, that Cham. Georgius Venetus likewise, and Pierius
wrong themselves very much, in maintaining, that he was no other, then the son
of Cham, and Grand-sonne to Noah, and the same that is called in the holy
Scriptures, Misraim. And indeed if it were so, how comes it to pass, that
Pliny, speaking so often of him, makes no mention of it at all? He says
indeed, that the same day he came into the world, he laughed; and that his
Brains beat so strongly, that if any laid their hand upon his head, this
motion struck it back again at the same instant: which was, says he, a sign,
that he would be a very Knowing man. but that he was either Cham, or the son
of Cham, is more then Pliny had ever met with: and with him concurre-in
opinion, the two Justins, St. Augustine, Epiphanius, and in a manner all the
Fathers, that have made any mention of him. But suppose him, may some one say,
to have been neither Cham, nor the son of Cham; yet it cannot be denied, but
that he was a Magician, and a Sorcerer. If Naudaeus had not already Learnedly
answered this Objection, I should in this place have examined it: but I shall
now desire the Reader to see the Reasons he has set down, Cap. 8.
in his Learned and exquisite Apology; which may hereafter serve for a Pattern
to all Demonographers. I confess, that Wise Persian addicted himself to the
Contemplation of the Stars; but worship them he did not; although Dinon, in
Diogenes Laertius, endeavors to prove it, after a ridiculous manner. Dinon,
says he, in quinto Historiarum libro, Zoroastrem, ex interpretatione nominis
sui, Astrorum asserit fuisse cultorem. I have turned over the Persian
Dictionary, with all possible diligence; and yet could not meet, neither with
this word, nor any like it, that can signify that which Dinon would have.
Peradventure he derived this Etymology partly from the Greek, and partly from
the Latin: but, who can hold laughing at it?

3. To the second Reason Hamahalzel answers, that the Persians were so far from
worshipping the Heavens, and the Stars; that, on the contrary, they taught
all men to acknowledge One God, by observing the just Motion of the Heavens,
and the Stars: and, that if he were at all acknowledged by any of the Ancient
Philosophers, it was, for the very same reason: as you may learn out of
Manilius, Diogenes Laertius, Rosellus, and Picus Mirandula. Lib. 1. Lib. 2.
Florid. In Trismeg.
Heurnius adds, that this their Observing of the Stars was so Holy, that the
First that addicted themeselves unto it, were therefore called, Magi, that is
to say, Wise men: from whence the word, Magic, is also descended; which
signifies only, a Perfect Knowledge of the Works of God, and their Effects;
which appear more visibly in these Celestial Bodies; by which the Magi
understood, (says Scaliger,) that One, that was God, was to become man. Contr^
Card. 327.
Hac Magia, says he, Dominum Jesum fuisse promissum Regem cognoverunt Magi;
qui ad eum adorandum longissimis e regionibus profecti sunt. And that we may
not omit any thing, if this Magic, by which men came to a full knowledge of
the Heavens, and the Stars, were so black and damnable a piece of Knowledge,
as it is given out to be; why then did none of the Ancient Philophers ever
condemn it? or rather, why did they take such long Journeys upon them, for the
attaining to this Knowledge? It will be answered peradventure, that we are as
desirous to learn that which is evil, as that which is Good: Well, but all
men of Learning have ever affirmed, that this Magic was the Fountain of all
Good Doctrine. Animadverto (says Pliny,) summam Literarum claritatem,
gloriamque, ex hac scientia antiquitus, and penes semper petitam. What can be
more expressly said, in the defense of its Innocence? As likewise, what he
presently adds; and which is known even to children: Pythagoras, Empedocles,
Democritus, Plato, ad hanc discendam navigavere; exilijs verius, quam
perigrinationibus susceptis. Hanc reversi praedicavere, hanc in Arcanis
habuere. And, to conclude, since all Antiquity commends the Affection of these
Magi, which followed the strange star; why then should their Doctrine be
condemned? Why did they not, out of their zeal, fall down and worship this
Star, In Dan. c. 13. Hist. Eccl l. 7. c. 8. Comme^t. in Dionys. de situ
orbis, Lib. 30. cpa. 1. Lib. 37 Lib. 22. Exercitat. 2. Number. 2. De regn. Pers.
l. 2. En l'hist. des Lang. c. 49. Eclog. c. 7.
which appeared more Bright, and Wonderful then any of the rest? but rather,
on the contrary, only followed it, as knowing well, that it was the Messenger
of him, whom they afterward worshipped in a Stable? You may see this Truth,
proved at large, by St. Jerome, Socrates, Eustathius, Agathias, Pliny, Ammianus
Marcellinus, Casaubon, Brissonius, Duret, and Bullinger.

4. The third reason is refuted, says Hamahalzel, in saying no more but this,
that our adversaries cannot name one Persian Astrologer, that ever worshipped a
Statue. They had indeed, says he, certain Wonderful Images, or Statues: but
since they were such, as were allowed by the Egyptian Lawmaker, (he means
Moses,) why might they not make use of them? Now that they were allowed of,
Jud. 17.
appears by that of Micah, and his mother, who allotted two hundred pieces of
silver to make one of: uae ^^ilit, (says the story,) ducentos argenteos, and
dedit eos Argentario, ut faceret ex eis sculptile, and conflatile; and fecit
Ephod, and Teraphim. Consecravi and vovi hoc argentum (...) Laiehovae, Domino.
Ib.
Neither do we find, that they were reproved by God for this; no more then
Laban was, for doing the like: but rather on the contrary, Nunc scio, quod
benefaciet mihi Deus, (says Micah,) after that he had gotten him a Levite to
be his Priest, and to have the charge of these Teraphim, or Statues: which are
often called by the name of God; either because they were consecrated unto him:
or else, because there appeared in them the Wonderful Effects of some
Particular Residence of some Power, which served instead of Oracles. Quia dies
multos, Ose. 3. v. 4.
(says Hosea,) Sedebunt filij Israel, sine Rege, and sine Principe, and sine
sacrificio, and sine Altari, and sine Ephod, and sine Teraphim: that is, as if
he had said: neither Ephod, nor Teraphim, shall give any answer.

5. And here we are to take notice of the Errors of diverse Authors, concerning
these Teraphim; and first, of Elias Levita; In Thisbi.
who reports, that they were made after this manner. The killed a man, that was
the first borne, and wrung off his Head; and having imbaulmed it, they placed
it upon a plate of gold, on which was first written the name of the unclean
Spirit, that they would call upon: and so, hanging it up against a wall, and
placing Lamps, and Torches about it, they worshipped it. A very subtle
Invention, this; but something a dismal one! And who can imagine the People of
God ever guilty of it? In Genesis 31.
The conceit of Aben-Esra is altogether as false, though not so scandalous: for
He says, that the Seraphim were certain instruments made of Brass, like
Sundials; by which they knew the particular Hour, and minute, that they were
to practice their divination in. Rabbi Eliezer, surnamed (...), Gadol, that is
to say, the Great, in his book entitled, Impr. Ven. an. 1544. cap. 36.
(...), Pirche Eliezer, i. e. Capitula R. Eliezer: is of opinion, that they
were certain Statues, made in form of a man, under certain Constellations;
whose influences, (which they were capable of receiving,) caused them to speak
at some certain hours, and give an answer to whatsoever was demanded of
them. And the reason, says he, why Rachel stole away her father Labans Images,
was; for fear that Laban, having recourse to them, might learn which way
Jacob, with his Family, had taken. G. Malmesburg. de Ghost. Reg. Augl. l. 2 c.
10.
Some Writers have affirmed, that the use of these Images has been sometimes
practiced, by one of the most pious Doctors, and most learned Bishops of our
Church: But these are Fooleries. R. David Chimchi is also deceived, when he
says; that these Teraphim were certain Images, (whose figure is yet unknown,)
by which the ancients were instructed concerning Future Events: being, as it
were, like those Oracles, which oftentimes spoke by the mouth of the Devil.
This false opinion of his is taken up by Cardinal Caietan, Sanctes, Vatablus,
Clarius, Seldom, and Marinus, in his Arca Noae. Mercerus also goes along with
the Stream of Interpreters, In Thesaur. Heb.
and says, that these Images were, as the Household Gods of the Ancients: Ut
Penates, says he, and Lares sumpserim. Philo Judaeus is yet farther out of the
way, then all the rest: for the account he gives of them is so Gross a one, as
that any, the most simple Old women would be able to judge it fit to be
accounted Fabulous. For, speaking of the Story mentioned in the 17. of Judges,
he says: that Micah made, of fine gold, and Silver, three Images of young
Lads, and three Calves, and one Lion, one Dragon, and one Dove: So that if any
one had a mind to know any secret concerning his Wife, he was to have recourse
to the Image of the Dove, which answered his demands: if concerning his
children, he went to the Boys: if concerning Riches, to the Eagle: if
concerning power and strength, to the Lion: if it any thing concerned sons,
or Daughters, he went then to the Calves: and if it were about Length of
Years, and Days, he was to consult the Image of the Dragon. A very pretty
Fiction, in truth. But leaving these people to their own Ignorance, and
Errors, we say, with St. Jerome, an Author more worthy of credit, In 1. Reg.
22. and Reg. 6.16.
in matters of the Old Testament, then any INterpreter what ever, either Greek,
or Latin, that these Teraphim, were sacred Images belonging to the Priest.
Teraphim, (says he, with Aquila,) proprie appellantur (...), id est, figurae
and simulachra, quae nos possumus, in praesenti duntaxat loco, Cherubim and
Seraphim, sive alia, quae in Templi ornamenta fieri jussa sunt, dicere. This
Opinion of his is so sound, and so true a one; that he must be no Rational
man, that preferres it not before any other. You have it also again, expressed
in other terms, in his Epistle ad Marcellam. In Teraphim, (says this Learned
Father) vel figuris, Ep. 130.
varia opera, quae Teraphim vocantur, intelliguntur, etc. Juxta igitur hunc
sensum and Micha, cum vest Sacerdotali, caetera quoque, quae ad Sacerdotalia
pertinent ornamenta, per Teraphim fecisse monstratur.

6. Now seeing that the Images of Seraphims, or Cherubins, are by a General
nare called Teraphim; who can accue the Eastren people of Sorcery, for using
them, any more then Laban, who did the like? Certainly the Holy Scriptures,
which reprove so sharply all manner of Vice, (as we hay already said,) never
reproves Him at all for doing it: neither is it at all credible, that Jacob
would have served an Idolater so long a time, and at length marry his Daughters
too. It may be also probably conjectured, that David made use of these Images;
seeing that it is storied, that his Wife Michal Tulit Teraphim, and posuit eum
super Lectum; using this subtle Devise, to ecure her Husbands life. If so be
that Michal her elfe only made use of it, though an unlawful thing; Why did
David then suffer it? Or why was it not at all reproved by God? If it be
objected, that Jacob commanded all his Household, to put away all the strange
Gods; Abijcite (says he) Deos alienos: and that He himself also hid them in a
pit, covering them with Earth, under a Turpentine tree: I answer, that there is
nothing more clear, then that he there speaks of the Household Gods of Gold and
Silver, which his Sons took from the Sichemites, as a rich booty, when they
spoiled and ransacked their City, for having ravished their Sister: Omnia
Vastantes, Genesis 34.
quae in domibus, and in agro erant. And that this is so, appears by this;
that though this blessed Patriarch had been so long a time sojourning in this
Country; yet he never made any mention at all of False Gods, till the time of
this Pillaging of the Canaaites, who were a People given to all manner of
Idolatry: which was the reason, (say the most Learned of the Rabbis,) that
Abraham made his Servant swear unto him, not to take a Wife for his Son
Isaac out of This People: Adjuro te (says he) per Dominum Coeli and Terrae,
ut non accipias Uxorem filio meo de filiabus Chananaeorum: because he knew that
they were Idolaters. The same Charge did Isaac give his Son Jacob. Hamahalzel
therefore concludes with this Truth; that certainly, in the time of these
Patriarchs, there were some certain wonderful Images, or Statues, by which
God made known his Will to his People. Those that shall have the happiness to
see the Tract, which MOnacaeus says, he has written of this Subject; will be
ready to confess, that they are not Dreams, which are here delivered by this
Persian Author of ours. If it be demanded; why then did not Moes make a
particular description of thee Images? I answer, tha this Wife Lawgiver,
knowing how extremely inclined to Idolatry, the People, which he conducted,
was; makes no other mention of them, save only in passage: being unwilling to
forget them wholly, lest any thing of the History should have been left out.

7. I do the more boldly propose this Doctrine, after this Persian Writer;
because I see, that in all Ages, God has made known his Wonders, and what ever
Accident of Importance was to happen, throughout the Universe, by some Sensible
thing; and will yet do the same hereafter, when he shall come to judge the
Quick and the Dead; giving a Sign of his Coming, by the Falling of the Stars,
and the Darkening of the Sun and Moon, and by a Deep Astonishment cast upon all
Mortals. If you please but to look back upon all Ages past, you shall not find
any one, (where according to this Truth) some new Prodigy did not foreshew the
Good, or the Evil Accidents, that were to come. Thus we see, that a little
before the time that Xerxes covered the Earth, with his Million of men, there
appeared horrible and dreadful Meteors, as Presages of the Evils that
afterward happened: as there did likewise in the time of Attila, who was called
Flagellum Dei. And, to go higher, was not poor Jerusalem forewarned of her
Approaching Misery, which made her the most wretched of all Cities, by many
the like Prodigies? For there was often seen, in the Air, Armies of men in
battle array, seeming to be ready to charge each other: and one day, at the
Feast of Pentecost, the High Priest entering into the Temple, to offer the
Usual Sacrifices, which God regarded now no more; there was heard a Sudden
Noise, and a Voice immediately following it, which said: (...) Naavour Mizeh,
Let us depan hence. I shall not speak of the Brazen Gate which opened of it
self, without being touched by any body: and all the other Prodigies, which
are spoken of by Josephus. Appian has reckoned up, what miraculous things were
even, and heard, before the breaking out of the Civil Wars; as namely, Fearful
Voices; and, strange running up and down of Horses, which no body could see.
Pliny has likewise set down those, that were heard in the same manner, before
the Cymbrian War; and among the rest, diverse Voices that were heard from
Heaven, and dreadful Alarmes, sounded by certain terrible Trumpets. Before
the Lacedaemonians were overthrown, at the Battle of Leuctra, the Arms, in
the Temple were heard to make a noise of their own accord: and about the same
time, at Thebes, the Gates of the Temple of Hercules opened of themselves,
without any man touching them; and the Arms that hung against the wall, Lib.
de Divin. Vid. Val. Max. l. 1. c. 6. Caes. l. 1. de bell. ciu. Fael. Malleol. de
Nob. c. 30. Peucer. de praecip. Divinat. Genesis Cypr. Leovitius de Conjunct. mag.
Lavater. de spectr. part 1. c. 16. and 17.
were found cast on the ground (as cicero reports the story) not without the
great Astonishment of the beholders. At the time that Miltiades went against
the Persians, diverse strange sights foreshewed, what the Event would be: and,
that I may trouble my self in reckoning up these Wonders no longer, you may
have recourse to Livy; who, for having been so copious in his stories of this
nature, is thought fit, by some Authors, to be styled, a Tragedian, rather then
an HIstorian. If we come down to the Ages, not so far removed from our Own;
we shall find, that in the Reign of Theodosius, there appeared a Star
shooting forth beams in the shape of a sword: and in the time of Sultan Selim,
an infinite number of Crosses appeared, shining in the Air; which foreshewed
the Loss he afterward received by the Christians. And who knows not, that the
Emperor Pertinax was forewarned of his death, three days before, by a
certain Vision that he saw in a pond, that seemed to threaten him with a
drawn Sword in his hand? That certain Spirits foretold the death of Constans
son to CONSTANTINE the Great! That Alexander 3. King of the Scots, was
likewise advertised of his, by a Spectre, that danced publicly with him in a
Mask! Th^^ another sad, ghastly, lean, disfigured Ghost foretold Julian the
Apostate, and the Emperor Tacitus, Theirs: Tha tthe Emperor Henry III. was
forewarned of his, by a Vision, in the shape of a HOrseman, who seemed to make
his Horse bound, and curvet; and also by two other, that fought a Duel in the
Base Court of a Palace in Millaine? The like to these, you may see described by
Virgil, Georgic. l. 1.

Armorum sonitum toto Germania caelo
Audijt, insolitis tremuerunt motibus Alps.
Vox quoque per lucos vulgo exaudita silentes
INgens; et simulachra, modis pallentia miris,
Visa sub obscurum noctis: pecudesque locuta.
And without borrowing Examples abroad, Cardan assures us; that in the City
Parma, there is a certain Noble Family, out of which when any one is to dye,
there is always an Old, strange, unknown Woman seen, sitting in the Hall, in
the Chimney-corner; and this so certainly, that it never fails. And even in
Our Dais, there is to be seen at avila, a Wonderful Bell, that, when any
disaster is to befall Christendom, sometime before it happens, is heard to
sound, without any body touching it. The Authors which affirm, that they have
known this of their own Experience, are of such Integrity, as that we cannot
but believe them? and This Miracle was seen by Ten Thousand, a little before
the Overthrow given to the Granatins. But what shall we say to this Prodigious
thing, which the Executioners of Justice upon Malefactors (whom we cannot
name, without horror) find to be true too often: namely, that when any Malector
is to be delivered into their hands, the Sword, or Fauchion, that they are wont
to use in this business, removes it self, no man coming so much as near it;
as it is at large discoursed of, by Lavaterus, in his book de Spectris, and
Natalis Taillepied, Part 1. cap. 17.
in his Treatise De l' Apparition des Esprits? We may here add that direful
Massacre of the Huguenots, on St. Bartholomew's day; which was foretold by the
White-Thorne, that blossomed the night before. Besides, it is observed, that
if, on Michaelmas day, which is the 29. of September, there be found a certain
little Worm in the Oake-apple; the year will then certainly be very
pleasant, and seasonable: if there be found a Spider, it will be a barren
year, and there will be great scarsity of all things: if a Fly, it is a sign
of a moderate season: if there be nothing at all found in it, it is a sign
that very sore diseases shall reign all that year. Sometimes also God lets us
know, what shall come to pass, by some inward sign, either in Sleeping, or
Waking. Loc. citat.
So Camerarius affirms, that some people have an Apprehension, and knowledge,
of the Death of their Friends, and Kindred either before, or after they are
dead, by a certain strange, and unusual Restlesnesse within themselves,
though they be a Thousand Leagues off. My mother, Lucrece de Bermond, when she
was living, had some such sign always given her: for there never dyed any of
our Kindred, but, a little before, she dreamt either of Hair, or of Eggs, or
of Teeth, all mingled together with Earth; and this sign was an infallible
one: and I my self, when I had heard her say she had any such Dream, observed
the Event always to follow.

8. My purpose is not to make this Volume swell, by reckoning up all these
examples: one only of them would have been sufficient* to the Learned, to have
confirmed the Truth of what I have delivered: and in adding more, I do it but
the more powerfully to enforce the Induction, upon the spirits of those
Obstinate Men, that will hardly be induced to the belief of the truth of this
my Assertion. I shall therefore draw this Conclusion, from all that which I
before delivered; that, seeing, that God has formerly Miraculously foreshewed,
and does still, at this very day, foreshew, by diverse signs, and in very many
things, what Events shall follow: he may then as well have showed it
heretofore, by One only, Particular Means: such, peradventure, as was that of
Laban's Images, which we may probably guess, to have been the Teraphim,
spoken of by Hosea. And then, if the Ancient Persians, as Zoroaster, Loc. citat.
having kept themselves to the use of one kind only of these Figures; following
the Example of the First Fathers, who inhabited their Country; are they
presently to be condemned, as Magicians? This is all one, as if we should
accuse of Sorcery all those, that, by the sounding of the Bell at Avila, or any
other the like Prodigy, conclude that some Calamity is to follow.

The Last Reason, for which the Persian Magicians are condemned, is thus
answered by Hamahalzel. I deny not (says he) but that our Ancient Astrologers
did make certain Images, under such and such Constellations, both of Gold,
Silver, Wood, Wax, Earth, and Stone; from the use of which, they did alsoreape
much benefit. But, that it was either by way of Enchantments, or Witchcraft;
there is no man will ever be able to prove. These are his very words,
translated: So that it now remains, that we set down, how, or in what
manner, the Virtue of these Images could be Natural: which I shall endeavor
to do, after I have first showed, how our Modern Philosophers have erred, in
this Particular.

CHAP. IV.
That for want of understanding Aristotle aright, men have condemned the Power
of Figures; and concluded very many things, both against this Philosopher, and
against all sound Philosophy.
THE CONTENTS.
1. ERrors in Learning, caused by the Ignorance of the Languages.

2. (...) signifies Specimen, and not Species.

3. The reading of (...), provel to be false.

4. (...), ill translated; and hence the Question of Universals, not understood.

5. The improper translating of (...).

6. The Errors committed in these words, (...), and (...) and (...). The
correcting of (...) rejected, against Cicero.

7. It is falsely concluded out of Aristotle, that Fire is moist; agaiust du
Villon.

8. That Aristotle is abused by Interpreters, by reason of their not
understanding the force of the word (...); and by reading (...), instead of
(...).

9. The false Interpretation of the word (...): given by Stapulensis.

10. The word (...), rightly understood, condemns those that deny the power
of Figures. The proof of This at large.

1. THe Ignorance of the Languages has been the Occasion of so many Errors,
not only in Learning, but even in Religion too; that it is not without cause,
that Learned men complain hereof. For what can be imagined more ridiculous,
then for a man, not knowing the force of the word (...) Rachaiah, which
signifies no more but the Air, or the Extent of any thing,) to fancy a
Christalline Heaven? From this passage: Divisit aquas quae subter Firmamention,
ab ijs quae super Firmamen ^um sunt, and aquae omnes quae super Caelos suut: it
has been concluded, either that there were waters above the Heavens, or else
that there were certain Christalline Heavens.
What Grosser Conceit can there be, then, for want of understanding the
Equivocall meaning of the word (...) Keren, which signifies both a Horn, and
Light, or Brightness, to paint Moses with Horns; which has been the cause
of great astonishment, among many Christians, and of Laughter to the Jews, and
Arabians? But my purpose here, is not to show, what Abuses are crept into our
Religion, merely for want of the knowledge of the Hebrew, or the Holy Tongue,
as we usually call it: I have discoursed at large elsewhere upon this
Particular; and those that desire more full satisfaction herein, may have
recourse to my Book entitled, Advis aux Doctes, touchant la necessite des
langues Orientales. I shall only at present show some of those several Errors,
with which our Books are full, only for want of understanding the Text of
Aristotle aright.

2. And of these I have heretofore observed above a Thousand: but, because I
would avoid Tediousness, I shall bring in only some few; and that, only to
make it appear, that Figures are condemned without cause: and that many
Conclusions are deduced, which Sound Argumentation could not bear. In Isag.
Porph.
Thus, (to begin our Enumeration,) all Interpreters have rendered the Greek word
(...), Species; whereas it ought to be rendered Specimen. For it cannot be
denied, but that (...) signifies the Species, or Sampler; and (...), the Copy,
or Extract: unless we should give Plato the lie, who always takes (...) in
this sense; as if we should interpret it, in our Language, The Copy of the
Great Pattern, or Sampler.

3. Next, it is a manner of speaking, very frequent with Plato; that when he
speaks of the Idea of a Man, or of a Horse, he says, (...): which almost all
Interpreters have corrected, though very falsely, and read (...), etc. For the
Idea of a Man is properly called (...); on the contrary, every particular man
may be called (...): as in Latin, every Particular man may be called, Ipse
homo; but when we would express the Idea, we cannot do it, but in these
Terms, Ipsi Homo, ipsi Equus, ipsi Coelum, etc. If I wrote to all sorts of men
indifferently, I should explain my self more fully in this particular: but
seeing I write not, but to the Learned only; I may presume of their
understanding me sufficiently, in two words.

4. Another Error, that is committed int the Interpreting of Aristotle, is in
the word (...), the sense whereof is usually expressed thus: Utrum Universalia
cadant in rerum naturam? Namely, Whether there be any Universals in the World,
or not? whereas they should rather say, Utrum realiter subsistant? or else;
Utrum sint realia? that is to say, whether they have an existence real, and of
themselves; or not. There being no small difference betwixt these two
Propositions; Utrum universalia existant? and, Vtrum subsistant per se? which
was the Opinion of Plato. And upon the same subject, there is likewise another
Error committed in these words: Vtrum Vniversalia in nudis tantum
conceptionibus posita sint ^ Vtrumsint secundum intentionaliter; sive per solam
cogitationementis?
(...): which is rendered; whether Universals have their being only in Little
thoughts. Whereas in sound Philosophy, and according to the Text, it should
have been proposed in these words: whether Universals exist only by the
Reflection of the understanding? Which is said to be, a Fine, Small Thought:
and so the question is, An sint realiter, aut per Intellectum? And we are to
note, that (...), is very properly rendered, Small Thoughts; or Conceptions;
because the second Thoughts are Lesser, and Finer then the First.

5. Interpreters have likewise rendered the Greek word (...), Avulsa, et
distracta: as if we were not to seek after the Propriety of language in all
things; and discoursing of a Philosophical point, were not to handle it in
Philosophical Terms. Who can then imagine otherwise, but that this Greek word
(...), should be rendered in Latin, Abstracta; and that so much the more
happily too, in that it is a Term so frequent both among Philosophers, and
Divines? Add to the Former, this other Error also; that the Common sort of
Philosophers say, that, Accidens dicitur in Quale: whereas Porphyrius affirms,
that it is not only spoken in Quale, but in (...), Qomodo se res habet. Isay.
c. 10.
Certainly it would show very strangely, if when it is demanded, Qualis est
Imperator? What manner of man is the Emperor? it should be answered; Been se
habet: He is in very good health. Neither is there any Language in the world,
that can bear this construction.

6. Again, where Aristotle, in the beginning of his Predicaments, and
elsewhere, says, (...), the Interpreters generally render it, though extremely
ill, Ratio substantiae: for, (...) signifies, Essentia; so that they ought to
have said; Ratio Essentiae, that is, The reason of the Essence, or, The
Definition; which is the true, and only Reason of every thing; and the Learned
know, that the substance only of any thing is not defined, but the Essence of
it. This Excellent Philosopher has another manner of Phrase, which we
frequently meet with, in his writings, which is; (...), which is always
translated, Quod quid erat esse; but so Obscurely, that, besides that it is no
very good Latin, it is a translation that was never yet understood by any man.
It is therefore an intolerable Oversight, that is here committed in the Greek
Text, in not taking this Verb of the infinitive Mood, (especially where the
Article is expressly added to it,) for a Noune substantive. So that I appeal
to all Learned men, whether these Greek words ought not rather to be rendered
thus: Quid est Essentia? for (...), is as much as, Essentia; and (...), Quid
est? And although that (...), signifies erat; this manner of speaking is
notwithstanding very Elegant, to use the Preterimperfect Tense, for the
Present: in like manner, as in French we may use the Infinitive Mood, with an
Article, instead of a substantive, thus: Ce que est l' Estre de la chose: That
which is the Essence of the Thing. It is also a very considerable Error which
is committed in these two words, (...), and (...), which are used by the
Philosopher in the sixth of his Moralls; for, almost all our Modern
Philosophers confound them: and because that each of them may signify both
Agere, and Facere, this Conclusion is drawn from thence, namely, Arts esse
Practicas: Notwithstanding that Aristotle teaches us expressly, that (...) is
used only, in discoursing of Moral Actions, Lib 6. Moral.
of Virtues, or Vices. In the same chapter, you may observe also another Error
our Philosophers are fallen into; who think, that (...) signifies only, an
Exterior, sensible Work: whereas Aristotle himself says, that, (...) is only
to do some Work, that has an External End. Neither is this Error less
remarkable, 2. de Anim.
that whereas he says 2. de Anima, that the soul is (...); Cicero, and a
great number of others have corrected it, and read (...); that is as much as to
say, that the soul is, A Continual motion: which is False. For the Soul is
not this Continual motion, but only, The Perfection from whence this Motion
proceeds: and this is the meaning of the Word, (...).

7. And now of late, another new Error, as great as any of the rest, is sprung
up, from the misunderstanding of another Text of Aristotle; and it is grounded
on the Word (...). For whereas Aristotle, 4. Met. c. 4.
in the Cap. 4. lib. 4. Meteor, says, Humidum facillime alieno termino
terminari, or is, (...): there are some, that conclude from hence, that Fire is
moist, because it is Easily bounded by another Thing. The discourse entitled,
Les Theses Curieuses, published some years since by one that was a soldier of
Provence in France, and besides, an Excellent Philosopher, has sufficiently
confuted this Position. We say therefore only here, that which is most true;
namely, that where Aristotle uses the word, (...), which Interpreters render,
Perfacile; it should be translated, Naturaliter. Now that Fire cannot Naturally
be Terminated by Another thing, is most certainly proved by the experience of
Canons, and other Fire-Engines: for the Fire being shut up, or Terminated by
them, either breaks them in pieces, or is broken it self. So true it is, that
one only word, mis-understood, is oftentimes the cause of the deducing of most
Absurd Consequences.

8. Let us now return back again to his Morals, Mor. c. 4. et Isago. c. de
differentia.
where, as in diverse other places, we meet with the word, (...), which is
usually translated, Deus, or Dij: doing hereby no small Injury to Aristotle, in
making him seem guilty of Admitting a Composition in God. But, what man of
sense is there, that sees not; that, according to the meaning of this Knowing
Genius of Nature, the word (...), should be rendered, Angeli, or Spiritus; or
else, Mentes, or Intelligentiae? And this is plain, because that in his Physic.
lib. 1. and elsewhere, he expressly says; that the nature of God admits not
of any Composition: but that Angels indeed are compounded of a Spirit, and a
Celestial Body; according to the Opinion of the Platonists: or rather, as the
Peripateticks will have it, Ex genere, and differentia: which is most true. Now
whereas he says, in the Chapter de Differentia, that (...) is compounded of
Parts; and, that he is in the Predicament of Substance; I leave it to any man
to judge, whether, or no, he speaks not there expressly of the Angels. Out of
this Error, have sprung two other; which gave occasion to the Ancient
Christians, to condemn this Philosopher; saying first, that he affirmed, that
God was, Animal: But they mistook the place in Aristotle; and instead of
reading (...), that is to say, Vivens; they read (...), Animal. The First of
these two Appellations is most proper to God; but the other is so far from
the Truth, that it never entered so much as into the Thought of this Excellent
Philosopher; who utterly denied, that there was any Composition in God (as we
have already said:) especially, that of Animal; as you may see in the First of
his Politickes; Polit. 1.
where he disdains all those, that attribute to God, the Form of a Man. The
Other Error proceeds, from their not understanding the Force of the Greek word
used by Aristotle, when they say, that Aristotle conceived, that he had
demonstrated the World to have been from all Eternity; which is very far from
the Truth. For he affirms, Lib. 1. Prior. cap. 4.
that to make a Proposition to be Demonstrative, it is necessary that it be
(...), that is to say, perse, of it self. Now, in his Metaphysics, and in the
Eighth book of his Physics, he demonstrates, that, Existence of it self, is
only proper to God. Judge you then, what must be the Consequence from hence.
Besides, if any man but examine the Writings of this Philosopher throughout,
and his manner of using this Term, per se; he will find, that the Worlds
Existence is not a Proposition per se.

9. I shall add, to these Observations, only one more, 7 Politic. c. 2.
which is, that where Aristotle in his Politics says, that in Ancient times
they were wont to give Warriers so many Lilyes, as they had obtained Victories,
Stapulensis, to the great Disparagement of the Antiquity of the Arms of
France, instead of (...), Lilyes, corrects the Text, and reads (...), Rings,
Contra (as he says himself) antiquam interpretationem. But seeing that (...)
was the Old Word, by his own confession, let any man judge, whether this
Capriccio of his be to be endured, or not.

Let us now see whether the Judgment of the world has been more upright in
this Particular Point we now treat of; and whether our Modern Philosophers have
had any good ground for their endeavoring to overthrow the power of Figures,
which all the Ancients allowed them, or not.

They therefore first of all urge this Maxim, which is indeed generally
received by all Learned men; namely that, Quantitas per se non agit: Quantity,
of it self, is a Dead Thing, and Works not at all. Thus a stone takes no care
to move it self; unless some body else move it: Otherwise Aristotle had not
fled to his Intelligences, to give motion to the Heavens. We confess
therefore, that Quantity of it self, Operates not at all: but, to proceed in
the syllogism, and conclude, that, Figure is Quantity; is such a thing, as
Philosophy will never endure. I must therefore necessarily lay down this
Position, (without troubling my self to prove it,) that Figure is a Quality,
and not Quantity: and this being presupposed, I shall examine, whether it has
any Power to Operate at all, or not.

The Conclusion which I shall here lay down, and on which the whole discourse,
contained in the two next Chapters shall move, is this: That Figures, of
themselves, Operate not at all: but being applied, or if they be Modificative,
(as the School speaks,) they may do something. And this is the sense of
Aristotle, which none of his Interpreters has hitherto had the good Fortune to
apprehend. Let us see what himself says, and what his manner of speaking is,
on this Particular.

10. There is nothing that more powerfully confutes those, that maintain, that
these Figures are of no force at all, then the Greek Text it self, (if but
rightly understood,) where this Philosopher speaks of Quality: for, he calls it
(...), that is to say, Facultatem, seu facilitatem faciendi: the word coming
from (...), which signifies, Facere, to do. And Aristotle himself says,
that, (...), renders us, (...); that is to say, Apt to do, or effect
something: or, as the Learned interpret it, Activos, and Effectivos: for which
reason, Poets are also called (...), Factores Fabularum.

Seeing therefore that there are Four Kinds of Quality: Habitus, and
Dispositio: Patibilis qualitas, and Passio: Potentia Naturalis, and Impotentia:
Forma, and Figura: and that it is most certain, that the rest of these are
properly said to Operate, or as the Philosophers speak, ad agendum conducunt:
as for example, a Habitude of Singing, a Disposition to Leaping; and so of the
rest: which the Reader may better understand, by the Table following; which
cannot so conveniently be translated into our Language.

Habitus and Dispositio: ut Canendi. Habitus and Dispositio: ut Saltandi.
Patibilis Qualitas and Passio: ut Calor. Patibilis Qualitas and Passio: ut Ira.
Potentia naturalis, and Impotentia: ut Risibilitas. Potentia naturalis, and
Impotentia: ut Debilitas ad ridendum.
Why should Men go about to deprive Figure, of this Propriety, and make it
less Able and Apt to operate, then the other Kinds of Quality are? And what
reason can there then be given, why it should be called, (...): that is to say,
that it is, Effectrix? In earnest, I cannot see what other reason can be given.
Besides, it is most certain, that a square piece of Wood, is not so Apt for
Motion, as a Round: and a Blunt piece of Iron will not pierce so easily, as a
Sharp one will do. It is the Figure therefore, that makes the one of these Apt
to roll about, and the other to penetrate: and if the share of a Plough were
made round, in form of a bowl, it would never enter the ground. A thousand
other Instances might be brought, out of the Mechanics.

CHAP. V.
The power of Artificial Images is proved, by that of those that are found
Naturally imprinted on Stones, and Plants, commonly called, Gamahe, or Camaicu,
and Signatures.
THE CONTENTS.
1. THe Division of Natural Figures, or Images. Gamahe, or Camaieu, drawn
peradventure from the Hebrew word (...) Chemaiah.

2. Of diverse rare Gamahes, or Stones Painted Naturally: and why they are more
frequently found in Hot Countries, then in Cold.

3. Of other Curious Gamahes not painted, mentioned by Pliny, Nider, Gesner,
Goropius Becanus, Thevet, and M. de Breves. A new Observation, on the Bones of
Giants.

4. Of Gamahes that are Engraven: and whether those places, where ever any Fish
shells are found, have been covered with water, or not.

5. Certain admirable Figures, and Signatures, that are found in all the parts
of Plants. Many Choice Inquiries proposed, on this subject.

6. The power of these Figures proved: and the Objections answered, that are
brought against it.

7. The Secret discovered, why a Scorpion, applied to the Wound made by a
Scorpions sting, should not hurt, rather then cure it.

8. Of the Figures of Plants, that represent all the parts of the Body of a
Man; and, that cure the same, when Ill-affected.

9. The Forms of all things admirably preserved, in their Ashes.

10. The Ghosts of Dead Folks, that appear in Churchyards, and after great
slaughter of Armies, whence they proceed. Certain Choice Questions proposed,
touching this Argument.

11. A New Reason given, of the Raining of Frogs, which has sometimes happened.

12. Of Figures that are found in living Creatures; and what power they have.

WHen I consider the wonderful Effects that are found, not only in Plants,
and in the most stupid of Living Creatures; but also even in stones, and the
most rude, and unpolished Flints that are found: I confess I find my self
very much inclined to the belief of that, which our Halfe-brained smatterers
in Learning account Ridiculous, and Fabulous. For, who would ever have thought,
that besides those many Wonders, which have been discovered to be in the
Lodestone, but in the days of our Grandfathers, there should yet in Our Time
also be found out This, in a certain kind of Lodestone, which is of a Mixed
Color, betwixt white and black, and something resembling that of Iron; that,
if a Knife, or Needle be touched with it, it will cut, and enter into a man's
body, without the least sense of pain at all? Which has given occasion to a
very Learned man, who himself also had tried the Experiment, to say; that our
Mountebanks, Card. de subtle. l. 6.7.
which we see to cut, and flash themselves upon their Stages in such manner,
without the least change of countenance, do make use of this Experiment. But
my purpose here is not, to set down indifferently, what ever wonderful
effects there are found, in Stones, and in Plants: Their several Figures, the
power whereof we now undertake, is the only subject, which at present I have
proposed to my self. It is necessary therefore, for the avoiding of all
Equivocation, that I make a Division of these Figures; their General name
being already known.

1. They are therefore either Natural, Accidental, or Artificial: of which,
this Last sort shall be the subject of the Ensuing Chapter, and the two Former
Kinds, of This. Now, both the Natural, and Accidental, as they are of three
sorts; that is, Imbossed, or rising up; hollowed, or Naturally engraven; and
only Painted: so are they found also in three sorts of things; namely, in
Stones chiefly, in Plants, and in Living Creatures: which neither Albertus,
nor Camillus have observed. Now there is this Difference betwixt the Natural,
and the Accidental: that these Later (say Writers) are not made to any End
Proposed; whereas, on the Contrary, those other are never produced without some
Reason, or other. The Accidental are produced after some such manner, as was
that Act of the Painter; who, being not able to express, to his mind, the
Foaming of a Horse, in a fury threw his Spung at his Piece, with a purpose
utterly to deface it: but it so happened, that, what his Pencill could not do,
his Sponge performed so rarely, that it was impossible for any hand to mend it.
This Foame then was made, without any Intention of the Painter to make it. But
if I should say, there is no such matter, in the Works of Nature; I should say
nothing, but what were Justifiable. For, if we are taught even by Divinity it
self, and Reason also confirms it; that there is a Certain Providence, which
leads on all things to their End; and which makes nothing, but to some purpose:
why should we then ascribe to Fortune, any thing that causes us to admire the
Power of God; and, to impute to Chance, things that are of greatest Admiration?
seeing that, among so many Leaves that are found in a Forest, there is not one
of them falls, without the Will and Pleasure of Him, that created them. But
suppose we should admit, that there are some Figures Accidental: we shall
notwithstanding endeavor to prove the power of a good number of such, as must
needs be confessed to be Natural. Let us now in Order consider, both the one,
and the other.

We have already said, that they are found in three sorts of things; in Stones,
in Plants, and in Living Creatures. Those that are found in Stones, are called
Gamahes; a word derived, in my opinion, from Camaieu; by which name, in France,
they call all Figured Agats: so that from this Particular name, there is now
made a General Appellation, serving to express all sorts of Figured Stones.
To give an account now of this word, and to tell whence it is Originally
descended, is something a difficult thing: no one Author that I have met with,
having resolved this Doubt, or indeed so much as proposed it: only this one
thing I do assuredly know, that it is no French word, but a Stranger. And I
have sometimes thought; that, as the Jews, who lived a long time in France,
have left us many of their Words; (as I prove elsewhere:) Advis sur les Langues.
they might peradventure have left us this also: and this Conjecture seems the
more probable, in that this People traficks much in precious Stones. Now the
word (...) Chamaieu, may have been corrupted from (...) Chemaija, which
signifies, As the Waters of God: because that you shall see some Agats streaked
in such manner, as that they perfectly represent the Figure of Waters: and the
word, God, is here added, according to an Idiotisme, frequent in the Hebrew
Tongue; which, when it is to speak of any thing of Excellence, usually adds
this Holy Name after it. Thus, speaking of a pleasant Garden, it calls it,
Paradisus Domini: of a great Army, Exercitus Domini: of tall Cedars, Cedri Dei:
of high Mountains, Montes Dei: and so of the rest. The Figures then, which are
represented on Stones, are, as we have formerly said, of Three sorts also:
either Painted, Embossed, or Engraven.

2. The Paitned ones are of two sorts; either Colored, or without Color: the
Colored, are all such as are found on Agats; such as was that of King pyrrhus,
where the Nine Muses, richly apparrelled, were represented dancing, with Apollo
in the midst of them, playing upon a Harp. Cardan cannot believe, that this
Figure could ever be so exactly drawn, Card. de Subt. 1.7.
by mere Accident: but rather is of opinion, that it was made after this
manner. Some Painter, (says he) had, long before, pictured, upon a piece of
Marble, Apollo amidst the Muses, and afterward, either by Chance, or upon set
Purpose, this Picture being buried in the ground, in some place where Agates
were generated; the Marble was turned into Agate, and yet still retained the
very same Lineaments, which had been formerly drawn upon it. A very pleasant
Conceit, this! But what would he have said, if he had seen that which M. de
Breves has observed, in his Voyages into the Levant, of a Crucifixe
represented Naturally, on a Marble Stone? I have seen (says this great
Inquirer after Curiosities,) another the like Wonder at St. George's in Venice;
En scs Relations fol. 137.
where the Figure of a Crucifixe was represented upon a Marble Stone; but with
so much Life, as that you might there plainly distinguish the Nails, the
Wounds, the Drops of Blood, in a word, all the particulars, that the most
curious painter would have expressed. This Crucifixe now (according to Cardan)
must needs have been drawn upon some other kind of Stone, which was
afterward converted into Marble; which is very ridiculous: or suppose, that
this was not some other Stone turned into Marble; but that it had, by some
Extraordinary Means, only received, and retained the Figure of some Crucifixe,
which had been applied unto it: We must then be forced necessarily to say, that
all other Stones have received those Figures, which we see perfectly
represented upon them, by the like Application: which Opinion is far wider of
Common Sense, then the Former. M. de Breves either had not observed, or else
had forgot to speak of that other Gamahe, or Wonderful Figure, merely
Natural, which is to be seen in the same Church, upon an Altar of
Jasper-coloured Marble. This Figure is a Death's Head, so exactly drawn, that
you cannot find any part of it defective. How prodigiously full of Wonder the
Effects of Nature are, which shows her self Admirable in all her ways!

And here we are to take notice, that these Figures are more frequently found,
toward the Eastern, and the Southern Countries, then in any other; by reason of
the Heat, Tract. 3. cap. 4.
by which they are generated, and the Virtue of the Stars. In India (says
Albertus Magnus) plures quam hic Gamahe, quia potentiora astra. In Italy there
are also more of them seen, then in France, for the same reason: and even in
France, at Limans, a Village in Provence, about a League distant from
Forcalquier, a City of good Note, there has been sometime found, in a certain
Mine of a kind of Reddish, soft stone, a great number of these Gamahes, or
Painted Figures, of Birds, Mice, Trees, Serpents, and Letters, so exactly
shaped, that little Children could tell what they were: and although I had
purposed, at my return out of Italy, to have gone to search for some of them;
yet a Fever, which hindered me from enjoying the sweetness of my Native Soil,
made me also forget to inquire after these Curiosities: yet, I have some while
since written for some of them; that so I may be able to let let my Friends see
the Raritie of this Wonder. Three leagues from Lions, which is a Country hotter
yet then This, there are found, on the Coast of Iseron, great store of Stones,
Lib. de Mirab. tr. 3.
which divided in two, yield many of these Gamahes, exactly figured. You may
add, to these Painted Figures, that which Albertus Magnus saw at Collen, on
the Tomb of the Three Kings; which was, the Heads of two Young Men, very
white, Onychine.
drawn by Nature upon a Cornaline; but so ordered; as that the one was placed
upon the other; so that there appeared, of the undermost, only the Nose, and a
little of the other parts of the Face: in a manner like to those Medals of
Gold, and Silver, which were made at the Marriage of the Last French King;
where His Face was figured, upon that of his Queen. There was likewise seen,
upon this Gornaline, a Black Serpent, that encircled the two Heads: in manner
of a Garland; and that with so much perfection, that Albertus could not
believe, that it was the workmanship of Nature: Probavi autem (says he) quod
non est vitrum, sed lapis: propter quod praesumpsi, Picturam illam esse a
natura, Exodus Tract. C. 1.
and non ab art. The same Author also saw at Venice one of these Gamahes, upon
a Marble Stone, that had been sawed asunder: and this was the Figure of a Kings
Head, with a Crown upon it; and there was so much perfection in this Natural
Piece of Picture, as that the skilfullest Painter in the World would have found
it a very hard Task, to have copied it: Such was the Majesty of his
Countenance, Eyes, and Mouth; that it filled with A stonishment all that beheld
it. In a word, it was in nothing defective, save that the Forehead was somewhat
greater then the Life: and the reason of it was, says he, because that the hot
Vapor, whereof this stone had been formed, being too vehement, it mounted
higher then it should have done, in the forming of this Figure. Cardan tells
also of another of these Gamahes, on an Agate; where was represented the
Hemisphere of the Heavens, with the Earth placed in the midst, and as it were
upon the waters: and many other the like wonderful Rarities he makes mention
of; as the Reader may see, in the above cited Book of his.

3. Those Figures, which are not painted at all, cannot be known otherwise,
then by the ending of the Lines: and yet do they notwithstanding perfectly
express that which they represent. Of this sort, in my judgment, Enses Relat.
fol. 476.
is that, M. de Breves saw at Bethlehem, upon one of the Tables of Marble, that
adorn the place, where the Cratch is: upon which you have, represented, an Old
man, with a beard, and a long Gown, with a Cowle fitted to it: and all merely,
by the meeting together, and Casual corresponding of the Lines of the Stone.
In Formic. l. 6.5. c. 6.
Nider reports, that in Mauritania, near to the city of Septa, there is a
Fountain, where there is found a certain kind of stones, that naturally
represent all the words of the Ave Maria. As for example, in one you shall have
Ave Maria, written at length: in another, Gratia plena: and in others, Dominus
tecum. Neither will this Story seem so incredible, to any man, that shall but
consider: that the late King of France was sometime presented with a company of
little Flint-stones, that, by the Letters naturally figured on them, did make
up his Name at large. Now if Nature does produce, among these little Flints,
some that bear One Letter, and many also that have Two, or Three; why may she
not as well produce One greater stone, where the word Maria may be found at
length? And if any man have a mind to impute this, to some extraordinary
Working of God, I shall not hinder him: as it is in like manner said of the
forementioned Old man at Bethlehem; which is conceaved to be the Portraiture
of St. Jerome, which was thus wonderfully represented upon the Marble, by
reason of the great Devotion he bare to the Cratch: And in this sense, I shall
be able much more easily to make good the Power of Figures, which I have
undertaken to maintain: although I shall notwithstanding endeavor hereafter
to produce such natural Reasons, as shall confirm the truth of my Assertion.
The same Nider reports also, that the Marquess de Bade had a Precious Stone,
that, on which side so ever you looked on it, it always represented a
Crucifixe, naturally figured on it. As for that other strange Effect which was
observed in it, it was rather External, then particularly Appropriate, either
to the Stone, or to the Figure. For they say, that if a woman, that had her
Monthly Courses upon her, chanced to look on it, it instantly covered it self
with a little dark Cloud; which afterward vanished by little and little.
Peradventure it was polished, and made as smooth, as Looking-glasses are, which
are often observed to be sullied, and loose their Luster, when women in that
Condition have looked upon them. Goropius Becanus also affirms, that he
himself saw in England, In Niloscop. lib. 3.
a Pearch-fish so perfectly figured on a stone, that you might distinguish both
every part of the body, and every little Scale. This Stone was taken up, upon
one of the highest mountains in the Kingdom: So that Cardan may learn from
hence, that this stone could not possibly have been thus figured, by the touch
of any Fish of the Sea; neither was it a Perch, which had been turned into a
Stone: for, who should carry it (says he) to the top of an unhabitable
Mountain? Plin. l. 3 is. c. 5.
Pliny reports, that there was the Image of a Satyr found, in a Marble stone
sawed in two: and Gesner, a very learned Switzer, makes mention of another
Gamahe, which represented two Roses; and of another, that was full of stars.
You may have recourse to the Tract which he has written of this subject, Lib.
de rerum fossil. lap. et gemmar. figur.
divided into Thirteen Chapters; where he tells you, of many Gamahes, which
represent, some, Comets; others, Plants, Fruits, Fishes, Living Creatures of
the Land; and some Artificial things too. I wonder notwithstanding, that he
should forget to speak of Embossed Gamahes, which the earth produces: such as
was that of the Virgin Mary, holding her Son in her arms; which was,
Natutally represented in a piece of a Rock, and with very great Relief; and
was found, in one of the Isles of the Archipelago; as Thevet testifies, in his
Cosmography. And in the Caves that are found in a certain Desert, Loc. citat.
in Provence in France, called l' Hermitage Saint Maurin, distant two leagues
from Reiz, and from Moustiers: a Desert, that is indeed a very horrid one, by
reason that it is encompassed with Rocks, but which is much more to be admired,
then that of the Grand Chartreuse: whether you consider the Air of it, which
is, for the most part, sereene, and pleasant; or its Crystal Fountains,
whose Original is wonderful: or the beauty of its Caves, which seem to be a
Palace, fit for Nature to inhabit: or the Flowings of its Verdon; which being
pent up by too small a Channel, makes a noise, which causes a Horror suitable
to those holy Solitudes: in these Caves, I say, are found good store of these
Gamahes, Embossed; which represent almost all the several sorts of Figures,
that can fall within a man's Imagination. You shall see some of them, as hanging
on high; others appear, as placed side-wayes; as you see Images placed in
walls: as if Nature had not forgotten any thing, that might serve to render a
place commendable. About seven leagues from Auxerre, in those Caves which they
call, Antounoirs, there are found almost the very same Gamahes, or Figures: and
both the one, and the other, have all of them a little hole in them, running
along through them from the top to the bottom: and my judgment of these
Figures is, that they are nothing else but water petrified, or congealed to
stone: for they hang down, (at least the greatest part of them) as if they
were fastened to a Roof above.

Goropius Becanus, speaking of this kind of Gamahe, assures us, that he has
seen Bones, that have been produced Naturally within the bowels of the Earth;
which were of a very Prodigious magnitude, though they were generated of other
Matter. And of this Kind peradventure are those Bones, whose vast bigness has
caused people vainly to conclude, that there have been heretofore Giants in
the World: So true it is, that for want of the true knowledge of the Secrets of
Nature, men usually fall into most gross Errors. Now these Embossed Figures
that are found in stones, are of two sorts: the first, are whole Embossed
round; as was the Piece of Rock in form of the Virgin Mary; and these Bones,
that the Earth Naturally produces: the Other are only in Relief, or only
halfe-embossed: such as were those Rocks, which Ortelius makes mention of,
situate in the entrance of the most Western parts of Tartary; on which are to
be seen the Figures of Camels, Horses, Sheep, and many other things; the
Marvellousnesse whereof this Geographer being not able to comprehend, he says:
Haec saxa, hominum, In Fab. Sciogr. Russ.
camelorum, pecorumque, caeterarumque rerum formas referentia, Horda
populigregis pascentis armentaque fuit: quae stupenda quadam Metamorphosi
repent in saxa riguit, priori part nulla in part diminuta. And then, to make
the story pass for a Truth, he adds: Evenit hoc prodigium, annis circiter
300. retro elapsis. But leaving him to go along with the herd of ordinary
writers; (who, then they cannot give the Reason of any thing, are feign
presently to fly to Maracles:) I say, that these Tartarian Rocks (if there be
any Truth in the Relation,) are only Gamahes, generated by Nature: Otherwise,
we shall be forced to forge new Miracles, for all the Places, where ever any
of the like Effects are produced; which would be most ridiculous, seeing that
we shall by and by make it appear, out of the Writings of one of the most
Pious, and Learned Men, the Ages past have brought forth, that these Effects
are the Workmanship of Nature only, who produces them no otherwise, then she
does Flowers. Of this sort of Gamahes were those three Serpents, figured within
the hollow of an Oister-shell, which were found, by the King of Castile's
Cooks, in the belly of a Fish. These Serpents were figured with their Head
Relieved, or swelling up; and that so naturally, as that they seemed to be
alive. The upper part of the Shell also afforded pretty Variety of the like
Figures: and, which was most of all to be admired, there was not one of them,
but had a Hole running along through it, from the very Mouth to the Tail,
though it were indeed but a very small one. Therefore says Albertus Magnus,
Loc. Citat.
Constat per illud experimentum, etiam Figuras elevatas super lapides aliquando
fieri a Natura.

4. Those Figures that are Naturally Engraven upon Stones, are either graved
Superficially only; or Transparently, so as the Graving passes through the
body. Of this later kind you shall oftentimes meet with some, among the heaps
of hollow stones, that are found in the fields; wherein you may observe the
form of a Head, by the little Holes, which represent the Eyes, the Nostrils,
and the Mouth: and sometimes also you shall have of them, that have the form
of a Death's head, either of a Man, or a Horse. As for those other, which are
only superficially graved, you may have store of them, among the little stones
on the Banks of Rivers, and upon the Seashore: where you shall light upon
some, so exactly representing the figure of shells, that you would think they
were the Natural shells of Fishes: and this sort ought rather to be reckoned in
the number of Embossed-Gamahes, then those that are simply Graved. My Brother
has sometime been very diligent in searching on the Sea shore, and gathering
together what Shells, or other Stones of any rarity, he could meet with: and he
has presented one to Mr. Frey, which perfectly resembles a Goat's Horn: and
I am of opinion, that it is one of those, which the Ancients called, Cornu
Ammonis; as you may see in Georg. Agricola, in his Lib. 5. de Natura Fossilium.
I thought at first, when I saw some of these Stones figured like shells, that
they had been at first Real shells of Fishes, which had afterward been
Petrified, and turned into Stone, by the Virtue of some kind of water; they
were so perfectly, and exactly formed. But I have since considered, that,
seeing that there are found of them upon the tops of the highest Hills, they
must necessarily be Gamahes, and the Workmanship of Nature; which without doubt
has not produced them, but to some end; as we shall see hereafter. From hence
you may judge, In Nilose.
whether, or no, Gorepius has not good reason to reprove those, that
confidently affirm, that Egypt, and a part of Aethiopia has heretofore been
covered all over with the Sea, because that there are some of these shells
frequently found in those Parts. For we may as well conclude, by the same
Argument, that the Apennine, the Alps, and the Pyrenean Hills, have been
sometime also overwhelmed with the Sea; which is most Absurd: unless they
mean, at the General Deluge: but this is not their Intention. Let us now come
to the Figures of Plants.

5. The most Learned among the Naturalists divide them thus. A Plant, say they,
is either Arbor, or Cremium, or Frutex, or Herba. A Tree is a Plant, that has
a great Trunk, or body: the Cremium has but a little one: the Frutex has
many: and the Herb, is that, which at its first Appearing out of the ground,
puts forth only two little leaves. I find then, that in all the several Kinds,
there is an Infinite Number of Admirable Figures, which are called by the
Philosophers, Signaturae rerum: now, One Part only of a Figured Plant, and not
the whole Plant, is called Signatura: or you may say, the Signature, is some
certain thing in that Part. I speak not here of Internal Signatures; the
Doctrine of these belong to Chemists: My purpose only is, in this place, to
discourse of those that we meet withal in Plants, which the Ages past have
taken very little notice of. I shall begin then to show, in order to the parts
of Plants, what Signatures, or Mavelous Figures, Nature has produced in them.

And first, the Root of diverse sorts of Plants, represents diverse parts of
Our Body: as, that of the Hermodactil, resembles a man's Hand.

The Body, or Stocke'iis yet more Admirable: for whether it be in great Trees,
or in small Plants, you shall find Figures, that represent the Parts of Living
Creatures. Among these later, the Serpentaria major perfectly resembles the
skin of a Serpent; as does also the Dracunculus, and the Ophioscorodon: among
the Former, we must consider either the Wood, or the Bark of them.

In the Bark you shall many times see, especially in that of Old Trees, many
Figures, representing diverse Kinds of things, by the Various Cranies and
Clifts that are in it. In young Trees, where the Bark is closer, it is figured
with many little Streakes, and Lines, in the nature of Painting: and I have
sometime observed, upon the Bark of a young Cherry Tree, the figure of Little
Trees laden with fruit, so naturally expressed, as if it had been done with a
Pencill.

The Wood is yet more Admirable, then the rest; seeing that in many Trees,
there is the very same Variety found, that is in Agats: and it is not many
days since I was informed, that there was a Tree lately found in Holland,
which being cut in pieces by a wood-cleaver, they saw, in one part of it, the
Figure of a Chalice; in another, that of a Priests Albe; in another, that of a
Stole; and, in a word, there were represented very near all the Ornaments
belonging to a Priest. If the Relation be true, we must needs confess, that
these Figures could not be there Casually, or by chance. In Latin, Acer; and
in Flemmish, Masaros.
But, to come to a kind of wood that is more Common; in boards of Maple, which
is a wood sufficiently known to every body, you shall often find the figure of
a Serpent, of a Bird, of a Fly, etc. perfectly expressed, by the streakes of
this variegated Wood. There are also some other sorts of Wood, that represent
some of these Figures, but not Painted, but Imbossed. So, at what time I was a
Student at Apt, a City in Provence: very famous for the Relics of Saint Anne,
mother to the Blessed Virgin, which are said to be kept in this place; I saw
the Trunk of a Vine, which represented a Man's Face, as far as the hair of
the Head, so lively, as that you might percieve the Forehead, the Eyes, Nose,
Ears, Mouth, Chin, all exactly formed, and in very good proportion. It was
brought by a Vineyard-keeper, to the shop of M. Roulet, a Surgeon.

The Branches of Plants are less Considerable, in matter of Figures, then all
the rest; (though it were in Wood:) nevertheless you may oftentimes observe in
them, some kind of Resemblances of the Fingers of a Man's hand; and of the
Bushinesse of his Hair. And this is the reason, in my opinion, why the Poets,
when they discourse, in their Metamorphoses, of the Transforming of Men into
Trees, they say that their Fingers, and the Hair of their Head, were changed
into Branches. In the Branches of Coral, you shall often meet with many
Curiosities; and the thing is not so Rare, or scarce, but that any man may
easily see the Experiment:

The Leaves seem to surpass all the other Parts; being divided into so many
Figures, that there seems not to be any thing in Nature, the Image whereof is
not to be found among them. If the question be made of the Parts of Man's Body;
they are here represented: if you would have a Representation of the Waters,
you shall find among these, some that are Waved: if you would have the Living
Creatures of the Land; you shall have some, that have their Feet, and Walk, as
They do; such as are those, which are found in the great Isle of Burner, which
are described by Antonio Pigafetta: if the Birds of the Air, and the Fishes of
the Waters; you shall find some that are skaled, and which have Finnes; and
some, that have both a Bill, and Wings, and which do in a manner Fly. I refer
you, Lib Philog.
for the truth of these Relations, to Baptista Porta, Barthol. Chassanaeus,
Jode Torquemada, Tib. de glor. mund. part. 12. Hexam. l. 6. Cosmogr. l. 16.11.
De subt. lib. 10. Exercit. 112. Hist. Ind. l. 18. c. 88.
Thevet, Cardan, Scaliger, and Guil. Rovillius.

Neither are the Flowers less Admirable, then These: for They likewise
represent the Figures of Living Creatures, both Beasts, Fishes, and Birds, the
Stars also, the Rainbow, and almost all the other Kinds of Meteors.

Fruits also are equally to be admired, for their several Forms, and Figures:
and although they do not represent the figures of so many Various Things, as
Leaves, and Flowers do; yet they do represent very many, and very
considerable ones: as you may observe in some Gourds, Pears, Apples, and other
Fruits. That sort of Pease, which the Latins call Arietini, resembles the head
of a Ram: as another sort of them, (which are for the same reason called
Columbini,) does a Pigeons: having each of them this Quality, agreeable to
their Figure, that they are both equally hot. So Beans likewise, bear, on one
side, the Form, and Figure, of a Man's Privy Parts; and, on the other, of a
Woman's. And perhaps it might be for this only cause, that Pythagoras gave that
Precept to his Scholars, (which has yet been rightly understood by no man;) A
Fabis abstineto.

Neither is the Seed, which is the Part of Plants that is brought last to
Perfection, ^s being of the Greatest Importance, altogether deprived of the
Beauty of these Figures. For that of the herb Echion, or wild Buglosse,
resembles the Head of a Serpent, with it is Mouth, and Eyes: and for this cause
also it is observed to be very Sovereign, against the biting of Serpents;
according to Dioscorides. That of Rue is made in the fashion of a Cross; and
this peradventure is the reason, Leonard. Fuchs. Hist. Plant. Cap. 103.
that it is of so great Virtue, in the cute of those that are Possessed; and
that the Roman Church uses it, in their Exocrismes. You may also observe some
kind of Resemblance of the Privy parts, both of Men, and Women, in a Grain of
Wheat, and in the stones of Grapes: and my Opinion is, that out of this
Observation, may be raised a Philosophical Interpretation, far above that
which is usually given, of this Proverbiall saying: Sine Cere, and Baccho
friget Venus.

If, after you have considered all the parts severally, you but take the Whole
Entire Plant altogether; you will yet meet with some such rare Figures, as
would seem Incredible; did not such Excellent Historians confirm us in the
belief of the Relation. Of this sort is the Boramet, which grows in Scythia,
having a perfect Resemblance of a Lamb, having a Head, Eyes, Ears, Teeth, and
the rest of the parts of the body proportionable. This Plant crops, and feeds
upon all the grass that grows round about it; and when there is no more left,
it dies with famine. You may see the story of it, in Hist. Mosc. De Variet. C.
22. Exercit. 181. Sur les Tabl. de Phil. Hist Plant. l. ^8. c. 85. In his Eden.
fol. 78.2. week. Perhaps this is that Zoophyte, or Plant. Animal, which is
called in Hebrew, Ieduah.
Sigismundus, Cardan, Scaliger, Vigenerius, Guil. Rovillius, Duret, and in one
of the most Excellent of the French Poets, who speaks of it in these verses.

Tells que les Boramets, qui chez les Scythes naissent,
D'une grain menue^, and de Plants se paissent:
Bien que du corpse, des yeux, de la bouche, and du nez.
Ils semblent des Moutons qui sont n' agueres nez.
Englished thus, by Jos. Silvester.

Such as those Boramets in Scythia bred,
Of slender seeds; and with green fodder fed:
Although their Bodies, Noses, Mouths, and Eyes,
Of new-yean'd Lambs have full the form, and guise.
Now in all the parts of Plants, the Figures are either Internal, or External
only; or both Internal, and External also. The Internal are, such as the
Fruit of Palestine; which bears the Figure of Ashes within; and likewise all
the sorts of Figures, that are found in sawing of Marble. The External are,
all such as are Painted, and Colored on the Outside of the Fruit, but (...)
only not at all Within; in like manner as the Apple, called in France, the
Fambure, is; which is all speckled with red spots, like drops of blood, but
only on the Outside, or Rind. Those that are both Internally, and Externally
Figured, are such as the Maple Wood; and many sorts of Stones. The Internal
Figures are likewise discovered, either by Any Manner of Cutting Indifferently;
or else, by one certain Particular Way only. That which appears after Any
Manner of Cutting indifferently, is, as in that kind of Apple, In Forn.
which, as Nider reports, has been seen at Granada, which being cut any
manner of way, did still nevertheless represent the Figure of a Crucifixe.
That which requires One only Particular way of Cutting, is, as in the Root of
Fearne; which being cut One way only, represents an Eagle perfectly. I have
often observed, that an Orange likewise so cut, not a-crosse, but long-waies,
represents, with its kernels and little skins, an Orange Tree laden with
Orenges. It is also observed, that the Kernels of an Apple represent the Tree.

These Figures do yet consist, either in the Color; or in the Division of the
Parts: in the Color; as in the flower of the Herb Eyebright, which
represents those of an Eye: in the Division of the Parts; as namely, in those
we have already spoken of.

Thus have we seen the Division of Figures: it remains now, that we prove,
that they have some Power to operate; and, that it is not in Vain, that they
are perfectly represented both in Plants, and Stones. Proceed we therefore, in
the same Order we have observed in our Division, beginning with the First.

6. I say then, that the Natural Figures, which are found in Stones, have
Naturally a Power to Operate, if they be Applied: and this I shall prove, by
two Reasons. The First is, because they are called Effectrices: and the Second
is, because we see it by Experience: For we daily see, that some of these
Figured Stones do Operate upon the Same Things that they represent; as for
Example, that Stone which we call Heliotropium, which is all speckled as it
were with Drops of Blood, if applied to the part that bleeds, it stops the
Blood. Others there are, that work upon the Wound that is made by the Image
they bear. So Pliny affirms, that there is a kind of Marble called Ophites,
by reason of its resembling the Figure of Serpents, whose name it bears:
which, if applied to the wound caused by the biting of those Venomous
Creatures, it heals it. See his own words: Genus Marmoris ab Ophite dictum,
Lib. 36. cap. 7.
quod imaginem horum Serpentum reprasentet; molle, candidum; nigransque, durum;
dicuntur ambo Serpentum ictus sedare. And here we may make This Division of the
Figures that are found in Stones; and say, that they are of two sorts. The one
are found in some certain stones, and are always the same: and these are
Naturally endued with very admirable Virtues. The other, are such as are not
tied to any certain sort of Stones; but are indifferently found in all; and
are not indeed of so great Virtue, De Subtle. l. 7.
as the Former. And this is the division that Cardan makes of them: Verum,
says he, mire quispiam dubitet, vnde figure hae in Gemmis, and lapidibus
proveniant? neque enim credendum est omnem figuran casu contingere, cum lapides
multi ex eodem genere easdem retineant figuras. Itaque meo judicio, dicendum
est, duo esse Figuram and Imaginum genera: alterum, quod semper in eisdem
lapidibus apparet, et hoc a Natura provenit; quae non secus ac in plantis,
foliorum et fructum numerum servat and rationem. Hoc figurarum genus vim habet,
and aliquid significat, etc. And so going on, he makes mention of a Stone,
which Albertus Magnus had; that, being naturally marked with the Figure of a
Serpent, had this admirable Virtue, that if it were put in a place that was
haunted with Serpents, it drew them all unto it. He speaks also of diverse
others, that would cure the biting of Serpents, and expel their Venom. You may
see diverse of these admirable Gamahes, Lib. 1. loc. cit.
in Georgius Agricola; who reckons up, what stones there are, that represent
all the parts of man's body; as well as those rare Fruits, and Plants do, which
we shall hereafter speak of.

And here it is commonly objected, that it is not at all the Figure, that
produces any such effect; but some occult Quality, wherewith the stone is
endued. For otherwise, if the Figure were Operative, one drop of Blood would
stop Others; and a living Scorpion should cure the stinging of another
Scorpion: forasmuch as there is much more conformity, and nearness of
Resemblance, betwixt two Real drops of Blood, or two living Scorpions, then
betwixt one Pictured, and one living One, etc. And this is the strongest
Objection, that our modern Philosophers do bring, and by which they do
conceave themselves to have overthrown, (though they have little reason so to
do,) the Power, which the Ancients attributed to Figures.

First therefore, to answer these Objections, it is true indeed, that the bare
Figure represented on stones, has not of It Self any power at all to operate,
though applied; except there be some Internal, or External Agent, that may
cooperate, and assist the Figure; or unless the matter be Proper, and Apt to
operate: as, for example, a Pointed Figure will never be able to Penetrate,
though it be applied; if it be either of soft Wax, or of Butter: because that
the Matter is not at all proper to Penetration: but the same Figure in Wood,
Iron, Brass, or any other hard Matter, will very easily penetrate. In like
manner, if a Stone have not, either from the stars, or from its own Nature,
some Quality proper to such, or such an effect; as for stopping of Blood, some
Restringent Quality; and so of the rest: in vain should we expect to find any
perfect power in the Figure. To say then, that it is (for example) this only
Restringent Quality, that stops the Blood; and that the Figure of the drops of
Blood, wherewith the Stone is spotted, and painted, is of no Concernment at all
in the business; is to fall back into the former Error: For, to what purpose
then has Nature bestowed this Figure on the Stone? there must necessarily be
given some kind of reason for it. If it be answered, that Nature had no
purposed End, in giving this Figure: this were to deny that Principle, which is
generally received by all: Id non frustra fit, quod Natura semper facit, vel
plurimum.

There were indeed very good Reason to doubt of this Power, if the Marble
called Ophites, (which represents the Figures of Serpents, by whose name it is
called,) would cure the biting of a Dog, or of a Horse only: But seeing it
cures the stinging of Serpents only, and of no other Beast; why should we not
attribute something to the very Figure? But to prove more forcibly, that these
Figures have some Power to Operate; against the perverseness of those that
dispute against it: if those which represent Scorpions, Serpents, Toads, do
find the nature of the place Proper, and aptly disposed for the supplying of
the Stone, or other Matter on which they are found, with a Quality, and
Nutriment, agreeable to the Nature of the Thing, whose Image they bear; these
Figures will then certainly be turned into Real Serpents, Scorpions, and
living Toads, and into no other kind of Creature. So that our Philosophers need
not now vex themselves any more to find out, how, or by what means a Toad
should come to be generated in the midst of a great stone; as was that,
described by Georgius Agricola, De Animal. subier.
which was found within a Mil-stone, when it was cracked, or broken in pieces,
either by the force of the Venom, or else by the Violence of the Motion: and
also how that Other was generated, which Goropius Becanus saw at Anvers, which
was found in the Sawing in two of a very thick Marble Stone, that had neither
Hole, nor Rift in it. For, the Figure of a Toad having been first represented
within these Stones, it so came to pass, that by some Property of the Place,
it was afterward changed into a Natural, Living Toad. And the very self same
may happen in any other Figures, except that of Man; whose Fabric is from the
hand of God alone. We may conclude therefore that these Figures are not
represented in vain, both on Stones, and on other things: seeing that if they
be Rightly Applied, they assuredly have some Secret Power, according to the
Principle before laid down. And here I had almost forgotten to inform the
Reader, that, without searching after any foreign Examples, we may daily see,
at the Plaisteries at Argentueil, the like Toads, and other such Creatures,
engendered with Stones, and the very heart of the hardest Rocks. I conceave
therefore, that after the very same wonderful manner of Generation, those
fishshels also, which are found on the tops of Mountains, are produced: not in
the Sea, (as some Ridiculously have imagined;) but upon the very place where
they are found: which gave occasion to that Curious Inquirer into the Secrets
of Nature, to draw from hence this Conclusion: Gorop. in Nilosc.
Ubicunque igitur humor, sive liquor invenitur, ad Testaceorum vitam idoneus,
viva Testacea generantur. He speaks this in discoursing of diverse several
Figures, or Gamahes, that he had seen, in diverse places: and then he goes on,
and says further; Opifex enim progeditur eo, quoad ejus materia patitur, ultra
progressurus, si loci and materiae inopia non excluderetur. If a Figure then
have so much Power, as to change it self into that Living Creature that it
represents, (provided that it meet with no Impediment;) how can it be denied,
but that they also have the Power to Work, by some secret Sympathy, (if
appled,) upon the Wound given by the Creature, which they resemble?

7. Now, why the same Figure should not rather hurt, then heal a wound so
given; seeing that the Living Creature it self being Venomous, its Figure
also, should by Sympathy be Venomous, rather then Healing: the Reason, I
confess, is very Dark, and hard to be given: nevertheless I shall here
adventure, the First, on this discovery; no man, that I know of, having as yet
undertaken it.

We have therefore said before, that, when the Figure of a Scorpion, (for
example,) being represented on a Stone, finds in the place where it is, any
Nutriment, or Humor, agreeable to the Nature of a Living Scorpion; it by
little and little acquires Perfection, and having at length drawn forth all
that which was proper for a Scorpion, it becomes a Living Scorpion. We do also
suppose, that when this Venomous Creature, or a Serpent, Dog, or any other
Beast chances to bite any; they leave an Impression of some Particular Quality
behind: as we see in those that are bitten by a Tarantuba, who presently fall
into a continual Agitation; (not that they continually Dance, as the general
Talk is:) this Venomous Creature having this Quality, that it is always in
continual motion; and though it be cut into many small pieces, yet it will not
leave stirring a long time after. And so likewise Pomponacius, and Campanella
affirm, that if a Mad Dog bite a Woman with child, De Incaut. De sens. rer.
if there be not speedy Remedy used, the Fruit of her Womb will be formed in
the shape of a Dog, and it will afterward come into the World, with all the
Liniaments of a Dog. So true it is, that if we should but inquire into the
Effects of Nature, and should be able to yield the reasons of them; we would
scorn all that we think we now know. Now I say, that the Figure of a Scorpion,
that is Naturally represented on a Stone, is still endeavoring is own
Perfection; and where ever it meets with any such Qualities, as are Proper to
it self, it attracts, and draws them to it. If therefore the Figure of a
Scorpion, be applied to a Wound made by a Scorpion: it there finds the
Impression of some certain Quality, made by a Scorpion: which, finding to be
Proper and Agreeable to its own Nature, it attracts and retains with it self:
so that the Wound, being thus delivered of these Qualities that envenomed it,
presently heales up, and grows well again. In a word, the Stronger here
prevails against the Weaker: so that in the Figure of a Scorpion, which nature
has represented on a Stone, there being greater Store found of the Qualities
proper to this Creature, then there is in the Wound which the Scorpion made;
those which are here, are drawn forth by those other, which are in the Stone,
as being the stronger, and of greater Virtue. Upon this Principle also it is,
that a Scorpion bruised to pieces, and applied to the Wound, cures it; as does
also its Oil. The biting of the Serpent is also healed, by the applying of its
head, beat in pieces; or else, by the Serpent it self, reduced into Powder; as
Crollius, and M. du Chesne, S. de la Violette, De sign. Plant. En la
Reformation de Theriaques.
affirm: as likewise that of a Crocodile, is cured by its Fat: that of a Rat,
by its Flesh made into Powder; that of a Dog, by its Hair, or Skin: the
Venom of a Toad is cured by a certain Stone, that is found in its Head: And if
we should search after the Properties of other Living Creatures, Toadsstone.
we should doubtless find the same thing in all of them. Upon this Principle
also it is, that if an Egg that is frozen, be put into Cold Water, it will be
thawed in a very short space: and Hands, that are benumbed with cold, will
presently become unbenummed, if they be put into cold Water, or into
Snow-broth. For, the Greater Cold, which is in the Water, finding the Less,
which is in the Hands; it draws in forth, and swallows it up; just as a small
Candle is lost, if it be placed near a great Fire, or a Red-hot Furnace. But if
the Cold, that is in the Hands, were greater then that in the Water; and the
Venom, that is in the Wound made by a Scorpions Sting, were more Powerful,
then that of the Scorpions Figure applied to it; we should then see a clean
Contrary Effect.

To go on then in our Answer to the Objection proposed, I say thus: We deny
not, but that there is a greater Correspondency betwixt two Real, Natural
drops of Blood; and betwixt Two Living Scorpions; then betwixt a Living one,
and a Painted. Yea, we rather, on the contrary, acknowledge; that the great
Analogy, and Resemblance that there is betwixt them, is the cause that Blood,
either broken into little pieces by stirring, or freshly drawn, and applied to
a Wound, stops the bleeding of it; as Experience testifies, if we may believe
Crollius: and the Oil of Hairs distilled, keeps the Hair from falling off:
so Earth-wormes, made into a Powder, destroy those that are bred in Our Bodies:
and the Gravel of the Urine we make, is an excellent Medicine against the
Stone: and many other Properties there are observed to proceed from this
Analogy, or nearenesse of Resemblance. But to return to our Figures again.

8. The Power of those, that are found in Plants, and their parts, seems to
have some Affinity with that of the Figures in Stones; seeing that they also
Operate on the same things that they represent: as, for Example, the Citrull
Cowcumber, which in some sort resembles the figure of a Man's Head, is a very
sovereign remedy, as Porta affirms, against the Diseases of the Head. B.
Porta in Phytog.
So the herbs Argemon, Seris, and Belloculus, all which represent the Figure
of an Eye, do likewise cure the diseases of it. Dentaria, which has the form
of Teeth, cures the Toothache: Palma Christi, and Ischaemon, which grow in the
shape of a Hand, are cures for the Wounds of that Part; as the herb
Geranopodium is, for those of the Feet; because it bears the Resemblance of
them. Crollius proceeds more Methodically, in reckoning up the wonderful
effects of this Resemblance, betwixt the several sorts of Plants, and the
parts of Man's body: and the Order he observes, is this.

The Head, says He, is represented by the Root of Squils, which is of the same
figure: and therefore also it is properly applied, in the diseases of the Head.

The Hair is represented by that Hairy Moss, which grows upon the Oaks, and
is called, Pili Quercini: and by Thistle-downe, the Juice whereof being
distilled, makes the hair to grow.

The Ears, by the herb Asarum, or Asarabacca, which is excellent against
Deafness.

The Eyes, Hist. Plant. c. 137.
by the flower of the herb Potentilla, a word, says Fuchsius, unknown to
the Ancients, and which is called with us, Wild Tansie; the water whereof is of
singular virtue for the Sight.

The Nose, by Water-Mints; the water whereof recovers the Smell, when it is
lost.

The Teeth, by the herb Dentaria, which causes the Toothache to cease.

The Hands, by the Root of Hermodactil, which is good against Chops in the
hands.

The Heart, by the Citron; and the herb called Alleluja, which is very
sovereign for it.

The Lungs, by the herb Lungwort.

The Liver, by Hepatica, or Liver-wort; which is of good use, in the Diseases
of the Liver.

You may see all the Other Simples, in the same Author, that represent the rest
of the Parts of Man's body; as the Breasts, Ventride, Navell, Spleen, Entrals,
Bladder, Rheins, Privy parts, Matrix, Backbone, Flesh, Bones, Nerves, Pores,
Veins, and even as far as the Privities; as the Phallus Hollandica, which is
particularly described by Adaianus Junius.

9. And here it may be Objected, that the greatest part of these plants, though
they be reduced into Ashes, yet do they not fail to work the same Effects,
and to have the same Quality, that they had before: and that therefore this
Power is to be attributed to the Nature of the Plant, and not at all to the
Figure; which it now no longer retains, when it is once reduced into Powder.

I answer, that though they be chopped in pieces, brayed in a Mortar, and even
burnt to Ashes; yet do they nevertheless retain, (by a certain Secret, and
wonderful Power of Nature,) both in the Juice, and in the Ashes, the self
same Form, and Figure, that they had before: and though it be not there
Visible, yet it may by Art be drawn forth, and made Visible to the Eye, by an
Artist. This perhaps will seem a Ridiculous story to those, who read only the
Titles of Books: but, those that please, may see this Truth confirmed, if they
but have recourse to the Works of M. du Chesne, S. de la Violette, one of the
best Chemists that our Age has produced; who affirms, that himself saw an
Excellent Polish Physician of Cracovia, who kept, in Glasses, the Ashes of
almost all the Herbs that are known: so that, when any one, out of Curiosity,
had a desire to see any of them, as (for example,) a Rose, in one of his
Glasses, he took That where the Ashes of a Rose were preserved; and holding it
over a lighted Candle, so soon as ever it began to feel the Heat, you should
presently see the Ashes begin to Move; which afterward rising up, and
dispersing themselves about the Glass, you should immediately observe a kind
of little Dark Cloud; which dividing it self into many parts, it came at
length to represent a Rose; but so Fair, so Fresh, and so Perfect a one, that
you would have thought it to have been as Substantial, and as Odoriferous a
Rose, as any grows on the Rose-tree. This Learned Gentleman says, that
Himself has often tried to do the like: but not finding the success, to
answer all the Industry he could use, Fortune at length gave him a sight of
this Prodigy. For, as he was one day practicing, with M. de Luynes, called
otherwise De Fomentieres, Counselor to the Parliament, to see the Curiosity of
diverse Experiments, having extracted the Salt of certain Nettles burnt to
Ashes, and set the Lie abroad all night in a winter Evening; in the Morning he
found it all Frozen; but with this Wonder attending it; that the Nettles
themselves, with their Form, and Figure, were so Lively and so perfectly
represented on the Ice, that the Living Nettles were not more. This Gentleman,
being as it were ravished at the sight, sent for the said Counselor, to be a
Witness of this Secret, the Rarity whereof he expressed in these Verses.

Secret, don't on Comprend, que, quoy que le corpse meure;
Les Forms font pourtant aux cendres leur demeure.
In English thus:

This Secret proves, that, though the Body die,
The Form does Still within it is Ashes lie.
But now this Secret is not so Rare: for M. de Claves, one of the most
Excellent Chemists of our Times, shows the Experient every day.

10. From hence we may draw this Conclusion; that the Ghosts of Dead Men, which
are often seen to appear in Churchyards, are Natural Effects, being only the
Forms of the Bodies, which are buried in those places; or their Outward
shapes, or Figures; and not the Souls of those Men, or any such like
Apparition, caused by Evil Spirits; as the Common Opinion is. The Ancients
thought, that these Ghosts were the Good, and Evil Genij, which attended
always upon Armies: but they are to be excused; seeing they knew not how to
give any other reason of these Apparitions: it being most Certain, that in
Armies, where, by reason of their great numbers, many die, you shall see some
such Ghosts very often, (especially after a Battle;) which are, as we have
said, only the Figures of the Bodies, excited, and raised up, partly by an
Internal Heat, either of the Body, or of the Earth: or else by some External
one; as that of the Sun, or of the Multitudes of the Living: or, by the Violent
Noise, or Heat of great Guns, which puts the Air into a Heat. In Cribr.
I have elsewhere handled the Curious History of Spirits; wherein I have
propounded these following Questions, Cabal.
touching these Ghosts: namely; Whether or no we may, by These, explain all
the Visions, that are mentioned by Writers? Whether those Wonderful Effects,
which we attribute to Demons, or Spirits, may proceed from these Figures, or
not? And then, Whether they have any Power at all, or not? And if so; Whence
they have it? And if it be granted they have any; Whether they have greater
Power, then the Dead Body it self, whence they proceed? Or, Whether the Dead
Body is of more Power, then when 'twas Living? Tom. 2. lib. 4. de cause. morber.
invisib.
as Paracelsus is of Opinion; who, says, that Mummie has in it all the Virtue
of Plants, Stones, etc. And that it has an Occult, Magnetique Virtue, which
draws Men to the Sepulchers of those, whom they account to have been Holy men;
where, by the Virtue of the same Mummie, there are those Effects wrought, which
we call Miracles: which are observed (says he) to be much more Frequent in the
Summer, then in any other Season of the Year, by reason of the Heat of the Sun,
which awakens, and excites the Humor that is in the Mummie. But these are
mere Fooleries; which we there refute, by such Principles, as the Rabbis have
drawn, from the Secrets of this so Famous, and Renowned Mummie. After those
other Questions, these follow: namely; Whether or no, these Wonderful Forms,
which proceed from the Blood, the Bones, or the Ashes of Dead Bodies, may serve
for an Undeniable Argument of the Resurrection; a thing unknown to most of the
Philosophers? Whether, after they are Raised up, they can in any thing be
serviceable unto us? And, Whether by their Means, we may be Naturally able to
attain to the Knowledge of diverse Secrets, which are Unknown to Us? Diverse
other like Questions are there proposed, and discussed, plainly, and
thoroughly; as I shall let the World see, in a short time: In the mean while,
we may safely account the Objection before proposed to be Invalid, and of no
Force; seeing that, though the Body be reduced into Ashes, yet nevertheless
the Figure is not thereby destroyed.

11. And this peradventure is the Reason, why it oftentimes raineth Frogs: for,
the Sun drawing up Vapors out of some Moorish place, where these Frogs, after
six Months space (say the Naturalists) are changed into Slime; it may so come
to pass, that these Vapors, which afterward become thick Clouds, may
produce, by the Concurrence of the Heat of the Sun, the Forms of Frogs; which
meeting there with Qualities proper for their Generation, receive Life, and so
become Living Frogs.

12. After the Figures that are found in Stones, and Plants, our Division leads
us to those that are found in Living Creatures, both Rational, and
Irrational; even down to Fishes.

Those then that are found in Fishes, are, Characters, Ciphers, or all kinds of
Arms: such as were figured not many years since, upon a Fish, whose Picture
was publicly sold up and down, though it was infinitely corrupted from the
true shape of the Fish it was made for. There are some other Marks, or Figures,
that are less corrupted, which have been found upon Fishes; such as are those,
which are set down in a Book, entitled Prophetia Halieutica, the Author whereof
was one Raphael Eglin, Minister of Zurich. Of the Three Fishes then, that he
there treats of, which were marked with these kinds of Figures, two of them
were taken on the Coast of Norway, An. 1587. November 21. and the other, on the
Coast of Pomerania, An. 1596. May. 21. And the Figures, which he there sets
down, are truly worth our Consideration: but, to go about to make them suit
with the prophesies of Daniel, and of St. John, as Ananias Jerancurius has
heretofore endeavored to do, is to make ones self appear Extravagant, and to
talk more idly, then men in Fevers use to do.

The Figures, that are found upon Beasts of the Land, are better known, then
those upon Fishes: for it has been often observed, that the Horns of Deer
have been Marked with certain Characters; and sometimes too, even with the
shapes of Living Creatures, which have been perfectly represented by them. So
we have sometimes seen Cats, and Horses, which have had upon their skins such
spots of White, Red, or Black, that by the intermixing of the streaks of the
severall-coloured hair, there has been represented the Figure of another Cat,
or Horse. And if we did not despise, whatsoever we account to be either
Feidiculous, or of Little Consideration; we should not be put to the trouble of
making so many strange Inquiries, which are oftentimes more Vain, then
Profitable.

Lastly, the Figures which are found upon Rational Creatures, are such as the
Imagination of the Mother, during the time of her Going with Child, has
imprinted there. And here I could enter into a Large Discourse, concerning the
Secrets of these Figures; which are not Commonly known: but, for brevities
sake, I shall only give the Reader here one or two Remarkable Examples, which
prove very powerfully the Virtue, which we attribute to all Figures. A Sister
of mine had the Figure of a Fish upon her Left Leg, caused by the desire my
mother had to eat Fish, when she was Great: and it is represented with so much
Perfection, and Raritie, that you would take it to be drawn by some Excellent
Master. Now That, wherein the Wonder lies, is, that when ever the Girl eat any
Fish, That upon her Leg put her to a sensible pain. And I had a Friend, that
had a Mulbery growing upon his Forehead; caused likewise by his Mothers Longing
after them: and he never eat Mulberies, but that his own on his Forehead put
him to pain by it is Extraordinary Beating.

This other Story, which I shall not relate, to the same purpose, is very well
known to all in Paris, that are Curious Inquirers after these things. The
Hostess of the Inn in the Suburbs of St Michael, at Bois de Vincenne, who
died about two years since, had likewise a Mulbery growing upon her Lower Lip;
which was smooth, and plain, all the year long, till the time that Mulberies
begin to ripen; at which time, Hers also began to be red, and to swell more and
more, observing exactly the Season, and Nature of other Mulberies, and coming
at length up to the Just Bigness, and Redness of other ripe Mulberies. But,
that I may not trouble my self any further, in reckoning up any more of these
kinds of Figures, I shall desire the Reader, to draw from hence a Consequence
of the Power of them by these two, or three Examples, which I have here set
down.

CHAP. VI.
That according to the Opinion of the Eastern Men, Figures, and Images may be
so prepared, under certain Constellations, as that they shall have the power,
Naturally, and without the Aid of any Demon, or Devil to drive away Noisome
Beasts, allay Winds, Thunder, and Tempests, and to cure diverse kinds of
Diseases.
THE CONTENTS.
1. THe insupportable Vanity of some Pretenders to Learning is noted.

2. How these Talismanicall Figures are called in Hebrew, Chaldie, Greek, and
Arabicke. The Etymology of Talisman uncertain, against Salmasius.

3. By what means the Power of Figures is proved: and who they are, among the
Arabians, that have defended it.

4. Of certain admirable Talismans, found as Paris, and Constantionople: and
what happened to these Places; after the breaking of them.

5. What the Dij Averrunci of the Ancients were. (...) whence derived: and
whence the custom of setting up Figures, and Images in Ships, came.

6. The fable of the Stone Bractan, in Turkey, discovered: and a Conjecture
given, concerning the Palladium, and the Statues mentioned by Philo Judaeus.

7. The Golden Calfe, and the Brazen Serpent, falsely said to be Talismans: and
why the Serpent was made of Brass, rather then of any other Metal.

8. The Wonderful Effects of 3. Talismans, spoken of by Scaliger, M. de
Breves, and the Turkish Annals: and of what virtue those other were, that were
made by Paracelsus, M. Lagneau, and diverse Learned Italians.

9. The Power of these Figures proved, by the power that Resemblance is known
to have, in all Arts, and Sciences: and first in Divinity. Why the Ancients
placed Images in their Temples.

10. In Philosophy. Of the Power of Imagination.

11. In Physic. Of some Animals, Plants, and Grains, that do good, and
hurt, merely by Resemblance.

12. In Astrology. A Certain Means of foretelling Evils to come, by the
Color of the Meteors that appear.

13. In Physiognomy. The manner how to know the Natural Inclination of any
man, according to Campanella.

14. In the Art of Divination of Dreams. Examples, both Sacred, and Profane,
touching this subject.

15. In Painting. Why our Savior Christ is oftener pictured Suffering upon the
Cross, then Sitting at the Right hand of his Father.

16. In Music. Of some Diseases, that are cured by it.

17. The manner of making these Talismans.

18. The Talismanicall Operations set down by Thebit Ben-Chorat, Trithemius,
Gochlenius, Albinus Villanovensis, and Marcellus Empiricus, condemned.

19. What Power the Heavens have over Thing here below.

21. The reason of the Names of the Celestial Images.

21. What Influence the Heavens have upon Artificial things.

THere is nothing in the whole business of Philosophy, that has more
perplexed our new Philosophers, then this Subject, concerning Images, or
Figures, made under some certain Constellations. The greatest part of them
therefore have rejected the Practice of these Operations, as Vain, and
Superstitious: yet some others, who are not so overswayed with Passion, have
both allowed, and defended it; though they have, I confess, suffered for it,
in their repute: insomuch that Galeottus, who is acknowledged by Paulus Jovius
to have been one of the most Learned, and Knowing men of his time; only for
having undertaken the Defense of this Truth, (as we shall make it hereaster
appear,) has been handled by some, like any base, Inconsiderable Fellow; and
Camillus accounted no better, then an Atheistical Wretch. And this is the
usage they bestow upon all the Ablest Men: whereas they ought rather to answer
their Arguments pertinently, and to show the Insufficiency of them, if they
can: but see the Mischief of it. If any of these men chance to be in company,
where there is any mention made of the most Able Scholars, or there be any
Question started, concerning any of those Choice Points of Learning, for which
these men have been Deservedly ranked above the Herd of Vulgar Brains; you
shall have some giddy-headed fellows, that will not stick to say, without
blushing, that they never wrote any thing of any worth at all, nor ever
understood the matter they handled. I my self have heard one say, that
Marsilius Ficinus understood not any thing of Plato's Doctrine; nor Averroe^s
of Aristotle's: and that the Wits of these Times are much quicker, then those of
the Ages past. And now, Reader, thou may judge, whether this Vanity of theirs
be to be endured, or no. But to leave these men to enjoy their own Ignorance,
and referring these Considerations to some other time, we shall only in this
place prove, (against all those that have condemned them,) that the making of
these Figures we here speak of, is Lawful; and the Power they have, is
Natural, Constant, and Certain. In the first place therefore let us consider
their Name.

2. They are called in Hebrew (...) Maghen, that is to say, a Scutcheon, or
Shield: in Chaldie, Egyptian, and Persian, (...), Tsilmenaia, which signifies
a Figure, or Image: in Arabicke (...), Talitsman, or (...), Tsalimam: and in
Greek, (...). The Hebrew word Maghen, though it signific a Scutcheon, or any
other thing, noted with Hebrew Characters, the Virtue whereof is like to that
of a Scutcheon: and although these Characters, according to the Opinion of
those that are most versed in these Theological Mysteries, are sOme kind of
Imperfect Images; yet notwithstanding the word in this place is not properly
taken for an Image that is Graven, carved, or painted; because that the Jews,
in making any such, should have sinned against the Commandment: Thou shall not
make to thy self any graven Image. Maghen therefore signifies Properly any
piece of Paper, or other the like Matter, marked, or noted with certain
Characters drawn from the Tetragrammaton, or Great Name of Four Letters; or
from any other: as we shall show hereafter. This word signifies also, though
Improperly, these very Figures also, and Images, which we speak of; because
that these also, as well as the Characters of the Tetragrammaton, do serve, as
it were, in stead of a Buckler, or shield of Defense, against Diseases,
Lightnings, and Tempests. The Chaldie word, Tsilmenaija, comes from the Hebrew
(...), Tselem, which signifies an Image: and the Arabic word, Talisman, may
likewise have been derived from the same root; Talismam, being corrupted from
(...) Tsalimam, by the Transposition of one letter only: Not. in Flav. Vopisc.
But the truth of this Conjecture is yet uncertain. The Learned Salmasius
gives it another Derivation: for the takes an Occasion to fall foul upon
Scaliger, who derives it from the Arabic, for not considering, that Talisman
is derived from the Greek word (...), hoc est, says he, (...), ut sunt (...)
anuli. But how can the truth of this Derivation be proved? and how shall we be
assured, that Talisman comes from (...), and not rather (...) from the other?
As for the last name that these Images are called by, which is (...), there is
no Difficulty at all in the word: so that it remains now, that we remember,
concerning these Names, that when we speak of Figures, we do not mean those,
that are properly signified by the Hebrew word, Maghen, which are nothing but
Scutcheons noted with Characters, such as many have seen in Paris at the Prince
of Portugals; the like whereof you have in Carlo Fabri his Scudo di Christo,
and in Agrippa: Lib. 1. de Occult. Phil.
we have elsewhere overthrown the Power of These Kinds of Characters, and
showed the vanity of these Fooleries, which are the Issue of some Ignorant
Cabalists Fantastical Brain. Neither shall I speak at all of those Images of
Wax, which Sorcerers are wont to baptize, in the name of Beelzebub; these are
Abominations, which we abhor, although let me tell you by the way, that the
greatest part of those things our Demonographers stuff their writings withal,
are nothing but mere Fables, as ridiculous as the Dreams of the Alcoran. Our
Discourse shall only be, what Natural Power Images, that are made under
certain Constellations, may have; banishing from hence all Operations of
Demons, or Spirits, and all superstitious Powers what ever.

I shall prove therefore this Power of Figures, and Images, three manner of
ways: by the Influence of the Stars: by the Power of Resemblance; and by
Experience. I shall begin with the last of these.

3. First then, it is Certain, and we cannot deny it, without denying the most
Authentic Historiographers that are, that there have been seen, both in Our
days, and in the days of our Fathers, some of these Talismans, or
Talismanicall Figures (for so we shall now call them,) that have cured those,
that have been bitten by Serpents, Scorpions, Mad Dogs, and diverse other
Mischances, that are but too frequent withus. The Ancient Arabians, as
Almansor, Messahala, Zabel, Albohazen, Haly Rhodoam, Albategnius, Homar,
Zachdir, Hahamed, and Serapion give us many examples of this kind; which gave
Haly occasion to conclude, that, Utilem serpentis imaginem effici posse, quando
Luna Serpentem Coelestem subit; aut faeliciter aspicit: Similiter Scorptonis
effigiem efficacem, quando Scorpij signum Luna ingreditur, etc. Neither did he
deliver this Doctrine, without having had Experence of the Effects: for he
affirms, that himself, being in Egypt, had in his hand one of these Images
of a Scorpion, which did cure those that were stung by this Venomous Beast: and
it was engraven upon a Bezahar, or, as it is commonly called, a Bezar-stone. It
will be objected perhaps, that these Arabians are Trifling, Vain Writers; and
therefore that there is little credit to be given to them. But I shall
elsewhere undertake the Vindication of them from this Calumny; and shall at
present, for the satisfaction of Self-willed men, forbear to cite them any
further; but shall content my self with Examples borrowed from such among the
Greeks, and Latins, as are accounted most Authentic.

Gregorius Turonensis, In Hist. Franc.
besides an infinite number of Rarities which he reports of France, says; that
when they were sometime digging in the bridge at Paris, there was found a piece
of Copper, whereon was to be seen the Figure of a Rat, of a Serpent, and of a
Fire: which being afterward neglected, and peradventure either broken to
pieces, or some way or other spoiled, there was observed, in a very short time
after, a great number of Serpents, and Rats to haunt the City; and they do
greatly annoy it still: and we cannot, without grief, call to mind, the many
great Losses the City has since that time endured by Fire: all which Sad
Accidents were never heard of here, before the taking up of this Strange Plate
of Copper.

It is also reported, Camerar. lib. 3. cap. 20.
that after that Mahomet the Second had possessed himself of Constantinople,
the breaking of the Lower Jaw of a Brazen Serpent, was the cause of the
increasing of Serpents in those Parts. So true it is, that these Talismans have
Power to divert many of those Calamities, that afflict Mankind. And who knows
not, that by the means of These, the Learned men of the Ages past have
oft-times chaced away Insects out of their Cities, and fields; Chil. 3. c. 60.
Circa. ^^. 1160.
as Gnats, Locusts, and Caterpillars? If any desire to see some of these
Examples, he may have recourse to the Chiliads of John Tzetzes; where this
Greek Author, (who lived about the time of that Excellent Historian Anna
Comnena, daughter to the Emperor Alexius Comnenus,) reports, that Apollonius,
by making a Talisman of a Stork, kept these Troublesome Birds from coming into
Constantinople; and by another Talisman, he drove away all the Gnats out of
Antioch. You may also see Ptolomies Centiloquium, Athor. 9. Ad marc. Vels.
Epist. 157. and 130. Et in Manil.
and the Commentary of Abre Gefar, falsely attributed to Haly, as it is observed
by Scaliger.

Furthermore, I am of Opinion, that the First Gods of the Latins, which they
called Averrunci, or Dij Tutelares, were no other then these Talismanicall
Images: and I ground this my Conjecture from hence, that there are some
Historians that affirm, that they made some of these Tutelar Gods, under
certain Constellations: but the poison of Idolatry having infected the best of
Sciences, was the cause, that, these Images being afterward taken for Gods,
the true, and legitimate manner of making them was smothered, and quite lost.
They were wont also to set up some of these Talismans upon the Prow of their
Ships, to preserve them from Shipwreck: and all this to be done Naturally too;
seeing that a Talisman may be made, under the Sign of Pisces, that may, for
some certain time, render the Waters Calm, and free from Tempests. The Greeks,
(as Hesychius, and Herodotus, called these Figures,) set up in Ships, (...) a
word, no doubt, borrowed from the Hebrew (...) Pitochim, which signifies as
much as Coelaturae: and therefore the Chaldie Paraphrase renders it, by this
our (...) Tsilmenaija. Now we are to take notice, that these Figures were not
at all of any Humane form, but of some Celestial Figure, or other; which
confirms me in the Belief, that they were real Talismans. Nevertheless the
Mariners had also their Statues of some Deity or other, as of Mars, Apollo,
Venus, Mercury, and the like; which they placed at the Poop, or hinder part of
their Ships: whence Virgil says:

-- Aurato fulgebat Apolline puppis And Persius:
-- Jacet ipse in littore, and una Ingentes de puppe Dei.
Which gave occasion to the Poets to feign, that Jupiter stole away Europa,
under the shape of a Bull; because the Ship of the Cretians, Vid. Heurn. Phil.
Barb.
who stole her away, had, for it is Talisman, the Figure of the Celestial Sign
Taurus, and, for it is Deity, a Statue of Jupiter. The like Original might,
probably, that other Fable of Ganimed have had; who is said to have been
carried away by an Eagle, the Bird Proper to the same God. You may see further,
concerning this Particular, in Sextus Pompeius, lib. de Europa, and Lactantius,
Cap. 11.
lib. de Falsa Religione. This custom of Mariners setting up of these
Talismans, or Images, in their Vessels, against Shipwracks, is so Ancient, that
they say, that among those that came with Aeneas from Troy, there was One that
had the Figure of two Lions: that the Gadarenes had one, with the Image of a
Horse: and that the Ship of Alexandria, which St. Paul sailed in, had the
Images of Castor and Pollux, or, according to the Arabians, the Gemini graved
on it: and that which carried Hippocrates, when he took his journey to Abdera,
for the curing of Democritus, bare the Figure of the Sun. Now all these
Talismans were not made so much for the avoiding of Shipwreck only, as for the
turning away of sOme other Disastrous Accidents, or the procuring of some good
Fortune, or other. And from this practice of the Ancients have the Christians
taken Example, though in a Christian way, of having Images in their Vessels,
and Picturing in them the Saints whose names they bear.

6. But since that I am unawares fallen upon this Choice Piece of Antiquity, I
shall here further add, that these Talismans were not set up in Cities only,
and Ships, but also in the plain, open Fields too: and it may be, that that
Stone so much famed among the Turks, which they call Bractan, and is set up at
Mecha, being four foot long, and two foot broad, as Suidas reports, was only a
Talisman. For otherwise we must even content our selves with Turkish Fables,
and believe, that it would never have been so highly prized by them, but for
that it served instead of a Bed to Abraham, when he had knoweldge of his Maid
Hagar: For, besides that this is ridiculous, the Turks will never acknowledge
themselves to the Bastards, and descended from a Servant-maid; but from Sarah:
and this is the reason, that they are so much delighted in being called
Sarasins. Others say, that the reason why the Turks have this Stone in so much
Veneration, is, because that Abraham tied his Camel to it, when he went up to
the top of the Mountain to sacrifice his son; as Enthymius Zigabenus
affirms: In Panopl.
or, as some others of the more Trifling sort of the Arabian Writers will have
it, because it was erected in memory of a certain Holy Woman, who was taken up
into Heaven, and afterward honored upon Earth as a Goddess, for having very
charitably entertained the Angels Arot, and Marot. That which moved these later
to forge these Fables, was the Figure of Venus, which is ingraved upon this
Stone, with a Crescent: and this is that which makes me believe, that it was a
Talisman of this Planet, which, as Mr. Seldom says, Syntag. 2. c. 4.
was anciently taken, throughout all Asia, for the Moon. And for this Cause it
is, that this People has Friday in the same Veneration, that Sunday is with
us: and that, in memory of this Star, which all the Asians worshipped, the
ridges of their Houses, and tops of their Temples were adorned with little
Crescents, as ours are with Crosses. Now it cannot be thought, that this Stone
was only a bare, simple Image, erected in honor of Venus: for, besides that
it was placed in the Open Fields, and not within any Temple; it had that
Virtue, which no other Image of this Goddess ever had. For it drove away,
says Zachder, all Venomous Beasts, and rendered all the neighboring Fields
both Happy, and Fruitful: which is so far from being observed in them at
this day, that, on the contrary, they are all utterly barren. And this agrees
excellently well with the Nature of these Talismans, whose Operation lasts
but for some certain space of time; as Albertus Magnus assures us. Non lateat
nos, De Mirabaract. 3. c. 3.
faith he, quod situt virtutes Naturales perdurant in quodam tempore, and non
ultra; it a etiam est de virtutibus Imaginum. Non enim influit aliqua virtus de
coelo, nisi quodam tempore periodi; postea cassa and inutilis remanet Imago
frigida and mortua. Et haec est causa, quare quaedam Imagines non operantur hot
tempore, quod fecerunt tempore antique. From the diversity of Opinions
concerning this Talismanitall Stone, it may be judged how many Fabulous Stories
have been raised touching those Artificial Images; as namely, of those which
were called (...), which were broken to pieces by the Latins, at their entering
into Constantinople: of the Palladium, of which there are so many Wonders
reported, and which perhaps was nothing else but a Talisman: of those Images of
the Amorhites, which, as Philo Judaeus reports, were called Nymphae sacrae,
which showed to their slaves hourly, what soever they were to do: Biblic. ant.
and, which being at last quite decayed, an Angel of the Lord, (seeing they
could neither be broken to pieces, nor burnt in the Fire) took, and cast into
a Bottomless Pit. Fine fooleries these; And here, Reader, thou art to take
notice, that the Greeks were the first, that turned these Truths into Fables;
for having lighted on some of these Images, that had been made long before,
and seeing them to have such Admirable, Strange Virtues in them; being unable
to apprehend the reason of these things, they presently betook themselves to
forging of Old, Ridiculous stories of These, as they have done of All Other
things, the truth whereof they understood not.

7. And here, two Questions may be asked: the First is, whether the Holy
Scriptures make any mention of these Talismanicall Figures, or not? and the
Second; when they were first Invented; and by whom?

To the First of these I answer, that as in none of the Translations, so
neither in the Original Hebrew is the name of these Talismans found: although
there are of those men that attribute all things to the Power of Nature only,
as Atheists do, who stick not to affirm, that the Brazen Serpent, set up by
Moses in the Wilderness, was but a mere Talisman, which drove away Serpents,
and healed the bitings of them. But this their Opinion is confuted by this;
that the Matter, of which a Talisman is made, must not be any whit contrary to
the Nature of the Grief which it is to cure. Now all the Rabbis, Vid. Pont.
Bibl. conc. col. 2. in Igno. S. Cruc. p. 270.
who have treated upon this History, affirm; that, according to the Opinion of
all the Naturalists, there is nothing more contrary to those that are bitten by
Vipers, then to touch, or look upon Copper: so that this should have added to
the Israelites Torment, and more invenomed their Wound, rather then have cured
them. And this was the reason perhaps, why God commanded Moses to make a
Serpent of Brass, rather then of Any Other Metal; that so this Incredulous
People might know, that seeing that God cured them by a Remedy, quite contrary
to their Disease; he was able as well to bring them safely into the place, to
which they despaired of ever arriving. And here by the way, I cannot excuse
Marsilius Ficinus, who without any ground at all has charged the Rabbis with
having a belief, that their Forefathers made the Golden Calfe in the
Wilderness, to no other end, then to serve as a Talisman, for the diverting of
the Influences of Mars, and Scorpio, which are Adverse to them. Hebraei quoque,
De vit. Call. comp. l. 3. c. 13.
says he, in Egypto nutriti, struere vitulum aureum didicerant, ut eorundem
Astrologi putant, ad aucupandum Veneris, Lunaeque favorem, contra Scorpionis,
atque Martis influxum, Judaeis infestum. But this is idle.

To the second Question, I answer, that it will require the Spirit of
Divination, to assign the first Invention of these Talismanicall Images to its
right Author: yet it cannot be denied but that the Persians, or, if you will,
the Babylonians, or Chaldeans were the First that found them out; as you may
see in R. Moses his Ductor Dubiorum, where he tells us, that the Egyptians, and
their Neighbors, whom he calls, Gens Zabi^rum, Cazedim, and Aranim, learnt this
Doctrine of them. And though we had no other testimony but this, that
throughout the whole Eastern part of the World there are yet to be seen some of
these Talismans, which are very Ancient ones; it would be an undeniable
Argument, that the Eastern Men were the First Inventers of them.

8. Some of those Talismans have now quite lost their Virtue; as namely, that
Leaden one, which was made by Achmed Ben-Tolon, Caliph. of Egypt, which drove
away Crocodiles; Exercit. 186.
as Julius Scaliger has observed: as also those that have been communicated
unto Me by Mr. du Val, a man very excellently well skilled in these
Curiosities, and whose Closet affords a vast number of them. I am now upon
causing the choysest of his Talismans to be cut in Brass; and it had been done
long ere this, had I not expected some which Mr. de Peyresc has promised me. I
am informed also, that M. Pontus of Lion has some few of these; which I shall
also endeavor to procure, that I may join them with those, which are promised
to be sent me, out of Italy, and Germany: and if I shall find that they are
right, I intend to publish them to the World, and to discover This Secret,
which all the Learned do either bewail, as a Thing Lost to the World; or else,
as of extreme Difficulty: and shall also show, how that all those, that have
made any of these Figures, have mixed such Superstitions with it, as are indeed
justly condemned.

Now some of these Talismans are yet of as much Virtue, as they were at first:
witness that which is spoken of by the Arabicke Cosmographer, (who is a very
Authenticke Writer,) and is cited by Joseph Scaliger. Epist. (...) Vazet.
This Talisman, he says, is to be seen in the Country of Hamptz, in a City
bearing the same Name; and it is only the Figure of a Scorpion, graved upon
one of the Stones in a certain Tower; which is of so great Virtue, as that it
suffers not any, either Serpent, or Scorpion, to come within the City. And if
any one, for Experiment Sake, bring one of these out of the Field into the
city; it is no sooner at the gate, but that it dies suddenly. This Figure has
this Virtue besides; that when any one is stung by a Scorpion, or bitten by any
other Serpent; they need but take the Image of the Stone with a little Clay,
and apply it to the Wound, and it is instantly healed. If any one doubt of the
credit of this Cosmographer, Page 33.
he may yet adventure to believe Mr. de Breves, as having been an Eyewitness
of the like experiment: Who says, in his Travels, that at Tripoli, a City of
Syria, within a wall, that reaches from the Seaside to the gate of the City,
there is a certain Enchanted Stone; on which is figured, in Relief, or by way
of Imbossement, the figure of a Scorpion; which was there placed by a Magician,
for to drive away Venomous beasts, which infested this Province; as the Serpent
of Brass, in the Hippodromus, at Constantinople, did. And a little above the
City, there is a certain Cave, which is full of the Carcasses, and bones of
Serpents which dyed at that time.

These are his own words, translated. Now whereas he calls this an Enchanted
stone, and says, that it was placed there by a Magician; you must note, that
he there speaks according to the Sense of the Inhabitants, who knew not how to
give any other account of the thing; as not understanding any thing at all of
the Natural reason of it; as we have said. At Byzantium, which is now
Constantinople, there were many of these Talismanicall Figures to be seen: but
the fury of War has demolished them all, to the great Prejudice of the
Inhabitants. Sultan Mahumet also caused one of them to be broken to pieces,
which was a Brazen Horse, with a Horseman upon him; which is certainly reported
to have preserved the City from Pestilence, and all Contagion of the Air: but
since that time, this Disease has raged so fiercely, as that in the space of
four Months, Leunclavius, who was present, affirms, that there died a Hundred
and fifty Thousand persons: and every year, Annot. in Annal. Turc. number. 130
in the Months of July, and August, the like Effect, in a manner, is to be
seen. In a word, all Asia was full of these Figures; the Use whereof was at
length, known to the Europaeans also: for the Druides, In his Admiranda
Galliar. and in his book which he calls Antiquissimae Gallorum Philsophiae
eclog. cap. de Druidarum Astrologia.
as the learned Frey reports, used these Talismans with good success; and even
our Grandfathers have assured us, that it was an Ancient Tradition; that where
the Fairies, the Druides Wives, inhabited; there, neither Hail, nor Storms
ever spoiled the Fruits. And the reason, in my opinion, was; because they used
to make of these Talismans. Now of late, many Learned men have rescued from
Oblivion these Figures; and Paracelsus did take so much pains herein, as that
he made diverse of them; and those of such Virtue, as that they preserved those
that wore them, from the Pestilence; as, many in Germany have had experience
of. And that I may not wander far abroad, I am informed that for certain, Mr.
Laneau preserved from this Disease, all those to whom he gave any of these
Talismans; which he made, according to Those, described by Marsilius Ficinus.
Those also which Paracelsus calls Zenexton, by a Made Name, (it being the
custom of this Author, to devise New Words,) are made with exceeding great
Art. In one of them there is a Scorpion, and a Serpent figured: and he says it
must be made, when the Sun, and the Moon enter into the Sign of Scorpio: In
another you have a great number of little Holes, within an Oval. You may see
the Figures of them, in the Chimicall works of Crollius. In Bafil. Chim.


It may be here Objected, that this Author, whose practice we have alleged,
was a Suspected person; and that his Writings are not free from Magic. This
Objection I shall take occasion to answer, at another time; and shall at
present produce such Figures only, as have been made by men, that are beyond
all Exception.

Junctin, upon the Sphere of Sacrobosco, Cap. 2.
affirms, that his Master, who was a Carmelite, named Julianus Ristorius a
Prato, one that was not any whit superstitious, was entreated by a Friend of
his, to make one of these Images, for the cure of the Cramp, which he was very
much subject to. This Learned man, resenting his Friends sufferings, taught him
the manner how to make one: so that He, not content to make only one; made
diverse of them, when the Moon was in the Sign Cancer; and that with so good
success, and with such certainty, as that he immediately found the benefit of
it. Confecit, says he, plures imagines, pro se, and amicis suis: quibus
effectis; unam pro se accepit, and liberatus est. The same he reports of a
certain Florentine, a very Pious man; who made one of these Talismans; for to
drive away the Gnats; which he did with good success. Nocolaus Florentinus,
says he, vir religiosus, fecit in una constellatione annulum, ad expellendum
Culices, quas vulgo Zanzaras dicimus, sub certis et determinatis imaginibus; et
usus fuit constellatione Saturni infortunati, and expulit Culices. What more
can be said, both for the Innocence, and Power of these Figures? Let who will
condemn those that defend this Truth, and cry down these Testimonies: for my
part, I shall ever acknowledge them to be both Certain, and Natural; and do
withal protest, that I see nothing in it, that is above the Power of Nature.

The Second Means which I have proposed to my self to use, for the proving of
the Power of these Figures, is, the Power and Virtue of the Resemblance that
there is, betwixt the Scorpion, and its Image, and the Constellation that bears
the name of this Living Creature. I shall then prove this Virtue, by an
Induction of that, which Resemblance alone produces, throughout all Arts and
Sciences, as Divinity, Philosophy, Physic, Astrology, Physiognomy, Divination
of Dreams, Painting, Sculpture, Music, etc.

9. Those then, that are well skilled in the Secrets of the Theology of the
Ancients, assure us, Galcot. cap. 28.
that those that first set up Images in their Temples, resembling the shapes of
Angels that have appeared upon Earth, had no other design in so doing, save
only the more easily to invite down those Blessed Spirits, by the force of the
Resemblance. And I know not whether or no, by the very same Virtue of
Resemblance, which is found betwixt God and Men; (Faciamus hominem ad imaginem,
and similitudinem nostram:) it has not rightly been affirmed by some Divines,
that the Son of God would nevertheless have become man, (yet without
suffering death,) though Adam had never fallen. But speaking of things, as they
are now at present, we know, that Jesus Christ is found in the midst of those,
that speak, with Faith, of his Name: because that when we speak with Affection
of any One, we represent him to our selves in our Imagination. When therefore,
speaking of Jesus Christ, we fancy him as he is; he is instantly present with
us, appearing to our Hearts at that very Instant, that we There frame his Image
by our Imagination. So true it is, that Resemblance has the Power to work
Wonders, even upon him that has Dependence upon no other, and is not under any
Power, or Law. But such Conceptions as these are to be entertained with all
Piety, and Humility; and proposed with such Sanctity, as becomes those that
speak of so Adorable a Subject.

10. Philosophy also lets us see the Virtue of this Resemblance, in the
business of the Imagination. For if a woman with Child did but strongly fix
her Imagination upon any Object, during the Act of Copulation, the Child will
assuredly bear the perfect Image of the same. Every Child knows the Story of
the Princess, that conceived and brought forth a Black-Moore, though her self
and her husband were both of them Fair; only, because there was a Moore
pictured on the Testern of the Bed. So if the Mother in the Act, either
strongly Fancy Robbing, Killing, or Love, the Child will be either a Thief,
Murderer, or an Amorous person: if she fancy Traveling, he will be a
Traveller; if Dancing, or playing on the Lute, he will be very Apt for These
Things; and so of the rest. And we see by daily experience, the Effects of the
strong Desires, and Longings of Mothers, during the time of their being with
Child, upon their Children; on whom the strength of their Imagination has
imprinted the Resemblance of the same thing that they have desired. And hence
they say it is, that the Children that are got upon a Married Woman, by some
Other Man then her own Husband, shall notwithstanding have the Perfect
Resemblance of her Husband; because that, during the Act of Generation, her
Mind still runs on Him, fearing lest he should come, and catch them at it. See
what we have said, at the end of the precedent Chapter, touching these Marks,
caused by the Imagination; and how they were presently affected, upon the
Parties eating that, which they bare the Resemblance of. You may further see
the wonderful effects caused by the power of the Imagination, learnedly
discoursed on, by Paracelsus, Marsilius Ficinus, Picus Mirandula, Tostatus,
Valesius, and Medina.

11. Physic likewise observes the Admirable Effects, caused by Resemblance:
Lib. 2. de Morb. invisib. Lib. 13. de Theol. Platon. De Imaginat. In Genesis C.
30. De Sac. Phis. C. 11. De rect. in Deum fid. c. 7.
witness those Herbs, which assuage the griefs of those parts of our body,
whose Image they bear, (as we have already said:) or else which cure those
Diseases, whose figure, or color they bear. Thus Lentills, and Rape-seed cure
the small pox in Children; because that the Grains are like to the spots of
this Disease. And Rhubarb, which is of a yellow color, expels Choler, which is
of the same color. In a word, those Plants which are Barren, or Fruitful, as
Porta says, do render those that use them, Barren, or Fruitful: the Fair,
makes them Fair; the Deformed, make them Deformed; the Imperfect, make them
imperfect: so that he concludes, Phylogn. lib. 1. c. 8, 9, and 10.
with Theophrastus; Accedunt stirpium aliquot genera deficientium, vel folio,
vel radice, vel alijs partibus, eademque ratione membris illis nostri corporis
respondentibus, infesta, noxiaque sunt. The same he also affirms of Living
Creatures. Eadem ratione ad animalia transeundo, si aliquibus membris deficisse
videmus, eadem membris nostris adversantur. For which reason, the eating of
those Creatures which have no blood, does wast ours; and so of all the other
parts. And it is observed, that in France there are more Lepers, then in any
other Kingdom, by reason of the great store of Hogs-flesh that is eaten there:
So true it is, that our bodies become like unto that, which we use to feed on.
And for this reason also is Hercules said to have been very strong, because he
fed upon the Marrow of Lions, the strongest among Beasts.

12. Astrology also shows the Virtue of Resemblance, judging of the Qualities
of the Child, by those of the Stars. For Mars casting forth a glittering, red
light, makes the Child that is borne under its Influence, of a red color also.
Saturn, who is of a pale, faint color, makes him pale, and wan. Jupiter, and
Venus, which cast forth bright, clear, and pleasant beams, makes the Child
beautiful, and pleasant. The like is observed also in other Qualities; so
that, if the Signs be High, and in their Apogaeum, the Child (say the
Arabians) shall be in like manner of a Tall, and Great Stature: if they are
Low; he shall be Low, and of a little Stature. As concerning Motion, Saturn,
which has a slow, and Heavy one, makes the Child likewise Heavy and Lazy: the
Moon, which has a Swift Motion, makes him Light, and Inconsiderate. You may
have the fuller prosecution of this Discourse, in those two Learned Italians,
Cardan, De cent. genit. loc. cit.
and Porta: who confidently affirm, that a man may likewise foretell
certainly, any other the like Qualities that a Child shall be subject to, by
the Figures, and other Qualities of the Meteors. Thus a man may conclude, that
we shall see Armies, Battles, and Wars break forth, after that Lances of Fire,
Swords, Trumpets, and Bucklers have been seen to appear in the Air: And
chiefly, when a Comet has appeared; of which it is usually said, Nunquam
impune visus Cometa. And so likewise we may conclude, there will be great
Effusion of Blood, if all these Meteors are Redder then Ordinary: or, when the
Sun and Moon, in the time of an Eclipse, seem bloody. And if they be Pale, and
Wanne, and of a dead color, we may conclude there will follow great Mortality
by the Pestilence; which makes those, that are infected with it, pale, wanne,
and colourlesse.

13. Physiognomy likewise shows us most Prodigious Effects of Resemblance, and
of Figures. For if a man endeavor to counterfeit any other man's Countenance,
and that he fancy himself to have His hair, eyes, nose, mouth, and all other
parts like Him; and, in a word, if he imagine himself to be like him in his
Physiognomy; he may by this means come to know, what his Natural
Inclinations, and what his Thoughts are, by the same, which he finds in
Himself, during the time of this his Making of Faces. This Opinion is grounded
upon the Experience of Campanella, Ee sensu rerum and Magia.
who expresses himself in these words. Cum quis hominem videt, statim
imaginari oportet, fe nasum habere, ut alter habet, et pilum, and vultum, and
frontem, and locutionem: et tunc qui affectus, et cognitationes in hac
cogitatione illi obrepunt, judicat homini illi essE proprios, quem ita
imaginando contuetur. Hoc non absque ratione and Experientia. Spiritus enim
format corpus, et juxta affectus innatos ipsum fingit, exprimitque. I always
thought, that the opinion of Campanella was, that a man should only imagine
himself to have the same Countenance with the Other; as his words seem to
mean: but when I was at Rome, understanding that he was brought into the
Inquisition. I did, out of Curiosity to be satisfied in this Particular, take
the pains to visit him there. Being therefore in the company of some Abbots,
we were brought to the Chamber where he was: who, as soon as he perceived us,
came to us and entreated us to have a little patience, til he had ended a
little Note, which he was writing to Cardinal Magaloti. When we were sat
down, we observed him oftentimes to make certain wry Faces; which we conceived
to proceed, either from folly, or else from some Pain, that the Violence of the
Torments, which he had endured, put him too: the calves of his Legs being all
beaten black and blew, and his buttocks having hardly any Flesh on them; it
having been torn from him piece-meale, to the end they might force him to
confess the Crimes that he was accused of. But a Learned German will shortly
publish the History of his Life, and Misfortunes. To return then to our
purpose, one of our company, amongst other discourse, asking him, if he felt no
pain: He, smiling, answered, No. And supposing that we had been something
troubled at the Wry FAces which he made, he told us; that, at our coming in,
he fancied himself to be Cardinal Magaloti, as he had heard him described: and
he asked Us withal, if he were not a very hairy man. Now, I, who had before
read that Passage in his Book, which I have before set down, presently
conceaved, that these Wry Faces are altogether Necessary, for to be able to
judge aright of another man's Natural Inclination. I shall not here set down
what passed betwixt us, in this Interview; because it is wholly besides my
present Subject. I shall now therefore rerurne to the Effects which are found
in Physiognomy, and are produced by the force of Resemblance. We see then by
experience, and all knowing Physiognomists have observed it; that if a man have
a Round Forehead, he is very subject to Folly, and Lightness, being very
easily moved any way; in like manner as a Round Figure is the most apt for
motion: and the Natural reason of this, is, because that the Spirits ascending
up, and meeting with a place of a Round Figure, they are very easily moved any
way. It is also observed, that those that have a Sharp Chin, that stands
forward, and a little Forehead, are very Brutish, and Stupid: in a Word, they
are qualited like a Hog, whose image they in a manner bear. And without
troubling my self any further with bringing in Instances of this nature; you
may have recourse to the Physiognomists, who will furnish you with good store
of them: by which you will be able to judge, how great the Virtue, and Power is
of Resemblance, and Figures.

14. The Art of Divination of Dreams is also grounded upon Resemblance, as may
appear out of the Holy Bible; Genesis 40.
where Joseph foretold the Cupbearer, that within three days he should be
restored to his office again: because he had dreamed, that he pressed three
clusters of grapes into Pharaohs Cup. But he foretold the Baker, that after
three days he should be hanged, and his Flesh should be eaten by the birds of
the Air; because that He also had dreamed, that he bare three baskets full; and
that the birds eat up all that was in them. He foretold also the seven years of
Plenty, and the seven years of dearth, by the seven Fat Kine, and the seven
Lean Ones; and by the seven Full ears of Corn, and the seven Thin ones;
according as Pharaoh had dreamed. Profane Histories also affoard us many
Examples of this kind, proving the power of Similitudes. For Hecuba, being with
Child, dreamed that she was delivered of a Firebrand, which burnt up her
Kingdom: and this was Paris, who was afterward the cause of the burning of
Troy down to the ground. I shall here add moreover, that this Resemblance of
Dreams has oftentimes been so powerful, as that, what one has dreamed, he
has afterward seen really come to pass. Thus Cornelius Ruffus, Plin. lib. 7.
c. 50.
dreaming that he had lost his sight, became shortly after quite blind. A like
story to this is related by Galen, in his book, De Praesag. ex Insomn. And the
Reader may have recourse to those Authors, that have written of this Subject;
as Nicephorus, Solomon Judaeus, Synesius, Plato, Cicero, Valerius Maximus,
Cardan, and Artemidorus; who have examined all that Chrysippus, Antipater,
Artemones, Jamblichus, Aristides, Apomazar the Arabian, and Scirnachan the
Indian have said concerning this Particular.

15. Painting and Sculpture do also wonderfully confirm this Power of Figures;
for as much as those that are Sad, and Weeping Pieces, do make us so sad, as
that they sometimes draw Tears from our Eyes; and the Merry, and Cheerful
Pieces, make us Joyful, and cause us to laugh. And this is the reason, why
these Later are very seldom made use of in Holy matters; and the Former Sort
are so Frequent in our Churches, where we shall oftener find Jesus Christ
pictured on the Cross, then Rising from the Dead; or, Sitting at the right
hand of his Father: because that, besides that the Painting him in that
Posture, puts us in mind both of our Redemption, and of his Love toward us,
who being Immortal, would yet become Man, that so he might be in a Capacity to
Die for Us; it also moves us, by the Virtue of Resemblance, to be sad, as It
is: so great is the power it has over us. Est enim Similitudo, says Porta,
pictus sermo, vel pictura loquens, quae quovis sermon, quibusve notis
Valentior est.

16. Lastly, the secret Virtues of Resemblance, and of Figures, appear as well
in Music, as in any other of the Sciences. Thus it is storied of Timotheus
the Musician, that by the Diversity of Voices, and Tones, which he ordered
according to the several kinds of Humors, he was able to raise up in a man any
sort of Passion that he pleased. And we find by daily Experience, Vid. Senec.
lib. 3. de Ira, c. 9. Plin. l. 28. c. 2. Corn. Cells. l. 3. c. 18.
that Merry songs make Us Merry, and sad ones, make us Melancholy. The Music
of the Lydians, as Plato reports, being very Effeminate, made the Hearers also
Effeminate: on the contrary, that of the Phrygians made men Courageous,
Manlike, and Undaunted. I shall not here set down, what some have delivered,
of the Power that Music has in the Curing of Diseases, only by the Harmony,
and Proportionable mixture of Tones; as it is reported of Pythagoras, who is
said to have cured Mad men; as Terpander did, those that were Deaf; and Damon,
See the learned Ferrerius, de Curand. rationem Homerica.
those that were Drunk. As for Musical Instruments, it is most Certain, that
we may make diverse of them sound together, without touching them; provided
that they be all Exactly Tuned to the same Pitch, and Tone, that That other is,
which a man shall play on: And although the sound of the others will be very
Faint, and hardly perceivable to the sense; yet you shall plainly perceive the
Motion that the Strings do make, if you lay but a feather, or some other such
light thing upon them. How Admirable then is this Resemblance, which does every
where produce such wonderful Effects! Quidnam hic efficit, says Marsilius
Ficinus, ut Cithara subito patiatur a Cithara, nisi situs aliquis, et quaedam
Figura conformis?

If then Resemblance has so great Power, in all those things which we have now
showed; we may very safely conclude, that it can have no less in that of
Talismanicall Figures; and this we may be the more Confident of, since we are
confirmed herein by Experience it self.

It now remains, that we prove this Power to be Natural, by the Third means
which we proposed; namely, by the Virtue of the Stars. And this we shall very
easily be able to do, after we have first showed the manner, which the more
Learned sort do observe, in preparing these Images: I say, the more Learned
sort; because I know very well, that many are not so Accurate in their
Observations; as we shall show hereafter; although they do notwithstanding
sometimes find the Effect answer their desires; but it is, after a longer time,
then otherwise it would be.

17. First of all then, they usually propose to themselves, what Effect they
would have these Images produce; whether to chase away some Hurtful Beasts;
or, to allay the violence of Winds; to prevent Lightnings, and Hail; to cure
certain Diseases, and the like. This being first proposed, they then search
after the Means, that may be proper for the attaining to the End Proposed: as,
for Example, for the Cure of the Dropsy, it is to be considered, that the
Disease consists in Moisture: they are therefore not to take any Matter
indifferently, for to ingrave, and form, under such and such Constellations;
but it must be something, that is of a substance Naturally Hot, and Dry.
Secondly, they must take, for the Ascendent, some Sign that is likewise Hot and
Dry; as Aries, for instance, is said to be. In the Third place, they must make
choice of some Star, to which this Malady is subject; such as Saturn is said
to be: but there being need also of some Star that is very moist, (to the end
that Sympathy, which is so powerful in all things, may assist also in this
particular;) they may take the Moon in her Wane. For, as the Curing of the
Biting of a Viper, they mix some of Its flesh, with the Antidote; in like
manner, for the expelling of these Waterish Humors, we must make use of that
Star, which has the greatest Affinity with the Waters. You must also observe
the Sign, which relates to the part of the body that is ill-affected: and this
is the Counsel of a learned Physician, Parcels. in Paragram.
who says, that; Oportet Medicum absque defectu scire, ubi cauda Draconis sit
in homine, ubi Aries, ubi Axis Polaris, ubi sit linea Meridionalis, ubi Oriens,
ubi Occidens, etc. Now that the Signs have more Agreement with, and have
stronger Influence upon one part of the body, then another; we are certainly
taught by daily Experience, in the curing of Wounds. We must also have regard,
if it be possible, to the Stars to which the Sick person is subject: and then
in the last place, we must above all things take care to begin our Work, under
some certain Aspects, which are only useful in the Operation, some for to shed
their Influences with more Heat, or Cold; and others, with less; as occasion
shall require. So that all things being thus diligently observed, the Beams of
the Stars, finding a Figure aptly disposed for the receiving them, do make such
an Impression in it, by the Resemblance and Harmony that they there find, as
that being once taken in, they do afterward Operate on that which they find
to be semblable. In all the other Operations, they proceed after the same
manner: as, for Example, to chase away Scorpions out of any place, they take
the Sign, with which they have some Correspondence; such as is the Sign
Scorpio: then do they take some Malignant star, which is Adverse to them; it
being not so necessary to observe so many rules in Beasts, and other
Irrational Creatures, as in Men. Now when the Figure of a Scorpion is thus
prepared, the Living Scorpions feeling naturally the Offensive Influence,
wherewith the Image is endued; they presently avoid the place, for their own
preservation; or else, if they be too near it, they presently dye. If it be
thought by any a Hard thing to conceive, how these Living Creatures should have
any sense of this Influence; let them but consider, that there are some Persons
that bear so strange a hatred to Cats, or other like Beasts, as that if there
be any within the house where they are, they do presently fall into a
Sweating, and Trembling, although they see them not. It is reported also, that
there is a certain Herb, that Cats will sent at a very great distance:
insomuch that, if one lay it upon the top of a House, or in a Chamber, you
shall have them come from very far, to tumble, and roll themselves on it. Many
things are delivered by the Naturalists, which are in appearance much more
Incredible then These. It therefore now remains only, that I answer three
Doubts which are proposed; namely, Whether the Stars have any Influence upon
things here below, or not? Whether they have any Resemblance with them? And,
Whether Artificial Figures can retain their Influences, and afterward
Operate by them? as we have said.

18. But first of all I must lay down this, for a most certain Conclusion, and
Foundation; That the Stars, and their Influences in these Figures, have no
Power at all over our Wills. And therefore do I account, as Ridiculous,
Damnable, and Scandalous, those Operations, which Albinus Villanovensis says,
may be effected by means of these Images: In Magia Astr.


Ad fugandos latrones.
Ut Mulieres transeuntes super imaginem, rideant and cantent.
Ad sistendum equum in cursu. Vid. infra cap. 7.

Ad recipiendam substantiam ablatam.
Ad expugnandos hosts, etc.
and many others: De trib. Imagine. Magic. Veter-Sophor. Sigill. De Sigillis.
to which we may add those of Thebit Ben-Chorat; and the greatest part of
those of Trithemius, and of Gochlenius; the Invention whereof we do utterly
reject, and condemn the Practice, as being Vain, and of no Effect at all; as
well as those of Marcellus Empiricus, who says, that to cure the Pain that is
bred in the Gut, which is called Colum, which passes from the Right Kidney to
the Left, Commonly called the Colic.
and goes along by the bottom of the Stomach, you must make a Talisman of a
thin plate of Gold, and ingrave on it these following Characters. But first, if
you have but a mind to be merry a little, take notice of these his
Observations. The plate of Gold must be graved with an Instrument pointed with
the same Metal, and when the Moon is twenty days old. And when it is graved,
it must be put into a little pipe of Gold, covered at the top with goats skin;
and then it must be tied with a thong of the same leather to the Right, or Left
foot of the Patient, according to the side he is pained on. And he that is to
use this Remedy, must not have any knowledge of a Woman, especially of a woman
with Child: and he must be sure not to go among Tombs, or Graves. And lastly,
he must above all, take care to put on his left shoe, before his right. You
shall hear this Author speak in his own words; and that more impertinently, and
superstitiously, then any that ever handled this subject, which has been so
much cried down, (merely for the many Fooleries that have been mixed with it,)
by people that would never take the pains to make choice of the Good, Lib. de
Medicam. Physicis.
and let the Bad alone. Sed dum, says he, utitur quis hoc praeligamine
abstineat Venere; and ne mulierem, aut praegnantem contingat, nec Sepulchrum
ingrediatur, omnino servare debebit. Ad ipsum autem Coli dolorem penitus
evitandum, ut sinistrum pedem semper prius calciet observabit. The rest is too
long, and too ridiculous to be inserted here. The Characters of this
Superstitious inscription on talisman L * THPIA

L * THPIA

L * THPIA

Talisman, which I produce for no other reason, then that the Reader may be
able to distinguish, with me, betwixt the False, and the True ones, are These,
here set down.

And now it is no hard matter to conceive, how the Power of Talismans comes at
this day to be so undervalued; for those that have written of this Subject,
have mixed so many both Confused, and Dangerous things together in their
writings; that people making no distinction at all betwixt the Good and the
Bad, do equally abhor all, whatsoever bears but the very name of Figure, or
Talisman. But we shall, in the prosecution of this Discourse, sever the good
Corn from the Darnell; and shall show, that, in the Making of these Figures,
all words are indifferent; and that they serve but to amuse the simpler sort of
people. As, when Albinus Villanovensis says, that for to cure the Tertian, and
Quartan Ague, the pain of the Nerves, Ventricle, and Privy parts, you must
grave the Image of a Scorpion upon a piece of Gold, or Silver, when the Sun is
in his proper House, and the Moon in Capricorn: and while you are graving it,
you must say these words: Exurge Domine, gloria mea; Exurge Psalterium, and
Cithara; exurgam diluculo: and then rehearse this Psalm; Miserere mei Deus,
miserere mei; quia in te confidit anima mea. From hence it is, that so many
Superstitions have sprung; and that people at length begun to undertake the
curing of Diseased persons, merely by the bare Reciting of Certain Words;
without any regard had, either to the Stars, or any thing else. Let us now come
to the First Quaere which we are to prove, for the Establishing of the Power of
Figures: namely, Whether the Stars have any Influence upon, and do cause any
Motion in things here below.

19. Primo Meteor.
Aristotle endeavoring to prove the Affirmative, brings a most Excellent
Argument, and worthy of so great a Philosopher; which is this. That, says He,
from whom Motion took its beginning, the same has no doubt given to all other
things the Power of Self-motion: now, without all Dispute, the Motion of the
Heavens was the First in Nature; therefore, whatsoever Moves, Moves by the
Motion of the Heavens. Insomuch, that if the Motion of these should cease, both
Growth, and Motion would also cease in all things here below. In Sphoer. Sacr.
c. 3.
Junctin brings here an Example of a Man's heart; which, as it is the beginning
of Life, and Motion, so does it communicate Life, and Motion to all the rest of
the Members: So that, if it once be wounded, not only the Motion cease in
all the parts of he body, but even Life also. You may see this Position
confirmed by Hippocrates, who backs it with so many reasons, Lib. de Aere and
Aquis.
and so strongly asserts the truth of these Celestial Influences, as that he
confidently affirms, that, by the rising and setting of the Stars, a man may
foretell Tempests, rain, Storms, and other changes of weather: through the
neglect of which Observations, Physicians are very often deceived in their
Cures and Diseases. Cum temporum mutationes, says he, and Astrorum ortus and
occasus observaverit medicus, quemadmodum singula horum eveniant, praenoscit
utique and de anno, qualis hic sit futurus, etc. And then, afterward showing,
what time, and what Seasons are dangerous for Sick People, by reason of the
diverse motions of the Stars, he presently adds: Periculosissima sunt ambo
Solstitia, maxim vero aestivum periculosum: etiam Aequinoctium utrumque, magis
vero Autumnale. Oportet autem and Astrorum ortus considerare, praecipue Canis:
deinde Arcturi, and Plejadum occasum: Morbi enim in his maxim diebus
judicantur, aliique perimunt, alij vero desinunt, aut in aliam speciem,
aliumque statum transmutantur. It would be but lost time, if I should stand
longer upon the Proof of this so clear a Truth; which all men ought to confess
to be so, were there no other Argument for it, but this; that it has been
constantly observed, ever since the first beginning of Astronomy in the World,
that the Rising and Setting of the Fixed Stars have been the cause of very
great changes here on Earth: and he must either be a very Ridiculous,
senseless man, or else a very Ignorant, that should go about to deny, that the
Hyades, and the Plejades, are not Watery, Cloudy Constellations; that is to say,
do cause Rainy, Cloudy, Darks weather: as Leo, and the Dog-starre, bring Heat,
and Drowth: and Orion, a Wet, and tempestuous season: and so of the rest. And
after all, Vid. Gul. Rovill. hist. Plant.
do we not observe, that there are some certain Flowers, that turn about as the
Sun does: and others, that appear above the Water at his Rising; and when He
sets, sink down again, and hide themselves, as it were bewayling his
absence? Neither are the Influences of the Stars shed upon Herbs alone, but
even upon Stones also: Some whereof do so exactly observe the motion of those
particular Stars, whose Influences they bear, as that they change their
Aspects with them. An Example of this Truth you have in the Stone called
Lunaria, which is endued with such wonderful qualities, as that it changes
its Appearance, in like manner as the Moon does, whose name it bears. In a
word, do not the Humors in our bodies increase, with this Planet, and
decrease, when It decreaseth? If any man yet desire to have more of these
Instances, backed with Convincing Reasons; he may have recourse to the
Astronomicall Praedictions of Ptolomy: and he shall there find, that the truth
of these Influences is too clear, to be called in question.

20. The other Point, concerning the Resemblance of the Heavenly Constellations
to Sublunary things, is something more Difficult to prove, though not less
True: Nevertheless this objection is brought against it. If the Constellations
of the Ram, the Bull, the Twins, etc. do resemble these Living Creatures; it
is either Really, or else by Imagination. If Really; they are then, either in
the Eighth Sphere, or else in some other: but they are not in the Eighth. For,
in the Constellations of the Ram, the Bull, etc. there is no sign at all of
these Beasts being figured, or represented by the Stars: neither are they in
the Christaline Heaven; nor yet in any of the Spears of the Planets: for we
should then see them, as we do the other Stars: nor yet in a Ninth Heaven; as
some have thought. If they are only by Imagination, then are their Effects also
Imaginary, and have no Truth in them; and so, by consequence, the Power of
Talismans, or Figures, is Vain.

We answer then, according to the Judgment of the most learned Astrologers,
that in truth these Images are not at all Real: for in the Stars that make
up the Constellation of the Ram, a man may as well fancy a Horse there, as a
Sheep; as I have sometimes made trial. Neither yet are they altogether
Imaginary, in the same sense as a Chimera is Imaginary, which never had Being
in Nature: but they are so ordered in the Heavens by our Imagination, because
that the Constellation which we call Aries, or the Ram, has a strong
Influence upon sheep; as Taurus has upon Bulls; and so of the rest. Or else the
Celestial Ram is so called, because there is not any beast upon the Earth,
that is more like in Nature to this Constellation, then the Ram: For it
renders him that is born under it so Pious, so Meek, so Gentle, so Courteous,
that he resembles in all things the Innocent Lamb. He will also have a Hard
Head, and thick Hair, curled in rings, Iusphaer. c. 2.
like a fleece of Wool. Vidimus enim (says Junctin) complures hujus signi
homines, capite malliari, Spissis crinibus ad modum velleris, and supra frontem
elevatis, quasi capite certarent. And these are the Natural reasons, why these
Celestial Signs are called by the names of Living Creatures. One may add to
this, with Junctin, that when the Moon is in the Sign of Aries, this Sign
has then the stronger Influence upon the Head of Man, and renders it strong as
that of this Beast: and this may be another reason, why this Constellation is
called by the name of this beast, rather then of any other. So in like manner,
when the same Planet is in the Sign of Taurus, it has a stronger Influence
upon the Neck; wherein consists the chiefest strength of a Bull: when it is in
Gemini, the Influence is strong upon the Arms; and for this cause, this Sign
is represented by the Image of two children, embracing one another: When it is
in the Crab, the Breast is then sharer in its Influences; because that this
Creature always goes upon its Breast: and when it is in Leo, the Sign sheds
its Influence upon the Heart; from whence the Lion is said to be a Generous and
Courageous beast. You may see the rest of this discourse, in the same Author;
which I shall not here trouble my self to set down, because the reasons do not
at all satisfy me. I do therefore believe, that these Signs do cast forth
their influences upon the several Members of the body, though not for these
Reasons here delivered; which often prove to be very Impertinent; but only,
because we daily see the Experience of it. They do therefore visibly work by
their Influences, upon those Beasts, whose names they are called by: for, Dogs
run mad, in the Dog-dayes; and Lions are very furious, under the Sign of Leo:
and this was the Only Reason, which moved the First Philosophers to call these
Constellations, by the names of these beasts: and all the other reasons that
are brought, are but of Later standing, and have been invented by the Later
Astrologers. These Constellations then are called by the names of these Living
Creatures, because that they are observed to have great power over them. And
that I may trouble my self no further in this Particular, you may see the
Abridgement of all that Junctin has written hereof, in Heurnius, Ibid. Philos.
barb. De Variet. De doctr. promisc. cap. 35.
Cardan, and Galeottus, who has a Particular Chapter upon this Question; Quare
Signa Zodiaci animalium nemina habent? where he concludes thus; Aries enim, in
Oves; Taurus, in boves; Leo, in Leones; Scorpio, in Scorpiones; Piscis, in
Pisces; Virgo, in Virgins, and steriles; et sic de caeteris, imperium habent.

As for the rest of the Forty eight Constellations, I shall not here speak any
thing of Them; because that some, who have undertaken to defend the Power of
Figures, have said, that the Signs of the Zodiac only are of power to Work
Effectually, and Generally; forasmuch as they make their Circuit, or at least
the Sun in them, over the whole Earth; Albumaz. in Mag. Introd. c. 2.
whereas the others respect but one Part only. Notwithstanding we could very
well be able to give an account of all of them; as I shall show at another
time, if I see that This Discourse find but favorable acceptance among the
Learned; and I shall also discover the Principal Reasons, which have hitherto
lain hid under Fables, why the Ancient Astrologers imposed such Extravagant
Names, as they seemed to be, upon all the rest of those Constellations. At this
present I shall only content my self in showing, how those of the Zodiac may
have power to Operate upon Figures framed by Art: and this is the Third Point,
which I have undertaken to prove.

21. The Question then is, Whether the Stars do shed their Influences, as
well on Artificial, as Natural Things, or not?

I answer, in two words, Contra gent. li. 3. and lib. de Fato. In specul. and
de Mirab. tract. 3. c. 4. and 5.
that the Affirmative is so Certainly True, that neither Thomas Aquinas, (who
left nothing unexamined in this Question,) nor Albertus Magnus could possibly
deny it. And even Experience teaches us, that the Sun warmeth as well the
Artificial Image of a Man, as the Man himself: now, if this Planet work
indifferently upon Both, why should not the rest do so too? In a word, why
should not the Stars as well Operate on Artificial, as on Natural things;
seeing that, in their Essence, they are All Natural? Should we exclude Gold
from the number of things Natural, because it is fashioned into a Ring? And are
Stones rendered less Natural, when they are framed into a House? If it be
objected, that, however, they should not acquire thereby More Virtue, then they
had before. I answer, that the Contrary is manifestly proved by two Reasons.
The first is, because that the different Figure renders them more apt to
Operate, to such, or such an Action, then they were before: as for Example, if
a piece of Wood, or Stone, were unapt to hold water, by making of it Hollow, it
presently becomes Fit for such a purpose: and so in other Figures. The other
Reason is; that these things, when they come under the Worke-man's hands, are
wrought under certain Constellations; which communicate such Influences and
Qualities unto them, as they never had before: as we see by Experience in
Biscuit bread; one sort whereof will keep a very long time, and the other, that
was baked either before, or after it, will be subject to Worms, and
Corruption, although kept in the same place, and made of the same Corn, and
kneaded up with the same water, and with all other imaginable conditions. But,
to keep our selves to the business of Figures only, we shall here conclude;
that, if they are prepared, with all these Circumstances observed, which we
have before delivered, and engraven upon some Matter that is Proper for the
receiving of the Influences of the Stars; they may Naturally retain them,
and work those wonderful Effects, which we have before set down. This
Conclusion will receive both more Confirmation, and more Clearness, by the
Answers to the following Objections: in the mean time, Contra Cells. 4. Advers.
Haeres. l. 1. c. 23. De Civ. Dei. l. 10. c. 11. Hist. Sclav. L^ 14. Contra
gent. l. 4. Col. 80. De Error. proph. rel. cap. 16. Pand. Turc. cap. 230.
Capitolo 4.
for your satisfaction in the truth of these Influences of the Celestial
bodies upon Artificial things you may have recourse to Tertullian, Origin, S.
Irenaeus, S. Augustine, Thekel, or the Author of the book, entitled, Liber
Lapidum filiorum Israel: Arnoldus Abbas Lubecensis, Arnobius, Olympiodorus in
Photius, Julius Firmicus, and Leunclavius. You may see also the little
Pamphlet, written by Barnerio, an Italian, the Title whereof is, Regole sopra
la Carta Marina; where he proves learnedly, and by Experience, that many
Cottons, and Wools of the Eastern Countries, and even of our Own Countries
also, do last longer, or a less while, if they be wrought in diverse Kingdoms,
and under certain Constellations; as it is also observed in Ships. Vitruvius
proves the same to be so in Buildings also, notwithstanding that both the
Stone, and Mortar, be as good in the one place, as in the other.

CHAP. VII.
That the Objections which are made against Talismanicall Figures, make not any
thing at all against their Power.
THE CONTENTS.
1. WHence the Custom of using certain Words, and of applying certain
Characters, in the Cure of Diseases, has sprung.

2. An Abominable Ceremony used by the Egyptians, for to cause Hail to cease.
The Reason of the Command, given to the Jews, of not Graffing on a tree of a
Different Kind.

3. The Talismans, delivered by Antonius Mizaldus, condemned.

4. The Objections brought by Gulielmus Parisiensis, and Gerson, answered. The
Power the Sun has, within the bowels of the Earth.

5. A Fourth Objection answered. The stories of Sorcerers, and of Images of
Wax, of very little Credit.

6. A Fifth Objection refuted. Of the Weapon-Salve, that cures the Wound, by
being applied to the Weapon that made it.

7. The Sixth Objection of no Force. A remarkable story of two Twins.

8. The Operation of these Talismans, proceeds not from the Secret Virtue of
the Stone.

9. Cajetan, and Pomponatius defended, against Delrio, touching the Power of
Figures.

10. The Virtue of the Stars descends as well upon a Living Scorpion, as upon
its Image.

11. The Forcible Reasons brought by Galeottus, in Defense of Talismans.

12. The Objection brought against Franciscus Rueus, answered.

13. The Story of Virgil's Talismanicall Fly, and Horse-leech, a True one;
against Naudaeus. Gervais his book not Fabulous, as is commonly believed.

14. Of some Admirable and Curious Inventions of men, that seem more
Incredible then Talismans.

15. Certain Objections, never before brought, against the Power of Figures;
with their Solution.

THe Wonderful Effects, which have been always observed to have been wrought
by Talismanicall Figures, have so perplexed the minds of those men; who account
every thing to be Magic, which themselves are not able to comprehend; as
that, without making any Distinction at all, betwixt Power which is Natural,
and Lawful; and that which our Faith permits us not to meddle with; they have
boldly published, that, what Virtue soever proceeds from Figures, is utterly
Diabolical. But when they perceived, that Knowing Men would hardly sit down
so; and that it concerned them to produce some Reasons, to prove that these
Figures can have no Natural Power at all; they have at length brought These
following ones; though they are built on very weak foundations, as we shall
make it appear.

1. The First is, that Reason it self tells us, that these Operations cannot be
Totally Natural, but rather superstitious and Dangerous; seeing that, to
reduce them to a full, and entire Effect, there are some certain words to be
used; which have no Power at all, especially over things which have no Sense;
and that Therefore, the Making of them ought to be forbidden, and rejected, as
the Church has ordained.

To answer fully, and in Order, both to This Objection, and to the rest that
follow, I say; that, in the First place, we are to take notice; that, in the
matter of these Figures, we have already condemned all Words, and all other
Superstitions: so that, to avoid a Tedious Repetition, the Reader must call to
mind, what has already been said to This. As for the Church, it never yet
rejected the True, and Lawful Power of Figures, such as we have described it:
as may appear out of the Writings of those two Learned Men, Tho. Aquinas, and
Cardinal Cajetan. And if the Fathers have sometimes condemned it; it was not
till they saw that it was so mixed with superstition (that I say not,
Abominations) that they conceived they should never otherwise be able to divert
men from the Practice of it, but by condemning it utterly: as Moses likewise
did, in forbidding absolutely the Graffing on a Tree of a different kind, only
to keep them from that sin, which was usually committed at that Action; as we
shall show hereafter. And that it may appear that the bare Figures have not
been used always, without any Application of Words and Ceremonies; such as
were not only Vain, but Ridiculous also; we may take notice, that in Egypt,
when they would cause Hail to cease, which might have been effected by the
Virtue of a bare Talisman only; it was thought Necessary, that Four Naked
Women should lie along upon the ground on their backs; and lifting up their
feet on high, they were to pronounce some certain words, and so the Hail
would cease. Quatuor Mulieres (said they, as R. Moses reports,) jaceant in
terra super dorsum suum nudae, et erigant pedes suos, et dicant talia verba, et
operentur istud: grando, descendens super locum illum, recedet ab eodem loco.
This Ridiculous Ceremony was taken from the Posture of some Talismanicall
Figure, In Genesis
which served to divert storms of Hail; whereon, says Chomer, was graven the
Image of Venus lying along. Besides, some Ignorant persons having lighted upon
some of the Characters, which the Ancients had invented, that so they might
conceal their Philosophical Secrets, from the unworthy Rabble; (such as are
those wherewith the Chemists books are full:) not knowing the Original of
them, and believing that they had some secret Virtue in them, they graved them
on Talismans. Such perhaps was the Egyptians Serapis, which had on its breast
the so much Celebrated Letter Tau. This inscribing of Cifres, and Characters,
brought also along with it this Belief; that seeeing there were Letters
written upon Talismans, they might certainly then be read also: and hence did
this Superstition take Rise, of speaking Words in the making of these Figures;
and afterward, of letting alone the Figures, and using the bare Words only: as
it is reported of Trallianus, Lib. 19. in fine. Odyss. l. 19. Hist. Aethi. op.
lib. 9. Geogr. l. 15. Tom. 1. cap. 65.
who used these words for the Cure of the Colic, (...). And Homer writes,
that the bleeding of Ulisses his wound was stopped, by using certain Words: as
likewise that of Oroondates was, in Heliodorus; who, with Strabo, affirms,
that the Indians, and Ethiopians, use no other way of curing their Diseases.
Froissart assures us, that he has seen these Ceremonies practiced in His time:
and even in Our days they are used but too often, especially by Superstitious
Women. But at last there were some that made more Esteem of Characters, then
of Plain Words, considering with themselves what the power of Figures was. Thus
Pliny reports, Lib. 28. cap. 2.
that M. Servilius made use of these two Letters, M, and A, to keep himself
from being bleare-eyed: and Eudoxia the Empress, being in Travel with a
Child, desired, (as Cedren reports,) to have certain Letters applied to her
Belly, for to bring forth the dead Child: but it was all in vain; for it cost
her her life. To conclude, these things having been invented only for the
concealing of some Secrets, as we have said, De secret. Oper. Art. and Not.
cap. 1,
(after Roger Bacon, who says, Quae Philosophi adinvenerant in operibus artis,
et Naturae, ut secreta occultarent ab indignis;) they were afterward turned
into Superstition, by those who mixed them with the Images, and made use of
them beyond the power of Nature; and that too with so Damnable Ceremonies, as
that the very Thought of them is Irksome.

2. Now that the Practice of making these Figures was never forbidden, but only
to keep us off from those Abominations, that were usually hereby committed,
(the Invention being nevertheless Natural, as we have showed; and the Things
themselves having been very Innocently used by Good Men, without the
assistance of any other Power, save that of Nature;) we may perceive by a like
Example, in the Command that was given, of not Graffing on a tree of a
Different kind. For it was given for no other Reason, (that I may here pass by
those, which are brought by Interpreters, both Greek and Latin, which are
many times very wide of the Text) but only to turn away the Jews from those
Filthinesses, and Abominations, which they usually committed at this kind of
Engraffing. The Latin words will in some sort hide the Uncleanness of the
discourse of these Villainies: you shall have them therefore out of the
abovenamed Rabbi Moses, a man of very great knowledge in these Traditions:
Dixerunt ergo, quod in hora qua inseritur una species in aliam, Moreh lib. 3.
cap. 38.
oportet ut ramus inserendus sit in manu alicujus mulieris pulchrae, and quod
vir aliquis carnaliter cognoscat eam praeter morem naturalem. Et dixerunt, quod
in tempore illius actus debet mulier inserere ramum in arbore. From hence a man
might conclude it was, that God, to set a Mark upon the Foulness of this
Crime, would have the very Trees themselves also to have some Sense of it. For,
if a Whore planted an Olive Tree, (says one of the Learnedest Prelates of
France, according to the Opinion of the Naturalists,) it would never bear any
Fruit. Oliva, says he, a Meretrice plantata, vel infructuosa perpetuo manet,
vel omnino arescit. Now, Gul. Paris. de Vniverso. part. 1.
to Engraffe any Tree what ever, is a thing both Natural, and of it self
Indifferent: nevertheless it was forbidden, merely to avoid the Sin which
Nature abhors. Propter hoc igitur, is the Conclusion of the forecited Jew,
prohibitae fuerune commixtiones, scilicet incisio arboris in aliam speciem, ut
elongemur a causis Idolatriae, and fornicationum. And the like cause has also
moved those men, that have condemned Figures; though They are both Natural,
and the making of them Lawful; as we have already showed. Now the reason, why
they have been also rejected by some of the more Learned sort, was either to
give way to the Rigor of the Inquisition; as the Italians, and Spaniards have
done: or else, for want of having taken the pains to examine them; as Gul.
Parisiensis, Gerson, and diverse others; whose Objections also, which they
conceive to be Invincible ones, we shall likewise answer.

3. The Second Objection is grounded upon the Foolishness, and Impertinence of
the words that are used about these Talismans; at the making whereof, Ignorant
people do still use some certain Words, which, say they, are very near
bordering upon Idolatry.

But we have already answered, in the precedent Chapter, that we do not at all
defend the Follies of the Superstitious; but do rather freely condemn Their
Observations, and all words, that tend to Superstition. In the same Chapter
also we have rejected part of the Fooleries, delivered by Villanovensis: and,
that we may not have any Scruple unsatisfied, we do also here condemn those,
which are brought by Antonius Mizaldus: as namely, Cent. Memorab.
where he affirms, according to Ptolomy, that for to drive away Serpents, you
must prepare a square Plate of Copper, and graving two Serpents on it, when the
Second Face of Aries is Ascendent, you must say these words: Cent. 1. Apher. 52.
Ligo Serpents per hanc Imaginem, ut nemini noceant, nec quenquam impediant,
nec diutius, ubi sepulta fuerit, permaneant. As also where he says, according
to the same Ptolomy, that, to drive away Rats and Mice, you must grave the
Image of them upon a Plate of Tin, or Copper, when the Third Face of Capricorn
is Ascendent; saying: Aph. 45.
Ligo omnes Mures per hanc Imaginem, ut nullus, in loco ubi fuerit, manner
possit. So likewise for to gather together, and catch Fishes, you must Engrave
the Image of a Fish, upon a piece of Lead, or Tin, when the First Face of
Aquarius, Aph. 94.
or of Pisces is Ascendent, saying: Ligo and adjuro omnes Pisces qui sunt in
Flumine (withal naming the River,) ad tractum balistae, ut ad hanc Imaginem
veniant, quotiescunque in ejus aqua posita fuerit. And so also for the driving
of Wolves away, either out of a Wood, or from a Sheep-coat, you must grave upon
a Plate of Copper, or of Tin, the Image of a Wolf, with his Feet Tied, and two
Mastives seeming to bark at him, when the Second Face of Sagittarius is
Ascendent; and you must withal say thus: Cent. 2. Aph. 8.
Extermino per hanc Imaginem omnes Lupos, qui sunt in hac Villa, aut nemore,
(calling the Wood, or the Sheep-house by it is name,) ut non remaneat aliquis
eorum in illo. As likewise, in the last place, to render a Huntsman fortunate
in his Game, you must grave upon a piece of Tin, Silver, or Copper, the Image
of a Huntsman, having in his hand a Bow bent, and ready charged with an Arrow;
graving it under the Sign of Sagittarius, whose Image he represents, and
saying: Per hanc Imaginem ligo omnes feras Silvestres, cervos, apros, lepores,
ut nulla meam venationem subterfugiat, Cent. 5. Aph. 100
quin optatam portionem and praedam mihi semper relinquat. I have set down so
many of these Talismans, that Men may take notice of them to avoid them, and to
give warning of them to those that are Curious Inquirers after such things; who
might happily have lighted on them in the Authors own writings, which are full
of Superstitions. For, besides that the Manner of making them is Ridiculous, it
is also as far different from the true way that is to be observed in making
them, as Hell is from Heaven. So that I cannot much wonder at the Ill Luck of a
Friend of mine; who says, that of above a hundred of these Talismans that he
had made, according to these Vain Rules here delivered, he never saw any One
of them answer his Expectation. But I desiring him to make one, according to
the Directions I gave him; he presently saw the Effect follow. And M.
Sanclarus, (the Learned Regius Professor in the Mathematics, who is yet
living, and may be asked the Queston,) has sworn to me, that he has cured a
most Intolerable Pain in the Reins, by one of these true Talismans: so much
does it concern us to be able to distinguish, betwixt the True, and False
ones. We reject therefore this Foppish Way of making them, delivered by the
said Mizaldus, as well in the places above cited, as in some others: as namely
in the 44. and 93. Aphorisms of the Second Century; the 98. Aphorism of the
Third Century; and the 47. Aphorism of the Ninth: in which places he makes use
of words both vain, and Superstitious, and also of most False Principles: which
is the Reason, why no man could ever, by using them, attain to the End he
proposed. Now I have formerly said, that we condemn all Figures and Words,
that are mixed with Superstition, in these Talismanicall Figures only: for, as
for those Ceremonies and words, which are piously used; as for example, to
cause a Storm of Hail to cease; a man may use them without any suspicion at
all, according to the Judgment of some Divines. The manner is thus described
by Wierus. Having first made the sign of the Cross, Lib. 4. de praestig. Daem.
against the Lightning, Hail, Thunder, or Tempest, you must take three
Hailestones, of those that first fell, and cast them into the fire, in the name
of the Holy Trinity; and having repeated the Lords Prayer two or three times
over, you must read the Gospel of S. John: which being ended, you must make the
sign of the Cross, over against the Cloud, and the Thunder, on every side;
and make the same also upon the ground, toward the four quarters of the World:
and after that the Exorcist shall have said three times, Verbum caro factum
est, adding to it as often these words; Per Evangelica dicta fugiat tempestas
ista; if the Tempest were raised out of malice, says Wierus, it will cease.
But let us leave the determination of this matter till some other time; only
observing at present, that there has crept in Superstition Here also, as well
as into the Business, we now treat of.

The Third Objection is grounded, upon the Impotency of the Matter Ingraved.
For, how can an Image, which is dead, and without Motion, give Motion to
others, and have such Operations, Ibid.
as are attributed unto it? Thus it is argued by Gulielmus Parisiensis, against
these Figures. Quomodo Imago mortua, et omni modo inapprehensa, omnique modo
immobilis, moveret viventes? out qualiter praestat Scientiam, quam nec habuit,
nec actu, nec potentia eam habet certissimum est? Gerson says the same, and
brings in a manner, all the very same Arguments, in a Book that he has
written against a certain Physician of Montpelier, Lib. peculiari duodec.
propos.
who graved upon a piece of Gold, the Image of a Lion, for the Cure of the
Stone.

4. To this I answer, that the Image of It self, is dead, and without any
Motion: but that by the Virtue of the Stars, under which it was made, it has
acquired new Qualities, which it had not before: or else, that the Matter being
before endued with some Qualities that were Proper for such an Effect, it is
disposed for such an Effect by a Semblable Figure, and its Qualities are
excited. Itaque ars, says Marcilius Ficinus, De vit. coelit. com. l. 3. c. 16.
suscitat inchoatam ibi virtutem, ac dum ad figuram redigit, similem suae
cuidam coelesti figurae, tunc suae illic ideae prorsus exponit; quam sic
expositam Coelum ea perficit virtute qua caeperat, exhibens quasi sulphuri
flammam. Thus many things, if they are not excited, work not at all: as for
Instance, to make some Herbs to smell, you must crush them betwixt your
fingers. So Amber, which has received from the Heavens, the Property of
drawing Strawes to it; yet unless it be a while rubbed, and chafed, it is not
able to do it. The Bezaar, or Bezohar Stone, (which Marcilius Ficinus says,
signifies as much as, A morte liberans: though this be an Etymology as
Unknown, as Untrue:) which is Naturally endued with the Power of Expelling
Poison, becomes also a very Sovereign Remedy against it. That of the Scorpion,
if there be first graved on it the Figure of a Scorpion, under the Influence of
the Celestial Constellation of the same name. The Flint Stone gives not its
Fire, unless you strike it: in a word, there is scarcely any thing, but
requires to be Excited, and Awakened up to its work; even as low, as
Artificial things; many whereof appear not at all, unless there be Art used to
discover them: as we may see, for Example, in Letters written with the juice of
Citrons, Figs, Onyons, Salt Almonicke, and many other things; which must be
either held before the Fire, or else dipped in Water, that they may be read. In
like manner also is it Necessary, that the Virtue of Metals, and of Stones,
should be excited by the Celestial Rays, for the Rendering them Apt to effect
that which we desire. Now that these Rays are so Powerful, as that they are
able to penetrate Stones, and into the bowels of the Earth, we have already
proved; and shall here confirm it, by the testimony of Bonaventure: Dicunt
Philosophi, quod corpus caeleste, mediante suo lumine, influit usque ad
profundum terrae, ubi mineralia corpora generari habent: et, Lib. 2. did. 12.
qu. 2. art. ult.
quantum ad hoc, verum dicunt. When Testimonies, are grounded upon Experience,
they cannot possibly then be denied: and we know that the Sun penetrates very
far into the Earth, and there gives life to Plants, and Living Creatures too;
which, when we see taken up, astonish us very much: as appears out of Georgius
Agricola, De Animal. subt.
and the Learned Licetus, who is still Professor at Padua. As for Subterraneous
Fishes, we find them but too often enlivened by the Stars, to our great
Disadvantage: as you may observe out of the Third book of Seneca's Not. quaest.
c. 19. Who also, in another place, says, that Philip having sent men down
into an old Gold-mine, to see if the Covetousness of Man had yet left there
any thing Undiscovered; they perceived Rivers, running along those deep
Cavernes, and many other Prodigious Sights: by which we may be certainly
assured, that the Heavens do operate through every part of the Universe.
Descendisse illos, says this Learned Author, Lib. 5. (...) 15.
cum multo lumine, and multos durasse dies: deinde longa via fatigatos, vidisse
flumina ingentia, and conceptus aquarum inertium vastos, pares nostris; nec
compressos quidem terra supereminente; sed liberae laxitatis, non sine horrore
visos. And those, that write of the Riches of America, assure us, that the Mine
of Ptosi, where Gold is generated, is so hollow, and so deep, that nothing can
more fitly represent the Dreadful Image of Hell. If then the Stars do
operate, within the bowels of the Earth, upon Living Creatures, Plants, and
Metals, why not upon Stones also? I do therefore account the Conclusion of
Hieron. Hangest, an Ancient, Learned Sorbonist, to be most True; who, searching
after the Reason of Gamahes, concludes, (after a long dispute;) that the
Figure, or Painting on them, proceeds from two Causes; from the Stars, and
from the Property of the Earth. Lib. de cause. fol. 88.
See here his own words. Quid igitur discendum sit? respondeo, ex duplici
radice posse contingere. Uno modo ex radice Siderea, secundum Astrologorum
authoritatem, multis experimentis comprobatam. Alio modo, ex radice inferiore,
etc. Now this Power, or Virtue of the Stars, works Indifferently upon All
Things; which Consideration has moved many, that stand up for the Power of
Figures, to believe, that all sorts of Stones, Metalls, or other Matter
indifferently, if it be graved, and wrought, according to the Rules before
delivered, would work the same Effect. For, as Fire heateth all things that
are set before it; in like manner do the Stars Operate, say they, upon All
Things Indifferently. But I hold the First Opinion to be the Truer, and more
certain: not, that this Later is False; but, because the Effect Here is
Slower. For, the Fire will indeed heat all things, that are placed near it:
but if the Matter be Indisposed, the Heat will not work so speedily: as we see
in Green Wood; and in a Pibble stone, which requires a longer time to grow hot
in, then a Brick does: and so in all other things. It is required then, to the
end that the Stars may Operate the more Easily, and in less time, that the
Matter be before hand endued with some Quality, that is proper to the Effect
which we have proposed to our selves; and have also some Sympathy with those
Celestial Signs, which we intend to make use of.

You may see this Sympathy, and the Wonderful Correspondence that there is,
betwixt Stones, Mineralls, Herbs, Plants, Flowers, Tastes, Smells, Colors,
Beasts, Fishes, Birds, and all things else, and the Stars, Ton. 4. Cant. 1. c.
31.
in Georgius Venetus his book, De Harmonia Mundi, and in the Learned Comment
of M. Moreau, a Physician, upon Schola Salernitana; the reading whereof, Cap.
19. p. 322. and seq.
in all sorts of books what ever, is truly very Admirable.

5. The Fourth Objection, which is brought by the abovenamed Authors, is; that
if this Art of preparing Images be Certain, and their Virtue so great, as is
said; the Egyptians, Arabians, and Persians, who were the First Inventers of
them, would then have made themselves Lords of the whole Earth, in subduing all
their Enemies: which thing they have not done; but contrariwise have themselves
all been Conquered.

To this I answer, that no Image, or Talismanicall Figure can possibly be
Capable of operating so Great an Effect: they may indeed possibly excite, in
some small measure, the courage of Combatants, and make them less fearful of
the Terrors of War; but these Qualities alone will never be sufficient, for
the obtaining of a Victory. If any here urge against me the Story of Nectanabo,
who is said to have drowned all his Enemies Ships, by making certain little
Vessels of Wax, and then drowning Them: I answer, that the Story looks very
Doubtfully; neither do I give any more Credit to it, then to those Flams we
hear reported of Sorcerers, in our own days, who are said, by pricking a
little Image of Wax in any part of it, to wound the same part of the body in
the person whom it represents. But suppose These Things were so: yet it could
not be from hence concluded, that these Effects were wrought by the Virtue of
the Stars; but rather by some Evil Angels, to whom God may have given some
such Power. Lib. citato.
Gulielmus Parisiensis utterly denies these stories to be True; as indeed they
are merely Fabulous: neither do I believe there is any one of them that has
any Truth it in. If it be returned upon us, that there is nothing in them, but
a man may believe, since Possibly they Might be True: I answer, that Many
Things Might have been, which never yet Haven been: as, for instance, there
might have been more Suns, and more Worlds then one.

6. The Fifth Objection is, that it is Necessary that Natural Agents should,
Arist. Phys. 7.
some way or other, Touch the thing they are to Operate upon: but a Figure,
which cures the Stone, Collicke, or any other Disease, touches not at all the
Part Affected: the Virtue of it therefore cannot be Natural.

The answer to this Objection is so easy, that, Did. 37. in Sent.
without troubling our selves to reckon up, with Scotus, the several ways of
Touching, we need no more but give an Instance in a Hot Brick. For as a Brick
receives heat from the Fire, without touching either Cole, or Flame; in like
manner does an Image receive the Influence of the Stars, without Touching Any
Part of the Heavens. In a word, all the Touching which is here found, is only a
Virtuall Touching; as we see in the Sun, which though it be so far distant
from the Earth, does nevertheless warm it by Its Virtue. And as a Brick,
heated either by the Sun, or by the Fire, does afterward operate upon any
other body, communicating its Virtue to it, if it be applied unto it: in the
same manner does a Figure, or Image operate upon Another Body, communicating
the Influences, which it has received from the Stars, unto It, if it be in
like manner applied, either by a Corporeal, or by a Virtuall Touching only. I
shall not here produce the Miraculous Operation of the Weaponsalve, which cures
a Wound, at a hundred Leagues distance, if it be but applied to the Weapon that
made it; and that you dress it, as you would do the Wounded Person: Tract. de
Vngu. Armar. De Vng. Magnet.
as it is proved by Rhodolphus Gochlenius, and Baptista Helmontius. If I should
have made use of this Example, I should never have been quiet from having it
thrown in my Teeth, that the Operation of this Magneticall Unguent is
Superstitious, and Diabolical. This is the whole Burden of the Ignorant
Rabble, who impute, what ever they find to carry Wonder with it, to the
Operation of Evil Spirits: and yet I have been assured by M. Loysel, Physician
to the late King of France, that this very Operation was Natural; and that
Himself had made use of it, with Good Saccesse, and on a very Good Man. Now if
Gulielmus Parisiensis deny, that the Operation of a Talismanicall Image, which
is buried under ground, can be Natural; because that it is kept in by the
Earth, which covers it: he may as well conclude, that the Operation of a
Needle touched with a Loadstone is also Diabolical; seeing that, although it
be a hundred fathoms deep within the Earth, yet will it always turn it self
toward the Pole. This Comparison is so much the more Pressing, because that
the most of the Learned believe, that this Virtue of the Lodestone is
communicated unto it, by that part of the Heavens, which the Needle points to.
So True it is, that there is nothing more Powerful, then the Influences of the
Stars, when they have once made an Impression upon things here below.

7. The Sixth Objection strikes at the Power, which we have attributed to
Resemblance: for, there is not any where (says Guliel. Parisiensis,) a nearer
Tie, and Correspondence, then in the Love of a Mother and her Child: and yet if
a Mother drown her self, the Child will not presently do so too; and so he
concludes: Quanto minus igitur in tam diversis, ut sunt Imago and Imaginatum,
nulla ligatura, inter ea erit, quae cogat, ut quod patitur Imago, patiatur et
Imaginatum.

I know very well, that this Author makes use of this Argument against
Nectanabo: but seeing that he brings it also against Talismanicall Images, I
answer; that these Images, (as we have already said) have no Power at all
over our Wills. Now, to Drown Ones Self, or, Not to Drown ones Self, is an
Action which depends wholly upon the Will. But if a Child resemble the Mother,
as well in the Lineaments of the Face, as in the Actions of the Soul; there is
no doubt, but that this Resemblance may have very much power, both as well on
the Passions of the Mind, as on those of the Body, which proceed from within:
as it is often observed. And even in Our days, We have heard of two young
Children, which were Brothers, at Riez, an Episcopal City in Provence in
France, who by reason of their being so perfecty Like One Another, if One of
them were sick, the Other was so too: as, for example, if One began to have a
Pain in the Head, the Other would presently feel it. If One of them were
asleep, or sad; the other could not hold up his head, or be merry: and so of
the rest, as I have been assured by M. Poitevin, a very honest man, and a
Native of the same city.

8. The Seventh Objection, brought by the same Guliel. Parisiensis, and Gerson,
is, That if at any time these Talismanicall Stones have been known to cure the
bitings of Serpents, and the stinging of Scorpions; this Effect proceeded not
at all from the Stars, but from some secret Properties in the Stone, whereon
the Figure of a Scorpion, or Serpent, was graved.

This Objection is answered in two words. I say then, that we have already
proved, that the Stars have power to communicate this Virtue to the Stone; and
also, that it is not at all Natural to it, and proceeding from Its Own proper
Virtue: because that, before it was Figured, and prepared under certain
Gonstellations, it had no such Virtue at all. And indeed, to what end should a
man take so much pains in graving, and preparing it under diverse Aspects of
the Stars, if it had as much Virtue before? To what purpose also should the
Inhabitants of the Country of Hamptz, in Turkey, trouble themselves to take the
Impression of a Scorpion that is figured upon a Stone in a certain Tower, in a
piece of Potters Clay, if so be the Clay it self had the same Virtue before?
We say therefore, that it had not Any Virtue before, Proper for such an
Operation; and that this Virtue was communicated unto It, by the Stone in the
Tower; and to the Stone, by the Stars.

I shall not here examine the Arguments of Gul. Parisiensis, which are to be
seen under the Title of the 56. Page, which is; Quod omnia ista quae fiunt per
Imagines, malignissime fiant: because that in this Chapter he treats only of
Speaking Images, or Statues; such as was that Speaking Image of a Man, which is
falsely said to have been made by Albertus Magnus: But the Images we speak of,
are quite Another Thing; as is also their Power. So that there is nothing
wanting now, to the full Vindication of them from Falsehood, and all other
Calumnies, save only to answer the Eighth Objection, brought both by Gerson,
and Guliel. Parisiensis also.

9. And it is This; which seems to be the most powerful of all the rest.

If so be the Stars are the cause of these Operations, why then (say they)
should not their Virtue descend rather upon the Living Scorpion, then upon it is
Image? Quomodo, says the Later of these, non potius hujusmodi virtus descendit
super ipsum Scorpionem vivum?

If we but call to mind, what has been before delivered, we shall find it no
hard matter to answer this Objection. For, we confess, that the Living
Scorpion is not at all Exempted from this Celestial Virtue; seeing that, if It
be applied to the Wound, It cures it, as well as It Is Talismanicall Image: so
does the Crocodile, the Rat, the Toad, the Dog, and the Viper also. And if in
all the rest of Living Creatures we find not the same Effect; it is rather for
want of searching after it, then any Defect in Nature: seeing that those, that
are most skilled in the Wonderful Works of God, do certainly assure us, that
wherever any Disease is found, There also is the Remedy to be had. And who
would ever have thought, that the Gravel, which is found in Urine, should
serve for a Remedy against the Stone? and a world of other the like Secrets
there are, which are daily brought to Light. But it may here be demanded; Why
then should not the Stars communicate the Virtue of driving away Scorpions, as
well to the Living Scorpion, as to it is Image?

I answer, that if it were so, Nature should then make war against It Self,
and should utterly destroy it self in a short time; seeing that all Living
Creatures would soon be destroyed by one another. Most wisely therefore was it
ordered, that the Stars only, and Men, should have this Virtue communicated
unto them.

10. Disq. Mag. l. 1. C. 4. quaest. 1. De Incant.
The Ninth Objection, is, the Answer of Delrio, to the Reasons brought by
Cajetan, and Pomponatius. For, whereas the Later of these says, that although
Figure be not the Beginning, and Cause of Operation, yet it may operate very
much: seeing that we may observe out of Experience, that the Figure of a Foul,
Deformed Man, strikes us with a kind of Sadness; whereas a Beautiful works in
us an Effect quite contrary. Besides, Beautiful Objects do so move us, as that
we love them; which Foul, and Ill-favored do not at all: Therefore says
Pomponatius, Figures have some Power to Operate. Delrio answers nothing to
this, but only to the Consequence; denying that Magical Figures are
Beautiful, or Deformed. But, even Children may easily perceive, that his
Antecedent is utterly false. For, those Figures, which he calls Magical, and we
Talismanicall, are Truly, and Really, Beautiful, or Deformed, according as the
things are, which they represent; which are, for the most part, the Heavens,
and the Stars; the Beauty whereof ravisheth our Senses. Besides, these Figures
do ordinarily represent some Constellation or other; as the Virgin, the
Twins, and the rest. Now if a Living Virgin, and Living Twins, are
Beautiful, or Deformed; why then should not their Figures, or Pictures be so
too? Let us now proceed to the Arguments of Cajetan, which Delrio refutes with
as little Reason, as he has done those of Pomponatius.

This Learned Cardinal then lays down this most True, and Powerful
Conclusion, in favor of Talismanicall Figures. Figura licet non sit ipsum
principium Operationis; est tamen conprincipium. He proves the Antecedent: quia
in artificum instrumentis efficit Figura, ut illa sic, vel sic operentur; tum
quia ferrum latum super aquas fertur, quod si in formam aliam contrahas,
demergetur. These reasons of his are so Strong, and so Certain, as that it is
Impossible to overthrow them. For, seeing that a Plate of Iron that is Large,
and very Thin, will swim upon the water; but if you reduce it into a Round
Solid form, it sinks presently: is it not evident, that this proceeds merely
from the Figure? What manner of Spirit must he be of, that dares affirm the
contrary; unless it be one that means to say, however, as Delrio says; whose
Answer you have in these words. Respondeo, Figuram esse Conprincipium in motu
locali, and Operationibus quae per hunc motum fiunt; ut sunt variae divisiones
continui per dolabram, per malleum, per asciam, per serram; non vero in
Operationibus quae fiunt per alterationem. I cannot but wonder, that this Acute
Jesuit, who has showed himself in other things a most Learned, and Sound
Philosopher, so that he comes not short of any in the whole Society, should so
grossly offend here, against those very Philosophical Maxims, which himself
has laid down. For, where he grants, that Figure is a Co-principle in Local
Motion, and in the Operations which this Motion produces; but not in those
which are caused by Alteration; he concludes against that, which Himself had
before laid down; seeing that, according to the Common Consent of all
Philosophers, Heat is caused by Motion: but Heat is a kind of Alteration:
Therefore Figure is, of It Self, a Co-Principle in the operations which are
caused by Alteration.

Again, when he grants to Cajetan, that a Large piece of Iron may perhaps swim
upon the water; yet he says, that it is not by reason of the Figure, but of
the Quantity: these are his words. Sed esto, fiat; erit, non ratione Figurae,
sedratione Quantitatis. Well; but of It Self, and in Sound Philosophy,
Quantitas non est activa: See then what the Consequence must be. And in the
end, when Cajetan concludes, that it is the Figure therefore that makes a large
piece of Iron to swim upon the Water; Delrio answers, that this Figure is only
Accidental: for, says he, let this Large, Thin piece of Iron be reduced into
some other Figure, either Circular, Square, or Five-angled, it will do the
same: that is to fay, it will still swim upon the water: therefore the Figure
Operates not, but by Accident. But here Delrio deceives himself; for Cajetan's
Purpose is not to oppose one Flat Figure, or, as the Mathematicians speak, In
plano, against another Flat Figure, either Square, or Circular: but a Plain,
Flat Figure, against a Solid one. For a Flat Figure, whether it be Square,
Circular, Octogonall, or of what fashion soever it be, will do that, which the
same Figure, if it be solid, will not do: which is most True; seeing that a
piece of Iron that is Square, and Thick withal, sinkes presently to the
bottom of the water; which the same piece of Iron would not do, were it
Square, and very Thin It is therefore a most Undeniable Maxim, that Figure
has some Power to Operate.

11. The Other Objections which are made, against the Power of these Images,
are set down, and refuted by Galeottus: De Dectrina promise. c. 24,
the most weighty of which, are these following.

In these Images which are ingraved on Gold for the cure of the Stone, and the
Pain in the Reins, the Gold of its One Nature cannot work this Cure; much
less then can the Image; which being without Life, cannot by any means alter
the Gold, and change it into another Nature. Besides, in the Image there is
found neither Action, nor Passion: again, the Gold, of It self, whether it be
figured, or not, is still of the same Species; and Consequently the beams of
the Stars must always work upon it, after one and the same manner: and if it
should work rather upon Gold which is Figured, then upon that which is Plain;
this Action would seem to proceed, rather from the Election of the Heavens,
then from any other Cause. In a word, the Virtue, which is attributed to this
Figure, can neither be Natural, nor Artificial: Not Natural, because it
proceeds from Within: much less is it Artificial; because it is not
communicated unto it by the Artificer: it must therefore necessarily proceed
from some Other Cause.

The Learned Answer of Galeottus to these Objections is this. Non Enim in hac
re mutatio speciei requiritur, nec proprietas auri immutatur, nec ulla Caelorum
Electio intervenit, nec ab Artifice vis illa sanandi datur, nec Imago, ut
Imago, quicquam Efficit, etc. sed principium Actionis ac Passionis affert, ut
B. Thomas, Magnusque Albertus testantur; non u^ Figura, and Imago, Mathematice
animadversa; sed ut efficit aliam in re figurata praeparationem, quae caelestem
actionem sine difficultate varijs modis accipiat. And afterward explaining,
how it comes to pass, that among the diverse kinds of Figures that are under
the Heavens, some are more Naturally Apt to receive the Influences, then Others
are; he brings in the Instance of Looking-glasses; amongst which, those that
are hollow, receive the beams of the Sun, in so full a measure, as that they
burn; and others receive them scarcely at all. So the diversity of Hills, and
Valleys, is the Cause of a greater either Heat, or Coldness. We may also here
add an Instance in pieces of Ice, which the Sun cannot so easily melt, and
dissolve, if they be Plain, and smooth; but very easily, if they be Uneven;
and Rough. Which has given occasion to some to say, that Painted Figures are
nothing so Proper to the Subject we treat of, as Graven, and Carved are: which
is most True. As for Gold, although the Figure change not the Species of it;
yet notwithstanding it renders it more Apt, and Proper for such an Action: as
Water, Cold, and Hot, though it be still the same Species, yet the one will
boil our Meat, when the other will not. Which makes Galeottus to conclude, in
these terms: Requiritur ergo, in unius and ejusdem speciei rebus, certum
culturae temperamentum, ut variet ur effectus.

12. It has also been Objected, against Franciscus Rueus, who undertook the
Defense of This Kind of Sculpture, after Galeottus, that if it be endued with
such Wonderful Virtues, Man's workmanship should then have more Power, then
God's: seeing that the Graved Figure of a Lion should be able to cure the Pain
of the Reins; which a Living Lion could not do. To this he answers, and that
very Pertinently, that, That which Man does, is as well the Work of God, as that
which God himself does; seeing that We are but His Instruments; and that all
our Actions, according to the Apostle, are in Him, and depend on Him. Besides,
we sometimes see, that That which has been composed by man, proves to be of
Greater Virtue, then that which God has simply Created: as, for Example,
Treacle is of more Sovereign Virtue against Poison, then any Simple, that the
Naturalists have yet found out.

13. I thought that I had now answered All the Objections, that had been made
against these Figures: but I have lately met with Another, which is a more
Confident one, then any of all the rest: and it is Na^daeus his, in his
Apology, which we have heretofore cited: where defending the honor of Virgil,
who is branded with the name of a Necromancer, because that he sometimes
applied himself to the making of these Talismanicall Images; he boldly
affirms, that all the stories, which are reported of this Poet, are False, and
Ridiculous. He denies then, Consequently, those Images which He made; as, the
Brazen Fly, which he set up, upon one of the gates of the City Naples; which,
for the space of Eight years, kept all manner of Flies from coming into the
City. He denies also that other Talisman, of a Horseleech, graved on a Plate of
Gold; which he cast into a Well, for to drive away the vast multitudes of
Horsleeches, that annoyed the same City. In a word, he stands not to dispute,
whether the Operations of these Images are Natural, or not: but he plainly
denies in Terms, that there was ever any such thing in the world: as if he
could not by any means have defended Virgil's Innocence, without easting
himself upon this Extreme, and giving the Lie to all the Authors that have
reported these stories. That which he says, in the Progress of his Discourse,
by way of confirmation of his Assertion, is after the same Rate. For, by reason
of the great number of Places, from whence these beasts are reported by
Historians to have been driven away; one may, says he, very well doubt,
whether, because they are said to have been driven from so many, they were ever
driven from any, or no. As if, because of the great number of Battails that
Hannibal is reported by Historians to have fought with the Romans, we might
not, by the same Reason, doubt, whether he fought any with them, or no. He
says moreover, that Scaliger had good reason, to make himself merry with one
of these Fly-drivers, who having made a Talismanicall Plate for This Very
Purpose; he had no sooner set it up, upon one of his Windows, but a Fly comes
presently and shites upon it for Handsell. But he must not think, that these
Reasons of his are able to derogate any thing, from the Power, which we have
acknowledged these Figures to have. For, (that we may give him his Answer,) if
such a Physician is not able to Cure a Sick man; or if such an Arithmetician
be not able to bring to an end some Operation, which he has begun: shall we
therefore conclude, that Physic, and Arithmetic, are False and Ridiculous?
An Able man can do that, which an Ignorant man cannot: and if he also sometimes
fail, it must be imputed to some default, either on his part, or on the
Matter; and not in the Science, which is Infallible. In which notwithstanding
there are so Many Things to be observed, that I cannot wonder much, if many men
find not the Effect answer their Expectation. Another reason, which renders the
Endeavors of men herein often Fruitless, is, the little Certainty that we
have, of Celestial Affairs, as being so far removed from us. And this is
that, which Roger Bacon says. Lib. cit.
Quia difficile est in his certitudinem Coelestium percipere, ideo in his
multus est error apud multos; et pauci sunt qui sciant aliquid utiliter, et
veraciter ordinare. And this is the Only Reason, why so many great Personages
have passed by, both this Science, and that of Erecting Horoscopes, and also
the so much Famed Philosophers Stone; being taken up with Employments of more
Importance, and which required not either so much Time, or Pains: Not, but
that they acknowledged the Truth, bth of the one, and of the Other; and
Especially of Talismans: as may appear out of several Epistles of Joseph
Scaliger to the Srs. de la Vau, Vazet, and Bagarris. So that I am of opinion,
that if his Father, Julius Scaliger did make himself merry, to see, that a
Mathematician should not be able, with a Figure made to drive away Flies, to
keep a Fly-from coming and abusing it; it was rather to laugh at the Ignorance
of the Artist, then at the Art he professed; seeing he has acknowledged the
Power of it, in diverse places. As concerning the Author, called Gervais, who
attributes to Virgil these Talismanicall Images; as namely, a Brazen Fly, a
Golden Horseleech, and some others: the high Employments which he was taken
into by the Emperor Otho, (to whom he was Chancellor:) and the book which he
presented him with, the Title whereof was, Ocia Imperialia, ought in my
Opinion, to render him a man Worthy of Credit: for as much as it highly
concerned a man of his Rank, and Condition, to publish nothing, but what was
both Grave, Serious, and True. And certainly, if he should have so much
forgotten himself, as to have presented the Emperor with a parcel of Absurd,
Impossible, Fabulous stories, as Naudaeus is pleased to call them; this would
have been the means to have made him been cried down for a Fool; especially
in a Princes Court; where there are always found some High Spirits, that
cannot flatter at all; and some others, who, envying the Fortune of the Great
Ones, will be sure to examine their very Least Actions; and will not pardon the
Least Fault they commit. How then would they have pardoned Those Faults, which
were Criminal; such as are those, which they would charge him with; which are
not fit to have proceeded (I will not say, from a Chancellor, but) from the
most Wretched Poet that lives? If it be said, that Princes have oftentimes the
like books presented to them, which are full of Lies, and other Impertinencies:
I answer, that such books however are never presented by a Chancellor, or by
any Person of Note, or Consideration in a State. Neither yet do such Books, by
whomsoever composed, escape from being answered by some or other: but, as for
This of our Chancellor, who has ever refuted it? nay rather, what Historian
has not transcribed him, and inserted his Stories into his own writings, as
most True ones? And whereas some may say, that he has some things, which seem
Ridiculous, and Incredible: I answer, that they ought not to be so esteemed;
since that the Ages past, and even these Our Own Days do produce the like.
So, that Admirable Tower, or Steeple, which Necham reports to have been made by
Virgil, with such wonderful Art, as that the Tower, which was built all of
stone, moved to and fro, when the Bell rung out; is not without Parallel: for
at Moustiers, a City of Provence, the Steeple, whose stones are all mortaifed
one within another, has in a manner the very same motion that the Bell has in
Ringing; and that in so strange a manner, as that sometimes those which are on
the top of it, knowing nothing of it, when they perceive the Bells begin to
ring, are very much affrighted: which, I confess, happened once to my self.

14. I could in like manner make good the greatest part of those other Stories,
which are reported of this Poet; which the same Naudaeus accounts both False,
and Impossible; but that I see on the other side, that they come very far
short of those Admirable Inventions of some certain Instruments, Images, and
Figures, which Our Own Age has brought forth. As, for Example, those
Admirable Clocks, which are to be seen; one whereof I saw at Ligorne, brought
thitherto be sold by a Germane; which had so many Rarities in it, as I should
never have believed, if my own Eyes had not seen it. For, besides an infinite
number of Strange Motions, which appeared not at all to the Eye; you had there
a company of Shepherds, whereof some played upon the Bag-pipe, with such
Harmony, and Exquisite Motion of the fingers; as that one would have thought,
they had been alive. Others Daunced by Couples, keeping exact Time, and
Measure; whiles others capered, and leaped up and down, with so much
Nimblenesse, that my Spirits were wholly ravished with the Sight. I shall not
here say any thing of that Admirable Instrument which is to be seen in the
hands of Mr. de Peyresc, one of the Kings Council, which shows the Hours of
the Day, and the Just Time of the Ebbing, and Flowing of the Sea, by the Motion
of a little bluish Water, which is shut up within a little Circular Pipe of
Glass, in which you shall sometimes see this water quite conveyed away. I
shall also pass by Architas his Wooden Dove; and the Artificial Fly, and
Eagle, A. Gell. Noct. At. c. 12
which have, in Our days, been made by Artto fly, at Norimberg: the Author
whereof has also made very Admirable Hydraulickes, and a Perpetual Rainbow;
Lib. 15. Biblioth. c. 1.
as Antonius Possevinus reports: as also the Burning-glasse which Proclus made,
in Imitation of that, Strab. l. 17. Plin. l. 36. c. 7. Tacit annal. l. 2.
Cassiod. variar. l. 1. Ep. 45.
wherewith Archimedes burnt the Ships of the Romans, at the siege of Syracuse:
the Statue of Memnon, which always yielded a strange sound, at the Rising of
the Sun: and those of Severinus Boethius, (so much admired by Theodoricus,
King of Italy;) who, as Cassiodorus says, made Serpents of Brass to hiss,
Birds of Brass to sing; and, in a word, gave, as it were, Life, and Soul to
all kinds of Mettalls: The Art of Flying, which Lucian affirms, that himself
has seen practiced; and which was publicly shown upon the Theater in Nero's
time, as Suetonius reports: Iu Pseudo philo. dial. 69^ In vit. Neron.
the Admirable Effects which Roger Bacon promised; as, of raising Artificial
Clouds, and causing Thunderclaps to be heard, and Flashes of Lightning to be
seen; and afterward to have all this end in a Shower of Rain: The Figure of
the Heavens made in Brass, Ambros. Mor. Narrat. in descrip. Hisp.
by Janellus Turrianus of Cremona, which were much more admirably done, then
that of Archimedes; and was to be seen, not many years since, in Spain:
together with a little Mill, which on one side made a Noise, as of a
Mill-clack; and on the other, cast forth the Meal ground: the Tree, which they
call, Vegetall; which is made to grow in a Glass, in less then a Nights
space: the Rose, and all other Flowers, which by Art are raised up, out of
their own Ashes: the Burning Lamp, which was found in the Temple of Venus, S.
Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 21. c. 6.
which the Violence of Winds could not extinguish: and that Other Candle, made
of a certain Stone, Lighted; which was harder then any Iron: Whereof Lucas
Tudensis, and Tostatus make mention: In vit. S. Isidor. c. 22. Inc. 21. Numeror.
as also many other the like, which the Learned Licetus has lately made an
Exact Discourse of, in his Book, De Lucernis Antiquorum. Lastly, I shall also
omit to speak of the Invention of diverse kinds of Hydraulicks in Our Own
times, which are of so wonderful Strange Contrivance, as that there is nothing
in the world, which they do not imitate: as also those Statues of Men, and
Women, that Speak, although Inarticulately; that Move of themselves, and play
upon diverse Instruments: Of Birds, that Fly, and sing: of Lions, that roar; of
Dogs, that bark; and others, that fight with Cats, in the very same manner, as
Living Dogs do: and a thousand other wonderful Inventions of Men, which are
enough to astonish our senses. And now let the Reader judge, if the Author of
that bold, rash Apology, have any just reason to say, as he does, that this
Learned Chancellor to the Emperor Otho was not in his right Wits, when he
wrote the forementioned Book; where the Effects of those Figures, which he
attributes to Virgil, have much less of Wonder in them, then These we have
here specified. So that consequently, a man might, by this means, defend this
Excellent Poet, against the Imputation of Magic, without denying (both against
the Experience of Former Ages, and of Our Own,) the Power of Talismans; the
Truth, and Efficacy whereof you may see acknowledged, (that I may trouble my
self no longer to prove it,) in the works of those Authors which we have
formerly cited; whose Quality renders them both without Suspicion, and above
all Reproach.

14. After all these Objections, there are yet some Other may be made, which
have quite escaped our Critics: I shall first propose, and then answer them;
to the end I may clear this Subject, which has been so Unjustly cried down,
of all Doubts, and Difficulties.

It may be then Objected, that, seeing that, in making of a Talismanicall
Image, we are to grave only One Celestial Figure; the rest, which should
concur in the Operation, not finding their Image there, cannot Operate at all.

Secondly, it is Ridiculous to grave the Figure of a Ram, a Lion, and so of the
rest; seeing that the Constellations, whose names these are, do not do the
business, in the Effects which we see in Nature; but rather the Sun, passing
through the parts of the Heavens.

Thirdly, the Virtue of the Other Stars will be communicated to the Image, as
well as of those, which we chiefly desire to make use of; seeing that, both the
One, and the Other, do continually send forth their Influences: those
therefore, that are of Contrary Qualities, will hinder the Operation of the
Other.

Lastly, these Figures must needs be Superstitious, and no whit Natural;
seeing that the Figure of a Scorpion, either Ingraved, or Imbossed, on a Stone,
has not only the power to cure the stinging of a Scorpion, It self; but is
able also to communicate This Power to Another Figure, taken from it, in a
Piece of Clay: as in that we have spoken of.

To the First I answer, that a man may, if he please, grave Diverse Images,
according to the Diversity of the Signs that he would observe. Such a one was
that Talismanicall Stone of the Sr. de Bagarris, which was seen in Paris, by
diverse Learned Men: such a one also is one of those Silver Talismans, that M.
de Marescot, Master of the Requests, so much honored me, as to communicate
unto me; although I conceive it to have been made by some Superstitious person.
For, besides the Table of Latin Cifers that you find there, and some Chemical
Characters; there are also three Angelical Characters, like unto those that
are found figured in a Book entitled, Les Clavicules de Solomon: which makes
me suspect all the rest. The Figure of a Woman, which you see on the One Side,
is certainly meant for the Sign of Virgo: and the three Hebrew Letters, which
are on the other side, (...), are the Abbreviatures of these three Entire
words, (...), El hascem Echad: that is to say, word for word: God; This Name is
one. Mr. de Peyresc, of whom I have formerly made mention, a man that is most
Exact and Skillful in Matters of Antiquity, has, among the many Rarities which
his Closer affords, very many of these Talismanicall Figures also; which he
could not have the opportunity of conveighing to me, because that the
Intercourse with Lions has been broken off, by reason of the Sickness. I may
possibly hereafter have the Opportunity to communicate them to the World. But
to return to the business in hand. The Influences of many several Stars may
be communicated to one Sole Figure; as the Virtue of many sundry Herbs, which
proceeds from the same Stars, may be reduced into one Medicine. This
Comparison is used by Marsilius Ficinus, who, following the opinion of the
Ancients, says: Illa vero ex quamplurimis conflari pro arbitrio possunt. Ut si
centum Sclis, Jovisque detes, per centum plantas, and animalia, similiaque
sparsae fuerint; componere simul haec centum tibi comperta possis: and in unam
conficere formam, in qua Solemn ferme, Jovemque totum jam videaris habere. So
that there is no great Necessity that the Figures of all the Constellations
should be ingraved, but only of That, which you would have to Operate the most
Effectually. And though the Other Stars meet not with a Figure semblable to
their Operations; yet will they Operate notwithstanding: for as much as they
do continually shed forth their Influences upon all things indifferently; and
do communicate their Virtue to the Gold, or to the Stone; though some, more;
and other some, less; according to the diverse Aspects, under which they were
wrought.

To the Second Objection I answer, in one word, that it is all one, whether it
be the Twelve Constellations of the Zodiac, or the Sun in them, that sheds
forth these Influences, so that we be but assured by Experience, that they come
from such a part of the Heavens, and that the Effect always follows: we are
therefore always to grave such a Figure, as is Correspondent to this Effect,
whether it proceed from the Sun, or from the other Stars. And yet it is
Manifest, that it proceeds not Principally from the Sun; seeing that the rest
of the forty eight Constellations, which are not in the Zodiac, and through
which the Sun passes not at all, do neverthelesle, in some sort, Operate also.

The Third Objection is as casily Answered, as the Former: forasmuch as those
Constellations, which are of a Contrary Nature to the Effect which we desire,
though they do Operate; yet it is but Faintly, and with Little Force: for we
use to observe the time, either when they are not in our Hemisphere; or if they
be, we then take them, when their Aspect is weakest, and when a Fortunate Star
accompanies them.

The Last Objection is indeed the most Difficult of all the rest; seeing that
the Virtue, which we find Imprinted in a Talisman, seems to surpass the Power
of Nature. Nevertheless we are able to make it appear, that there is nothing
Extraordinary in it, by instancing in the Loadstone; which having communicated
it is Virtue to a Piece of Iron, This Piece of Iron communicates it afterward
to Another, in drawing it to it self, and retaining it. In like manner may a
Talismanicall Figure communicate it is Virtue to Another Figure, which shall
have received Impression from It; which shall afterward have the power to work
the same Effects: only the Difference is, we can give a Reason of this Later,
though not of the Former. For, the Talisman is, as a Brick, made very hot,
which is able to heat another Brick, though not with so much force, as the Fire
does: and the same is to be said of the Print of a Talisman in Clay, which can
never be so Powerful in Operation, as the Talisman it self; which is heated,
or penetrated, by the Beams of the Stars.

We conclude then, that we may Naturally, and without the Aid of Spirits,
prove, by the Secrets of Nature, not only the Power of these Images, but of
many other Operations also, which are more wonderful. As, for Example, to send
News to our friends, in less then an hours space, above an Hundred Leagues
off: as Trithemius Abbas; In Tract. Apol. pro Societ. Fratr. de Ros. Gruce.
Part. 3. c. 4.
and Bartholemy Cordelier, and after them, Robert Flud, have undertaken to do.
To do such Miraculous things, by the help of Looking-glasses, as we would
think to be utterly Impossible: such as were those strange Operations, which
Roger Bacon undertook to do in the number Nine; by which he promised the
Pope, that if he would furnish him with such a Sum of money, as the Charge of
making them would require, he should be able to annoy the Turks more by these
Glasses, then by an Army of a Hundred Thousand Men. Briefly, if Aristotle had
not informed us, that the Image in the Air which inseparably followed a
certain man, so that he could never be rid of it, was Natural: would it not
presently have been concluded, that it was some Familiar Spirit, or some Demon,
that took upon it the Figure of this Man? And yet nevertheless, this was only
the Effect of the Man's own Weakness of Sight; which being unable to penetrate
the Medium of the Air, it is beams were reverberated, in like manner as in a
Looking-glass; so that, when ever his Eyes were open, he still saw his own
Image in the Air. De sens. ter. In Fernel. Dialog. de Fascino.
Which makes me to be of their Opinion, who endeavor to vindicate the
Ancients, from the Imputation of Magic, and to think, that the Works which
They did, and which are commonly accounted Diabolical, proceeded merely from
some Natural Principle: and I am seriously of this mind, that there can be
nothing more Ridiculous, then to have recourse to Spirits. For, besides that
Campanella, Riolanus, Symphorianus, Campegius, and many others assure us, that,
whatsoever they may have done, yet They have never observed any thing that was
Supernatural, at least in those Works, which are said to proceed from Spirits:
We our selves may do, without Their Aid, whatsoever they can do; seeing that
they have no Advantage over Us, but Operate only by applying Active things to
Passive, De Secret. oper. Art. and Not. cap. 5.
like as We do. We conclude therefore with the Learned Bacon. Non igitur
oportet nos uti Magicis illusionibus, cum potestas Philosophiae doceat operari
quod sufficit.

PART. III. Of the Horoscope of the Patriarchs: or the Astrology of the
Ancient Hebrews.
CHAP. VII.
That Idolatry is falsely said to have sprung from the Astrology of the
Ancients.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Arguments against Astrology ill grounded: and how, by the ways of Nature,
it is possible to give judgment of the Good, or Evil Fortune of a Child.

2. The Resolution of Tho. Aquinas, in the behalf of Astrology.

3. Gulielmus Parisiensis, and Paracelsus refuted. Astrology by whom found out.
The Error of Pliny in this Particular.

4. Astrology both Good, and Evil; and how. Moses a skillful Astrologer.

5. Idolatry whence sprung forth, according to Marsilius Ficinus, and Bechay, a
Jew. Hannibal, and Hasdrubal, Compounded names; and why.

6. The Opinion of R. Moses, and the Author of the Book of the Wisdom of
Solomon, concerning the Beginning of Idolatry. The Conclusion of all before
delivered.

7. Fires used to be made, by the Ancients, to the Sun, and the Moon: and
for what Reason.

8. Reasons given, for the proof of the Innocence of the Ancients, in these
Curiosities.

I Do not doubt, but that, now I here undertake to prove, that the Patriarchs,
and First Fathers were Astrologers, and Casters of Nativities, I shall be
accounted a Ridiculous fellow; and that the Common Cry will be, that my
Opinions are Wild, and Extravagant, and without Common sense. But be it so; I
have already endured so many Calumnies, for endeavoring but to reform the
Ignorant, as that I may very well say with the Poet;

Hoc quoque Naso feres, quoniam majora tulisti:

Jam tibi sentiri Sarcina nulla potest.

All things are sweet unto me, so that the Truth be but known: and certainly
my Enemies must of Necessity leave persecuting me, unless they are more
senseless then Beasts. I publish then Freely, and Boldly, This Curious piece
of Doctrine, which the Ignorance of the Hebrew tongue kept a long time hid from
the Christians. But seeing that my Custom always is, first of all to clear
the Subject which I handle, from all suspicion; it concerns me, that, before I
discover the Secrets of this Astrology of the Ancients, I make it appear, that
Men have, without just Reason, or Ground, questioned the Purity of this
Science; which, teaching how to erect Nativities, under the diverse Aspects of
the Stars, makes us Able to Foretell, and that by a way of Natures own
teaching, the Good, or Evil Fortune that shall befall men.

1. Those then that oppugn the Innocence of Astrology, make use ordinarily of
these two Reasons: first, that it is Vain, and of no Truth; and secondly, that
it is condemned by the Maxims of our Religion; which requires nothing at our
hands, but this Burden of the Cloister; Obedience, and Humility. And if we but
consult the Canons, where this Decree is to be seen, written in red letters;
you will find, say they, that it is not without Cause, that This Art is cried
down; seeing it imposes a Necessity upon our Actions: and that the Principle
on which it is grounded, has been of so dangerous Consequence, as that it has
planted Idolatry in the Minds of Men. Now if these Arguments had not been
already answered by so many Authors, it would concern me to examine them in
this place: but Cardinal de Aliaco, Lucius Bellantius, Melanchthon, Pirovanus,
Goclenius, and Ranzovius, have so judiciously done it, to the satifaction of
the most Critical Palate, as that he must be no Man, that shall not
acknowledge their Reasons to be most Just, and Sound. For, if the Church, say
They, cannot endure the very name of Astrology; it is not meant of that Kind of
Astrology, which, by the Rising and Setting of the Stars, and by their several
Conjunctions, is able to foretell Rain, Thunder, Storms, and Tempestuous
weather, and, by Consequence, the Plenty, or Scarcity of Fruits: as also, by
the Nature of these Celestial Figures, to judge of the Natural Disposition of
a new born Child: as, that it will be of a Temperate Humor, if it be borne
under a Temperate Sign; and for the same reason, will be also Meek, Affable,
and Courteous: or else on the contrary, if it be borne under a Malignant
Constellation, by reason of Its being either too Cold, or too Hot, and
Parching; the Child will also abound with the Like Humor, and so a man may
proceed on in his judgment of him, and pronounce of him Probably, and without
captivating the Will at all, that he will be Quarrelsom, and Ill-natured; and
these Quarrels being always accompanied with some ill Accident, or other, one
may conclude, that he will be Unhappy, and Unfortunate: and many the like
things may be foretold, which I shall here omit; because they are so common,
that even Children know them. This then is not the Astrology, against which the
Church has given Sentence; but that Other Sort, which has been Justly
condemned; which attributing more Power to the Heavens, then it ought to do,
imposes a Necessity upon the Freest Part of our Soul.

These Authors have likewise given the same Answer to the First Argument,
concerning the Incertainty of this Art, which we have before brought to prove
the Truth of the Power of Figures. We may therefore account all those to be
very Obstinate, and Self-conceited men, who, to asperse Astrology, do reckon up
all those Astrologers of note, that have been found Liers: whereas they should
also as well have produced the names of all those that have hit right, and
whose Predictions have even astonished all those, that have seen the Event to
follow. So, the great Picus Mirandula, who, for writing against Astrologers
more, and more reproachfully, then ever man did, was called Flagellum
Astrologorum, met at last with one Lucius Bellantius of Syena, who was not at
all deceived in his judgment that he gave upon his Nativity: for he foretold
him, that he should die in the Thirty fourth year of his Age; which accordingly
came to pass. And did not Junctin, an Italian, of the City of Florence,
foretell, that Himself should die of some Violent Death, and upon the very
same day was knocked on the head, by his Books in his own Study falling upon
him? But that we may not weary our selves, in turning over books, in searching
for Examples of this Kind, even our own Country of France will be able to
affoard us enough, and he must have been a blind man, that has not observed
them.

2. Certainly the Consideration of these Truths prevailed so much upon the
Minds of the most Learned men, that lived in the days of our Fathers, that
without any making Doubt, or Scruple at all, they put Pen to Paper; employing
their most precious hours of Study, in Confirmation of what their Prededessours
had herein delivered: addicting themselves so much the more freely to this kind
of Study, for that they saw it was asserted also, even by the most pious
Doctors of the Church. Damascene, says, Damasc. 2. lib. de Fide. Contrae Cent.
l. 3. c. 54.8^.
Alios atque alios Planetas, diversas complexiones, habitus, and dispositiones
in nobis constituere. Tho. Aquinas has also embraced the same Belief, citing
the forenamed Author, and confirming this Doctrine by the comparison of a
Physician, who is able to judge, by the Complexion, and Temperament of the
Body, as by the Immediate Causes, of the Subtilty of the Understanding: In like
manner, says he, may an Astrologer judge of it, by the Diverse Motions of the
Stars, as by Causes also, though more remote. He adds further, Cent. Aphor. 38.
that it is True which Ptolomy affirms of the Planet Mercury; that if, at the
Nativity of a Child, it be found in one of the Houses of Saturn, he will
have an Acute, clear Wit. 1. Part. q. 150. art. 4. and 2. q. 3. art. 5. videat
and finis libri de generat.
And at last, this Learned Doctor concludes, that Astrologers are very seldom
out, in their Judgment, as far as concerns the Manners of Men: for, we are,
says He, to believe our Sense, and Experience.

3. I shall here pass by all that the rest of the Fathers have written,
Acroteleut. Astronom.
touching this Particular; all which is diligently collected, by Rodolphus
Goclcnius, a Physician of Masbourg: neither do I purpose to make an Apology
for this Science; for, I shall rest satisfied in the Churches Determination:
Only I will here set down, what the Opinion of the Rabbis is, in this point
in hand.

And first, that I may clear these Secrets from all manner of Suspicion, it
will concern me, in few words to show, that there can be nothing more False,
then what is usually given our, to the Disparagement of this our Astrology;
namely, That the Beginning of It, has given Rise to Idolatry. Gulielmus
Parisiensis, in his First Part de Universo, denying the Power of the Stars in
Figures, which we have before treated of, endeavors to confirm This
Opinion; which was first broached by some Christians in the Primitive Church.
Theophrastus Paracelsus has also since judged it True, in his Book De Morb.
Invisib. in the Chapter which treats of the Disease, which is called by the
name of S. Valentine, or, the Falling Sickness; where he says: Quidam ex
populo observarunt, quod and Planetarum Conjunctiones and Oppositiones, and
alij cursus Coelestes, tales morbos irritarent, and augerent; unde etiam sectae
natae sunt, ut quidam crediderint, Stellas esse Deos. But this Opinion has no
Solidity in it at all; and that for Three Reasons. The First is, because the
Patriarks, according to the Testimony of the most Authentic Authors, were the
Inventors of this Science. The Second is, because that their Children practiced
it, and were Blamelessc. And the Third is, because it is a very hard Matter,
Truly to determine, whence Idolatry took it is beginning.

As for the First, Josephus affirms, Antiq. 1.
that Adam and Seth, were the First that practiced this Science; whether it
were in them, Infused, or Acquired: and that Abraham, when he fled into Egppt,
taught it the Egyptians. This Truth has so much the more Force in it, in that
it proceeds from a man whose Authority is Unquestionable. So that we may
perceave, that Pliny is much mistaken, Lib. 5, 6, 7.
when he affirms, that none but Atlas was the Author of it: for, besides that
we are very certain, that Astrology was in Use, long before Atlas; he
contradicts what himself had said in the Book immediately going before; where
he would have Belus to have been the First that invented Astrology: although
afterward again he assures us, the Phoenicians were the men. But suppose we
should grant him, that the Phoenicians, or else, as others will have it, the
Assyrians, were the Inventers of it: yet still will it be true, that the
Patriarks were the Men; forasmuch as, Abraham was an Assyrian; and his
Predecessors were Phoenicians; a Colony of Assyrians having gone into
Phoenicia, as we have elsewhere proved. I shall not here speak of the Two
pillars which are reported to have been erected before the Flood; upon one of
which, all the Rules of Astrology were ingraved, by Seth; and which was
preserved down to the very time that Josephus lived in, who affirms himself
to have been an Eyewitness of it. Now it could never enter into any man's
breast to imagine, that these First Patriarks, observing the Motions of the
Heavens, did worship the Stars: it were a great Crime to entertain any such
Thought. Idolatry therefore took not its Beginning from Astrology.

4. The second Reason is grounded upon All Story, both Sacred, and Profane:
where any one may see, that there are very few Ages passed, wherein there was
not some Great Personage that was Famous for his Knowledge in Astrology,
without being condemned for it by any. It is true indeed, that the Primitive
Christians condemned Aquila; who is no other, then the Famous Interpreter of
the Bible, known by the name of Onkelos: but it was not, till they found, that
this Overcurious Spirit rested not in the simplicity of Astrology, but betook
himself to the superstitious Observation of the Stars, attributing to them the
Power of overruling; as well our Mind, as our Body; and that Inevitably too,
without leaving us any Power to Decline their Influences, which he is said to
have called by the name of Fatal. In a word, no man will ever be able to find,
what ever Picus Mirandula, (who is seconded by Delrio, and many others,) says
to the contrary, that among so many Astrologers, that are spoken of in History,
any One has been reproved; if so be that he only observed the bare Rules of
Astrology, as we have described it; and followed the Tract, which Nature has
laid down; leaving us the Proper Freedom of our Will, as our Religion teaches
us. And in this sense, Astrology is Good, and Allowable; but very Pernicious,
if it proceed otherwise. Besides, This Reason ought to satisfy us in this
Particular, that Moses himself, who was a Man as Holy, as Politic, was
skillfull in the Purity of This Science, as well as in all the rest, that
Egypt, and Chaldea had brought forth; as is proved by Philo Judaeus; whose
words we have elsewhere quoted. Theophylact says, that for to be able to
convince the Superstitious Egyptians, In Act. Apost. c. 7.
it was Necessary that he should understand, not only the True Religion, but
also the Grounds of the False. Dedi cormeum, says the Wise man, ut scirem
prudentiam atque doctrinam, Ecclesiast.
erroresque ac stultitiam. Upon which Text, R. Selomo says, that by the two
First Words, Prudentia, and Doctrina, we are to understand Sciences Divine,
under which he comprehends Astrology: and by the two Last, Errores ac
Stultitia, those that are Unlawful, in which number he reckons the Magic of
the Egyptians; to which some will also entitle Moses. And he that desires to
be informed more particularly, how able a man in Astrology he was, needs but to
have recourse to Abarbanel, or Moses Egyptius, lately translated, and corrected
by Buxtorfe. He may also see a Book entitled, L' Homme d' Estat Chrestien,
written in Spanish, by Jean Marquez, and translated into French by le Sr. de
Virion, Counselor to the Duke of Savoy. Now the most excellent among all
those Sciences, that the Egyptians, and Chaldeans were skilled in, was, without
all Controversy, This of Astrology: who will not then conclude, that Moses was
learned in it? But perhaps it will be answered, that Idolatry was not as yet
sprung up; and that it was afterward introduced by the Egyptians, by their
being too much addicted to the Contemplation of the Stars; and that thus it
will still appear to have taken its Original from Astrology. I answer first,
that it is False then, that the Beginning of the one, was the Beginning of the
Other. Besides, it is certain, that before Moses his time, Idolatry had spread
it self through the whole East, and they offered Sacrifices to the Sun, and to
the Moon, and to the rest of the Stars; which this Divine Lawgiver, applying
himself to the usual manner of speaking, there calls, The Host of Heaven; the
Worship whereof he interdicts the Israelites. But suppose that this Abominable
Practice had been derived from the Observation of the Celestial Signs, either
before, or after Abraham, and Moses; which nevertheless is was not: Or else,
that the Contemplation of the Stars was the Cause, not of Idolatry in General,
but of One certain Kind only; which, perhaps is the meaning of Paracelsus: What
can be hence concluded? Heresy has sprung from the Scriptures,
Mis-understood; must we therefore condemn all, that the Prophets, and Apostles
have written?

5. We will now show, by way of a Third Reason, that it is Uncertain, whence
Idolatry took its Beginning; whether from Astrology, or otherwise. Marsilius
Ficinus reports, De vit. colit. Comp. l. 3. c. 26.
out of Mercurius Trismegistus, that the Egyptian Priests, being unable by
Reasons to persuade the People, that there were any Gods, or Spirits, which
were above Men, were constrained to call down Demons, or Spirits, into
Statues; and to bring These forth to the People, to be an Object of their
Adoration. These are his words. Addit, Sapientes quondam Aegyptios, qui et
Sacerdotes erant, cum non possent rationibus persuadere populo, esse Deos, id
est, Spiritus aliquos super homines; excogitasse Magicum hoc illicitum, quo
Daemones allicientes in Statuas, esse Numina declararent: And from hence came
Idolatry. Bechal, a Learned Rabbine, who lived about the year of our Lord,
1291. approves not of this Opinion. For in his Tract of Strange Gods, which is
put at the end of his Comment upon the first Chapter of Genesis, he assures us,
that Idolatry sprung merely from the Presumption of Cham's Posterity: which is
not much different from that we read in Story. For, Ninus erected Altars to his
Father; and Belus caused himself to be called a God. And thus, other Proud
Princes, following their Example, endeavored to work this Persuasion in the
minds of the more Simple, Vid. Jacob. de Valentia, in 1 Psalm. and Fabr. in
Scudo. l. 2. c. 21.
that Themselves were Gods, though they appeared in the Form of Men. Thus Nero
despoiled the Altars, intending to have no other Deity acknowledged by the
people, save His Own. Augustus called himself the Son of Apollo; as Domitian
did, of Pallas; by this means denying his own Mother that bare him. Alexander
believed himself to have been the son of Jupiter Ammon. In a word, Historians
are full of these kind of Fooleries; which passing for Truths, among the simple
Vulgar, it at length became a Maxim with them, that whosoever had lived well
in this world; and had, by some generous Action, deserved the title of a Hero;
after he was Dead, he presently became a God, and so had Statues Erected to him
by the People, (in memory of his high Exploits;) which they afterward
worshipped with such Veneration, as is due to God alone. And peradventure the
Princes of the East, especially those of Babylon, for the more firm Imprinting
of this Error into the minds of their Subjects, added the Name of some Deity,
to their Own; as, for Example, that of Baal, to Hanni: which being joined
together, make Hanni-bal, by leaving out one Letter, for the more smooth
Pronunciation; and so in Hasdru-bal, and many others. This Conjecture may give
some light, to that Passage of Heurnius, in his Philosoph. Barbar. where
speaking of the Philosophy of this People, he says: Ille apud Principes
Babylonicos mos vigebat, Tract. 2. cap. 4.
ut aut Dei alicujus nomen sibi assumerent; aut plurium Divorum, Heroumque, et
fortitudine Excellentium virorum nomina aliquot combinata.

6. This Opinion, though it seem to carry very much Probability with it, yet
does it no way satisfy R. Moses: who is of this Persuasion, that Idolatry took
it is Beginning, from the too much honoring of Those Statues, that were
permitted in the Ancient Law; as we have formerly said, of those of Laban, and
of the Golden Calves of Jeroboam. The Author of the Book of Wisdom is of
another Opinion; affirming, that the Worshipping of I dols took beginning from
hence; that a Father being very much grieved for the death of his son, caused
his Image to be made; to the end, that by seeing his Resemblance, his grief
might be somewhat assuaged. But he honoring this Image too passionately, he
began at length to worship it as a God: Sa. 14. v. 15. etc.
so great is the power of Love. Acerbo enim luctu, says this Excellent Author,
dolens pater, ciro sihi rapti silij fecit imaginem: Et illum, qui tunc quasi
homo mortuus fuerat, nunc tanquam Deum colere coepit, et constituit inter
servos suos sacra and sacrificia. You may see the rest in the Book it self;
which the Liberunisme of these times has expunged out of the Canon. The
Observation which Mr. Selder has made upon the Hebrew word (...) Aghtsabim,
seems to confirm this Later Opinion; for, this word, says He, signifies
both Idola, and Dolores: Quod quotannis, statuis, et monumentis mortuorum
dolor afficerentur. Notwithstanding he is in an Error afterward, in the
prosecution of this Truth; when he says, that Terah, Abraham's Father, was the
First that ever worshipped Idols. But this is, to adventure to say more, then
the History of Moses gives warrant for; and to be so Uncharitable, (that I say
not Insolent, and Rash,) as to accuse the Ancients without Witness. For, as for
the Testimony of Cedre^, who says, that Abraham threw his Fathers Idols into
the Fire; and that his brother Aram, endeavoring to preserve them, was burnt;
I find no such thing in any of the Hebrew Historians: so that one may say of
this Opinion, as S. Gregory did of another, as gross as this: Eadem facilitate
contemnitur, qua probatur. In a word, we must even be content to satisfy our
selves, with Justin Martyr, S. Cyprian, S. Hilary, R. Moses, Advers. Gent. De
Idol. van. De Trin. l. 1. Moreh Neboch. l. 2. Divin. Instit. Colat. 8.
Lactantius, and the Abbot Serenus in Cassian; and Conclude, that as the Black
Art is certainly known to be, though it is Beginning is not; no more is that of
Idolatry. And indeed these same Authors now mentioned, that we may look after
no other Witnesses, are of Opinion, that this Abomination was on foot before
the Flood: and many others think, that it was not till after, while the
Wonderful Works of God were yet fresh in the Memories of Men. And this, in the
Opinion of Alexander Halensis, was the reason of Idolatry: Part. 11. quaest.
138.
Propter recentem memoriam ejus, qui fecit Coelum and terram, quam ex
disciplina Patrum habuerunt. And when all is done, an Argument to prove the
Uncertainty of the Spring, whence Idolatry is derived, might very well be
raised from the Uncertainty, and Diversity of the Opinions here delivered,
concerning this Particular; were not That, out of the Book of Wisdom, to be
received as the truest, by reason of the Sanctity of the Book. However we do
not yet see any thing to the Contrary, but that Astrology is Innocent, and
clear from the Crime, that it is charged with. We will now by the way set
down, (that we may leave no doubt behind us,) that which no Author, either of
the Greeks, or Latins, has yet discovered; and which Reason must needs allow,
as most true.

7. Bechai then says, that the Ancient Chaldeans are very falsely accused, to
have been such wicked men, as people would make them; and to have worshipped
the Stars. For, says he, if the First Nazarenes (he means the Christians)
were so good men, as they have been reported to have been, in the first Ages of
their Belief: why may we not as well believe the same of the First Men, who were
created with a thousand times more Simplicity, then ever has been found in any
of their Posterity since? And who can believe, that they should so give
themselves over to those Vile Abominations, wherewith they now stand charged?
This Argument is not much different, from that of Alexander Halensis.
Nevertheless Bodine is quite of another Opinion, and scoffs at those Authors,
who will have the First Ages to have been such Golden, and Silver ones. But,
if he had weighed the business rightly, he would have found; that those Vices,
which the Ancients are accused of, are so small, in comparison of those, that
the Corruption of the Times has since brought forth; that they deserved rather
to have passed for Merry Pranks only, and to have been ranked among Venial
sins. But to return to Bechai. That which he observes of these First Men; and,
which, I say, has been observed by no man else, is; that those Fires which
they made, in honor of the Sun, and Moon, were Lawful, and Kindled to a good
End. For, says He, they testified the same thing to God, which God testified
to them by the Sun, and by the Moon, which is nothing else but a Great Light.
They kindled these Fires then, by way of returning Him thanks, for His; and,
looking up to the Stars, they prayed to the Angels, which God had there placed,
for to move them about, to the End they might be Favorable unto them. But, as
the best things come at length to be corrupted; Cham, or his Posterity, looking
no higher, then to this Fire, began to worship it; and so, terminating their
Adoration in the Sun, and Moon, they paid them those Honors, which the First
Chaldeans meant to None, but to the Author of these Stars alone.

8. This Opinion of the Learned Jew may be proved, by two, or three
Conclusions. The First is, that the Wise men of the Former Ages had knowledge
of the Invisible God, by the Things that are Visible. Now of the things that
are Visible, there is none that more powerfully proves, that there is a God,
then the wonderful Effects of the Sun, and Moon, and the rest of the Stars.
They had knowledge of God therefore, by the Stars. And whereas the Apostle
says, that though they knew him, yet they glorified him not afterward; he
speaks of those Philosophers, which had knowledge of him only by this Natural
way: But the First Chaldeans, besides this way of Knowledge, had knowledge of
him also by Revelation. It is Probable then, that this Later way, joined with
the Former, brought them to a just acknowledgment of Him; which they expressed
by these Fires, which they kindled in Honor of Him. Another Conclusion is,
that these Chaldeans had not as yet dealt with Spirits: and although that,
after the Flood, a great part of this People, whom the Pride of Cham had
corrupted, had addicted themselves unto them; yet notwithstanding the greatest
part still kept themselves to the Laws of their Fathers; and would not
acknowledge any other Demons, save those Spirits, which they conceived to have
their Residence in the Stars. But I should perhaps be thought to talk Idly,
with this Rabbin, had I no other Proofs of this, but what I have out of his
School. But these Truths are acknowledged also by Jamblicus, who is of the
same Persuasion. Chaldaeos vero, (says Ficinus, speaking of this Philosopher,)
Daemonibus non occupates, Aegyptijs antepoint. See also what Porphyrie says,
speaking of the Oracle of Apollo, which was enforced to say, that

Chaldaeis, quae vera esset sapientia tantum,
Hebraeisque ipsis concessum agnoscere; pura
Aeternum qui mente colunt Regemque, Deumque.
The Fires then, which they kindled before the Sun, Porph. l. 1. de Phitosoph.
Resp.
and Moon, were not consecrated to Demons. And, as for those Spirits, which
they prayed to in these Stars, the Practice of it is so lawful, as that We
our selves, in our Litanies, do also invocate them. And, but that These Words
would be an occasion of Scandal to the Ignorant, I could very well say: O
Angel of the Sun, and thou O Angel of the Moon, pray for me. And here I
could give thee, Reader, some very Choice Observations, concerning the Ancient
Oriental men, and their Adoration of Spirits, and Ghosts: but I consider, that
I have many Enemies; I shall therefore have to another Subject, which is as
little Known to the world, though less subject to Suspicion.

CHAP. IX.
Whether, or no, the Ancient Hebrews made use of any Mathematical Instrument
in their Astrology: and what the Figure of their Instruments was.
THE CONTENTS.
1. What Instruments the Ancient Astrologers used. The Fable of Atlas
discovered. 2. The Hebrew's Sphere described. 3. Certain Doubts proposed,
concerning the Fabric of it. The strange Conceit of R. Moses, concerning the
number of the Heavens. 4. A Conjecture, upon the Antiquity of this Sphere. 5.
Of the Dial of Ahaz, and it is Description, not yet seen. 6. Conjectures, on
the Figure of our Sundials.
THose, who have had more then ordinary skill in the Science of Astrology, and
who have sometimes also taken the pains to erect Figures, and cast Nativities,
have assured us; that it is a very hard matter to practice these Curious Arts,
without the help of some Instrument. Which has moved some of the Rabbines to
conclude, that seeing their Forefathers were skillful in this Science, they
must needs have made use of One, or More of these Mathematical Instruments;
that so they might be able the more easily to attain to the end of those
Operations, which the Learned reckon to be of Astrologicall Cognizance. Now
that the Ancients had of these Instruments, and in their practice made use of
them, may be made appear out of Historians; some of which have made mention of
the Chaldean Astrologers: as namely, Q. Curtius, who, giving an account of all
those that went forth of Babylon, for to receive Alexander the Great, Ibid.
says: Magi deinde, suo more carmen canentes; post Chaldaei, Babyloniorum, non
vates modo, sed etiam Artifices. Where, by the word, Artifices, he means these
Astrologers, who made Instruments, for the Practice of their Art. And this is
the Gloss of Heurnius: Idest, ij Astrologi, In Chald
qui Astrorum cursus observabant, varia instrumenta in eum vsum fabricantes.
Hence we may discover, what the ground was of that Fable of Atlas, King of the
Mauritanians, or Phoenicians; who fled before the Army of Josuah. For, the
Heavens, which the Greeks (whom we may truly say, to have been the Corrupters
of all Antiquity,) say, that This Man, who was both a King, and an Astrologer,
bare up with his shoulders, was only a Globe, or Sphere, not much unlike ours;
which he made use of, in searching after the motions of the Heavens. Ac tum,
says the same Heurnius, disciplinas avitas ipsum excoluisse; L
sphaeramque, Caeli effigiem confecisse. Vnde postea Poetae, et mendacissimi
Graeci, Caeli gestationem ipsi affixerunt. It is most certain then, that the
Ancients had certain Instruments, which they made use of, in their Practice of
Astrology. But to conclude now, that those which are described by Chomer, and
by another Anonymous Rabbine that I have seen in the Library of Cardinal de
Saint Susane, were invented by the Hebrews; the Conjectures which I shall
afterward produce, will not suffer me to believe. However, I will here give
you a particular Deseription of them, as I find it delivered by these Authors.

2. The first piece that you saw of these Instruments, was the Base, or foot of
it; which was made of a Thin Plate of Copper, or some other Metal, bowed, and
hollowed, in manner of a Basin. Three small Pillars rose up from the
Superficies, whereon were written these three words, (...) Din, Schalom, Emet:
that is to say; Judgment, Peace, Truth. These Pillars bare up two great
Semi-circles, which made up a Triangle, with so great Artifice, that it was
nevertheless Round, in the Superficies. Within, you had a Great perfect
Circle, which had within it, two others: and all of the same Metal with the
Base. The First, which was the greatest of these Circles, had these words upon
it; (...), Schemai haschamaim, THE HEAVEN OF HEAVENS. The second had only
written upon it, (...), Schamaim, THE HEAVENS: and the Third had only this one
word upon it, (...) raquiagh, which signifies as much, as Expansum. This Later
Circle, and the First, were nothing so admirable, as the Middlemost; which was
beset round, with very many several Little Circles, which were all Moveable;
among which there were seven, which appeared more Eminently then the rest, by
reason of their being placed nearer the Center of the Instrument. All these
Circles had little Stars on them; and those, which were upon these 7. Circles,
were marked, each of them with one of these letters, (...), which signify the
Planets, in the order that we reckon them, beginning with that which is
furthest off from us, which is Saturn. Near these letters, there was seen
these following words: (...) Jom Rischon, Scheni, Schelicsi, Revighi,
Chamischi, Schicsi, Scevighi: that is to say, The First, Second, Third, Fourth,
Fifth, Sixth, Seventh Day. Every one of the Circles of the Planets, had upon it
the number of years that it finisheth its Course in: and that of the Moon had
ingraved on it these twelve Characters; (...), which are the first letters of
these names of the twelve Months; (...) Nisan, Aijar, Sivan, Tamouz, Ab,
Aelol, Tisri, Tisvan, Kislieu, Tebet, Schebat, Adar; that is to say, MARCH,
APRIL, MAY, JUNE, JULY, AUGUST, SEPTEMBER, OCTOBER, NOVEMBER, DECEMBER,
JANUARY, FEBRUARY. Now these Circles were ordered so exactly, as that one might
perfectly distinguish the Degrees, and distances, there set down. In the Midst
of all, and in the very Center, there was placed a little Blew Ball, which was
a little hollowed; on which were described many letters accompanied with
certain Lines, acrosse which ran a little Green Streake, or Circle; like to
another made in the same manner, which went round about the Great Circle of
all, which included all the rest: and all along both of these, you had these
words engraved: (...) Ceter, Chochmab, Binah, Chesed, Gedolah, Tipheret,
Netsac, Hod, Jesod, Maleout: which signify in order: CROWN, WISDOM,
INTELLIGENCE, MERCY, MAGNIFICENCE, GLORY, VICTORY, POWER, FOUNDATION, KINGDOM.
And these are the Ten Names, which the Hebrews call, ZEPHIROTS.

I shall not here meddle with any of these Questions; namely, Whether this
hollow Blew Ball intimates, that the Ancients conceived the Earth to be of this
Figure: whence peradventure some of the Greek Writers took occasion to say,
that it was of the form of an Omega. 2. Whether the great number of Stars,
which had each his Proper Circle, showed, that every one of them had a Peculiar
Orb; and that consequently there are many more Heavens, then our Philosophers
reckon upon. Whence R. Moses also took occasion to say, Non est autem
impossible, quod quaelibet Stellarum fixarum sit in caelo sueproprio, et motus
omnium ipsorum sit unus, et omnes sphaerae ipsarum revolvantur super eosdem
Polos. 3. Whether the three Great Circles represent the Three Heavens, which
the most Learned do acknowledge Only; accounting the Air, or the Vast Extent,
which is betwixt the Earth and the Heavens, for the First; the Heaven, wherein
the Stars are, for the Second; and the Place of the Blessed, for the Third:
avoiding by this means that Dispute, concerning the Heaven that S. Paul was
caught up into. Neither will I Positively determine, whether, or no, this Green
Line, or Circle, be the same with That, which is called by the Cabbalists,
Linea viridis quae circuit Universum. I shall pass by all these Questions,
which some other may resolve; that I may come to those Conjectures which I
promised; which will let us see, how little Assurance we an have, of the
Antiquity of this Instrument.

4. The First is, that seeing that before the time of these Rabbis, no man
ever made mention of this Instrument; and that, before these men gave us the
Description of it, the Doctrine, on which it was built, was known; it is
Probable, that it was invented afterward, upon this Doctrine. The Second is,
that Rabbi Kapol, who was a very Learned Astrologer, makes not any mention at
all of it, in any of his Astrologicall writings; as neither has Abraham
Avenar; nor, before Them Both, R. Moses. It is true indeed, that Aben Esra in
his Sphere of the Hebrews, Indians, Persians, Egyptians, and Arabians, an
Author often cited by Scaliger, calls to mind a certain Instrument, that was
arciently much in use among these People: but seeing he gives us no Description
of it at all, and speaks but sparingly of it; we may conclude, that it is
Uncertain, what the Fabric of it was; for otherwise, he would certainly have
described it, as being Necessary, in the matter he had in hand.

The Last Conjecture, which makes me think, that this Instrument was never in
use, among the Ancient Hebrews, is, because that the Names of the Months,
which are graved on the Circle of the Moon, are not Hebrew, but Chaldee: and
although seven of these names are to be found in the Hebrew Bible, which are
these; (...), Nisan, Sivan, Elol, Kisleiu, Tevet, Schevat, Adar; MARCH, MAY,
AUGUST, NOVEMBER, DECEMBER, JANUARY, and FEBRUARY; yet are they not therefore
Hebrew; for they are no where found, save only in the Books that were written,
during the Captivity; as Haggai, Zechariah, Daniel, Esra, and Esther. If the
Author of this Instrument had made use of these three names of Months, which
are indeed Hebrew, though out of use; a man would have had the less suspicion
of it: (...), Ziu, Aitanim, Boul; 3. Reg. c. 6. v. 37. and 38. et cap. 8. verse.
2.
which are used in the Third Book of the Kings. The Translator of our Bible,
interprets them not, nor specifies, what months they were. Lucas Burgensis,
Elias Levita, Marinus, In 12. Exodus In Thisb. In Kalend. Heb. Glob. ling.
Sanct. Lib 8. Anaceph. Hebraic. men's.
and Ludovicus S. Francisci, say, that they were, APRIL, SEPTEMBER, and
OCTOBER. We may conclude then, from these three Conjectures, that this
Instrument is none of those, which were in use among the Ancient Hebrews: and
we may add, to this Conclusion, that as well the Figure, as the Invention of
it, is unknown to us.

5. The Figure of Ahaz his Dial is more certain; or rather, is less
suspected of Novelty: but that the Fabric of it, as it is delivered to us, is
entirely perfect, and such as it was Anciently, I find not many Reasons to
induce me to believe. For as much as, except only one Rabbine, who is indeed a
very Learned man, I have not met with any Historian, either Christian, Hebrew,
Egyptian, or Arabic, that has taken any notice of it, or so much as touched
upon it. Yet because there is less uncertainty found in it, then in the Sphere
aforesaid; and also, in case any man should have a mind to take one single
Authors word in this matter; I am content to give you the Description of it, as
he has delivered it, seeing it is Proper to my Subject in hand. For the
Ancients, in their Horoscopes, did often make use of these Dials, whatsoever
the Fashion of them was, observing exactly the just motion of the two Greater
Luminaries. We do not find then, throughout the whole Bible, any mention
made, of these Sciotericall, or Sun Dials, save only in the Last Book of the
Kings; the Author whereof, speaking of the Cure of that Good King, who was
Son, and Father to two other so Abominable ones, says: Invocavit itaque
Isaias Propheta Dominum, et reduxit umbram per lineas, quibus jam descenderat
in Horologii Achas, retrorsum december gradibus. The Original Hebrew calls this
Instrument (...), Maghalot Achaz; that is to say; the Ascensions, or Degrees of
Achaz. So much for the Name: but as for the Figure of it, there is no man
hitherto, that has published, what it was: I shall therefore be the First,
(after R. Eliahou Chomer,) that shall communicate it to the world: and it was
after this manner. A Stone, or else a Plate of Copper, of what Bigness a man
pleased, was wrought into the Form of a Crescent; the hollow part whereof
encompassed a Ball, or Globe, of the same substance, having the hours of the
Day described upon it. This Globe, or Ball, was compassed with a Circle, which
was raised above it about two Inches, and had 28. holes bored in it; which
served to show the Hours, as well by the Moon, as by the Sun; in this
manner. The Instrument was placed upon a Pedestall, or else upon a Window only;
(as Chomer says, That of this Kings was:) but in such a manner, as that one of
the Horns of the Crescent, which was to be fitted to the Elevation of the
Place, must respect the East; and consequently, the Circle, that crossed it,
would look toward the South. When the Sun then shone, it cast a shadow
toward the Opposite Horn; so that, the shadow falling upon the Round Ball,
the height whereof exceeded not that of the two Horns of the Crescent, it
showed exactly the hours, till about Ten of the Clock, (according to our
manner of reckoning the hours:) at which time the Sun, being too high, could
not cast the shadow any longer upon the side of the Horn: so that, for the
following Hours, this Defect was supplied by the Circle; which showed the
hours, till about Two in the Afternoon. After which time, as the Sun
declined, the other Horn of the Crescent began to show the hours, till Night.
And thus, of the Twelve hours of the Day, the Circle always sehwed four of
them; that is to say, from Ten, to Two in the Afternoon: and this Part of the
Day is still called, by the Eastern men, Midday, or Noone; dividing the Day
naturally into three parts; Morning, Noone, and Evening; as having long since
lost the use of Dials; as Scaliger has observed. As for the hours of the
Night, they were found out upon this Instrument, by the Moon; by casting its
shadow upon a little Pin of wood, wherewith one of the Holes of the Circle,
round about which the Hours were described, was to be stopped every day: So
that this Pin which appeared on the top of it, served instead of a Style, or
Cock of the Dial; which the Greeks call (...). If I had not found some
Difficulty in this Obscure Description, I would have here set down the figure
of it, and the manner how this Dial is to be made. But I had rather be silent,
in things that I do not fully understand, then to speak by guess: some
better leisure may perhaps giveme Opportunity, to discover This Secret, and to
communicate it to the world. At preent I shall only add, that Jonathan's
Paraphrase calls this Instrument, whether it be a True one, or not; (...),
Tsourat Aeven Schagaja; Figura Lapidis Horarum.

6. And here Aben-Esra observes, that those Sun-Dials, which we use to set up
in Gardens, for Ornament sake, have some kind of Resemblance, with this here
described: and he makes a Doubt; whether, or not, the Fabric of them has not
been borrowed from, or made in Imitation of this Instrument. For, if you but
consider the Hollownesse of the Figure, in the upper part of these garden
Dials; you will find, that it is not much unlike a Crescent; the Ball, or Globe
in the Midst being only wanting; so that the Hours are described in the
Hollownesse of the said Crescent, and in stead of the Horns of the Crescent, a
Gnomon of Wood, or Iron, by its shadow, points out the hours. And this is the
Instrument, which was most in use, among the Ancient romans, called by Writers,
Concha; as Munster testifies, who was a man of very great knowledge, as in
many other things, so in this also. Praefat. in Horologiograph.
Erat primo, says he, apud Antiquos Concha Hemicyclea, lineis debita
proportione distincta; cui praelongus ex aere, aut ligno baculus, Soli
oppositus, supereminebat; et ejus umbra, in lineas incidens, horas ostendebat.

CHAP. X.
That the Astrology of the Ancient Hebrews, Aegyptiuns, and Arabians, was not
such, as it is delivered by Scaliger, Augustinas Riccius, Kunrath, Duret, and
Vigenere.
THE CONTENTS.
1. THe Holiest things are often mixed with Fables.

2. The strange Fancies, and Falsehood of Duret, touching the Spirits of the
Planets; and, touching the Astrologicall Cable of the Jews.

3. The Fooleries of Carlo Fabri, in his assigning of the Angels, proper to
the seven Electors of the Empire.

4. The Strange Docrine of Riccius, and Kunrath, concerning the Planetary
Zephirots.

5. The Stars, the Cave of the Diversities of Religions; in the Opinion of R.
Chomer.

6. The Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ, erected by Bechai, and Cardan.

7. The Astrologicall Pictures, or Figures at the Conjunctions of the
Celestial Signs, (falsely attributed to the Egyptians, and Arabians,) what
they were, and by whom invended: against Scaliger.

BUt that we know, that in point of Learning, especially when it is of any
Antiquity, and of a Nature so Quaint as this is, it is very Hard to discover
all the Secrets of it, without encountering also with many Vanities, it must
appear very strange, that I should here reject, what Scaliger chiefly, (a man
who has been deservedly esteemed one of the most Learned of our Times,) has
laid down for Truth, in the traditions of the Eastern People. But they, who
have read those Books, that bear these Titles, De fuga Mariae: De gestis
Joseph: Historia Regum: Sorts Apostolorum, and many others the like, may
casily be able to judge, that seeing the Most Holy things cannot make their
passage, through the successions of Many Ages, without being mixed with many
Vain, Fabulous Stories; it is no Marvel, that Those Things, that are of a
Lower, and more Indifferent Nature, should not be able to preserve themselves
in their Original Purity. The Astrology of the Hebrews had not as yet lost
any of its Luster, so long as it was practiced by those of That Nation Only:
but so soon as the more Northern Nations began to have any knowledge of it;
they presently fell to vanting of such Strange, Wild Fancies, and to increase
the Number of Fables in such sort; as that it is no Marvel, that this Science
has been since so much cried down. I hold it therefore Necessary, before I
descend to that which we have of Purity, and Truth, in this Science, to give a
Touch first at That which is False, and Corrupted. And this we shall do, if we
but set down part of that, which has been written of this Subject, by the
aforementioned Scaliger, Riccius, Kunrath, Vigenere, and Duret; it being an easy
matter afterward for any man, to discover the like imposture, in all the other
Authors, which are less Considerable. The First, Second, and third, of these
abovenamed, do unjustly attribute to the Jews such a kind of Astrology, as
they never were acquainted with: the Fourth will needs have them to have
acknowledged, in the Secrets of this Science, Certain Spirits; which never had
any Being, save only in his own Fancy: and makes them to have been the Authors
of a world of Fopperies, which have been forged by the Greeks, and Latins,
upon this Subject: And the Last of them makes such a Strange, Wild thing, of
the whole Doctrine of it; and sets it forth in so Gross, and Ridiculous a
Dress; as that his Book deserves very justly to be ranked with the Fables of
Merlin.

2. To begin then with Hm; if you have a mind to have a Taste of him, see but
the 20th Chapter of his History of Languages: where, after a long Discourse of
the Jewish Curiosities, which he explaines after His manner; he comes at last
to his Tables, or Figures: the First of which shows the Mysteries of the
Unit, number of Two, number of Three, and number of Four: to whom he assigns
these Four Good Angels; ARIEL, THARSIS, SERAPH, CHERUB; and their Four
Spirits, which, he says, are called, MAHAZAEL, AZAEL, SAMAEL, AZAZEL: then,
the Four Seasons of the Year; the Four Gates of Heaven; the Four Quarters of
the World; the Four Angels, that rule over them; the Four Rivers of Paradise;
the Four Winds, FAVONIVS, SVBSOLANVS, AVSTER, AQVILO; with their Four Spirits,
PAYMON, ORIENS, AMMONIVS, EGYN. Very Pretty Stuff, this! which he fathers upon
the Jews; although in Truth it never had any Being, save only in his own
Fancy; no more then those other Fooleries, which he has vented in his Second
Table. For, as concerning the names of the Angels, which, according to the
Opinion of the Ancient Astrologers, have their Residence in the Seven Planets;
he is right but in one of them: all the rest being either Corrupted, or else
Invented by Himself; as will appear to Any Man, that shall but compare them
with the True Ones, set down by Aben-Are, who is translated into Latin by the
Conciliator. As for those Seven Intelligences, which Duret has assigned to the
Seven Planets; he had need be a very Subtle Theologist, that can show any
Reason, why he makes a Distinction betwixt the Seven Spirits, which he calls by
the names of SEMELIEL, NOGAEL, COCHABIEL, LEVANAEL, SABATHIEL, ZEDEKIEL,
MADIMIEL; and their Intelligences, NACHIEL, HAGIEL, TIRIEL, ELIMEL, AGIEL,
JOPHIEL, GRAPHIEL. But may we not very well laugh at Carlo Fabri, an Italian;
who has fince translated these Fopperies into his own native Language; (and
has besides given other strange Names to these Angels, the most of which he
has taken out of Raziel, Picatrix, Agrippa, and a Book entitled, Les
Clavicules de Solomon;) of all which, Duret will need have us believe the
Hebrews to have been the Authors; as likewise of the Twelve Intelligences, that
belong to the Twelve Months; and of those, which reside in the Twenty Eight
Mansions of the Moon; which he sets down, in his Third, and Fourth Table; but
so Childishly, that being not able to find any character for the last Mansion,
(for there are but Twenty Seven Hebrew Letters, reckoning also the Final,) he
is fain to make use of a Latin O; and will have this Cipher, in the
Predictions of his Fantastical Astrology, to signify INUNDATIONS, caused by
the Intelligence AMNIXIEL, in the Mansion ALBOTHAM. And now tell me, if he had
not very good Reason, to devise these strange words, for the better
Confirmation of these Chimera's. For why, we are to take notice, that here is
no such stuff, as the Ancient Enchantments of Toledo, or the Art Magic of
Raziel, or Picatrix; but all Excellent, Natural Secrets, and things well
worthy of our serious Contemplation. What Beasts should we be, should we but
suffer our selves to be lead by the Nose by This Man? And, what a miserable
Condition were we in, had we no other Judges in this Particular, then Him, and
Vigenere; who would notwithstanding seem to be very Learned in these Mysteries;
endeavoring, as the other has done, to make us take up, upon his Account, for
Solid Doctrine, a thousand Fooleries, which are more Impertinent, then those of
Men in Fevers. I should willingly have given you a Taste of them; but that I am
already nauseated with those before set down: only I shall give this Caveat, to
those that shall read the writings of these Men: that, where ever they speak
of Spirits, and of the Astrology of the Hebrews, where they produce One Truth,
they vent ten Thousand Falsehoods; as I shall make it appear in my Cribrum.

3. As for Carlo Fabri, whom I named before, I do not remember ever to have
read any thing so Ridiculous, Dello Seudo, di Christo, overo di David. l. 2.
as that, which He has written of These same Spirits. For, as if he had spent
one part of his Time in Heaven, and the other part in Hell; he gives you an
Exact Account, as he thinks, what Angels are proper to all the several Princes
in the World; assigning to the Seven Electors of the Empire, those which are
acknowledged to be of greatest Power: as namely, to the Archbishop of Mayence,
who is the Primary Elector, and High Chancellor of Germany, MICHAEL; to the
Archbishop of Treves, High chancellor of France, and the Second Electour,
GABRIEL; to the Archbishop of Collen, High Chancellor of Italy, and the Third
Electour, RAPHAEL; to the Count Palatine of the Rhine, the Fourth Electour,
URIEL; to the Fifth, which is the Duke of Saxony, SCEALTIEL; to the Sixth, which
is the Marquess of Brandenburg, J EHUDIEL; and to the King of Bohcmia, who is
the Seventh, FERECHIEL. And now, who can choose but laugh at this Precious
Doctrine?

4. That of Augustinus Riccius, of Kunrath, and of some of the Later Rabbis,
is altogether as Impertinent; where they assure us, that the Ancient Hebrew
Astrologers disposed of the Ten Zephiros, in several Parts of the Heavens;
allotting Seven of them to the Seven Planets, which are the Authors of all
those Effects, say They, which we impute to the Stars; distributing Good, and
Evil Fortune to Mankind. His itaque Zephiros, (says Riccius,) sive Ideis,
Mundi corporei regimen, quasi immediatoribus Dijs; non secus quam and
Astrologi, Septem Err aticis Stellis, Terrenorum Dominatum adscribunt. They go
yet farther then this, and say; that Moses, who was a Learned Astrologer,
making use of his knowledge in these Secrets, gave the Jews Those Laws; which
he grounded upon the Harmony of these Planetary Zephiros. As for Example: He
instituted the Fourth Commandment, REMEMBER TO KEEP HOLY THE SABBATH DAY;
because this Day was governed by Saturn, a Malignant Planet; who might cause
those works, that were undertaken on This Day, to be Unprosperous: and that
Moses therefore thought it fit, that the people should rest on This Day. The
Fifth Commandment, HONOVRTHY FATHER AND THY MOTHER, has Reference to the
Sphere of Jupiter, which is a Benign, Favorable Star: the Sixth, THOU SHALL
NOT KILL, to Mars, who has the Government of Wars, and Murders: the Seventh,
THOU SHALL NOT COMMIT ADVLTERY, to Venus, who rules over Concupiscentiall
Motions: and so of all the rest; to which he has fitted such strange
Chimemera's, as deserve to be ranked with those Extravagant, wild Fancies,
which Gemma Frisius has inserted into his Ars Cyclognomica; and those other
that Cichus Aesculanus has forged, upon the Sphere of Jo. de Sacrobosco. The
forenamed Authors say moreover, that it is from this Astrology of the
Zephiros, that the Cabalists report the Patriarks, and Prophets, to have
derived all their Divine Knowledge. Simili ratione, says the same Riccius,
Cablistae quoque Patriarchas, Prophetasque, quemlibet cuilibat harum Sephiros
imperio, atque afflatu subjiciunt; prout quivis illorum certum Divinitutis
gradum susceperit.

5. Chomer adds, In Galgal. Hamizra. Chim.
that these very Planetary Zephiros have been the Cause, by their Revolutions,
of the Changing of Kingdoms, and Religions: which is consonant to what
Cardinal de Alliaco has cited out of Gulielmus Parisiensis, who says; De
sid. et leg. De leg. and sect.
that some Astrologers affirm, that the Diversity of Religions has been
caused, by the Aspects of the Planets: as, that of the Jews, by the Influences
of Saturn: by reason whereof, this Nation has always been Miserable, and is
at this time, and ever shall be so; because that the Planet, on which their
Religion is founded, is a Malevolent, and an Unfortunate one; rendering them
also Covetous, and Perverse, and great Lovers of Saturday, which is the Day,
dedicated to Saturn. That of the Turks, is governed by the Planet Venus: and
this is the reason, that this People celebrate Friday; and are likewise
extremely addicted to Luxury; and that in so high a measure, as that they
believe, the chiefest happiness, in the Life to come, consists in this
Brutality. The Christian Religion, (say they in like manner,) has received its
Foundation from the Sun; for which cause they have Sunday in great Veneration,
being the day which is governed by this Planet: and that by Virtue of Its
Beams, the Chief Visible Head of the Christians has his Seat in a Solary
City, that is, Rome; which City had its First Stone laid, when the Sign Leo was
the Ascendent; which is the Proper House of the Sun; and was afterward built,
in the form of a Lion. This is also very Observable, or rather very
Extravagant, which Cardinal de Alliaco reports, out of these Astrologers; who
says, that they affirm, that according to these Principles it is, that
Cardinals go in Red, which is a Solary Color and suitable to this Planet,
which was the Founder of their Religion. All other, say They, as Arrians,
Armenians, Lutherans, and the rest, are caused by the Conjunction of Diverse
several Planets, which has caused this Mixture.

6. Bechai, who is in like manner fallen upon such Fooleries as these, and who
has examined our Religion, with too much Tartness, goes yet farther then all
this, and says; that Jesus Christ, (whom notwithstanding he will not
acknowledge to be the Messiah,) in Order to this Foundation, was raised again
upon the Day, which, as we have said, is assigned to the Sun; and that having
been a Man Perfectly Solary, he was consequently very Beautiful, and of a
Fair, Lovely Countenance; and of a very Quick, and Daring Spirit: as may
appear, says He, by that Act of his, in driving the Buyers and Sellers out of
the Temple; and by his disputing with the Doctors of the Law, at the Twelfth
year of his Age. How happy had this Rabbin been, if he could but have raised to
himself, from these Mavelous things, the Foundation of his own Salvation? But
leaving him to his own Darkness, we observe (since we are insensibly fallen
upon this Discourse, which yet we make Mention of with all possible Humility,)
that, in the Nativity of our Savior Christ, Commen^. in Ptol. lib. 2.
he no whit agrees with that which Cardan has erected. For he says, (after
that he has told us, that there were Five very Observable things, in his most
Adorable Nativity, which show what manner of Man he was,) that Saturn, having
part in his Geniture, rendered him Sad, and Pensive: whence Josephus also took
occasion to say of him; Visus est saepius flere, ridere nunquam. And for the
same reason also he semeed to be Older, then in Truth he was: For, The
Sorrowful Spirit dries up the Bones: and for This Cause it was, says He,
that the Jews took him to have been forty years old at least, when they said
unto him; Nondum quinquaginta annos babes; Et Abrahamum vidisti? He proceeds,
and says, that this Planet meeting with Venus, was the cause of his having
certain red Specks in his Face, following the aforementioned Josephus; who says,
that he was Lentiginosus in Facie: which moved Cardan to say, Quod si a Deo
omnia fuissent profecta, quorsum erat Lentiginosum creari? But let us now leave
this Point, which we have touched upon, only by the By; and proceed to the
other sorts of Astrology, which are falsely attributed to the Hebrews, and to
their Neighbors.

7. That which Scaliger has produced, though it seems to have better
Grounds, In Spher. Barb. Manil. fol. 487. and seq nov. Ed.
then those other Kinds which we have before spoken of; yet nevertheless was
it never practiced, nor acknowledged by the Egyptians; and therefore much less
by the Jews. However, the Curiosit of it makes me willing to give the Reader a
Taste of it; and it is, as follows. The Planet Mars, being in the first.
Degree of Aries, they represented a Man, holding a Sickle in his Right hand;
and in is Left, a Bow: In the second Degree, a Man, having the head of a Dog,
and holding a Cudgel in one hand, and having the other stretched forth: In the
Third, another Man, lifting up one hand to Heaven, and in the other, seeming to
point at all, that is in the whole Universe: In the Fourth, another Man again,
with curled Hair, having a Hawke upon his Right Hand, and in his Left a Flaile.
In the Fifth, two Men; one eleving wood with a Hatchet; and the other, bearing
a Scepter in his hand. The rest of the Degrees have their several Figurs also;
which I shall pass by, that I may come to the second Sign, which is Taurus:
into the First Degree whereof when Mercury entered, they pictured a Man,
holding a Cudgel in his hand, with which he drives an Ox to the Shambles. In
the Second Degree, a Woman, holding in her hand a Horses tail. In the Third,
an Old Woman, covered with a Veil; or else a Woman in Breeches. In the Fourth,
another Woman, holding a Whip. And that I may trouble my self no further in
reckoning up all these Figures, the Reader may see them, if he please, in the
foresaid Book; where Scaliger says, that he has taken them out of the
Writings of the Arabians, and that these kinds of Pictures were in use among
the Egyptians. But, (with all Respect to so great a Scholar be it spoken) I
must take leave to say, that he was never so far wide of the Truth, as Here:
and if any be so Curious, as to desire to be satisfied in this Particular, he
may be pleased to take notice, that Scaliger has transcribed them word for
word, out of a Second Book of a Work entitled Astrolabium Planum, where they
are all represented, by Figures cut in Wood, and are the Invention of Petrus
Aponensis, otherwise called, the Conciliator: being the very same, which he
caused to be painted, in the Great Hall of the Palace of Padua, where they are
yet to be seen. The Truth of this may be proved, by the forenamed Book of
Aponensis, whose very words he has also made use of: but contenting himself
with the bare Names of these Figures, he would not trouble himself with the
Graving of them. I shall only add, for the greater Confirmation of what I have
said, that this Astrolabium Planum, where these Figures of Aponensis his
Devising are to be seen, was printed at Venice, by Emery de Spir, An. 1494. I
should not have here made this Observation, but only that I might be the better
able hereafter, to make known the Virtue of the Astrology of the Ancient
Hebrews; which was, in a manner, the same with that of the Egyptians, and the
more Learned among the Arabians: out of whose Books, Scaliger vainly says,
that he has bestowed much pains in collecting the said Figures. For there
has long since been such a World of Strange things, which never had Being,
foisted upon this Science; that people generally now adays stick not to say,
to the great Disadvantage of Antiquity, that there is no Truth, or Certainty in
these kind of Studies. I think it necessary therefore, for the better
Informing of those, who are thus abused, to declare, what it was that moved
Aponensis, to represent these different Postures of Men, Women, and diverse
kinds of Living Creatures. This Learned Astrologer having observed, that those
that are borne under certain Conjunctions of the Planets with the Signs of
the Zodiac, were always inclined to one and the same thing: as, for example,
the Planet of Mars being the Ascendent in the First Degree of Aries, those that
are then borne, are commonly Laborious, and lovers of War; he figured a Man, as
we have said, holding in one hand a Sickle, which signifies Labor; and in the
other a Bow, the Hieroglyphicke of War. In like manner, those, that are borne,
when the same Planet is in the Second Degree of the same Sign, are Quarresome,
and Envious, as Dogs: and this made him represent a Man with a Dog's head,
holding a Cudgel in his hand. The Figure of the third Degree, shows that the
Child will be a lover of Peace. The Fourth, that he will hardly be Rich,
scattering about what he shall have gotten, which is signified by the Flail,
and the Hawk. When Mercury is found in the First Degree of Taurus, the Child
will be addicted to Blood, and Butchery: and therefore he sigured a Man with a
Cudgel, driving an Ox to the Slaughterhouse. If in the Second Degree, he will
be given to Idleness; as the Woman, that holds a Hors-taile in her hand. If in
the Third, a Woman will desire to marry in her Old Age, and endeavor to be
thought young; according to the Figure of the Old Woman, that is covered with a
Veil, or else wearing a Pair of Breeches. If in the Fourth, the Child will be
Quarrelsome; which is signified by a Woman, figured with a Whip in her hand.
And so of all the rest, as you may see in the Author himself. We may conclude
then, that these Astrologicall Devises are no more of the Hebrews, and
Egyptians inventing, then the Brazen Horse is of mine.

CHAP. XI.
What, in Truth, was the Course the Patriarchs, and Ancient Hebrews took in
their Observations, at the Erecting of a Nativity.
THE CONTENTS.
1. THe Celestial Constellations were anciently marked with Hebrew Characters.

2. How the Celestial Signs are figured in the Spheres, and Globes of the
Arabians. That of Virgo has a Mystery in it.

3. A new Observation, on the Hebrew Names of the Planets.

4. A Table, by which the Jews erected their Nativities. The use of it.

5. Demonstrative Reasons, why the Days follow not the Order of the Planets. A
Genethliacall Table of the Ancient Hebrews.

6. The Difference betwixt the Ancient's manner of giving Judgment upon a
Nativity, and that of the Astrologers of our times. The Fable of Lucina laid
open.

7. The Moon, why called Lunus, and Luna; and the Heavens, Coelus, and Coelum.

8. A new, and Certain Reason, why the Poets report, that Saturn eat up his
Children.

9. What Qualities the Ancients acknowledged to be, in the Celestial Signs.

10. The Authors Judgment, upon the Astrologicall Writings of R. Abraham
Aben-Are, translated into Latin by the Conciliator.

11. What Planets were accounted Benign, by the Ancient Hebrews. What Ceremony
the New-married Man used, toward his Bride.

12. This Astrology of the Ancients is proved out of the Holy Scriptures.
Reasons, which prove, that (...) God, (which was the name of one of the sons
of Jacob,) is the Planet Jupiter.

13. The Egyptians the First, that corrupted this Astrology. It is False
notwithstanding that they were the Inventers of the Characters of the Planets.
Fables introduced into Astrology by the Greeks.

14. Athlon, a word in Nativities, used by Manilius, rightly interpreted;
contrary to Scaliger.

NOw that we have seen, what is Falsely attributed to the Astrology of the
Ancients; it remains, that we in the next place show, what we have discovered
of the Purity, and Truth of it, in the Writings of those, who have handled this
Subject; and which are such, as have been esteemed the most Free from Trifling,
by the Learned Men of Our Own Nation. I shall then make my Collection of
these Secrets, which the world has hitherto had little knowledge of, partly
out of Rabbi Moses, to whom Scaliger has given this Testimony: In lib.
Horaiot. and passim in li. Mis. Thorab. and Mor. Neb. lib. Taamin, and Astag.
Ha^izr. Lib. Milban^t. haschem, tract. 4, 5 and 6. contr. Aver. In Chocmet.
bacoc. In Thor. Jessod. laghol. In aghmouq. In Thecum.
Primus inter Hebraeos nugari desivit: and partly out of R. Aben-Esra, whom the
same Scaliger calls, Magistrum Judaeum; Et hominem supra captum Judaeorum. Out
of R. Eli; whom Augustinus Riccius calls, Virum utique Scientiarum omnium
plenum. Out of R. Isaac Hazan, whom the Jews conceive to have been the Author
of the Astronomicall Tables of Alphonsus. Out of R. Abarbanel. R. Isaac
Israe^lita, R. Jacob Kapol ben Samuel, Aben-Are, R. Chomer; and some others of
the most Learned, and Knowing men of This Nation, as their VVritings testify
of them.

First then, the Ancient Hebrews represented the Stars of Heaven, either All
Together, or severally, by the Letters of the Alphabet; in the same manner
expressing, and distinguishing them, as we do, by the names of Aries, Taurus,
etc. And when all the Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, or what other soever they
were, (for I shall clear this Doubt some other time,) were ended; they then
went onto express the rest of the Stars by Two Letters together; by this
means, making up a Word: to which also they added a Third Letter; the more
perfectly to express the nature of the Star, or Constellation. And perhaps a
man may be able, by this Doctrine, to put an end to that Long Dispute, that
has been raised, concerning the Signification of those names of Stars, which
we meet with in the Bible: as, for Example, (...), Ahs, in Amos; which is
Interpreted, Arcturus; or, as Aben-Esra will have it, Isa. 11.6 Thren. 2.3.9.
Dan. 7.5
Vrsa. Now we know very well, that (...), Ahs, signifies not Vrsa, neither in
the Holy Scriptures, nor in any other Author: but, the name of this Beast in
Hebrew, is (...), Dob; as you may see in Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Daniel. These
two Letters therefore, (...), joined together, might perhaps be only the bare
Characters of the Constellation of Vrsa Major.

2. And by this we may see, that the Ancient Hebrews fancied not the Figures
of any Living Creatures in the Heavens, as we do. The Ancient Arabians imitated
the Hebrews in their Astrologicall Practices, as Abarbanel testifies: till at
length, the Example of the Greeks, made them make use of Living Creatures. Yet
notwithstanding they forbear to express any Humane Figures; as having an Eye
to the Zeal of the Hebrews. Thus they represented the Sign of Aquarius,
instead of the Figure of a Man pouring out of water, by a Mule with a Pannell
on it, and laden with too Vessels, or Barrels: of Gemini, by two Peacocks: of
Virgo, by a Sheafe of Corn: of the Centaure, by a Horse: of Ophiucus, by a
Crane, or a Storke; as is to be seen, in some Arabicke Globes: of Sagittarius,
by a Quiver: of Andromeda, by a Sea-Calfe: and of Cepheus, by a Dog: and so of
the rest. The Egyptians also, and Persians, following herein the steps of the
Hebrews, represented the Stars, only by certain Characters; till that the
Example of their Neighbors drew them also at length, to set down the Figures
of Living Creatures; as the same Author testifies; who says, that the
Persians Chiefly, and after them, the Indians, and Egyptians, expressed by
Figures, not only the forty eight Constellations, which are represented on the
Globe; but also all other Figures that they could imagine, at the Beginning of
every Principal Sign, and in each Degree of it: as appears out of Zadchir. In
Astr. Ind.
The Figure, by which they expressed the Sign of Virgo, is one of the most
Remarkable; and which has also moved some of the More Learned Arabians to
speak well of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of his Blessed Mother. And indeed
it is not without some Mystery, that the Tradition of the East represents
this Constellation in the form of a Fair Damsel, with a Comely long head of
Hair, which seems to add much Grace to her, while she reaches forth two Ears
of Corn, to a young Child, to whom she seems to give Suck. Intentio est,
(says Alboazar, who is falsely called Albumazar, and is translated into Latin
by Hermanus Dalmat.) quod Beata Virgo habeat figuram and imaginem, infra december
primos gradus Virginis; et quod not a fuit, quando Sol est in Virgin, et ita
habetur signatum in Kalendario, et quod nutriet filium suum Christum Jesum, in
terra Hebraeorum. Whence the Author of the Book, which is entitled, Vetula,
took occasion to say,

O Virgo foelix! O Virgo significata
Per Stellas, ubi Spica nitet. --
3. The Indians then, the Egytians, Persians, and Arabians, having all thus
introduced the Figures of Living Creatures into their Astrology; the Hebrews
were necessitated to imitate them, in some sort; and to take up, though not
their Figures, yet the Names of them at least. Yet did they nevertheless
abstain from the very Names also, of those Figures of Men, which the Arabians
made use of. Thus they call Aquarius, (...), Deli; which signifies, not a Man;
but a Vessel to take up water with: Sagittarius, (...), Keshet; which
signifies only, a Bow: Saturne^, (...), Scautai, Rest: Mars, (...), Maadim,
Red; which is the Color of this Star: Venus, (...), Nogah, Brightness; a name
very suitable to this Planet: Jupiter, (...) Tsedek, Just; because it makes
them so, that are born under its Influence: Mercury, (...), Cocab, signifying
only, a Star; or else, (...), Catab, to Write, or Writing; because this Planet
is very Favorable to Learning. And there is but one only Sign, of all those
that have any Humane Figure, that has retained the Humane Name, save only that
of the Virgin, which is called in Hebrew (...), Bethola; not without some
Design in it; although it is often called by the Rabbis, (...), Shiboleth,
the Ear of Corn. So true it is, that those of This Nation are not only very
free from Idolatry; but even from the Name also, of what ever they conceive to
be an Idol: which has not been hitherto observed by any man. Let us now return
to their Forefathers, who knew nothing of any of these Names, in their
Astrology.

4. This way of Expressing the Celestial all Constellations, by Letters and
Characters, being presupposed; the Ancient Hebrews, when they went about to
erect a Nativity, observed on what Day, and under what Sign, the Child came
into the world; and what Planet ruled, at the hour of its Birth: and which
Particulars they afterward set down in Twelve Places, which they called (...),
Machataloth, that is to say, Ligaturae. Ben David says, that these were the
same, which the Astrologers now call, Houses. Now these Ancients had perfect
knowledge of all the Particulars above specified, by looking on the Table
hereafter described; which R. Kapol Ben-Samuel has rescued from Oblivion, in
his Book entitled, (...) Ahmouk ahmoukim, vecol devar kaschah; Profunditas
Profunditatum, and omnium rerum difficilium, which was Printed at Cracovia, An.
358. according to the Jews Later way of Computation; which answers to the
Year of our Lord, 1498. I borrow of this Learned Jew, a great part of these
Astrologicall Curiosities; and I do it with so much the more Confidence, in
that he was accounted one of the best Astrologers of his Nation; having
diligently examined, all that the most Learned men had ever written, of these
kinds of Antiquities.

The 24 Hours of the Night and Day. The Signs for the Beginning of the Night.
The Signs for the Beginning of the Day. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

This Table seems something Difficult at the first appearance: and yet it is
not so, if a man but consider; that the Seven Letters of each Row, running from
the Right hand toward the Left, or from the Left hand to the Right, signify
the seven Planets; and these are the first Letters of their several Names;
which are these following.

(...) Schautai, Saturn, Saturday. (...) Tsedek, Jupiter, Thursday. (...)
Maadim, Mars, Tuesday. (...) Chamah, Sol, Sunday. (...) Nogah, Venus, Friday.
(...) Cocab, Mercury, Wednesday. (...) Levanah, Luna, Monday.
Now, if I would know, what Planet rules, at the first hour of the Night on
Saturday; (that is to say, the first hour after Sunset:) I presently have
recourse to the Table; where having found the Letter (...), which stands for
Saturn; I say, that this Planet rules at that hour. And so, going down along
that Column, under the said Letter; I find that Jupiter, which is noted by
this Letter, (...), rules at the second hour; (...), that is to say, Mars, at
the Third; (...), the Sun, at the Fourth; (...), Venus, at the Fifth; (...),
Mercury, on the Sixth; (...), the Moon, on the Seventh; and again, (...),
Saturn, on the Eight; (...), Jupiter, on the Ninth; (...), Mars, at the Tenth,
(...), the Sun, at the Eleventh; and lastly, (...), Venus, on the Twelfth. Then
going down further, in the same Column, I find that (...), Mercury rules, over
the First hour of the Day; (...), the Moon, over the Second; and so of the
rest.

5. And yet there may be two Doubts raised, upon this Table. The First is, why
it should begin with (...), Mercury, which is the Planet of Wednesday; rather
then with (...) Sol, which is the Planet of Sunday? seeing that This Day was
the First created.

The Second is, why the Days follow not the Order of the Planets? Or, why
Sunday follows next after Saturday?

To the First of these, R. Kapol answers; In ord. (...) cap. 9. quod incip.
(...) fol. 19. colum. 2.
that the Planets, as well as the rest of the Stars, were made, or Created
upon the Fourth day: and that according to this Order, Mercury was to rule the
First hour; as any one may see says He, that will but take the pains to
compute the Revolution of Dais. You may have recourse, for the fuller
satisfaction herein, to those among our Latin Authors, who have taken any
notice at all, Not. and Emendat. in Manil. In Sphaer Io. de Sacrobose. Part. 1.
of the Horoscope, or Nativity of the World; which has been Erected
particularly, by Scaliger, and Iunctin.

To the Second Doubt, We answer; that the Days observe not the Order of the
Planets; because that, according to the Order that they are ranked in, they
make in their Courses, by an Equal Intervall, as it were seven Angles of a
Geometrical Figure, which is called Isosceles, or Equicrurall; the Bases
whereof, are the sides of a Heptagone, described within a Circle; as you may
see in this Figure following, which more clearly explaines the Motions of
these Planets.

motions of the planets

where you see, that on the outside of this Figure, all the Planets are set in
Order; (...) Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna. Within the
Figure, you see it is otherwise: for, from (...), Saturn, you pass to (...),
Sol; from hence, to (...), Luna; from Luna, to (...), Mars; from Mars to (...),
Mercury; from Mercury, to (...), Jupiter; from Jupiter, to (...), Venus; and
from Venus, to Saturn again: which motion makes in Order the days of the
Week, Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. But
now all the Characters of these Tables, are according to the Modern Jews. The
Ancient Table, from which R. Kapol Ben-Samuel drew that before set down, is
This that follows; wherein you are to proceed in the same manner, as in the
other: only the Planets have other Characters; which are these: (...), Saturn,
(...), Jupiter, (...), Mars; (...), Sol; (...), Venus; (...), Mercury; (...),
Luna.

THE ANCIENT GENETHLIACAL TABLE OF THE HEBREWS.
The 24 Hours of the Night and Day. The Signs for the Beginning of the Night.
The Signs for the Beginning of the Day. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

6. These Ancient Fathers then, having found out the Planet that ruled at the
Nativity of a Child; they presently began to foretell, in General Terms,
according to the Quality of the Sign, what manner of Person it was like to be.
I say, in General Terms: not standing to reckon up so many Particulars, as
Astrologers now a days do: who will undertake to assure us, that if a Child
be borne in an hour, for Example, that Saturn governes, it will be an
Arrogant, Sloathfull, Dreaming, Melancholicke, Subtle, Wary, Impudent, Sad
person; and shall love Black things, be very Meager, and Lean, shall have
much, and black Hair, shall be Pale, Envious, Hollow-eyed, given to stealing,
shall keep his Anger long, will be stubborn, and selfe-conceited, and shall not
much care for the company of Women; he will soon grow gray, and shall not be
very rich; he will be a hater of all Company, and will be given to talk to
himself; and, above all, will be a faithful keeper of Secrets. The Ancient
Hebrews, I say, took no notice of all these Particulars; neither did they
admit of any Distinction of Signs Humane, and Brutish; Double, or Single;
Right, or Crooked; Terrestrial, or Aquaticke; Fruitful, or Barren; Strong, or
Weak; Lying, or Standing; Seeing, or Hearing; Loving, or Hating; that is to
say, that they are the Authors of Seeing, Hearing, Loving, Hating, and the
like; All which Effects are specified by Manilius. But they said only, that the
Child would be Healthful, or Sickly; without particularizing any Disease; that
it would be Fortunate, or Unfortunate; without specifying wherein. And, in
brief, they foretold, in General Terms, the Good, or Ill, that should befall
it; according to the Benevolent, or Malignant Nature of the Signs. For they
saw, that Saturn, by reason of its being so Cold; and Mars, by reason of its
great Dryness, were very Malignant: Jupiter, and Venus, being Temperate, were
very Favorable Stars; as also was the Sun: and Mercury, of an Indifferent
Nature. But as for the Moon, they thought so diversely of It, as that when it
was at the Full, they accounted it Fortunate; but when it was Horned, they
thought it to be so Malignant, as that, if a Child were borne under some
certain of its Aspects, it died not long after; or, if it lived, it would
prove to be guilty of Crimes, as great, as its Temper was Black. And this is
that, which moved the Wise Women among the Hebrews, to write, or cause to be
written upon the Walls of their Bedchamber, at the time of their Falling in
Travel, these words, as Abiudan testifies: (...) Adim, Chavah, Chouts Lilith:
Adam, Eve; Out Lilith.
that is to say; Let not Lilith enter here. Now this Lilith, is no other, then
the Moon; being a name derived from (...) Lailah, which signifles, the Night. I
shall not here set down, what strange Conceits the more Superstitious Jews,
that came a long while after, have vented, concerning this Demon, called
Lilith; which they said, had its Residence, in some certain Influences of the
Moon. But I conceive, that the Greeks, and Latins, who borrowed the greatest
Part of their Theology, from the Idolatrous Syrians, and Chaldeans; have, among
the rest, lighted upon these Traditions of Lilith; which they called by the
Name of Lucina, accounting her the Goddess that ruled in chief at
Child-births: because they had heard say, that the Moon being at the Full, was
a very Favorable Planet to Women with Child: which gave occasion to Horace, to
sing thus of her;

Montium Custos, Nemorumque Virgo,
Quae laborantes utero puellas,
Ter vocata, audis, adimisque letho;
Diva Triformis.
7. But, that we may not dwellany longer upon Fables, you may perceive, that
the Wisemen among the Hebrews acknowledged their Good, or Ill Fortune, to
have beeen caused by this Star, as Chomer testifies; and that either by Its
being in the Full, or in the Wane: seeing that they called it by two names; by
a Masculine, (...) Jareach, which signified, Good Fortune; and by a Feminine,
(...) Levanah, which denoted Ill Fortune. And Possibly the Latins also may
have imitated them in this Particular, in these two Names of This Planet,
Lunus, and Luna: which neither Scaliger, nor Casaubon, searching after this
Etymology, did observe. I am not ignorant, that Julius Firmicus, and the
Platonists are of Opinion, that in these names, Masculus significat Virtutem
Efficientem; Foemina Virtutem ipsam, ac potentiam capientem Numinis. And if we
but rightly consider this Doctrine, we shall find it, to be very little
different from the former. And perhaps, for this reason it was, that the
Heavens also were called, Coelum, and Caelus; as Pighius Campensis testifies,
in his Themis; where he produces this Ancient Inscription, COELVS AETERNVS
JUPITER: Or else, according to our former Conjecture, the Heaven was so called;
because it was Favourble to some; and either Indifferent, or else Adverse to
others.

8. As concerning the Planet Saturn, these Ancient Hebrews stood in great
Dread of It: because they did observe, that those, that were borne under the
Dominion of this Star, were Melancholicke, and Sickly. And this is the reason
that the Chaldeans, who gave themselves over to the Worship of many False Gods,
observing, that this Star was very Hurtful to them; thought good, by some
Sacrifice or other, to render it more Propitious, and Favorable to them. And
there being no other Sacrifice more Proper for It, then that whereon It so
often shows Its sad Effects; that is to say, newborn Children; they began to
sacrifice of These, to this Planet under the name of Moloc, quasi (...) Melech;
that is to say, a King: because it reigned Imperiously over Men; or rather,
showed it self a Tyrant over them, by afflicting them with Diseases, and a
thousand other Disasters, at Its own Pleasure; as Tyrants use to do. And this
is confirmed also, by that other name of Baal, by which the Idol of this Star
was likewise called; which signifies as much as Master, or Lord. And my Opinion
is, that from hence it is, that the Greeks, and Latins have taken occasion to
invent the Fable, of Saturnes Eating his own Children. I shall not here
proceed any further, in setting down the rest of those Choice observations,
concerning this Moloc, which are delivered by Aben Esra, upon Amos, In cap. 1.
Amos. Vbi Molos. Ki. un, Pe^sice, et Arabice vocari asserit.
because that, besides that they are not any thing at all to my Purpose; they
are also too long, to be inserted here.

9. After the Observation of the Planets, these Fathers, says Kapol, entered
next upon that of the other Stars, which are usually called Constellations. I
shall not here bring in, what Aben-Are has collected out of the Ancients,
touching these Stars now mentioned: because I intend not to produce any
thing, that is translated into Latin, and that the World has already seen, or
may see, if it please: as namely, the Works of this Learned Astrologer, which
are translated into Latin, by the Conciliator. I shall only note this by the
Way, which the Translator observed not, concerning the Original Text; that
where Aben-Are speaks of the Nature of these Signs; he does not therein
follow the example of the Ancients, who never descended to Particulars, as the
Later Astrologers have done since; who tell us, for example, what Signs cause
a Quick Wit; and what render Men Good-natured, Courteous, and Affable; as,
Gemini, Virga, and Libra: and which make them Dull, and Brutish; as Aries,
Taurus, Leo, and Capricorn: which make them Fruitful; as Scorpio, Pisces, and
Cancer: and which, on the Contrary, make them Barren; as Gemini, Leo, and
Virgo: and so of the rest, which are all reckoned up by this Rabbine. But they
pronounced only in General Terms, of these Fixed Stars, which they called
(...) Oghmedim; as they did of the Planets, which they also called (...)
Lechet, Ambulones, Wanderers; De Art. Cap. Lib. 3.
as Reuclin has observed.

10. And here, since we are fallen upon the Works of Aben-Are, which are
translated by the Conciliator; I shall give the Learned this Advertisement,
that the Translation does not always exactly answer the Original; and that
there are also some certain Tracts added, which are not found at all in the
Hebrew. Those Pieces, that are Legitimate, are these that follow: First, a
Tract entitled, Initium Sapientiae; which is called by the Conciliator,
Introductorium: which is indeed a very Choice Piece; and contains in it, what
ever is necessary to be observed, in the Nativity of a Child. Another, called
Liber Rationum; where he discourses of the Natures of the Signs, the
Revolution of Days, and Ages; and of those Angels, which have the Government
of the world, in their several Turns; which is a Position maintained by
Robert Flud also, in his Apology for the Brethren of the Rosy Cross: as we
have observed, in our Notes upon R. Elcha. Then follow in order these other
Books. Liber Interrogationum. Liber Luminarium; et Cognitio dici Critici: seu,
de Cognitione cause Crisis. De Mundo, vel seculo: which the Translator calls,
Liber Conjunctionum Planetarum, and Revolutionum annorum Mundi: where he makes
a Repetition of many things, which are set down, only in the Second Book, by
the Author. It appears then by this Catalogue, that those two Tracts, which
the Conciliator makes to follow these, and intitles, Liber Nativitatum, and
Revolutionum earum: and, Liber Electionum, are not found in the Hebrew: neither
could I ever meet with any such Tracts, in any one of all those Copies that I
have seen of this Rabbis Works: nor yet, with diverse other things, which are
handled in That Collection, which the Translator calls, Tractatus insuper
Particulares ejusdem Abrahae, in quibus tractatur de Significationibus
Planetarum, in duodecim domibus. However, the Learned are very much obliged
unto him: seeing that, before this Translation of his came abroad into the
World; the Astrology of the Hebrews was wholly Unknown to the Latins. But to
return.

11. We have showed, what Stars these Ancient Astrologers accounted Malignant,
in the Nativities of Children: Let us now see, which were those they accounted
Benign, and Favorable; and from whose Aspects, they Presaged all Good Fortune
to the Newborn Child.

Abarbanel then says, that Sol was the Chiefest, from whom they took their
Omens of Good: and this was the reason, says the same Author, that when God
caused King Hezekiah to be borne again, as it were, the second time; he made
choice of the Sun, to be the Sign, by which this Miracle should be wrought.
Next after the Sun, they accounted Venus to be most Propitious: and perhaps
from this Observation of the Ancients, it was, that next to the Sun, and the
Moon, This Planet was most especially Worshipped, throughout the whole East; as
it is affirmed by R. Kapol Ben-Samuel. These Ancient Hebrews acknowledged also
the Planet Jupiter, (which they sometimes called (...) Gad, and sometimes also
(...) Mazal Tob, and those that came after them, (...) Cocheb tsedek;) to be a
very Favorable Star. For which reason it was, that the New-married Man was
wont to give his Bride a Ring, whereon was ingraved the forenamed words, (...)
Mazal tob; that is to say, in the Natural signification of the Words, A Good
Star, or Good Fortune: desiring, by this Ceremony, that She might be delivered
of all her Children, under this Favorable Star: as it has been observed,
both by Munster, Aben-Ezra, and Chomer. Insomuch that the Later of these
Authors affirms, that even in His time there were some that were so Curious
(as he calls them) in these Observations, (or rather, as we may justly say, so
Melancholic, and Foolish;) as that they would not lie with their Wives, but at
some certain hours; to the end, that if they should prove with Child, they
might be brought to bed, under this Star; whose Revolutions they were most
diligent in Calculating. But these Strange Fancies are found, only among the
Later Jews; and never entered so much as into the Thoughts of their
Forefathers, the Ancient Hebrews; (as the same Chomer affirms;) who observed
only That, which a certain Pure Innocence dictated unto them; attributing no
other Effect to the Stars, then what were merely Natural; and whose causes
were imprinted on these Celestial Bodies, by Him, who created all things in
their Perfection.

12. But it is now time, that we answer this Weighty Objection, that is made
against us: namely, that seeing that the Holy Scriptures make not any mention,
of any of these Astrologicall Curipsities, in the Lives of the Patriarks, whom
we affirm to have been Calculaters of Nativities; a man may very well account
them to be False, if not Dangerous: seeing they are grounded only upon the
Fantastical Conceits of the Rabbis, who are known to have been of the Faction
of the Judiciary Astrologers.

If I had not already elsewhere defended the Innocence of the Learned Jews,
See my Advertisement to the Learned, touching the Oriental Languages.
in this Particular; I should in this place have taken an occasion to show, how
much our Christian Writers have injured them, by charging them unjustly with
such things, as they were never guilty of. But now I shall only here make it
appear, that these Astrologicall Curiosities may be proved out of the Holy
Scriptures.

For confirmation then, of what we have here proposed, we read in Genesis, that
Leah, Jacobs Wife, Genesis 30.11.
called one of her Sons by the name of the Planet Jupiter, which is called Gad;
under which, no doubt he was born: et peperit Zilpah, says the Latin,
following the Original, ancilla Leah ipsi Jacob filium; et ait Leah, (...)
Bagad; et vocavit nomen ejus, Gad. The Vulgar Translation, and S. Hierome,
instead of Bagad, translate Focliciter: which is the same with, Cum Bona
Fortuna; as it is proved by S. Angustine; who reprehendeth those, that
collected from this Text, that the Ancients worshipped Fortune. Vnde videtur
Occasio (says he) non been intelligentibus dari, tanquam illi homines Fortunam
coluerint, etc. And that it may clearly and evidently appear, that the Vulgar
Translation understands by (...), Gad, Fortuna Bona, which is one of the
Epithets, that is given to the Planet Jupiter, as is acknowledged on all hands;
we need but turn to the 65. Chapter of Isaiah, ver. 11. where the same word is
rendered by, Fortuna: Vos qui dereliquist is Dominum; qui obliti estis montem
Sanctum meum; qui ponitis Fortunae, ((...) Legad,) mensam, et libatis super
eam. The Sepuagint also had long before given the same Interpretation of this
word, rendering (...) Bagad, in Fortuna.

Now that (...) Gad is the Planet Jupiter, Aben-Esra testifies expressly, In
Sphaet Iud.part. 3. sec. 5. col. 2.
where he says; that the Targum purposely retained this word, as being the
most proper for the expressing of this Star. And Abarbanel, upon the same Text
of Genesis, expounds this Passage without any Scruple at all, thus, (...) Vegad
hou Cochab Tsedek: that is to say; This Gad is the Planet Jupiter: as you may
see in the Learned Pagnin; who, being a Christian, Thesaur. lingu. in Gad.
ought the less to be suspected. The Learned may also have recourse to the
Great Masoreth; where this word is reckoned in the number of those Fifteen,
that are written Imperfectly; and yet are read, as though they were perfect,
and wanted not any Letter. And this is the reason, that in all the Correct,
Hebrew Bibles, you always see this word (...) in the Text, expressed by a
little Mark, which sends you to the Margin; where you find it written at
length, (...) Bagad. All these things being considered, it will appear most
evidently, that this Child of Jacobs, was born under the most Propitious Planet
Jupiter, which is, for This Reason, called by the name of Gad; which name was
also given to the same Child. Now if it be demanded; why do we not then any
where else meet with the like Example? Jacob Ben-Samuel answers: that This
was observed, chiefly, by reason of the Jealousy, that was betwixt the two
Sisters, Leah and Rachel, Jacob's Wives. For, Leah seeing, that her Sister had
two Children already; which made her so proud, as that She began to boast,
Comparavit me Deus cum sorore mea: fearing, lest that after She should have
given over Childbearing, her Sister would have the upper hand of her, and that
She should be no longer beloved by her Husband; She gave her Maid unto him, and
caused him to go in unto Her: and as soon as she perceived her to be with
Child, she observed so well the time of her falling it Travel; that seeing her
bring forth a Mar Child, and that under the Planet Jupiter too as she had
learnt to speak, from her Husband she accounting her self now more happy then
her Sister, would have him called also by the name of this so Propitious a
Planet.

And these were the Astrologicall Observations of these Patriarks; which were
so much the more Holy, and Religious, in that they wrought in these Good Men, a
Continual Admiration of the Works of God. But, those that came after them,
mixing superstition with this Astrology of their Forefathers; it came in a
short time to be Corrupted, and to loose its First Purity.

13. Thus the Egyptians, who were neighbors to the Chaldeans, of whom they
also learnt this Science; were the first that filled it with a world of
Vanities, or rather, Abominations: as you may see in Rabbt Moses his Ductor
dubiorum; who often cites these Books: De Servitio Egyptiaco: De ritu Zabiorum:
and, De Art Magica, which is otherwise a very choice Book; a part whereof I
have seen in Hebrew; but it was Originally written in Egyptian, by Centir the
Philosopher. The Egyptians then were the first Authors of this Alteration in
Astrology: yet were they not, nevertheless the Inventers of the Characters of
the Planets;: for, none of them, except one, or two, are to be found in any of
the Ancient Monuments of this Nation: and besides, those that are found there,
have a clear different signification, from what at this day they have with us.
And certainly, if they had desired to have represented Saturn, by a Sickle;
they would have figured a Sickle; and not have set down this Character, which
is no whit at all like it: and so of Jupiter,; of Venus,; and the rest. And now
let any one judge, what reason we have to give any Credit, to the Author of
those Collections, which are inserted at the end of Hyginus his Works; when he
tells us, that these Characters came, not only from the Egyptians, but from the
Chaldeans also. Chaldaicae sunt, (says he) atque Egyptiacae Notae, quibus
Planetae ab Astronomis insigniuntur. But he, good Man, understood not, that the
Reasons, why Saturn is pictured with a Since, or Sickle; and Jupiter, with a
Thunderbolt, were things these People never dreamt of; and were a long time
after forged, by the Giddy-headed Greeks, who turned all manner of things into
Fables; and who thought, they should never be taken for men of worth; unless
they invented, and published to the world, these their Fooleries; which have
since wrought us this Unhappiness, that we have but a Dark, Confused Notion,
of the Wisdom of the Ancients. So that, endeavoring to give us a New Kind of
Astrology, which was stuffed up with Fables; their Horoscopes were crected upon
an infinite Rabble of False Deities, which they assigned to the Stars. And thus
at length, they began to teach, that the Planets themselves were Gods; whereof
some were of a Gentle, and others of a Stern Nature; calling Saturn, by
reason of its Malignancy, (...) which is the name of a Certain Goddess, the
Reyengeresse of Injuries; so called, say They, ab Indignatione. Jupiter was
called (...), Victory: Mars (...), Boldness: The Sun, (...), the Good Demon:
Venus, (...), Love: Mercury, (...), Necessity: and the Moon, (...), Good
Fortune: searching after the good Fortune of the Child, in these Appellations,
which they called, Sorts Fortunae.

14. Now as it was their Design, to imitate the Ancients, and to follow them
in their Inventions: So did they notwithstanding endeavor, either to corrupt
their Doctrine, or else to add something to it: that they might not be thought
to have borrowed the Whole from any body: such is the power of Ambition, and
Vainglory. Thus in the twelve Houses, wherein the Planets mutual Aspects to
each other, throughout the Signs of the Zodiac, are set down; they thought
sit to foretell of the Child, not such things as take their Original from the
Instant of the Child's Birth, which are called Congenitae; and which the Ancient
Hebrews also observed; but, from those rather, that happened after its Birth.
Those that are desirous to be satisfied herein, may have recourse to Scaligers.
Notes upon Manilius; where he sets down the manner of erecting this kind of
Theme, or Figure of a Nativity: where the First House shows, that the Child
shall be a Housekeeper: the Second, that he shall be a Soldier, and a
Travailer; the Third, that he shall be a man of great Employment; and so of the
rest.

These Houses, Manilius calls, Athla; as, for example, when he would say, the
First House, he says, the First Athlon; or the Second, the 2d. Athlon, etc.
Whereupon Scaliger takes occasion to refute Picus Mirandula, and Jo. de Roias,
a Spaniard, for saying that these Athla, mentioned by Manilius, were only the
Theme of a Nativity, or Horoscope, as they are now usually taken: whereas He
affirms, on the Contrary, that the Author understands hereby, whatsoever is
Acquired, beside the Natural Inclination of the Child. Et ut melius, says he,
mentem Manilij aperiam, duo Themata homines praecipua instituit; alterum
Geniturae, alterum Actionum. So that these Athla are not the Theme, or Figure
of the Nativity, or of such things, as are borne with us; but rather,
whatsoever we Acquire afterward. And here Scaliger takes occasion to let the
world know, that Himself is the only Man, that has rescued his Athlon, out
of the very Jaws of Oblivion; which, he says, is a word used only by Manilius;
and which, though it be very Ancient, yet neither the Jews, Greeks, nor
Arabians had any knowledge of. He confesses them, that it is very Ancient: Now
would I very feign ask this Question of Him: Whether this Word, if it be so
Ancient, be either Greek, Hebrew, or Arabicke? I suppose, he would be very
wary, how he answered this Question, lest he should be forced to contradict
himself. Let us see then, if we can discover the true Original of this Word;
and briefly set down, whence this Athlon, whose Etymology has been for so
long time unknown, is derived.

We have formerly showed, that the Ancient Hebrews digested all the
Observations which they made, at the Nativity of a Child, into Twelve Places;
either on some Instrument, or else in a plain Figure only. We have also said,
that these Twelve Places, according to Abarbanel, and R. Jacob Kapol, were
called by one General name, (...), Machataloth, that is to say, Ligaturae: not
according to the Usual Acception of the Lature Word Ligatura, which signifies a
little Scrol tied about the Neck, or Arm, for the cure of some Disease or
other. R. Nathan much abuses himself, in taking the word in this Sense, and
saying, that they used to tie the Geniture, or Figure of the Nativity, about
the Neck of the Child; which Abarbanel proves to be very False: But they were
called (...) Machataloth, from the Verb (...) Chatal, which signifies, to
Bind; because that they were taken, and considered all together, as United; and
not severally, and apart. For, if any one of them were omitted, there could no
perfect Judgment be given of the Fortune of the Child. Now, from this Chatal,
or Machataloth, is Athlon corrupted; which Manilius, describing the Astrology
of the Ancients, has so often made use of, and none but He. And thus you see,
whence this word, which Scaliger so much rejoices over, and will needs
persuade us, 'twas utterly Unknown to the Hebrews, is derived. As for the
Greeks, though perhaps they might have it; yet the Vainglory wherewith they
were puffed up, made them forbear the use of it; and put them upon inventing
of new Terms, for all that they ever had received from the Ancients; by this
means depriving Us of the knowledge of Antiquity; the hidden Mysteries whereof
we shall more fully discover, in our Cribrum Cabalisticum; and shall there also
more fully prosecute this Choice Point of Learning, touching the Astrology of
the Ancients. Let us now descend to the Reading of the Stars.

PART. IIII. Of the Reading of the Stars, and what ever else is seen in the
Air.
CHAP. XII.
Whether it be Possible to read any thing in the Clouds, and in all other
Meteors.
THE CONTENTS.
1. HOw many ways this Reading by the Meteors may be performed.

2. Battles, and fearful Prodigies, seen in the Air.

3. The Reasons they give, who are of Opinion, that these Prodigies are
Supernatural.

4. Reasons given to the Contrary. Angels, and Saints, how they have sometimes
been seen to appear in the Clouds.

5. A new, and Quaint Opinion, touching the diverse kinds of Figures that
appear in the Clouds: and a Conjecture upon the Secret, mentioned by
Trithemius, of conveying News, agreat Distance off.

6. The Authors Resolution, concerning strange Sights in the Air.

7. The Raining of Blood, in the figure of a Cross, not Natural; against
Cardan.

8. The Manna in the Wilderness, marked with the Hebrew letter. Vau, according
to some of the Rabbis: and, what Consequence we may hence deduce, against Them.

9. Hail in Languedoc, figured like Arms: Snow, like Stars in shape, spoken of
by Kepler.

10. The Rainbow, the Hieroglyphicke of Sorrow.

11. Diverse Opinions, concerning the Generation of Comets: and whether they
Natuturally presage some Evil to come, or not.

12. Rules to know, what Pillars, Swords, Bucklers, Trumpets, and fiery
Arrows, seen in the Air, foretell. Hebrew Letters sometimes seen in the
Air.

13. What Letters have been devised, in Imitation of the figures, made by
Cranes in their Flight. Presages of Accidents to come, taken from Birds.

I Make no Question, but that those, who account Averroe^s an Atheist; Cardan,
a Libertine; and Pomponatius, an Ungodly person; and who, being charmed with
the Doctrines of some Over-scrupulous men, will not be beaten out of the Common
Road; will look very strangely upon this Proposition which I have here made,
touching this so Unheard Of Kind of Reading. But leaving them to their own
Astonishment, and taking little notice of what they can say; since They are not
the men, to whom we write; let us come, in the last place, to discover the
Secrets of this kind of Reading.

1. First, Reading presupposes some Visible Sign; whether it be in Letters,
Characters, Marks, Ciphers, Staves, Torches, Darts, Javelins, Knots, Streakes,
Colors, Holes, Points, Living Creatures, or any other Sensible thing. Now all
these Figures, or Signs, may be represented in the Clouds: and the Reading of
them may be performed, three manner of ways. Either by Letters, or Known
Characters; or by Hieroglyphickes; or lastly, by Signs, or Marks, which do
represent Perfectly, and not Obscurely, that which we read. For, these Signs
are different from Hieroglyphickes, in this; that Hieroglyphickes do represent
things Obscurely; as, for Example, expressing a Battle by a Sword: but the
other contrary wise, Clearly, and Plainly; as namely, one Battle, by another.
Now all these Letters, Marks, and Hieroglyphics, are represented not only in
the Clouds, but sometimes also in all the other Meteors; as Comets, Lightning,
Rain, Hail, Snow, Manna, and White Frosts; as we shall see hereafter. We
begin with the Clouds.

2. The most Intelligible Signs, Marks, or Characters, that are figured in the
Clouds, are Armed Men, Onsets, Arms, and Battles; which appearing in order,
for many days together, do give notice to Men, of some semblable Event to
follow. Now whether these Prodigies proceed from some Natural Cause, or else
are produced by the power of Almighty God, for to admonish us of our sins; we
shall examine hereafter: but this is most certain, that we never fail of
seeing the Event to answer the Sign; and that to the great Astonishment of all
those men, who would reduce all things, to the Principles of Philosophy. About
twenty four years before the Birth of our Savior Christ, there were two
Armies seen to encounter each other, in the Air; and that with so great
violence, as that men might hear (if at least the story be true,) the Running
of their Horses, Vid. T. Live. l 2. Decad. 1. Plutarcb. in Vit. Caes. Dion, and
Suet. Appian. l. 44. Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 15. Eueas Sylv. Deser. Europ c.
15. Fincil. in nov-Evang. Lycost. Beaistcau, Tesserant, and Belleforest. in
their Histories of Prodigies.
the Voices of the Men, and the Clashing of their Armor. Not long after, was
the truth of this Vision made manifest to the world. For Marius and Sylla, by
their Factions, making, as it were, a Shambles of the Feilds; were the cause of
so much Bloodshed, as that the Romans never received a greater Blow, then This.
In like manner, when the Goths, Hunnes, and Lombards, invaded Italy: the
Europeans, Palestine; and the Turks, Constantinople; there were seen in the
Air, Arms all bloody; Men, raging like Mad; and Dogs, so feirce, and cruel;
as that the very Description is full of Horror. But, that we may not borrow
Examples abroad; it is reported, that in the year 1561. the like Prodigies
were seen in our own Country of France, and even in the City of Paris also;
which, not long after, suffered under an infinite number of Calamities. Of late
years also, while the King continued his Seige before Montauban, there
appeared, at Caen, at the beginning of the Night, very many Dreadful Sights in
the Air. A City seemed to be beseiged, Ordnance planted, Soldiers drawn
forth, and the Clouds moving forward and backward, appeared like to two pitched
Battles, that stood ready to charge each other: and that which caused the
greatest Terror in the Beholders, was, that these Figures seemed to be all
bloody, and, as it were, Inflamed; and the Face of the whole Heavens also was
most dreadful to behold.

Now these Hieroglyphics, and Letters that are seen in the Clouds, are more
Frequent then others, though not so certain. And, because people do not much
take care to observe them, I doubt not, but if I should here set down, what I
my self have sometimes seen in the Clouds, I should be laughed at;
notwithstanding, the Consideration of These Things ought not to be rejected, by
those that are Curious; as we shall show hereafter. For, besides those
wonderful Effects, which Philosophers have observed do happen daily in the
Clouds, it is also an Admirable thing to see,

Qu' else se forment
En cent diverse portraicts, don't les events les transforment,
En Centaurs, Serpens, Hommes, Oyse aux, Poissons.
Et d'vne form en autre errent en cent fasons.
In English thus.

How into several Forms themselves they throw;
Which Winds change into Shapes of Things below:
Biras, Fishes, Serpents, Centaures, Men; and thus
Shift, in a Round of Figures various.
3. Let us now proceed to the Consideration of these Prodigies; and discover,
whether there be any Secret meaning in them, or not.

Those men that are of opinion, that these strange Sights in the Clouds are not
Accidental, and have no Signification in them, endeavor to prove their
Assertion by these three Reasons. The First is, because their Generation is
wholly above the Power of Nature; seeing that no man can assign any Natural
Cause for it. The Second is, because that their Duration is much different,
from that which Philosophy allows them. For; if we consider the Figure of a
Cloud, we shall find, that it cannot preserve it self, in the same Form, and
bigness, the space of one hour only; but is presently scattered, and changed
into some other shape, very much different from the former. But as for these
Prodigious Figures which we speak of, they have been sometimes seen to last,
for the space of forty days; as the Author of the History of the Maccabees
testifies; who reports this wonderful strange Story, 2. Maccab. c. 5.
here following. Eodem tempore Antiochus secundam profectionem paravit in
Aegyptum. Contigit autem per universam Jerosolymam civitatem, videri diebus
quadraginta, per ae^ra, Equites discurrentes auratas stolas habentes, and
hastis, quasi cohortes, armatos, et cursus equorum per ordines digestos, et
congressiones fieri cominus, et scutorum motus, et Galeatorum multitudinem
gladijs districtis, et telorum jactus, et aureorum armorum splendorem, omnisque
generis loricarum. A like Prodigy happened to the same City, a little before
the utter Destruction of it by Titus, son to the Emperor Vespasian; who was
the Instrument of punishing the Inhabitants thereof, for committing the most
Horrid Crime, that ever the Sun beheld. For, there were seen at that time,
for above a whole days space; Armies of men, running up and down in the
Clouds: Joseph. de Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 12.
and Chariots likewise; the very sight whereof astonished the Beholders. The
Third Reason, to prove that these Figures are not Accidental, nor produced by
the Power of Nature only, is; because that the Prayers of Godly men have
oftentimes been the cause, that there have appeared in the Clouds, the Figures
of Angels, and of Saints, whose Assistance has been implored, in some
Calamitous Times: as S. Celestine was seen at Aquileia; and S. Petronia, at
Bologne.

4. But those, who are of a Contrary Opinion, bring Arguments against the
former; and maintain; that there is nothing seen in the Clouds, but what may
be Natural. For, as concerning the manner how these strange Sights are
generated, it is every whit as much known to us, as that of Comets; which are
often engendered in various, and several shapes; as, Pointed, Round, Long,
Large, and in the Figure of Hair; according as the Matter is Disposed. In like
manner may the Body of a Cloud be formed by the Wind, which carries it to and
fro, into ten thousand several shapes, which appear strange to our sight;
though, in themselves, they are clean otherwise. And thus the First of the
aforesaid Reasons is overthrown.

The Second seems to have much more Force; but in Truth, has none at all.
For, though the History of the Maccabees say, that these Fearful Sights of
Armies appeared in the Clouds, for forty days together; yet it does not say,
that they were Really such; but only, that they Appeared to the Beholders, to
be such. Now their Sight might be deceived, by a strong Imagination, caused
from having seen it once; as it often happens, in the like case. If it be
Objected, that though one Single man might have been deceived; yet, that Many
could not possibly: and that therefore, the same thing having been seen by All,
it must necessarily be Real, and not Imaginary. To this I answer, that Many
may be deceived, as well as One single person; seeing that the Imagination of
Many is altogether as strong, as that of a single person; and besides, that if
the Cloud, wherein these Figures appear, be Thick, and Moist; the Rays of our
Eyes, being prepossessed by our Imagination, may easily think they see, that
which we fancy to our selves. This Answer is set down more fully by
Pomponatius; De Incant.
who, treating of so difficult, and bold a Subject as this; might have cleared
himself of the Objections made against it, by using another Reason, (which we
shall produce hereafter,) which is both easy, and better known; without
casting himself upon the Maxims of a Philosopher, that scarce any body
understands. As for the Long Continuance of these Prodigious Sights in the
Air, it may be answered in a word, that it was Natural: seeing that the
Histories do intimate, they were not seen continually, and without
Intermission: and by Consequence, it might so fall out, that at some time or
other the next day, the Winds might possibly dispose the Clouds after the same
manner, as on the day before.

The Third Reason, which is, that the Figures of Angels have been often seen in
the Clouds, is not of sufficient Force to prove, that these Effects are
Supernatural. For, oftentimes the Clouds, if they be Thick, and Smooth, do
receive the Rays, and Species of things here below; which is the Cause that we
see them by Reflection, as in a Looking-glass. By reason whereof, Cardan
reports, that one day there was the Appearance of an Angel, seen in the Clouds,
at Millane; which caused great Astonishment in the People, till such time as
Pelicanus, a Philosopher, made it plainly appear to them, that this Angel was
nothing else but the Reflection of an Image of Stone, that was on the top of
the Church of S. Godart, which was represented in the Thick Clouds, as in a
Looking-glass. And thus might Pomponatius have given a reason of the
Apparitions in the Air aforementioned, namely of S. Celestine, at the City of
Aquileia, and of S. Petronia, at Bologne; without engaging himself in so long,
and tedious a Disputation.

5. From this Emission of the Rays, and Species, some have conceived, that all
those Figures that are seen in the Air, are nothing else, but the Images of
things here below. And therefore they say, that those Armies, which have been
often seen in the Air, were the Rays of some Armies, that were in some part
of the Earth, or other. And so, that Navy of Ships, that was seen floating in
the Clouds by the Romans, when they were preparing to go against the Genois;
and against Perses, the last King of the Macedonians, who was vanquished by
Aemilius, was likewise nothing else, but the Image of their own Navy, which
appeared upon the smooth surface of a Cloud. And according to this Doctrine,
peradventure, the Armies of Foreign Kings may be known; and News may be
conveyed, at a vast distance; there being nothing to hinder it. For, as for
those Objections which are made against the Reading, that Cornelius Agrippa
speaks of, which he said might be done, by the help of the Moon, which should
receive the Species of the Characters, as a Looking-glass does; they can have
no place here; for as much as the Clouds are not very far removed from us;
and the Rays of Characters, or any other things, presented before them, cannot
be spent, before they can reach so far, as they must needs do with the Moon,
by reason of its too great Distance. And thus perhaps is that Secret of
Trithemius discovered; where he undertakes to send News abroad, and make it
known a great distance off in an Instant, by the help of certain Spirits,
whose names he there sets down; which are, in my Opinion, nothing else but the
Winds; some whereof are more proper for the disposing of of the Clouds, then
others are. We may possibly discourse some other time, more fully, of these
Secrets of his; which have been hitherto accounted, either utterly False, or
else Diabolical.

6. It remains now, that we satisfy this Doubt here proposed: Namely, whether
these Figures that are seen in the Air, and in the Clouds, be the Images, and
Representations of things here below, and consequently purely Natural, and are
of no signification: Or, whether they are produced, and formed, by the
Providence of God, who cease not continually to forewarn us, by some Visible
Sign, or other, of what Evils soever are to befall us; as we have formerly
said. Chap. 3.
To which I shall give this Answer, which I conceive to be most True: Namely,
that, without all doubt, Many of these Figures are Natural; and are produced,
either Accidentally, in the Clouds, or else by the Emission of the Image, and
Species of things here below, as we have already said: But that there are also
some, which we must refer to the wonderful works of God. Of this Later kind
are Those, spoken of by the Author of the History of the Maccabees; 2 Match.
cap. 10.
where Judas, fighting in Heavens Quarrel, had an Apparition sent him, of five
Horsemen, appearing in the Air; which pursued his Enemies with so great
violence, as that above twenty thousand of them fell upon the place. Sed cum
vehemens pugna esset, apparuerunt adversarijs de caelo viri quinque in Equis,
fraenis aureis decori, ducatum Judae is praestantes: ex quibus duo Machabaeum
medium habentes, armis suis circumseptum incolumem conservabant: in adversarios
autem tela et fulmina jaciebant; ex quo et caecitate confusi, et repleti
perturbatione, cadebant.

If it be here objected, that these five Horsemen might possibly have been the
Image, and Species of some of the Army; I answer, that it appears by the
Circumstances, that this could not be so; it being most evidently true, that
these Horsemen did not only seem to fight; but did Really fight, and charge
the Enemy. And if the Lightning here mentioned, had been Natural, and had
been discharged from the Clouds; Both Armies should then have felt it alike.
But seeing, in that confusion, and mixture of both Armies together, the Darts
fell from Heaven upon One of them only, and not upon the other; we must
necessarily conclude, that this was the Hand of God: Besides, that this Prodigy
happened also, in a clear, bright day, when the Air was darkened with no
Cloud. So that, as I am of Opinion, with Cardan, and Pomponatius, that
oftentimes we may see in a Cloud, as in a Looking-glass, the Species of the
Statue of an Angel, or of a Saint, placed either on the top of a Church, or
elsewhere; or else, that our Sight may be deceived, and betrayed by our
Imagination: so do I likewise believe, that these Visions may sometimes also be
Divine; as was that Image of a Cross, shining most gloriously in the Air,
which was seen by Constantine the Great; who afterward found the Event to
follow, according to the words, that he saw written on it: In hoc signo vinces.
An. 316. Hist. Tripart. l. 1. c. 5.
The Histories of the Lives of the Saints, are full of the like Visions, which
cannot be attributed to the Power of Nature alone.

7. After the Consideration of the Clouds, we shall in the next place come to
that of Rain: wherein we can make use of no other way of Reading, besides the
Second; which is, by Hieroglyphickes. And of this kind, is the Raining of
Blood; or, of Water of a Bloody Color: such as was that, which fell in
Switzerland, Anno. 1534. which fell upon Peoples Clothes, in the form of
Crosses. Jo. Picus Mirandula has Immortalized this Prodigy, by a Large Copy of
Verses; among which, you have the story of the Wonder fully delivered, in these
few that follow.

Permixtamque Crucem rubro spectavimus olim.
Nec morum discrimen erat; Sacer, atque Prophanus,
Jam conspecta sibi gestabant Mystica: Patres
Conscripti, and pueri; conscriptus sexusuterque;
Et Templa, and Vestes, a summa Caesaris aula,
Ad tenues vicos, ad dura mapalia ruris,
Cernere erat liquido deductum ex Aethere signum.
Cardan cannot believe, that there is any Extraordinary Matter in This Rain:
for as much as, the Red Drops (says He) lighting upon Men's Clothes, might
appear in the form of a Cross, by reason of the Waters spreading it self
all along the threads, which are wrought Crosse-wise. But here he takes no
notice, that the Historians, that report this Story, affirm; that these drops
of Blood fell in the form of Crosses, not on Clothes only, but upon the Stones
also, and upon their Meal: which is an Evident Demonstration, that the Cause
of it was not Natural, but proceeded from some Divine Power. And certainly,
the same kind of Rain, figured like Crosses, which happened in the time of
Julian the Apostate, what could it betoken, but the Sufferings of the Church,
and the Ignominy of the Cross? If you but run over the Annals, and consider
these several years, 747.783.959.1503.1507. you shall find, that the like
Prodigies have been the Forerunners of such Truths, as have most certainly
afterward come to pass. I shall not here speak of the Raining of Wheat,
Wine, Oil, Honey, Mice, and Frogs; because that their Causes are more Natural.
Neither will I deny, but that These Things are sometimes also true
Hieroglyphics: as it has been sometime observed in Germany; where the People
being, by an Intolerable Dearth, brought almost to Despair; they were
suddenly comforted by a Shower of Wheat, which was seen to fall from the
Clouds, presaging the great Plenty of Corn that should follow: which,
accordingly came to pass.

8. All the Other Meteors also, though they are Naturally produced, do yet
sometimes serve for Signs; which God makes use of, when he intends to
communicate unto us some Secret, worthy of his Greatness. Thus the Manna,
wherewith the Israelites were fed in the Wilderness, besides the many Wonders,
that it was endued withal, had This also added to the rest, (as some of the
Rabbis report,) that the grains of it were figured with the Hebrew Character
(...) Van, very perfectly expressed: and this was the Principal Reason, (say
they) that the Israelites, wondering at the Novelty of this Character, said one
to another, (...) Man hon? which is as much as to say, What means this (...)
Vau? And so going on upon this Ground, they afterward find out a thousand
Mysteries; raising from hence a strange King of Doctrine, which seems to be
Repugnant to the very Principles of Common Theology. However, we may take
Advantage hence, and make use of these Conceits of Theirs, in confuting the
Peevishness, and Stubbornness of this People: and thus far it is Useful to
us. As for Example, when they say, Exodus 6.
that This Letter, which, in Numbers, signifies Six, gave them to understand;
that, during the six days of the week, they were to gather this Manna: and
that this Number Six, denoted also unto them, the Misery, and Sorrow wherewith
God threatened them, if they murmured any more against him. Now, that this
Number (say they) is the Hieroglyphick of Labor, and Servitude, appears out
of Leviticus, Levit. 25 Exodus 21
and elsewhere; where it always signifies, Labor: as, for Example. They were
to work Six days: and to Till the Ground likewise Six years. So an Hebrew
Servant was bound to serve his Master Six years: and Job was tried by Six
Tribulations. But suppose we should reply upon them, Job. 5.
that all these Mysteries are more fully figured in our Messiah, would they
conceive themselves bound (think you) to believe us; seeing that we take our
Foundation out of Their Own Doctrine? Let us suppose then, that the Manna was
marked with the Character (...) Vau; according to Themselves, this Character
signifies, the Fruit of Life; and it is the Character also of the Messiah, as
it is proved by a Learned Venetian. This Eating of Manna then, Georg. Venet. i^
Harm. Mund.
might also figure out unto them, their Earing of the Bread of Life, which they
One Day should enjoy, as the Christians Now do. Besides, that it may appear,
that the Number of this Character, which is Six, does perfectly agree with all
things, that have been spoken of CHRIST; according to Their own Computation,
we have long since arrived to the Sixth Age of the World; which is the Age,
wherein our Savior CHRIST appeared, and not in Any Other: so that this Number
seems chiefly to point at, and to concern Him. Secondly, if we would make
known to the Samaritans the Wonders of his Love, it is not without some
Mystery, that he sat him down at Jacobs Well, De Trin. l. 4. c. 4.
about the Sixth hour. Whereupon S. Augustine says: Iam incipiunt Mysteria:
non enim frustra hora sexta sedet: quare hora sexta? quia aetate seculi sexta.
Thirdly, we find in the Gospel, that in the Sixth Month the Messiah was
foreshewed by an Angel, Lu. 1.26.
and at the same time conceived also, in the Womb of the Virgin his Mother.
Fourthly, Many are of Opinion, that he was borne on the Sixth day of the Week;
and that on the same day also he ended his Long, and Tedious Fast. Fifthly, that
he came Six days before the Passover, to Bethany, which is interpreted, The
House of Obedience. Lastly, that upon the Sixth day of the Week, and at the Sixth
hour of that day, he died for us upon the Cross. See now, whether the Jews
are not confounded, (at least, should be persuaded out of their Perverseness,)
by their Own Principles. But, to leave these My steties, which we shall more
fully examine in another place, and shall clearly demonstrate That, which shall
be enough to convince the most Obstinate of this Naiton; and to return to our
Meteors.

9. Snow, Hail, and Frost, do also bear sometimes certain strange Characters;
the Reading whereof we are not to neglect. For, there has Hail been often
seen, which has borne the Figure, either of a Cross, a Buckler, a Heart, or
of a Death's Head: and if we do not carelessly pass by these Wonders, when we
meet with them; we may, no doubt, afterward find the truth of the Events,
foretold by these Hieroglyphicall Figures. It is not many years since, that, in
Languedoc, a Friend of mine, being abroad on hunting, was upon the sudden
amazed, at an Extraordinary Noise of Thunder, and of a most Violent Wind: which
made him bethink himself, how to get to some Shelter. But, as he was got a
good way into the Wood, which led to his Dwelling; thinking with himself, that
he should not be able to reach his own House, before the Rain fell, which
commonly follows such kind of Tempests, he took up his harbor under a Rock:
under which he had not stayed about the space of a Quarter of an hour, but
that, thinking the Malice of the Storm had been spent, by a light Shower of
Rain that had fallen; he began to go on with his Journey. But he was not gone
a Stones cast, but he saw some Hail begin to fall; which made him think of
going back again. Notwithstanding, upon better Consideration, he began to
think, that this Hail could not be very troublesome to him, seeing it fell in
so small a Quantity; and presuming withal, that the Thickness of the Trees
would be well enough able to secure him from the violence of it. This
Consideration had certainly put him upon his Journey again; had he not by
Chance, casting his eye upon some of the Hailestones, as they fell, observed,
that they appeared to be of another kind of shape, then commonly they used to
be. This made him stay, to take better notice of them; so that taking one of
the Hailestones up in his hand, he instantly perceived a Fearful Prodigy in
it. For, some of them bare the figure of a Headpiece; others, of a Scutcheon;
and others, of a Sword. This Prodigious Novelty amazed him, and the
Apprehension of some Disaster at hand, made him return back to the Rock again:
where he was no sooner arrived, but that there fell so great, and so violent a
Storm of Hail, as that it killed not only Birds, but very many Beasts also.
The like to this, I my self have also sometime observed, in Provence. This man
then, returning home, after the Storm was past, could find no more such
figures upon the Hailstones, as he had seen at first: which made him conclude,
that this Prodigy would not end with the Death of these Beasts: as he had
indeed most Truly Conjectured. For, within a little while after, this Miserable
Country had its Fields covered with Soldiers, and its Revolted places
besieged, and assaulted, with so much Bloodshed, that the very Memory of it
will be always very grievous unto us. The Story of this Figured Hail, In
Cosmocrit. l. 1. c. 8.
confirms that which Cornelius Gemma has observed, in these words: Inventa est
saepius Grando, cui futurarum rerum manifest, ut Mortis, Clypei, aut pugnae,
aut Crucis insculptae imagines spectarentur. Kepler has observed, that Snow
also is not without It Is Wonders: for he affirms, that Himself has seen some,
figured like a Star, having perfectly Six Angles, of an Exact Proportion.
Others have also observed some, that has had the Figure of Branches of Trees,
or Leaves: and Some, which by its small, Unequal Parts, represented the figure
of some Old Ruins of Buildings; but without any Design, in my opinion; the
Generation of It being Natural, and daily to be seen: as you may see in the
said Kepler. And yet perhaps, if These Figures were not too Frequent, They also
would be observed to foretell something to come, as well as any of the rest,
which are observed to happen but very seldom; which God makes to serve for
Admonishments to Us; as we shall show more plainly, when we come to discourse
of Comers.

10. I had almost forgot to set down this following Observation, upon the
Rainebow, one of the most Noble Meteors, that are formed in the Clouds: namely,
that the Figure of it, as R. Kapol says, represents the letter (...) Caph,
which the Jews write in this manner (...); which might peradventure be the
Reason, why God placed it in the Heavens, to be a Sorrowful Memorial of the
Deluge past. For, This Character stands for 20. which is the Number of
Sorrow, Thus we read, Genesis 37.
that Jacob served in Labans house, Twenty years: and Joseph was sold for
Twenty Pieces of Silver. The Flying Roll, wherein were written the Sins of
all Men, was Twenty Cubits long: and at Twenty Years of Age, Number. 7.
the Israelites were reckoned able to serve in the Wars. And Helena, in
Homer, Hiad l. 24.
complaining of her own Misfortunes, takes notice of this number also.

Quatuor hic jam lustra moror, quo temport nunquam
Iratus miserae mihi verba indigna dedisti.
In a word, the Poets, as well as the Prophets, when they would express any
thing of Sorrow, made use of no other number. Thus Ulysses is reported to have
endured full Twenty years Misfortunes:

Quosque tuli post tot terrae, pelagique labores,
In patriam veni jam nunc labentibus annis Vicenis.
Many Examples, of this Nature, Numb. Myster. Number. 20
are produced by Bungus; which I shall here omit, that I may proceed to Fiery
Meteors.

11. And among These, Comets are the First, which are of use, in the discovery
of such Secrets, as we now treat of. I am not Ignorant, that many are of
opinion, that These Wonderful Lights, are not Exhalations, drawn up from the
Earth; because it is Impossible in Nature, that it should be so: for as much as
the whole Earth, converted into Exhalations, would not be sufficient, (say
they) to produce so Vast a Body, as that of a Comet is; if so be it be true,
which some have observed; that they are not in the Air, but in the very
Heavens. But let us Suppose them to be, either mere Exhalations, drawn up
from the Earth, and Kindled in the Air, which was the opinion of most of the
Ancients; and, among the Modernes, of Picolomeneus, Regiomontanus, Vogelinus,
Libr^^ Met^
and Fracastorius: or else, Beams gathered together, or Exhalations, sent
forth from the Stars, De Comet.
as Snellius affirms: Or else, Air condensed by the Cold, as Fromundus
thinks: or Thick, and Diaphanous Air; Shining, and not Burning; De Comet. l.
1. Parad. 5. p. 27. De nov. Sid. Serp. cap. 19. De nov. Stel. l. 1. p. 793. and
seq. Rab. Panissahal de Animant, aethereis: interpr. Petro Cambaforte.
as Puteanus: or, a kind of Celestial, Waterish, or Oily substance; as Kepler
endeavors to prove: or, some of the Grosser Parts of the Galaxia, or Milky
way; as Ticho Brahe maintains: or lastly, whether these Comets be certain
Fiery Animals, which sometimes appear on the Superficies of That Element; as
one of the Rabbis will have them to be: however, it is most certain, that
they do appear to us in some kind of Figure, or other; which is the
business of our present Discourse. Now, whether the Body of a Comet, or its
Figure, do naturally presage some disaster to follow upon the vanishing of it;
the reason of its so doing is not easily given. Yet many are of opinion, that
the Body of a Comet being kindled, produces by its Heat, a very great Drowth
upon the Earth; which ordinarily causes the death of Princes, and great
Potentates; who are otherwise much dried up, by their Cares, Watchings, Rich
Wine, and high Odoriferous Meats. And this is the reason Julius Caesar died,
shortly after the appearing of the like Comets.

Non alias Caelo toties cecidere sereno
Fulgura, nec diri toties arsere Cometae.
says Virgil.

These Comets therefore may presage the Death of Great Persons; De Subtle. l. 4.
and be not only the Sign of it, as Cardan holds, but, the Cause also. See
what Ericius Puteanus has said, De Comet.
in this Particular. They may also cause Barrenness; and consequently, Famine:
for, the Earth being two much dried; and suffering an Alteration, either by the
Exhalations that are drawn out of it, or else by the immoderate Heat of the
Air; and being also corrupted, by the stinking Fumes, issuing from the body of
the Comet; cannot give any perfect, and Sufficient Nutriment to the Corn, and
other Fruits. Then follows the Pestilence, and all other Diseases, by reason
(says Kepler) of the Corruption of the Air; and Earthquakes also, which are
caused, not by Winds that are generated by the Vapors issuing from the Comer,
and getting into Cavernes, and Subterraneous places; as Kepler maintains: but,
by the Vapors that are Naturally engendered within the bowels of the Earth, by
the great Heat caused in it; which, searching for some passage to get forth at,
and finding none, by an extreme Violence causes this Motion; which is for the
most part accompanied with some Diseases, or other; caused by the Noisome
Vapors, that ascend out of These Cavernes. Besides, the Air being Heated,
together with the Malignity of the Matter of the Comet after it is
extinguished, or else, when it begins first to ascend, over-heating our
blood, is a Means of driving Princes, and Great personages, into strange
Furies; whence presently follow Wars, Battles, Heresies, and a world of other
sad Accidents. Thus, a little before the Wars of Peloponesus, there appeared a
Terrible Comet, for the space of Seventy five days together. So did another,
before the Athenians suffered that great Loss in Sicily: another, before the
Lacedaemonians were vanquished by the Thebans: another, before Arrius vented his
Heresy: another, before the Change of the Roman Empire: another, before the
Mischeifs that happened, during the time of Claudius the Emperor: and this
Comet is reported to have lasted six months. Another presaged the Wars of
Achaia; and, the Destruction of Corinth, and of Thebes. Another appeared,
immediately before the Goths invading Italy: another, before the Army of
Charles the Fifth sacked Rome: another foreshewed the breaking forth of the
Faction of the Guelphes and Gibelines: another, the Bulgarians breaking in upon
Thrace: and another, the Civil Wars of Caesar and Pompey; of which Lucan
writes thus.

Jgnota obscurae viderunt sidera noctes,
Ardentemque polum flammis, Caeloque volantes
Obliquas per inane faces, crinemque tremendi
Sideris, et terris minitantem bella Cometem.
Now all these Effects may proceed merely from some such Causes as These: But
if it be so, that Comets burn not, nor are generated by any Elemntary
Exhalations here below; but, that they are Above, in the very Heavens; which is
the Opinion of the Learnedest Mathematicians; we must then search for some
other Causes: so that those men then, who affirm, that these New Fires, are
Miracles; are not wholly to be neglected: for as much as it is recorded, that in
the time of Augustus, there was seen One of these Comets, wherein appeared the
Figure of a Child. Whereupon the Divines, being demanded what they thought of
it, returned answer; That, This Child should be Greater, and more Powerful,
then Augustus himself; and such a one, as should deserve to be Worshipped by
Him. But, now whether these Comets be the Handiwork of God; or whether they be
but mere Exhalations; or lastly, suppose them to be New Stars, appearing in
the Heavens; we shall in the next place proceed to show, that their Figures are
Mystical Characters; or, as it were, a kind of Hieroglyphics, by which we may
be able to read, by virtue of Analogy, what Good, or Evil accidents shall
befall us. The General Rules whereof do here follow.

12. The First is, that if they are figured like a Column, or Pillar; they
denote the Constancy of some Prince, or of some Great Saint, or else of some
People, or Nation. And hence, some of the Jews have taken occasion to affirm,
that the Pillar of Fire which went along with the Children of Israel in the
Wilderness, was given unto them, as a Hieroglyphicke of Constancy, and
Steadfastness: and that it was no Ordinary Comet; whatever Andreas Rosa affirms
to the Contrary: De nov. sid. l. 1. page 783.
who maintains, that it was merely Natural, and had nothing Divine in it: it
being the Ordinary Course of Nature, (says He) once in two Thousand years to
produce some such Light, as This. Thus, two thousand years, or thereabout,
after the Creation of the world, This Pillar of Fire appeared: Two Thousand
years after, which was the Second Age, was That Wonderful Star seen, that
appeared to the Wise men, at the Birth of our Savior Christ: and Two Thousand
years after that, which is the Third Age, and which We Now live in, a New
Star appeared in the Constellation of Cassiopeia. Seneca, Phavorinus,
Alpetragius, and Elias Talmudista, 7. Qu. Not. cap. 19. Apud Agell. Noc. At.
c. 1. Apud Tichon. Brah. de nov. Stel. p. 783.
seem to favor this Opinion: But it has nothing of Truth in it. For, besides
that this Pillar of Fire had no Proper Motion at all, as other Compets have; no
more then had the Star, which appeared to the Wise men; which had nothing of
the Nature of the Other Stars in it, but only the Figure, and Light: neither
yet did it appear in the Second Age, (as Rosa affirms,) but in the Third;
for, they reckoned then Five Thousand years from the Creation:) these New
Stars, and Comets have been known to appear much oftener: and consequently it
is most False, that they are seen but every. Two Thousand years. De nov.
astr. and Comet. l. 2. c. 51.
Thus, the Learned Licetus has observed, that within the space of 30. years,
or thereabouts; namely, betwixt the years 1572. and 1604. Three new Stars were
seen: One, in Cassiopeia; another, in the Constellation, called Serpentarius;
and a Third, in the Neck of the Swan.

The Second Rule is, that when a Comet, or fiery Meteor, is Round, Clear,
Bright, and not Duskie at all, but looks as it were, like another Sun; it may
signify the Birth of some Great Prince: as Justin, the Historian writes, that
the year that Mithridates was borne, during the space of seventy days, there
appeared a Comet; (some say, that it was a Star,) but so Wonderful a one, as
that the Greatness of it took up the fourth part of the Heavens; and the
Light of It, eclipsed That of the Sun. Nam (says he) et quo genitus est anno,
et ex eo quo regnare primum caepit, stella Cometes, per utrumque tempus,
septuaginta diebus ita luxit, ut coelum omne conflagrari videretur: nam et
magnitudine sui, quartam caeli partem occupaverat, et fulgore sui, nitorem
solis vicerat: et quum oriretur, occumberetque, quatuor spatium horarum
consumebat. We have already set down, what Presages may be made, from the
Color of these Comets.

The Third is, that if they be of a Pyramidall Figure, we shall then suffer
great Losses by Fire; and, by way of Analogy, may conclude, of some Tyranny
approaching. And this is the Opinion of Cornelius Gemma, who expresses
himself in these words. De Not. Divin. Charact. l. 1. c. 6.
Fortassis, quae in acutam Pyramidem desinunt, Ignis praedominia magis, et ex
Analogia, in Republica Tyrannidem praesignificant.

The Fourth is, that if they be of much Extent, Waved, and Dissipated here and
there, in the form of Waters; they then denote Seditions in the People: seeing
that among all the Hieroglyphical Characters, that signify the People, This of
Water is the Chiefest; according to that Vision of the Prophet: Aquae multae,
populi multi. And it has been very often observed, that after any Inundations,
either of the Sea, or of Rivers; the People have presently also made
Insurrections.

The Fifth is, that if they be of the figure of a Horn, which is the
Hieroglyphicke of Power; as may be observed out of the Scriptures, in very many
places: they foreshew the Great strength of some Monarch, and an Absolute
Power. Historians report, that when Xerxes invaded Greece, with a Million of
Men; there appeared one of this kind of Comets, shining most resplendently.

The Sixth is, that if they bear the figure of a Sword, they presage
Desolations, which shall be caused by the Sword. Such a one was that, that
appeared over the City of Jerusalem, for the space of a whole year together,
and did fore-shew the death of Eleven Hundred Thousand Jews, as Josephus
testifies; De bell. Iud.
the greatest part of which number fell by the sword. And in the year 1527. a
Comet of the like Figure appeared, for many days together; with this strange
Spectacle attending it, that it was encompassed round about with Lances,
Pikes, and Halberts, with such a great number of Heads cut off, as that the
Description of it was full of Horror. Those that are the least versed in
History, cannot but know, how Calamitous a Time this was. If the Comet be
figured like a Trumpet; it then also foretells of Wars: but if it be of the
form either of a Dart, or Arrow; or else of a Javelin, it denounces both
War, and Pestilence; the Effects whereof fly abroad, as swift as an Arrow.
Such a one, as this, appeared An. 80.

Now, although that in all Comets, these several Figures may be produced
Naturally; (if so be, that the Matter (which we suppose to be Elementary) be
aptly disposed,) whether they be Long, Large, Pointed, Square, Ovall,
Triangular, or Round; from whence proceed, Beams of Fire, Bucklers, Caprae
Saltantes, which are so called, not, for having the figure of a Goat; but,
either because this Comet has something of the Resemblance of a Goat's Beard,
as Philoponus (...) Olympiodorus affirm; or else, because at the matter of it
being dispersed, takes (...) degrees, one part after another, seeming herein to
imitate the skipping of Goats; (...), for the Reason that is given by Seneca
which I profess I understand not,) where, speaking of these Comets, he says:
Aristoteles quoddam genus illorum, Capram, vocat; quasi Ignis globum: although,
I say, these Figures may be Natural; yet do they notwithstanding foretell,
(whether it be, by the Power of Resemblance, which we have spoken of formerly;
or by some other way, which is Unknown to us;) all those Events, which we have
now delivered; and that, most Certainly too, as Experience it self testifies.

There have been oftentimes seen of these Meteors in the Air, which have
represented the figure of some of the Hebrew Letters; and that in a reasonable
perfect manner expressed too: as, for example, that, which they call, Ara
Coeli, represents the Letter (...) Schin; the Chasma, represents the letter
(...) Mem; or else, the letter (...) Samech: and so, of many others. Wherein
notwithstanding I can discover no Secrets to lie hid; at least, that do
satisfy me at all. In our Cribrum Cabalisticum, we ex^mine all these
Mysteries; and discourse at ^^ge, of all that ever the Cabalists have writ^^^
of this Particular.

(...) here I thought to have ended (...); but that I now remember, that (...)
to treat of all sorts of Reading, that (...) performed in the Air. Now, one of
(...) Natural, of all these kings, is that which may be taken, from the Flying
of Cranes: Ep. 4. ad Rust. Monac.
of which S. Jerome says: Grues unam sequuntur, ordine literato. These then
change their Order, and shift their Ranks, at the Instant that the Wind
turns; that so, by means of a different Figure, they may be able to fly, with
the greater Ease, and Swiftness. Thus, when the Wind blows behind them, one,
or two of them, by turns, place themselves behind the rest; so that they are,
as it were, a kind of shelter to the maine body of the Flight, which is divided
into two Branches. But if the wind chance to blow against them, they then
presently change their whole Order: For, whereas before, the Forepart of their
Body was divided into two Ranks, they now divide the Hinder part into two
Ranks, representing the Figure of a V, one of them only, flying in the head of
the Company, and dividing the Air before them; and all the rest, flying
smoothy after it, as if they were joined together in a Line, make way for the
Wind in such sort, as that meeting with no Resistance, they fly with all
possible ease, and pleasure. Sometimes they make a perfect Triangle; or a
Semicircle, like to a C; or else, a perfect Round O; as, when they are set
upon by an Eagle; by this means defending themselves from his assaults. For, on
which side soever the Eagle comes, he encounters with nothing but Bills: just
as a Body of Horse, setting upon a Party of Foot, meets with nothing but
Points of Pikes. And hence we may conclude, that Lucan is much mistaken, when
he says, that all the Figures, which these Birds imitate in Flying, are merely
Accidental, and Made by Chance.

Strymona sic gelidum, bruma pellente, relinquunt, 1. De bell. Phars.

Poturae te, Nile, grues: primoque volatu
Effingunt varias, casu monstrante, figuras.
Mox, ubi percussit tensas Notus altior alas,
Confusos temere immixtae glomerantur in Orbs,
Et turbata perit dispersis littera pennis.
So Cranes in Winter, Strymon's cold forsake, Translated by T. M.

To drink warm Nile: and in their first Flight make
(As Chance directs,) of Letters various forms.
When their spread Wings are by the Violent storms
Of strong South-winds assailed, by and by
In a confused globe all mingled fly:
The Letter's lost in their disranked wings.
For, besides that in Battle, they never observe any other Order, or manner of
Marshalling themselves; 3. de Animal. c. 13. Chiliad. and alib. 2. de not.
Deor. De solert. Animal. et in vit. Thesei. Ornitholog.
a man may observe also in their Flight, that when either the Wind cease, or
another begins to blow; they presently break their Ranks, and cast themselves
into another Figure. These Truths are largely discoursed of, by Aelian,
Tzetzes, Cicero, and Plutarch: and Particularly by Aldrovandus, who reports,
from diverse of the Ancients; that, from this Diversity of Figure in the Flying
of these Birds, Palamedes, in the time of the Trojan War, took occasion to
invent diverse Letters of the Alphabet; which he added to those other, that the
Phoenicians had before. In Xenijs
Whence Martial Says:

Turbabis Versus, and litera tota volabit,
Unam perdideris si Palamedis avem.
And certainly we often see, that Cranes, in flying, do strangely imitate these
Greek Letters, (...). Lib. 8. var. cap. 2
Cassiodorus goes further yet, and assures us, that not only some Letters, but
generally All of them, were invented by Mercury, in Imitation of the several
Figures he observed, in the Flying of these Birds. His words are so
Considerable, as that I think fit to insert them here. Ut aliquid certum, and
exquisitum dicere videamur, has (Literas) primum, ut frequentior tradit Opinio,
Mercurius, repertor Artium multarum, volatu Strymoniarium avium collegisse
memoratur. Nam hodie Grues, qui classem consociant, Alphabeti formas, Natura
imbuente, describunt; quas in ordinem decorum redigens, vocalibus,
consonantibusque convenienter admissis, viam sensualem reperit, per quam alte
petens, ad penetralia Prudentiae Men's possit alta pervenire. They say, that
Wild-Geese also observe the same Method, that Cranes do.

Now the Letters, which all these several Birds make in their Flying, show us
only the Diversity of the winds; or else, the manner of their ordering
themselves in Battle; and no more. But their Fighting, Singing, and manner of
Feeding, and going to Rest, are of more Signification then so: for these are
often Signs of things to come. Thus we usually see, a Sick person is near his
End, when a Raven is observed to come croaking, and to light upon, or fly near
the Chamber where he lies: the like whereof is observed also of Scritch-Owles,
and Horn-Owles; Birds, which by reason of their delighting in Darkness only,
and Shady places, are accounted Unfortunate, and Ominous. The Fighting, and
Gathering together of all other sorts of Birds, especially Birds of Prey, and
which feed upon Flesh, does likewise often foreshew some sad Accident
approaching. Thus Dion reports, that when the Armies of the Triumvirate marched
forth against the Accomplices of Pompey, Lib. 50.
to take a just Revenge of Coesar's blood, there were seen, hovering over the
Troops of Brutus, and Cassius only, great numbers of Ravens, and Vultures;
which by their Many, and Fearful Cries, did foreshew the Ruin of These Two
Murderers. Neither need we travel so far, for Examples of this Nature: for,
we have a like Story to this, delivered by Aeneas Sylvius; who, coming to be
Pope, was afterward called by the name of, In Europ.
Pius II. and it is this. In that Part of Gallia, (says he,) which is furnamed
Belgica, not far from the City of Liege, a Falcon, as she was sitting upon her
Eggs in her Nest, a company of Ravens, perceiving her, set upon her; and not
content with beating her, devoured her Eggs also; and that, with such Strange,
and Unusual Outcries, as that the Boors, and Shepherds thereabout, who had
observed this Strange Piece of Tyranny, acted upon the Faulcon, were very much
amazed at it. But at length, the Faulcon, though with much ado, being gotten
from them, the Shepherds thought the Quarrel to be now certainly over, and
that they should hear no more of these Outcries. But, which much increased
their Wonder, on the Morrow, they saw gathered together, in the very same
place, so infinite a number of Faulcons, and Ravens, as that they could not
have believed before, that there were so many in the whole world: all which
were now gathered together to decide this Difference, betwixt the Faulcon and
the Ravens; the Place, and Combat being, as it were, agreed on, on both sides.
The Faulcons pitched their Battle toward the South side of the Place; and the
Ravens toward the North: and both the One, and the Other, observed their Ranks,
and Order as exactly, and beheld each other with as fierce Countenances, as if
they had been Armies of Men. At length, after they had been observed to keep
this Order, for some little time, (some of them being, as it were, in the Main
Body of the Army; and others, in the Wings,) the Fight began, with such Fury;
as that, in an Instant, the place all about was covered with Feathers, and
Blood, and with dead bodies of both Parties. But in Conclusion, the Faulcons
won the Day: and it seemed but Reasonable; that They, who fought in so just a
Cause, should bear away the Victory. Now that this Battle, fought betwixt
these Birds, did presage some Battle to be fought by Men in the same place,
Edovardus Scleikel endeavors to prove, by the Event: who writing the History
of the year 1391. tells us; that not long after this happened, two Bishops,
pretending Right each of them to the Bishopric of Liege, were so incensed
against each other, as that filling all the parts round about with Soldiers,
they made a Sad, and Bloody Decision of the Controversy. For, Benedict XII.
and Gregory XIII. (whose Factions had likewise made a Division in the Church,
about the Popedom,) maintaining each of them the Bishop of his own Election,
drove on the business to so great a Height, as that it was to be determined
only by the Sword. The Liegeois favored the one Party; and John Duke of
Burgundy, the other. But in the end, the Duke being stronger then his Enemies,
gave them Battle in the very same place, where these Birds had fought before;
and won the Day, with the loss of three Thousand of the Liegeois. The like
also happened An. 1484. when Lewis, D. of Orleans fought against Charles VIII.
And that I may not trouble my self any further, in collecting Instances of this
kind, you may have recourse to the forenamed Scleikel, and Belle-forest, who
will furnish you with good store of the like Presages: Hist. Prod.
it not being my Purpose to give you a Catalogue of them, but only to examine
their Cause.

We say then, that Birds may Naturally foreshew sad Accidents approaching; if
we except all such, as depend upon the Will of Man; as, to give Battle, or,
Not to give Battle: for, in this case, all Presages are Vain. And if by Chance
the forementioned Battles were observed to be fought, after those of the Birds;
yet the Birds cannot be thought to have fore-shewed them: since it is by mere
Accident, that the Birds fought in the Air, either before, or at the same
time, that men fought upon the Earth: or else, perhaps, God may sometimes make
use of these Extraordinary Signs, to prepare us, (as we have said before,)
against the Evils that we are to encounter with.

To keep our selves therefore within the Compass of Natural Causes; we
affirm, that we may foresee Fair weather, Rain, Thunder, Pestilence, the
Overwhelming of Cities, and Hills, and also the Natural Death of Men, by the
Natural Disposition of Birds; and that, three manner of Ways. The First is,
by their Flight: the Second, by their Singing; or Crying: and the Third, by
their Leaving, and Forsaking a Place, The Later of these does manifestly
foretell the Falling of Mountains, and of Cities, and Houses; the Pestilence,
and Famine approaching: And the Two Other fore-shew the Change of Weather, and
the Natural Death of Men. And here I cannot but wonder, that among all those
Historians, that have written of the Presages of Birds; there is scarcely any
of them that have endeavored to give the Natural Causes of them. They will
tell you perhaps, that against Rain, some certain Birds will fly close to the
side of Rivers; but they do not tell, what should be the Cause of their Flying
thither, rather then to any other place. But, seeing that all these Actions are
not done, without some Reason, or other; we shall here endeavor, in a few
words, to discover what it may be.

It is certain then, that Birds which keep always in the Air, have a more
perfect Sense, and Apprehension of the present Temper of It, then We can have:
and this is the reason, why against all Changes of the Air, and of the Weather,
they are wont to give us some Sign of it: as, for example, to Sing, and Chirp
very pleasantly, when the Air is Clear, and Calm; and on the other side, to
change their Note, when it begins to be troubled and overcast; and to fly to
Rivers sides, when it is like to Rain; especilly those that delight in eating
of Worms; which abounding most about River's banks, by reason of the
Corruption, and Humidity, always come abroad out of the Earth, against Wet
weather. And this is the Reason, why Crows fly to Rivers sides, when it is
like to Rain. Secondly, if the Air begin to be infected with any Contagion;
they, finding themselves annoyed thereby, presently get them gone, and quit the
Country; although it be so Fat, and plentiful a one, as that it affords them
more store of Food, then any other place can. Thirdly, they use to fly away,
and forsake a City, or Hill, which is near falling to Ruin, and to be
Overwhelmed; by reason that the Hill, or City, not falling to the ground
suddenly, as it seems to Us to do; but, by little and little; there are caused
by this means certain Rifts, and Openings in the Earth, out of which ascends
so Contagious an Air, as that the Birds, (which are far quicker Sented then We
are,) perceiving it, presently leave the place, and fly away. Thus did those
Birds, which we have formerly mentioned, out of Rab. Elcha, fly all of them
away, even as much as the very Poultry, when the City, wherein they were, was
now ready to be overwhelmed by the Ruin of Two Mountains. We have also said
before, that in a certain Village, in Suitzerland, called PLOURS, the very Bees
did the like. The Instance of a Man near death, does also confirm this Truth:
for, when he is at his last Gasp, the Pores being opened, by a Certain Violent
Laboring of Nature, send forth so Corrupt an Air, or Sweat; that the very
Fleas, not enduring it, leave the place. The same is also reported of Rats, and
Mice; who will be sure to forsake a house, that is ready to fall. And certainly
no man can doubt, but that the Air which is pent up in the Close holes, either
of a Mountain, or of the Foundation of a City, or of the Walls of a House, must
needs be very Corrupt, and Putrified Air; which, when it comes to be exhaled,
must necessarily be very dangerous, De Variet. l. 3. c. 3
to all those that shall take it in. And in this sense we are to understand
Cardan, when he says; that a City is near its Ruin, when the Ravens are
observed to croak, more then usually: forasmuch as, these Birds having a Sent
of the Putrid Air, that issues out of the Earth, think it to be Carrion; after
which they are so greedy, says Aelian, as that getting to the tops of Trees,
or else flying about in the Air, they turn themselves about toward every blast
of Wind, that so having a Sent of any, they may go, and feast themselves upon
it. And for the same reason, if they chance to fly over a house, where any are
Sick, and that they alight upon it, and cry more then they use to do; they
have some Sense, by reason of the Air that comes out of the Sick persons
Chamber, of his approaching Death. The Augury therefore, or Divination by
Birds, used by the Ancients, was not altogether so Ridiculous a thing, and fit
to be accounted only as a Piece of Superstitious Foolery; Disquis. Mag. l. 4.
c. 2. q. 7. Sec. 2.
as Delrio would make it to be. And here I cannot choose but laugh at those
men, that will needs have Apollonius Tyaneus to be a Sorcerer, and a Magician;
because he was able to imerpret the Language of Birds: as if we might not see
the Experience of this every day, and perceive, that a Hen uses always one
Certain Tone, when She calls her Young ones about her; and a quite different
one, when she has laid an Egg; and makes a Third Kind of Noise, Unlike either
of the Former, when she is any way frighted. So that, when I hear a Hen make a
Noise, I may say, that either she has found some Corn, and now she calls for
her Young ones; or else, that now she has laid an Egg; or else, that she is
frighted. And what should hinder, but that by long Experience, a man might be
able to do the like, by all other Birds? As for the other Presages, that may be
taken from them, and which are more Common; Lib. 1. de Divin. Lib. 1. Georg. De
Temp. mut. Repert. de mut. ^eri^. Prognost. perpet. De ventis. Deprogn. temp.
Ephemerid. Prognost. temp. Ephemerid. aer. perp.
I must refer the Reader to Cicero, Virgil, Alchindus, Firminus, Hieronymus
Tortus, Federicus Bonaventura, Augustinus Niphus, Alliacensis, Minerva, Gul.
Gratarolus, and Antonius Mizaldus.

CHAP. XIII.
That the Stars, according to the Opinion of the Hebrew Writers, are ranged
in the Heavens, in the form of Letters: and that it is Possible to read
there, whatsoever of Importance is to happen, throughout the Universe.
THE CONTENTS.
1. THe Celestial Configurations, devised by the Greeks, permitted by the
Church, though Dangerous. This New Doctrine, of the Reading of the Stars, no
whit repugnant to the Christian Faith.

2. This Reading, proved out of the Scripture. Diverse passages of Scripture,
tending to this purpose, interpreted.

3. The Opinions of the Ancient Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, in this
Particular.

4. The reason, why so few Authors, of these Later times, have meddled herein.
What our Modern Writers, as Reuchlin, Picus Mirandula, Agrippa, Kunrath,
Banelli, and Flud, have delivered of this Subject.

5. Postell's Intention of bringing it into Europe.

6. The Stars ranged, not in the form of Arabicke, nor Samaritane, but of
Hebrew Characters. The Superstition of the Arabians, in reading some kind of
words. Their Letters, borrowed from the Hebrews.

7. The Hieroglyphicall Living Creatures of the Egyptians, placed in the
Heavens, are not to serve for Letters. The Constellations Imperfect.

8. What things are to observed, that one may be able to read the Heavens.
What the reason is, that New Stars often appear; according to the Rabbis.

9. A Continued Enumeration of the several Means that must be used, for the
rendering a Man Capable of this Reading. The Star in the Tail of Ursa Major,
the fore-shewer of the Change of Empires; and how.

10. On which side we are to begin this Reading of the Heavens, and how we must
Interpret the words we find there.

11. Of those Celestial Letters, that have foreshown all the Great Mutations
in States. The Fall of two Potent Kingdoms in the East, read in the Heavens by
R. Chomer.

12. The Authors Judgment, concerning this Reading of the Heavens.

THose, who have diligently examined the Choycest parts of the Learning of the
Ancients, have observed, that there is nothing that is more Absurd, in
Appearance, then the Figures of the Celestial Constellations. For, what a
Confused thing is it, (say They) that, in those places, which are destined to
be the place of abode for the Blessed Spirits only, there should be lodged such
numbers of Beasts; and, some of them so dreadful, as that we cannot think of
them, but with Horror? If they had placed only Men there, and had allotted a
Castor, and a Pollux, Dominion there; this might have been interpreted an Error
of Love; which suffers us not to be content, in wishing small Honors to those
we Love. This Consideration might also have satisfied those, who complained,
that the Celestial Figures were nothing else, but the Representations of the
several Scapes of Jupiter; and that the whole Face of the Heavens was filled,
with the Notes of his Incestuous Prankes: so that if any one should undertake
to excuse these Amorous Signs, he would be the less blameworthy; in that he
did it, only in Defense of the most sweet, and Powerful of all our Passions.
The Excuse of those, who imposed upon these Incorruptible Bodies, the Figures
of Brute Beasts that are most subject to Corruption, and even of Things
Inanimate also, was most just; seeing that, in so doing, they had no other
Design, but what was Religious. Thus we see Fishes there, Censers, and Ears
of Corn in a Virgins hand: And, those who are skilled in the Secrets of the
Ancient Theology, know well enough, that it was not without some Mystical
reason, that they placed one Crown in the South part of Heaven, consisting of
Thirteen Bright Stars; and another in the Northern part, containing eight stars
in it. But to place Dragons there, and Serpents, and Hydra's; Reason can never
endure. And yet, see the Strangeness of the thing! For Though the Ancienes had
thus filled the Heavens with Brute Beasts; and that, according to this their
Doctrine, one would have imagined this Celestial Paradise to have been, an
Habitation of Monsters, and a Dreadful Wilderness, rather then the Seat of the
Blessed, and a Place abounding with all manner of Pleasures; yet
notwithstanding neither has the Church ever reproved it, nor any of the
Ancient Fathers disavowed it. Now the Subject we treat of, is much less
Scandalous; and, by Consequence, more Tolerable. For, what danger can there be,
in affirming; that the diverse Figures of the Stars represent, and make up
the different Characters of the Hebrew Alphabet? And, that as These Letters
have some Signification, when they are Single, as well as when they are joined
with others: in like manner the Stars, either alone, or joined with other
Stars, do note unto us some Mysteries? Yea rather, this Doctrine of ours is so
far from being such, as men should beware of, and hold it Suspected; as that,
on the Contrary, it teaches the Manifold Wonders of God; and proves, that all
these Stars have not their Order bestowed on them in vain; and that their
Motions, and different Aspects are not utterly useless, and without any
Design. Insomuch that, in my Opinion, it would be no less then Blasphemy in
any man, to affirm the Contrary; or to say, that they are placed there, only
for Ornament, and to beautify the Heavens, and to give Light; and for no other
cause at all. But, what Madness is it to confine these Wonderful Lights to One
only Operation; seeing that, besides that Experience teaches us, that the
Moon is the Governesse of all Humors; the Sun, the Principle of Life; Saturn,
a Malignant Star; Jupiter, a Benign; the Sign of Taurus, cold and dry; that of
Gemini, Hot and moist; Aries, Hot and dry; and so of the rest: we do also see
daily, that one and the same Simple here below, serves to diverse and sundry
Operations: and therefore, if the Properties of Herbs, are not restrained to
the narrow limits of One Sole Effect; why should we think so unworthily of the
Stars, as not to believe the same of them? We conclude therefore, that beside
those Wonderful Qualities, which we acknowledge to be in them; they may also
represent, by their Diversity of Aspects, certain Figures, or Characters, by
which we may have some Apprehension of the Greatest Changes, that happen here
below. And this Truth we will now endeavor to prove, out of the Holy
Scriptures.

2. If then we can any where find, in these Holy Scriptures, that the Heavens
have been called by the Holy Ghost, A BOOK; then doubtless we may conclude,
that there are, in this Book, Letters, and Characters, which may be Understood
by some or other. Now, that it is called a BOOK, appears out of the Prophet
Isaiah, who speaking of the Last Day, wherein all things shall Cease, Isa. 34.4
(...)
he says, Complicabuntur, sicut Liber, Coeli; where the (...) Caph, in Hebrew,
which the Latin translateth, Sicut, signifies, in the Original, Quia. So
that, as Isaiah has said, that the Heavens shall be rolled together; so has
he, at the same time, given the Reason of it also; Because they are a Book. If
it be Objected, that (...) may signify, Sicut as well; I answer, that those,
that are but meanly versed in the Holy Scriptures, know well, that this Latin
word, is not always a Note of Similitude, Facti sumus Sicut Consolati: (was
the song of the People, returning out of Captivity:) as Men that are Comforted;
shall we conclude hence, that they were not Really so? No: But this word Sicut,
AS, is Redundant in this place, and might as well have been away. So likewise
in this passage; Transivimus Sicut per Ignem: and in many more the like.
Therefore Complicabuntur Coeli, Quia LIBER sunt. But if it be still Objected,
that for as much as (...) Caph, signifies sometimes sicut, in the Original;
there is no more reason, why it should be rendered Quia, then Sicut: and
Consequently it will still hold true; that the Heavens are not a Book, but are
only as a Book. To this it may be answered, that the Holy Scripture does
elsewhere fully decide this Controversy; seeing that, speaking of the
Heavens, it makes mention of Lines, and Letters, which are words, that are most
properly, and Essentially spoken of a Book; and makes no use of the word
Sicut, As, at all: which is an Infallible Argument, that these words, in the
passage before cited, Complicabuntur, SICUT Liber, Caeli, are not expressions
of Similitude. Now that the Scripture, speaking of the Heavens, names expressly
the word LETTER, will appear out of the very First Verse of the Bible; where
the Hebrew Text runs thus. (...) Bereshith bara Elohim ET haschamaim: that is
to say: In the Beginning God created the LETTER, or CHARACTER of the Heavens.
For, this is the meaning of the Hebrew word (...), ET; or (...) Aot, which
signifies a LETTER. And as for the word, LINE, we find it much more plainly
set down in the 19. Psalm, Verse. 4. In Omnem terram exivit (...) Kavam, LINEA
little.

I shall not here enter into any tedious Dispute, Whether it be to be read
(...) Kolam, Sonus eorum, rather then (...) Kavam, Linea eorum: and so
consequently, whether the Passage cited by St. Paul, out of the Interpretation
of the Seventy, be corrupted: or else, the Hebrew Text. In my Advis sur les
langues Orientales, I show, with Titelmanns, Bredembachius, Malvenda, Mercerus,
and Genebrard, that the Places are not at all Corrupted, neither in the one,
nor in the other: but that the Septuagint, and St. Paul had regard to the Sense
of the Words, rather then to the Letter; saying, Sonus eorum, to make it suite
more aptly with the following Words: Et in fines Orbis terrae verba eorum:
because that, the Sound, the Voice, and the Words, do very handsomely accord,
and suite together. We may add also, that they made use of a Sublime, and
Allegorical sense of these words, applying them to the Preaching of the
Apostles. And thus St. Paul, and the Septuagint, being fully reconciled to the
Hebrew Text; we may the more boldly stick to the Letter, and read (...) Kavam,
Linea eorum; understanding it spoken of the Stars, which are ranged in the
Heavens, after the manner of Letters in a Book, or upon a Sheet of Parchment.
For which reason also, God is said, in the Holy Scriptures, to have stretched
out the Heavens, as a Skin: calling this Extension, (...) Rachia; from whence
perhaps the Greeks might take their word (...), which signifies a Skin, or
Hide; it being most proper to a Skin, to be Extended, or Stretched forth. Now
upon this Extension, as upon a Skin, has God disposed, and ranged the
Stars, in the manner of Characters; whereby, as by a Sacred Book, the
wonderful Works of God are set forth, to all those that know how to read
them. Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei; says the Psalmist. And here peradventure
some may say, that the Wonderful Works of God are set forth by the Heavens,
in their Prodigious Extent, Harmony, Brightness, Order, and admirable Motion;
and not by way of any Writing. But R. Moses, a very learned Jew, assures us,
that the Word (...) Saphar, to Declare, or Set forth, is never attributed to
Things Inanimate: so that from hence He concludes, that the Heavens are not
without some Soul; which is no other, then that of those Blessed
Intelligences, who have the Conduct of the Stars, and dispose them into such
Letters as God has ordained; declaring unto us Men, by means of This Writing,
what Events we are to expect. And for this cause, this same Writing is called
by all the Ancients, (...) Chetab hamelachim, that is to say, The Writing of
the Angels. And that this passage, Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, is clearly meant
of this Celestial Writing, appears by the words immediately following; In
omnem terram exivit Linea eorum. I know very well, that according to St. Paul,
and the Septuagint, a man may understand, by the Heavens, the Apostles; or, as
some others will have it, the Prophets. But, if pursuing the Allegory, a man
should take occasion to deny the Literal Sense; this would be no small Crime,
in in the Judgment of the Fathers. Scripturae Verba, says the Whole School,
proprie accipienda sunt, quando nihil inde Absurdi fequitur. So that if we
stick to the Letter of the Text, not only this Passage alleged, but many
others also, which I omit, that I may come to the Maine Matter in hand, do
very much confirm this Writing.

3. Now, as the Prophets have done before, so have all the Learned among the
Ancients also, after their Example, called the Heavens, SACRED BOOKS: as,
among the Jews, R. Simeon Ben-Jochay, in the Zohar, on the Section Temourah;
which is the 25. Chapter of Exodus, Cifr. 305. where he speaks very largely of
this Celestial Writing, Lib. Moreh. Seps. Kab. Beres. The^il. Maguid Misnah.
In Misn. Milchamot Adonai. Galg. Hass. in Beres.
though very Obscurely. R. Abraham also, in his Jetsira, or Book of the
Creation, delivers many Mysteries of it; and after them, R. Moses Aegyptius,
Moses Ben-Nachman; Abraham, the Son of Dior, his Contemporary; Aben-Esra,
David Chimchi, Jom Tof Ben-Abraham, Joseph the Son of Meir, Levi Ben-Gerson,
Chomer, Abarbanel, and many others; which I shall here omit, that I may come to
the Greeks, and Latins, who will peradventure be better received.

The Learned Origin, interpreting, after his manner, that is to say, Subtly,
and Quaintly, this Passage in Genesis, Et erunt in Signa; Praep. Evang. lib.
6.9.
affirms, (as he is reported by Eusebius,) that the Stars were placed in
this Order in the Heavens, for no other end, but to show, by their diverse
Aspects, Conjunctions, and Figures, what ever is to happen, while the World
indures, as well in General, as in Particular: yet not so, as if they were the
Cause of all these things; never any such thing came into the Thought, much
less into the Writings, of this Learned man. For, as the Prophecies, that are
written in Books, are not the Cause of those Events, which they foretell shall
happen; but only, the Sign: in like manner, says he, may the Heavens very
justly be called a Book, wherein God has written, all that is, has been, and
hereafter shall be. And, for confirmation of this, he cites a passage out of a
Book, the Title whereof is, Narratio Joseph, a Book in his time highly
esteemed by all men: wherein the Patriarch Jacob, giving his Blessing to all
his Children, tells them, that he had read in the Tables of Heaven, all that
ever was to befall Them, and their Posterity: Legi, says He, in tabulis Caeli,
quaecunque contingent Vobis, et filijs vestris. Whence the same Origin
concludes, as well in his Tract on this Question, Vtrum stellae aliquid agant?
as in his Book, De Fato, Cap. 6. that some Mysteries may assuredly be read in
the Heavens; by reason, that the Stars are disposed, and ordered there, in
the form of Characters. The Conclusion of this Learned Father is so much the
stronger, in that, where the Vulgar Translation reads, Sintin Signa, the
Original Hebrew is, (...) vehaio^ leototh; that is to say, word for word, Et
sint in Literas. Lib. 9. de Fato, cap. 35.
This Doctrine is of so great Importance, as that Julius Sirenus has
undertaken the Defense of it; and maintains, that it is a most True, and Safe
Opinion; and such as has been Entertained by most Religious Men. Neque in
illis corporibus Coelestibus (says St. Augustine) hic latere posse
cogitationes credendum est, Lib. 2. contra Manich. c. 2.
quemadmodum in his corporibus latent; sed, sicut nonnulli motus animorum
apparent in vultu, et maxim in oculis; sic in illa perspicuitate ac
simplicitate coelestium corporum, omnes omnino motus animi latere non arbitror.
In Genesis l. 2. de Astron. c. 4.
I am not Ignorant, that Pererius endeavors to find out another Sense, in
these words of St. Augustine: but it is an easy matter to say, what one
pleases, in interpreting the words of a man that is Dead. Now this Celestial
Reading may the more easily be believed to have been the Real Meaning of This
Learned Father, seeing that many others of the Fathers have strongly confirmed
it: as, St. Ambrose, and Prosper; who call the Heavens, Ep. 8. ad. Demetr. De
vera Rel. 3. and in Ps. 41. De Mirab. De Fid. Orthod. lib. 3. c. 1.
by the Epithets of PAGES; and, WONDER FULL INSTRUCTIONS: Albertus Magnus
styles them, an UNIVERSAL BOOK. And John Damascene goes yet farther, and says
that they are CLEAR MIRROURS; intimating, that we may see, distinctly There,
even as far as to the most Secret, and Weightiest Motions of our Soul: which
gave occasion to St. Augustine to utter those words, which we have before
cited. All the Platonists in a manner, were likewise of the same Persuasion:
and this is the reason that Porphyrie assures us, that when he had resolved to
have killed himself, Plotinus, having read his Intention in the Stars
hindered him from doing it. Orpheus also had knowledge of these Secrets, as
appears by these Verses of his:

(...)
(...)
Certus tuus Ordo,
Immutabilibus mandatis, currit in Astris.
4. As for our Modern Writers, it would even amaze a man to consider, that
among such infinite numbers of Books, wherewith our Libraries are stuffed,
there is hardly Five, or Six to be found, that have taken any Notice at all, of
this Curious Piece of Antiquity, concerning this Celestial Writing. I know
very well, that Ignorance will be presently ready with this Answer; that the
Vanity of the Subject, is the reason of this Their Silence. But why then have
such an infinite number of other Fooleries been taken into Consideration, and
thought a fit Subject for their Learned Pens, which are a thousand times more
Ridiculous in Appearance, then This is? whereas, on the Contrary, there is no
Astrologer, to whom this Science is not Necessary; nor any Searcher into the
Choiser Pieces of Theological Antiquity, to whom in like manner it may not be
useful; if at least it be True. I am therefore apt to believe, that the true
reason is, the Neglect rather of the Oriental Languages; whereon these
Curiosities do so necessarily depend; as that, without the knowledge of them,
they cannot possibly be explained, or understood: insomuch that, we had no
notice at all of these Mysteries, till such time as they were brought into
Europe by those men, that addicted themselves to the study of the Eastern
Languages. Capnio was the First, that, De Art. Cab.
in an Age when Barbarism reigned, adventured to make some of these Choice
Discoveries. Picus Mirandula likewise, who was the Phoenix of the Age he lived
in, took some pains in searching into these Secrets; and also proposed the
Question in hand, in these terms: Utrum in Coelo sint descripta, and
significata omnia, cuilibet scienti legere? Quest. 74
Cornelius Agrippa also has delivered His opinion herein. Pierius Valerianus,
in his Hieroglyphics, Occult. Philos. Lib. 44. fol. 366. c.
has these words. Illa Extensio in modum pellis, tanquam literis, inscriptae
luminaribus, and stellis, dicitur Rakia, etc. Blaise de Vigenere; in his Book
Des Chifres, makes a long Discourse on this Particular. Banelli, an Italian,
has said more to this purpose, then all the others, upon those Words of S.
Luke: Gandete, quod nomina vestra scripta sint in Coelis. Kunrath, according to
his usual manner of Fooling, makes a Riddle of it; In Amphith.


In quo sunt pueri quotquot in Orb Viri. It seems, that these kind of Authors
write to no other end, but that they may not be understood: by this means
seeming to make war against Nature; which has given us a Tongue, and the use
of Speech, that we might be able to express our Conceptions: whereas these
men, on the contrary, Endeavor to be Obscure, and Dark. Robert Elud, in his
Apology for the Brethren of the Rosy Cross, has gone on very far with this
Celestial Writing; the Characters whereof he affirms to be made, in the same
manner that Others are. In Coelo, (says He) inserti and impressi hujusmodi
Characteres, Apeloget. Ed. Lug. Bar. An. 1617.
qui non aliter ex stellarum ordinibus conflantur, quam lineae Geometricae, and
Literae Vulgares, ex punctis; Superficies, ex lineis; and corpus, ex
superficiebus: at length concluding, that who so is able to read these
Characters, shall know not only what ever is to come, but also all the Secrets
of Philosophy. Fol. 62.
Quibus hujusmodi linguae, and Scripturae Arcanae, Characterumque abditorum
cognitio a Deo concessa est; his etiam datum erit, veras rerum naturas,
mutationes, alerationes, and proprietates siderum, omnesque alias operationes
and executiones, oculis quaasi illuminatis legere, and legendo intelligere.

5. But of all the Moderns, who have spoken of these Celestial Characters,
Postell is the only man, who seems to have had the greatest knowledge in them;
as may appear, out of the greatest part of his Books; among which, that which
he has written upon the Jethsira, gives us an Account of what himself had had
experience of. Si dixero, me in Coelo vidisse, in ipsis Linguae Sanctae
Characteribus, ab Esra primum public expositis, ea omnia quae sunt in rerum
natura constituta; ut vidi, non explicit, sed implicit; vix ^llus mihi
crediderit: tamen testis Deus, and Christus ejus, quia non mentior. Now that
which makes me believe, that this Learned Man had some ground of this his
Confident Assurance of having such Knowledge in these Curiosities, is, that
beside the Experience which possibly he might have had, he had often also
travailed into the Eastern Parts; where he had no doubt seen the Books of the
Arabians, which are all full of this kind of Secret Learning. And John Leo, in
his History of Africa, affirms, that, in Marocco, there is nothing more
Common: and the first book which he makes mention of, is a book written by
Elboni, an Arabian, the Title whereof is, ELLYMAHEMORAMITH: which book scarcely
treats of any thing else; and it teaches particularly, how to describe all
the Constellations in Arabic Letters, and to picture them Elegantly within
little Tables; such as the Arabian Hermites do always carry about them, and
have them ready for their Use, in applying them to the Rules of their Zairagia,
or Divination. And this confirms that which I shall bring hereafter, concerning
the Mahometans searching after no other Figures in the Heavens, then in their
own Characters, reading therein what ever is to happen, in a very strange, and
unusual manner. Whence the forementioned Postell, upon the same book of the
Creation, In Iethzira.
says: Decreti itaque sunt demum delineati, suisque figuris adumbrati igne
divino in aquis Coeli scilicet expresso sancti Characteres, and tanta virtute
in Coelis expressi, ut possit etiam vertias futurorum haberi: cujus scientiae
adhuc vestigium in Marocho, et multis alijs Ismaelitarum civitatibus; licet
sint apud eos admodum depravatae, and adulteratae figurae Sanctae. I have
sometimes thought, that this Author put forth this Book of his, De
Configuratione Signorum Coelestium, as a Preparative only, to make way for the
better entertaining of this Doctrine, among the Europeans. For having showed,
that all the Stars, instead of representing the Images of Living Creatures, do
no more but only make up certain Square Figures; it would have been no hard
matter afterward, to have persuaded men, that these Figures were nothing, but
Hebrew Letters, the figure whereof comes very near to that of a Square. For if
he should have gone to work otherwise, and should have endeavored to have put
these Celestial Letters upon the world, without any Preparing of men's Minds to
receive them; he would doubtless have been taken for an Impostor. And he had
been formerly sufficiently cried down; so that he needed not to have exposed
himself anew, to the Calumny of every black Tongue, by broaching new
Propositions; which he could never think would down with them, unless he had
first prepared their Palates to relish them. After the world had once been
satisfied in the Probability of this his Doctrine, he then intended to make a
Full Discovery of all these Secrets, in his Commentaries upon the Zohar:
wherein he had laid together such Variety of Curious Learning, as himself
witnesses in diverse places of his Printed Books, as that it was not without
reason that he so earnestly commended This most Excellent Piece to the World,
in his Last Will and Testament, written with his own hand. But since I have
here made mention both of Hebrew, and of Arabic Letters; it may very well be
doubted, which of the two, this Celestial Writing is expressed in; and, which
of these Languages these Letters make up. This Doubt therefore I think fit to
decide, before I go any further.

The Ismaelites, or Arabians, who have never wanted Men, that have been very
well skilled in all manner of Choice Learning, (though they have fallen
sometimes upon Ridiculous Studies also:) being moved with a vainglorious
desire of concealing this Truth; namely that Their Language depended upon the
Hebrew; have not only altered their Characters, which were before very like to
the Hebrew; but have also adulterated their Names: and, the better to cover
their knavery, have also added certain Letters: which the Hebrew Alphabet never
knew: as, their Ssim, Dsal, Thsda, or Tsa, etc. Insomuch that a certain Learned
man, that was very well skilled in their Language, says: Arabes, Postel. de
Phoen. Char.
versutissimum hominum genus, and plane Ismaeliticum, id est, adulterinum,
postquam cognoverunt, suas Literas ortum ducere ab Hebraicis; satagerunt non
tantum absolute dissimiles forma reddere, sed ordinem etiam perturbare, and
nominum bonam partem mutare studuerunt. They have had the Confidence also to
affirm, that Their Letters are the First that ever were; and, that if there be
any Mysteries to be found, either in the Signification, or Figure of
Characters; we are to look for them no where else, but in Their Language. For
which cause, interpreting their Alphabet, they deduce, from the first Letter,
which is ALIPH, this Verb Conjungere: from the second Letter, which is B A,
this word, Inire: from T A, the Third Letter, Producere: and so of the rest:
making up a Prayer out of it, which they say, no other Alphabet is able to
show. So that it is no marvel, that they are able to produce so many several
meanings of words, after this Rate of Interpretation; seeing that, as
Kirstenius says; Integra Volumina de solis Nominibus literarum Alphabeti.
Arabici conficiqueunt: sed long adhuc plura de ordine, figura alijsque
accidentibus conscribi possent. These Niceties have made the Arabians so
superstitious in the Pronunciation of their Letters, as that when they meet
with many words united together by the means of an Aliph, they will pronounce
them all in a Breath, though there should be an hundred of them, and though
they should be in danger of expiring in the Act. Those that are Curious after
satisfaction herein, may have recourse to the Arabicke Grammar, Printed at
Rome. Now, as all Superstition is attended on, by a certain Foolish Credulity;
so are these men certainly persuaded, that the Heavens being figured with
Their Letters, (and not with the Hebrew,) do fore-shew all things to come. And
this is the reason, that, besides the Division of their Letters into
Gutturalls, or, such as are pronounced in the Throat; into Vuales, as the
Latins call them, that are sounded in the furthest part of the Roof of the
Mouth; as others are by the Palate; by the Gummes; by the Lips; by the Teeth,
and the Tongue together: and also into some, that are pronounced with a kind of
Sibilation; others, with a certain Stammering; and some, with a gentle turning
of the Tongue, which They call, Dsalqijetun; and the Latins, Flexae: into
others again, that are Short, Long, Radical, or Trancall, and Servile: I say,
that besides all these Divisions, they do yet divide them again, (the better
to accommodate them to this Celestial Writing) into Schemsijun, and Kumrijum,
that is to say, into Solar, and Lunar, which are particularly known, by those
that observe the Rules of the Zairagia, it being unlawful for them to devise
them. And perhaps it is in Observation to this Doctrine, that the Mahometans
do never begin to write the first part of a word, at the end of a Line, and
the rest of it at the beginning of the next Line; as the Greeks, and Latins
use to do: but if the space be not sufficient to hold the whole word, they
draw a stroke from the last Letter of the Last word, to the end of the Line.
Now we affirm, that though these Letters are very much altered, and corrupted;
yet may it notwithstanding very easily be discovered, by the Figure of a great
number of them, that they have been taken from the Hebrew: and even Children
may be able to judge of the Truth hereof, by comparing but the Arabicke Hha,
with the Hebrew He; the Cha, with the Cheth; the Ra, with the Resch; the Zain,
with the Zain; the Sin, with the Schin; the Tha, with the Teth; the Ain, with
the Aghin; the Pha, with the Pe; the Caph, with the Caph; the Lam, with the
Lamed; the Vau, with the Vau, etc. So that consequently, if we are to search
after any Mysteries in these Letters, it ought to be, not in a corrupt Copy,
but rather in the Original. The same is to be said of the Samaritane
Characters also, which are corrupted from the Hebrew: and this is so certain a
Truth, as that it is a Point of Infinite Perverseness to offer to doubt of it;
as I have proved elsewhere against Scaliger.

7. The Reasons brought by the Ethiopians, or Egyptians, in the behalf of Their
Letters, is not so easily answered, as those of the Arabians, and Samaritans:
for as much as, their Letters being only Hieroglyphics, expressing the figure
of an Ox, of a Horse, of a Lion, of a Bear, of an Eagle, and in a manner of
all other Living Creatures; they do (say They) represent in the Heavens,
whatsoever is to come to pass in this world. And therefore, if there be any
thing to be read there above, by means of the Stars; we must read it in these
Hieroglyphics, and in this Language, and not in any other; since that in
Ancient times in stead of Letters, they made use of the figures of Living
Creatures. To this it is answered, as we have formerly said, that these Living
Creatures have been represented in the Heavens, only by reason of a certain
Correspondency, that the Stars of which these Constellations consist, are
observed to have, with these Living Creatures upon the Earth: and what other
Reasons of it soever are given, they are Vain, and Foolish. Such as are those,
alleged by the aforenamed Lazaro Banelli; who accommodates the Properties of
these Celestial Animalls, to several Kingdoms, over which they rule: as, for
Example, the Constellation of Aries rules over France, Germany, Syria,
Palestina minor, Suevia, and the Upper Silesia. That of Taurus governs Persia,
the Isles of the Archipelago, Cyprus, the Maritime parts of Asia Minor, Polonia
major, Russia alba, Switzerland, the Country of the Rhetres, Franconia,
Ireland, Lorraine, and part of Swethland. But, to leave this Italian to please
himself with these Trifles, and likewise Albertus de Marchesijs de Cottignola,
Caeliloq. Mor.
a Franciscan Friar, who moralizeth this Astrology after a way of his own; we
affirm, that all these Celestial Living Creatures signify no more then what
we have said before; and do therefore by the same reason conclude, according
to the judgment of the Rabbis, that we must not search after any Mysteries,
nor any other Characters, made up by the diverse disposition of the Stars, but
only in the Hebrew; and consequently, no Signification in any other Language,
but in the Holy Language: it being most proper, that That Language, which was
the First in the whole World, and which was spoken by God himself, should give
us notice Above, what things are hereafter to come to pass; seeing it has
informed us here Below, namely in the Holy Scriptures, of all Things that are
past. And this Conclusion is a most true one, say the same Rabbis, for as much
as in a clear, bright Night, a man may see in the Heavens all the Hebrew
Characters perfectly figured: which one cannot do of those several Living
Creatures, that are placed there; seeing that the Imagination cannot be any
whit satisfied, when, for example, in the Stars that make up the Constellation
of Aries, there are Five Other to be seen close about it, which by reason that
they are not comprised within the Figure of this Beast, do disturb the Fancy,
and hinder it from making up the Figure it desires. The same also may be said
of Taurus: for there are Eleven Stars to be seen there, which are
Essentially of this Constellation; and yet are not brought in, in the Picture
of it. So likewise in the Constellation of Gemini there are Eleven Stars
belonging to it, which are distinguished from those Nineteen, that represent
the Figure of this Sign: as Cancer also has Four bright Stars, which lie
Loose from those Nine, which make up the Image of this Living Creature. But as
for the Hebrew Letters, there is nothing to hinder us, from finding them
distinctly described: and if any one do chance to find either Arabicke, or
Samaritane Letters there; this is still but to return back to the Original,
from whence they were taken.

8. First then we are to take notice, that the Stars which make up these
Letters, are not disposed into the order they appear in, at all adventures,
nor in any confused way, as they seem to us to be: but are placed thus, with
some Design, and in a Divine Order; God having made all things in full
Perfection. Those that understand not the Play of Chesse, seeing the Pieces
stand here and there, so confusedly, will be apt to think, no doubt, that they
stand in that confused manner by mere haphazard, seeing that in some places
there are a great many; and in some, very few; and one side of the Chesse-board
is full, and the other side quite bare; and in a third place perhaps you shall
have but two, or three: In a word, this Difference in the placing of the Pieces
is so great, as that he will certainly conclude, that the whole Business is
clearly without any Design at all: notwithstanding that they are all ranked
in very exact Order; and that there is not the least Piece there, but is of
use, and does its proper Office. After the same manner is it with the Stars,
which we see in the Heavens: for, though in some places you see many together,
and in others but a few; and that the Order they stand in, looks confusedly,
and in a manner ridiculous; yet nevertheless is it most Admirable, in it
self, and proceeds from some most wonderful Design; which Those Men
perfectly understand, who by their Holy Life, are elevated above all that is
here below. Thus it is storied of S. Anthony, that he perfectly understood this
Heavenly Writing.

Secondly, that although the Stars which are in the Eighth Heaven, (if at least
there be any such thing as an Eighth Heaven,) be Fixed; yet do they not
therefore always compose the same Letters; at least, the greatest part of
them; but they have their Changes, according to the Diverse Aspects of the
Planets. Thus those Stars, that, ten years since, made up, for Example, a
Teth, shall now perhaps make a Mem, or a Lamed. Which is the reason, say the
Rabbis, that This Writing serves not, but for the showing of things to come.

In the Third place they say, that we are most especially to observe what New
Stars soever shall appear; because that These do fore-shew the greatest
Mutations: God making use of these, in making up, by means of their Aspects,
and Conjunctions, New Letters; whereby he either expresses unto us his Wrath,
or his Mercy: as having determined with himself, to chastise us, if we
continue in our sins; and to pardon us, if we repent of them. Thus, before
almost all the greatest Mutations, that have happened in the World, have some
of these New Stars been observed to appear; and they have been such Stars too,
as have been really found to be in the very Heavens. Such, as was That,
observed by Hipparchus, 125. years before the time of our Redemption; which
Star presaged the end of the Grecian Monarchy approaching. Another the like
appeared also in Claudean's time, in the year of our Savior Christ 388.
Another, in the time of Messahalah, Haly, and Alhumazar, Arabian Astrologers;
which appeared in the 15. Degree of Scorpio, and cast forth as great a Light,
as the Fourth part of the Moon could do. Another, in the time of the Emperor
Adrian; and another also under the Emperor Otho; which appeared betwixt the
two Constellations of Cepheus, and Cassiopeia. Another in the year 1264. not
far from Cassiopeia, tending toward the North: and Another likewise that
appeared afterward, on the Chair of the same Constellation, about the
beginning of December, Anno 1572. and continued for the space of six Months.
Another, that appeared Anno 1596. in the Constellation of the Whale: another,
of the Third Magnitude, observed in the neck of the Swan, Anno 1600. and
another, that was seen, two years after, in Pisces. Another, that appeared two
years after That, in the Constellation called Serpentarius, An. 1604. and was
called by the name of the said Constellation. There are some others besides, De
Nov. Astr. and Com. l. 5. a Cap. 6. ad 23.
which Licetus has collected together, out of Homer, Varro, S. Augustine,
Pliny, Albumazar, Pherecides, Athenaeus, Eustathius, Germanicus, Cyprianus,
Leovitius, Cardan, Paulus Hajazelius, Galiaeus, Thomas Fienus, Cuspinianus,
Tycho Brahe, Gul. Jansonius, who was his Scholar, Jo, Kepler, Alphetragius,
David Chytraeus, Fabricius, Hieronymus Munosius, Wenceslaus Pantaleo, Beyerus,
Pyrgius, Michael Coignetus, Cornelius Frangipanus, etc. some of which Authors
have particularly observed the truth of this Doctrine which I have here
delivered; namely that all These New Stars have been the Forerunners of the
Greatest Mutations that have happened: and that in default of These, Comets
have appeared; which, though they are easily distinguished from True Stars, and
have their place of Being in the Air only; yet have they served to represent,
by their diverse Aspects, (according to the Doctrine of the Rabbines,) Other
Letters, and to fore-shew the Disasters that have happened: it being very
necessary (say They,) to have a special regard to these New Lights; which are,
as a new Letter, which being added to a Word, alters the sense of it. As, for
Example, in this Word ACHE, if one add an L, it will be no longer ACHE, but
LAKE. Or if in the midst of this word ACHE, one insert an R, it will alter the
word, and make it ARC. So that we see, one only Letter, as an L, or an R,
utterly changes the whole Sense. In the same manner is it with the Stars;
where a New Star added, varieth both the Writing, and the Sense.

9. In the Fourth place, that we may be able perfectly to understand this
Celestial Writing, we must exactly observe the Vertical Stars: for, those
which are over a Kingdom, says Abiudan, do ordinarily show; what ever is
like to befall it. And in this Sense, it will not be any hard matter to
apprehend the meaning of Cardan, when he says, speaking of the Star in the
Tail of Ursa Major, that it has fore-shewed the Changes of all the Great
Empires: understanding this to be the Sense of this Truth, delivered by Cardan;
that, according to the Doctrine here laid down, this Star, though not Alone,
and by it self, yet joined with others, has showed these Changes; making up,
by their Conjunction, such Entire words, as did fore-shew the Fall, or Rise of
these Empires, either clearly, and plainly; or else perhaps, more secretly, and
Mystically, as we shall show hereafter. Now, as in all sorts of Writing, there
is One certain Letter, both in Nounes and Verbs, which is more Frequent then
any other; and has the Preeminence throughout all the several Conjugations,
and Declensions; in like manner in this Celestial Writing, it has been
observed, that in all the Mutations of Empires, This Star, in the Tail of the
aforesaid Constellation, has been more Eminently noted, then any other: Either
because it is more Frequent, in the Discourse of Monarchies, then any other: Or
else, that it is as the Capital Letter, in the most Significative Words; as we
see there is in all Proper Names, of almost all the Languages in the World: as
for example, in the name of Peter, the first Letter is greater, then any of the
rest that follow. And thus may we answer this Question, which some may happily
make; namely, Why, in this Celestial Writing, there are both Little, and Great
Stars also? If it be further demanded; Why, in this kind of Writing, there are,
in one and the same word, Great, and Small Letters, or Stars, mingled together?
it may be answered, that the Reason is, to make us take more Notice of those
Letters in the Word, which are the Most Significative; which is a Course, that
the Anagrammatists are very well acquainted withal. As, for Example, if in the
word Sovereignty, I would have VERITY, to be especially observed, I will write
the word Sovereignty, in this manner, Sovereignty: where the Letters of the
Word VERITY, are greater, then any of the rest. Or if in the Word,
Representative, I would have, Present, to be Chiefly taken notice of, I would
then write the Whole Word thus; rePRESENTative. We are not then to wonder, if
in the Heavens we often see two, or three Great Stars to go to the Composition
of a Word, wherein there are Small Stars also: and this is that, which we are
to have most particular regard unto, (as we have already showed, When they are
Vertical to any Place. And by this means may we be able to give a Reason of
that, which has been hitherto Unknown: as, when the Astrologers affirm, that
when Caput Algol, or Medusa's Head, was Vertical to Greece; the Stars did
fore-shew the Calamities, which afterward happened unto it, by the Tyranny of
the Mahometans; without giving us any Reason Why: no more then they do of
their Confidence, in assuring us, that the same Constellation, which will in a
short time be Vertical to Italy also, fore-shewes a strange Desolation, that
is to fall upon this Pleasant, and Fertile Country. Now all these Disasters,
though, according as they are foretold, so do they Certainly come to pass;
yet nevertheless is the Foreseeing of them grounded merely upon Experience;
neither can the Authors of these Predictions, for the Most part, give any other
Reason of them. But now, according to this Doctrine of the Celestial Writing,
we know, that these Mutations shall happen on the Earth, because we see, they
are written in the Heavens. And this is the Reason that R. Chomer affirms,
that the aforesaid Medusa's Head, or, the Stars that Compose it, did foretell
the Lamentable Desolation of Greece, because that Five of the Principal
Vertical Stars did for a good while together, make up this word, (...) Charab.
Which, in the Second Conjugation, signifies, To be Desolate: understanding
This, particularly of Greece, over which these Stars shone; because that the
number of its Letters, which are, Jod, Vau, Nun, and which being put together,
make up (...) Javan, that is to say, Greece, do yield the same number, that
Charab does: as you may here see.

228

(...)

Charab,

Destroyed, Desolate.

Sum. 12.

561

(...)

Javan.

Greece.

Sum. 12.



According to these Principles, any man may foresee, by the putting together
the Stars of the same Constellation, the Disasters that Italy is threatened
with. However it be, Junctin, an Italian Priest, and a very excellent
Astrologer, is bold to utter these words: Illud vero (says He, In Sphar. Io.
de Sacrohos. c. 1.
speaking of this Medusa's Head,) Toleto nunc, Apuliae, and Neapolitanorum
regno est verticale; moxque Italiam invadet: quibus suam quoque cladem
allaturum esse, maximopere est verendum. Now how long before hand, these
Celestial Letters do foreshew the Changes that are to happen; no one Author,
that I know of, has precisely determined: they only say, that, Before they are
Vertical, they do fore-shew this Change, and whatsoever is to happen: God
being willing thus to prepare us for the Evils which are to befall us. And
after that they are precisely Vertical, if our Repentance has yet found any
place in his Mercies; He then causes some New Star to appear, and, by its
Intervening, to show (as we have formerly said) a quite Contrary Thing, to what
was before signified.

10. In the Fifth Place, the forenamed Authors affirm, that to be able
perfectly to understand this Celestial Writing, we must know how to
distinguish exactly, which Stars are Oriental, and which Occidentall,
Meridionall, and Septentrionall: forasmuch as these Quarters of the Heaven are
very Essential in this Reading. For, if any one desire to know, say They, the
Good Fortune, and Prosperity of a Kingdom, or of any Other thing: he must
then read those Letters which are Vertical to him, (or which want not much of
being so,) from the West, toward the East. And if he would be informed of the
Evil Accidents, and Misfortunes that shall befall a place; he must then begin
to read, from the North, toward the West. Now, why the Good Fortunes of a
Place should be read, from the West, toward the East, rather then from the
East, toward the South: and why the Ill Fortune is likewise to be read, from
the North, toward the West; I have not found any Reason given, by any Author.
However, I shall adventure to give this Conjecture at it: namely; that seeing
that Nature, being at Liberty, and not hindered by any thing, always tends
to the Best: and that, as Aristotle says, It would always bring forth Males,
as being more Perfect Creatures then Females are, if it were not hindered by
some Repugnant Cause: it is most proper, that Good Things, and all Perfections,
should be read from the West toward the East, seeing that This is the Free, and
Natural Motion of the Stars; the other, from the East to the West, being a
Contrary, and Forced Motion. As for Ill Fortune, and Disasters, they might
according to this Principle, have been read from the East toward the West, had
not the Oracle which cannot lie, uttered this Wonderful Truth: A Septentrione
pandetur malum: Ier. 1.14.
All Evil comes from the North. But, why from the North, rather then from
any other part of the World? The Reason of this is not so easily given: yet I
conceive, it would stand with sound Philosophy, to answer; that, by reason of
the Darkness, and Gloominesse of the Air of those Parts; caused by the great
distance of the Sun; and also, by reason of the Evil Spirits, which are the
Authors of so much Evil, and which inhabit Dark Places; a man may very
Reasonably say, that all Misfortunes come from the North; as being a Place,
which is full of these Evil Spirits, or Demons; as Historians testify.

And from hence, it will be an easy matter to apprehend the Reason, why the
Ancients figured in these Northern Parts of the Heaven, a Serpent, or Dragon,
close by the Two Bears: Uid Theodor. Graminaij Mist. Aquil.
seeing that these Creatures are the True Hieroglyphickes of Tyranny, Violence,
and all manner of Oppression. And certainly, who ever shall but run over the
Annals, will find, that all the Great Desolations that have ever happened,
have come from the Notherne Parts. The Assyrians, or Chaldeans, set on by
Nabuchadonosor, and Salmanasar, have sufficiently manifested the Truth of this,
in burning to the ground a City, and a Temple, that was both the most
Sumptuous, and the most Holy in the world; and in the Utter Ruin of a People,
whom God himself had taken into his own Special Protection, and whose Father
he particularly called Himself. Sub Honorio, Martiano and Justiniano, an.
412.456. and 551.
And has not Rome, like a Second Jerusalem, in like manner often felt the
Fury, of this Accursed Generation of the North; when, by the Cruelty of
Alaricus, Gensericus, Totilas, and the rest of the Gothic, Hunne, Vandale, and
Alane Princes, It saw its Altars overturned, Its Stately Palaces burnt to
Ashes, and Its Inhabitants consumed by Fire, and Sword! Thus has not This
Nation spared at all, the Two Spouses of the Living God; and does still torment
the Later of these, by the Tyranny of the Turks, which also came out of the
North. Most Properly therefore do we, in this Celestial Writing, begin to
read Disasters, and Misfortunes, from the Northern Part; seeing that A
septentrione pandetur omne malum. Or Else we may say, that we begin to read
on this side, because that the Verb (...) Tipatach, which, in this Prophecy,
is translated, Pandetur, signifies also in the Original, Depingetur: so that
we may render this Prophecy in these words: All Evils shall be described, (or,
written) from the Northward. And if written, then certainly to be read from
This Side.

Now this Celestial Writing does not always represent in Words at length,
what things are to happen; but sometimes in a more compendious manner, and by
way of Abbreviation: in like manner as was that Vision, which appeared to
Belshazzar, foreshewing the Destruction of his Kingdom, According to the
Hebrew, MEAN, THECCHEL, PARSIM.
and which was interpreted by Daniel: MANE, THECEL, PHARES. And as none but
Daniel, who was a Just Man in the Sight of God, could interpret this Vision: in
like manner, say the Jews, it appertains only to Good Men, and not to all
manner of Persons whatever, to interpret those things, that are found Written
in the Heavens; which are, for the most part, very Obscure, and Difficult; and
which require, for the Perfect Interpretation of them, that a man should be
skillful in the GEMATRIE, NOTARICON, and the TEMURAH; which are the Three Parts
of the Cabale. The First of which, (the name whereof (...) Gematria, Genesis 49.10.
is corrupted from the Greek (...), or else this Later from the other;)
considers of the Numbers that are contained in the Letters; and, by comparing
them with others the like, gives an Explication of what was before Obscure. As,
for Example, where it is said in Genesis, concerning the Coming of the
Messiah, (...) Java Schilo, Shiloh shall come; these Hebrew Letters make up the
number 358. which is the Number also of the Letters of the Messiah (...)
Maschich: so that the Prophet saying, Donec venerit Schiloh; it is as much, as
if he had said; Donec venerit Messiah. The Second Part is of use, when the
several Letters of a Word do represent, each of them, a whole Word: as, in
this Devise of the Romans; S. P. Q. R. Senatus Populusque Romanus: and in this
Hebrew Name, (...) Adam; the First Letter whereof signifies (...) Epher, Dust;
the Second, (...) Dam, Blood; and the Third, (...) Marah, Bitterness:
Intimating, that Man is nothing but Bitterness, and Sorrow; but Corrupt Blood,
and Sin; and, lastly, but Dust, and Ashes. The Third and Last Part, (the name
whereof, Notaricon, is taken likewise from the Latin, Notarius; or else this
Latin word, from the Hebrew (...) Natar, which signifies, to Transfer, or
Transpose; a word very proper to the Art of Anagrammatisme;) is, when either
Two, or more words are united together; or are read backwards, or otherwise,
after the manner of Anagrammes; or else, are divided into several other words,
by the Transposition of the Letters: As, for example, where God says to in
Children of Israel; (...) Jelec Malachi lepanecha, My Angel shall go before
you: where, it is demanded, what Angel this was? and it is answered, that it
was Michael: because that the Letters of the word (...) Malachi, Transposed,
make up that Name. You may see many Examples of this Nature in my Advis sur les
Langues, etc. and in my Apology for the Cabale, the Title of which Treatise,
is, Abdita Divinae Cabalae Mysteria, contra Sophistarum Logomachiam, defensa.

11. we will now discover, according to these Rules laid down, some certain
Secrets of this Celestial Writing, which are delivered by R. Kapol, Chomer,
and Abiudan; which are the Three, that have written the most, of this Subject,
of any. We have formerly showed, how the Stars of the Constellation called,
Caput Algol, being Vertical to Greece, did foreshew the Desolation of it. The
like is to be observed in the rest of the Stars, when they are Vertical to any
other Kingdom, though they are perhaps ordered, and to be understood otherwise.

Thus, a little before the Temple of Jerusalem was burnt, and utterly consumed
by Nabuzaradan, it was observed, that Eleven of the Stars, that were the most
Vertical to it, composed, for a pretty while together, these five Letters,
(...) which being joined together, made up this Word, (reading it from the
North toward the West,) Hikschich; which signifies, to Reject, and Forsake,
without any Mercy: and the Number of Three of them added together, amounts
to 423. which is the Space of Time, that this Stately piece of Building had
stood. In like manner, a little before the Jews saw their Scepter cast down
to the ground, and their Liberty carried Captive into Babylon, Five Stars were,
for a long time together, observed to compose these Three Mystical Letters,
(...) Nataq, a word which signifies, to Break, Cast Down, and to Drive out.
And the Number of these Letters, which is 505. was the Exact Number of years
that the Jewish Kingdom had lasted, from Saul, to the Deplorable King
Zedechias. Neither are the Jews the only People, who have been advertised, by
this Celestial Writing, of the Miseries that were to befall them: but all the
other Nations of the World might have read in the Heavens in like manner, the
Evils that have happened unto them; as the forenamed Authors affirm.

Thus the Persians, or Assyrians, who were the Ruin of the Monarchy of the
Jews, saw the Period of their own Empire, after that Four of their Vertical
Stars had composed these Three Letters, (...) Rob, which make up the Number of
208. which was the time of the Duration of this Monarchy, which was founded by
Cyrus.

The End of the Grecian Empire was likewise fore-shewed, by Four Stars, which
made up the Verb (...) Parad; which signifies, to Divide: and that in This
Wonderful Manner, as that the very same Letters did produce also the Number of
years that this Monarchy lasted, which took beginning, at the time that
Alexander the Great subdued the last Darius.

That of the Athenians lasted but 490. years; which is the Number of these
Three Letters, which Four Stars, that were Vertical to this Place, did
compose; (...) Tsarar, which signifies, Angustijs affici. Besides these Four
Stars, says Ch^mer, there were Four other observed also, which made up two
(...) Caphs; I know not Why though, says He; unless it be, that these Letters
are Fatal, and of Sad Omen. I shall add my Conjecture here, that possibly
they might point out these Two Names, Cecrops, and Codrus; which are the names
of those Two Kings, under whom this Powerful Monarchy had its Rise, and Fall.

The Roman Consulate could not maintain Its Power beyond the Term of 500.
years: because that these Bounds were determinately prefixed to it, in this
Celestial Book, by Eight Vertical Stars, which composed this Word, (...)
Raasch, which bare this Sense, and Number: Cacumen, 501.

The Monarchy of Julius Coesar, which was built upon the Ruin of the
Consulate; as This also was, upon the Ejection of the Kings, was very near of
the same Continuance; and the End of it was in like manner prefixed by Six
Sars, which made up these Three Letters, (...) Scavar, which signifies, To
Break; the Number whereof is 502.

But, that we may produce something, concerning Things Yet to Come, R. Chomer
assures us, that it is now a good while since, that this Celestial Writing
has pointed out the Declining of Two great Empires of the East. The First is,
that of the Turks; over which there are observed seven Vertical Stars, which
being read from the West to the East, (for, it would be a great Blessing, to
see the Ruin of this Empire,) make up this word, (...) Caah; which signifies,
to be Battered, Feeble, Languishing, and Drawing to an End. But now, Aleph,
which in humbers, signifies, 1. stands also for 1000. as the rest of the
letters also do; as may be observed out of Hebrew Grammars.
seeing it may be doubted at what time this Empire shall be reduced to this
Extremity; the same Letters do clearly resolve this Doubt. For, the Middle
Letter, which is Aleph, being made up of Brighter, and more Sparkling Stars,
then the Others are, shows, says Chomer, that Its Number is the Greater; so
that, in This place it stands for 1000. and the First letter signifies, 20.
and the Last, 5. So that, when this Kingdom shall have accomplished the number
of 1025. years, it shall then be overthrown, and brought to Ruin. Now, if we
reckon from the year of our Lord 630. which was the year, (according to our
Vulgar Compution,) wherein the Foundation of this Empire was laid; we shall
find, that it is to last till the year of our Lord 1655. for the completing of
the aforesaid number 1025. so that, reckoning from this present year, 1650.
this Kingdom is to last but Five years longer.

The Other Eastern Kingdom, whose Declining is pointed out by the Stars,
according to K. Chomer, is that of China: but this Rabbin delivers himself in
such an Obscure manner, in discoursing of this last piece of Celestial
Writing; as that, till I understand it better, I shall forbear to set it
down. He produces also diverse Others, which do define the Particular
Durations of most of the Kingdoms of Europe: all which I may happily
communicate to the World hereafter, when I have first seen, how these
Curiosities are received.

12. Now, that I may freely deliver my own Judgment concerning this Celestial
Writing, I must take Liberty to propose some few Objections, which, I have
found, may be brought against it.

The First is, that if so be, by this Writing, all the Great Mutations in the
World may be known; it is possible then, that the End of the World may in like
manner be found out by It; as being the Greatest, and most Important of all the
rest: so that Men may, by a natural Means, attain to the knowledge of This
Great Secret: which is Contrary to the Holy Scriptures.

The Second is, that Astrologers have been able to foretell many of these
Mutations, which have afterward come to pass accordingly; and yet have never
had any knowledge of This strange Kind of Writing: It is therefore Useless,
and Imaginary.

The Third is, that the Position of the Stars is not so Essential to the
Letter, which it is brought to make up; but that the same Star may as well
make, for Example, a Resch, as a Daleth; and so of all the rest: and
Consequently, Several Men, forming several Characters of the same Stars, may
draw from them Contrary senses, the one to the other.

But to all these Objections, I answer briefly thus. To the First, I say, that
it is not Necessary, that this Celestial Writing should foreshew the end of
the World; because that God may have reserved this Secret to Himself: Or else;
Math. 24.29. Mar. 13.24. Luc. 21.25.
that It will Really foretell This hereafter; when those Other Signs, set down
by the Evangelists, shall show it also: it being all one to say, that the
Stars shall fore-shew it by some certain Writing; as to say, that the Sun,
and the Moon shall foretell it, by their being Darkened.

To the Second, I answer; that the Four Grand Causes, Card. 1. Aph.
which (according to the Opinion of Astrologers) produce the greatest
Mutations; the First whereof is, the Changing of the Apogaeum, and Perigaeum of
the Planets: the Second, the Changing of the Excentricity of the Sun, of Venus,
of Mercury, of Saturn, of Jupiter, and of Mars: the Third, the diverse Figure
of the Obliquity of the Zodiac; and the Fourth, the Conjunction, (chiefly the
Great one) of the Superior Planets: I say, that all these Four Causes may,
for the most part, be comprised within this Celestial Writing: that is to say,
that it has happened very often, that at what time this Celestial Writing did
point out some great Change, there was at the same time also a Conjunction of
the Superior Planets; or else, some one of the Three other forenamed Causes.
So that They, not understanding any thing of this Celestial Writing, imputed
those changes which they observed to come to pass, to those Four Reasons
only. But that it may clearly appear unto us, that These have not been the
True Causes of all these Changes; we need but have recourse to the
Chronologies, and Particular Annals of each several Kingdom, and compare them
with the Astrologicall Observations; and we shall find, that the greatest
part of all the Grand Mutations have happened, without any Conjunction of the
Greater Planets, or any of the other Causes before specified. So that we must
necessarily fly to some other more Certain Means, by which we may be able to
foreknow, by the Aspects, and Motions of the Stars, all these Events. Now this
Means can be no Other, as it seems, but this Celestial Writing.

To the Third Objection, which seems to have the most Weight in it, it may be
answered, that it is true indeed, that a Man may make a Resch of the same Star,
that another man perhaps will make a Daleth of: but in This, as in many other
things, we are to follow the Tradition of the Ancients, and to rest satisfied
with what They have delivered unto us. Otherwise, there will not be any
Certainty at all, in any One of the rest of the Sciences; especially in
Astrology: which requires, that those Stars which compose, for Example, the
Constellation of Aries, or the Ram, should be described rather in the Figure
of this Beast, then in that of an Ox, or a Horse; and so in all the rest. So
that who ever should represent the Figure of a Bull, among the Stars that
belong to the Ram; and the Figure of a Ram, among those of the Bull; he
would destroy the very Principles of Astrology: notwithstanding that the Stars
of Taurus would as well bear the Figure of a Ram, as of a Bull. In like
manner, he that should make a Resch of such a Star, as he should have made a
Daleth of; notwithstanding that the Star would bear it, yet would he overthrow
the Principles of this Celestial Writing.

If it be now demanded; who it is, that is to judge of the vast number of New
Letters that are made daily, by the Diverse Aspects of the Planets? I answer;
that it appertains to those Men, who are Piously, and Religiously versed in
this Heavenly Writing; and, not to all kind of Persons indifferently. But I
shall as yet suspend my own Judgment, as well in This, as in all the rest of
these Curiosities, which I have here delivered; till such time as I shall have
found either Weaker, or Stronger Reasons.

THE END.
The First Table of the Celestial Constellations, expressed by Hebrew
Characters.


THe Characters of these two Tables are something different from those, which
Bonavent ure Hepburn, a Scot, has out in Wood; and from those (...) other
also, which Duret has set down, in his History of Languages. For I have made
choice to follow those, delivered by R. Chomer, a man more skil^^^ in this
Particular, then either of the former: as being one of the most Learned amongst
the Jews, of our times. And yet, I confess, some of the ^haracters are not
right, through the Gravers fault: yet the difference is so little, as that it
cannot be of any great consequence, or importance. The two ^ables are divided
by the Equator; and the Stars are ranged here, in the same order, that they are
in the Globe: only those Stars, which are under the Aspects of any of the
Planets, cannot be supposed to make up the same Letters now, which you here
find represented, and which they made before; because that these Planets, which
by reason of their Wanderings, cannot be here set down, do daily, by their
various Motions, create New, and Different (...).



THE CELESTIAL HEBREW ALPHABET

(...)

IERSEY



Aetatis suae. 10.

From thy afflicted Veil, that Cypress Bower still Watere'd fresh by thy
Celestial shower Come forth, come forth, Bright Captive, and Declare With a
Full Orb the Innocent, and Fair.




