A NEW CATECHISM, Commanded to be set forth in this time of Reformation, being
the Principal grounds of Christian Religion, with directions for the
Exammining of all Persons, before they come to Receive the Holy Communion, or
Lords Supper.

ALSO, With a brief Direction, how to Read the Holy SCRIPTURES with profit.

Written by WILLIAM GOOD. Minister of Gods word, at Denton in Norfolk.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Bernerd Alsop, 1645.

A GODLY DIRECTION, For the Receiving of the HOLY COMMUNION.
Q. WHat is required of a man, that he may receive the Communion to his
comfort?

A. Some thing is to be done before, some thing in the receiving, some thing
after.

Q. What is to be done before?

A. *To perepare our selves rightly for the receivng of it.

Q. Wherein consists this preparation?

A. In getting sound knowledge, true Faith, Repentance, Obedience, Love, and
earnest and humble desire of it, and in exammination, and renewing of these
graces.

Q. What knowledge must we have?

A. A sanctified knowledge of God, of our selves, of Christ, of the grace of
Christ, and the means of this grace, as has been showed before. Now the
Sacraments are one means of grace, the doctrine whereof we must know
particularly.

Q. What is a Sacrament.

A. An outward sign ordained of God. Genesis 17.11. Math. 26.26. whereby Christ
and all his benifits are signified, Romans 4.11. if we truly believe, are
converted and sealed unto it: 1 Pet. 3.21. 1 Cor. 10.16. Exodus 12.3.4.5.

Q. What mean you by Christ and and all his benifits.

A. Not a corporal eating of Christ, as the Papist vainly immagin, compare
Acts 3.21. with Matt. 28.6. John 16.10. but Christ is received by a spiritual
union with him and being made liveing members of that body, whereof Christ is
the head, John 15, 2. Ephesians 5.30. Acts. 3.21.

Q. What mean you by the benifits of Christ.

A. Justification, comfort in affliction, sanctification, and all other
blessings merited by him for us, Tit 3.5.

Q. How many Sacraments be there*

A. Two, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.

Q What is Baptism?

A. A Sacrament of over ingrafting into Christ, and the society of the
faithful, and of receiving of the seal of the covenant of grace, Tit. 3.5.
Matthew. 28.17.

Q. How many parts be there in a Sacrament.

A. The sign, and the thing signified.

Q What is the outward sign in baptism.

A Water, wherewith the child is Babtized, in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the inward Grace, or thing signified.

A. The blood of Christ, whereby we are purged from sin, justified, Heb.
9.14. and the spirit of Christ, whereby we are sanctified, enabled to die to
sin, and lead a new life* These benifits are sealed by Baptism to the true
believer. Romans 6.3.4.5. 2. Cor. 3.17. Gal. 5.24.

Q. What is the Lords Supper.

A. A Sacrament that causes our continuance and grows in Christ, Matt.
26.27. 1. Cor. 10.16.

Q. What is the outward sign in the Lords supper?

A. Bread and Wine, with the actions pertaining to them, according to Christ's
constitution, as breaking by any lawful means, Receiving, Eating, Drinking,
Matt. 26.26.

Q. What ia the thing signified?

A. Christ and all his benifits, which I shall as certainly receive, if I
believe, as I receive the Bread and Wine into my body 1 Cor. 11.24. 1 Cor.
1.30. Romans 4.23.

Q. How do the Bread and Wine in the Sacrament differ from common bread and
wine?

A. Not at all in nature and substance, but in use only, being now made means
to increase in us our Sanctification, and to assure us of Justification, Romans
411.

Q. Who ordained this Sacrament?

A. Christ himself, 1. Cor. 11.23.24. Matt. 26.26.27.

Q. What are the reasons, which are the ends for which we must receive the
Sacrament?

A. First, that we may obey Christ, that has so commanded: Matthew. 26.27.
Secondly, that we may the better understand, and remember what Christ has done
for us, of whose death and blood shed, the breaking of the Bread, and the
pouring out of the Wine, is a lively resemblance. 1 cor. 11.26. Heb. 9.26. Gal.
3.1. Thirdly, that I may be stirrred up to be more thankful to him for his
infinite Mercy, 1 Cor. 11.24. Fourthly, that all Graces needful to salvation,
may be increased in me. Romans 8.29. Matt. 25.45. 2 Cor. 11.25. Fifthly, that the
assurance of my salvation, may be hereby sealed unto me, John 6.51. Romans 4.11.
Sixthly, to teach us what union and love ought to be amongst Christians, being
all but one body, represented by one Bread, 1. Cor. 10.13.

Q. What else is required in our preparation?

A. Faith Repentance, Oobedience Love, as may be seen before.

Q. What is the sum of them?

A. First to take Christ as my only Lord and Savior, believing the
forgiveness of all my sins, and punishment due to them by Christ only,
Ephesians. 1, 13. Acts 16, 3.

Secondly, that I grive for nothing so much, as that I have offended God by my
sins, Ezech. 10.12. Mourning and bewayling, from my very heart, all my
sins, even my unclean thoughts, and evil motions, though I consent not to
them, Romans 7.2.

Thirdly, that I hate and leave every sin. Psalm. 119.104. and walk in
obedience to every Commandment; so that I allow my self no sin to reign in
me, but mortify, and lessen every sin, Psalm. 119.104. James 2.19. so that I
am willing, and resolved rather to suffer death, then to continue in any known
sin, Luke 14.26.

Fourthly, that I love God above all, Matt. 22.37. grived to see him offended
by any, Psalm. 119.136. useing all means, carefully, and constantly, whereby I
may be enabled to keep all His Commandments, and desire nothing so much, as
grace and power to do His will, Matthew. 5.6.

Fifthly, if any offense be between my Brother and me, that I reconcile my self
unto him, wishing the same good to his soul and body as to my own; that I
labor to bring others to true Repentance; that I love Gods people, and that
for their holiness, above all others, 1 John 3.14. that I love and do good to
my enemies.

Q. What else is required in this Preparation?

A. That humbly and earnestly, thirst after this sacrament, and the blessing of
God upon it, that it may work these effects in me, for which it is ordained.

Q. What mean you by humble thirsting?

A. That I acknowledge my self altogether unworthy to receive it, in respect
of any thing in my self, and that I look for acceptance of my work through
Christ.

Q. What else is required?

A. That I would strictly examine my self, whether I have these graces or no.
1 Cor. 11.28. 2 Cor. 13.5.

Q. What else?

A. That I should renew all these graces, 1 Cor. 11.31.

Q. What is it to renew the graces of God in us?

A. To quicken and stir them up, and to make them more active.

Q. How may this be done?

A. First our knowledge may be renewed, by meditating, reading, and conferring
on the the chief principalls of Religion.

Secondly, our Repentance may be renewed by the consideration of the number,
and haniousnesse of our sins, by that eternity of wrath, that is due unto
them, and the infinite Goodness, Holiness, and Mercy of that God, that is
offended by them.

Thirdly, our Faith may be renewed, by considering the Al-sufficiencie of
Christ, to satisfy Gods wrath for sin, to purchase salvation for us, and the
fulness and freeness of Good grace offered unto us in the promises.

Fourthly, our obedience may be renewed by resolutions and covenants, of better
and more strict walking, for the time to come.

Fifthly, our love to God may be renewed, by considering the infinite variety of
the expressions of Gods love to us, in forbearing, giving, and forgiving; and
especially, in the unspeakable sufferings of Christ, Our love to man may be
renewed, by considering how infinitely more is forgiven us by God in one day,
then we can forgive to others in all our lives: How will God forgive us, if we
forgive not our Neighbors? And by considering how bountiful love is, where it
is true; and by laboring for meek, and humble spirits and contented minds.

Sixthly, our hungring, and thirsting, after Christ, in this Ordinance, may be
stirred up, by consideration of our lamentable emptiness in our selves; our
daily and grivious failings; and how fearful the absence of Gods grace, or
the comfort of his Holy Spirit, will be to our souls, especially, if procured
by any neglect of means by us, Matt. 7.7.

Q. What is to be done in receiving the Holy Communion?

A. First, I must meditate upon the Elements, and the Actions of the Minister;
for these are ordained of Christ, to teach us the nature of these benifits we
receive by Him, being administered according to His institution.

Secondly, I must meditate, when I see the Minister set apart the Bread and
Wine, and blessing them; that Christ was set apart for man's redemption, and
furnished with all needful abillities thereunto.

Thirdly, when I see the Bread broken, and the Wine powered out, I must consider
of the infinite hauiousnesse of my sins, the infinite love of God, and the
torments that Christ suffered for me; believing Christ's blood to have been
shed, and His body broken, as verily for my sins, as this Wine is powered out,
and this Bread broken, which is before my eyes. 1 Cor. 11.25.

Fourthly, when the Minister comes to me with Bread and Wine, I must put
forth an act of Faith to believe, that my soul shall be as verily fed unto
eternal life by Christ, as my body is nourished by the Bread and Wine.

Fifthly, having received them, I must lift up my soul in thankfulness to God,
praying, that as this is the greatest gift, that ever God gave or man received,
and that it may be so to me, and that I may be able by his grace, to offer up
my body and soul, even what I am, or have, as lively sacrafices unto him to
honor him all the days of my life, a Knigs 8.66.

Q. What is to be done after the receiving?

A. We must labor co find our graces strengthened, and give God hearty thanks
for his blessings, Prove. 4.^8. Ezech. 47.12. And if we find little or no
benifit, we must be humbled for our want of preparation, and depend upon God
with patience, for increase of grace until He shall please to give it. We
must also strictly endeavor, to keep the Covenants, and Promises, which we
have made to God in this Sacrament, in Holiness and Righteousness all the
days of our lives, Judges 10.14. Exodus 13.9.

Q. How often must we receive this Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

A. So often as it is appointed, by the Ministers, to be received in the Church
where we live, Numb. 913.

FINIS.
DIRECTIONS HOW to Read the Holy SCRIPTVRES, with Profit.
FIRST, ever begin with Prayer, and Invocation upon Gods holy Name. Read with a
Mind, Learn your Duty, with a purpose to Practice what you know.

Deny your own reason, and wisdom, in seeking to find out the sense of
Scripture.

When you read Gods word, ever note especially those places, which will give
you most comfort against all afflictions, and crosses in general.

Then observe, more especially, wherewith God has, or does, most perticularly
try you withal; and gather the more especial places against them.

Observe those places, especially, where the general duties of Christianity
are commanded to us, and refer them to some of the commandments.

Observe more particularly, those places, where your own particular duty, of a
Father a Mother, a Son, a Servant, etc. And the particular duty of your
general calling, as a Magistrate, Minister, etc. What ever your calling be.
Observe especially, those places, wherein the principal grounds of our Religion
are plainly laid down, that you may be able to render a reason of your Faith.
Observe the heryses, which trouble the Church, werein you live, and ever as you
Read observe places, which most of all make against those Herysies, that you
may be able to stop the mouths of all gaine-sayers.

Observe those sins whereto you are most especially tempted, and in danger to
be drawn to; and gather places of Scripture, which most of all speak against
them.

FINIS.

