GOOD NEVVES FROM General Blakes Fleet

Twenty Holland ships taken: With a LIST of the Particulars.

AND The Whole Hollanders Fleet pursued by Genesis Blake and Sir George Ayscue.

ALSO How the Hollanders fell upon 10 English Merchants ships, and three Men of
War. And the Success thereof.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane.
1652.

A Letter from PLIMOVTH Touching The good Success of General Blake, and Sir
George Ascues taking of several Merchants ships and others, from the
HOLLANDERS.
SIR,
ON Wednesday the 8th. of this present September 1652. General Blake with the
Parliaments great fleet passed by within sight of this place.

A Message was sent in from him to Sir George Ayscue, who with his fleet was
then at anchor in this Road, To desire him to weigh Anchor, and come out
speedily to him with his fleet.

Sir George Ayscue then presently sent out Orders to all the ships, and they
all sailed out, according to the Orders sent in by Genesis Blake.

After salutation of the Fleets, Sir Geo. Ayseue went aboard the Admiral to
the General, where a Council of Officers presently met, and resolved to sail
Westward toward the Holland Fleet, or where they should discover them to be.

That night in the evening they set all sail Westward, the season being very
good, fair weather that day and the next, and the wind good.

But since that, we have had some boisterous winds, which have been very high,
but I do not hear of any great loss, or harm (blessed be God) that we have
sustained by it.

The Lord has been pleased to give some good successes to our Fleet since they
went out from hence.

For General Blake has sent out squadrons of ships which have taken from the
Hollanders twenty sail of Ships, whereof one Man of War, one Pickeroon, and
the rest Merchants ships.

The Merchants Ships are laden with wine, Strong Water, vinegar, salt, and
other merchandises to some value.

Seven of these ships are already come into Plymouth, and orders sent for
disposal of them, with directions and instructions, the rest being thirteen,
when these came away from the Fleet, they were ordering to be disposed of, they
are speedily to be sent into some Port.

The Dutchmen in the Man of war seem to be but sorry Seamen, and it was
not extraordinary well manned; they speak of great distractions in Holland,
and Zeland, but chiefly in Holland, the Zeland Seamen are very famous.

On Thursday last General Blake had a discovery of the Holland Fleet, which
are thought to be about a hundred sail, and General Blake, now with Sir
George Ayscue, both joined, are near an hundred sail, I think of the-best
Ships, and the gallantest Fleet in the world.

The Holland Fleet were then discovered to be about some twelve Leagues off
from Scilly.

Hereupo, this discovery being made, a Council of War was called, to
consult what to do.

And it was resolved with a great union and magnanimity, that they should
presently sail toward them, and endeavor if possibly to engage them.

And accordingly our whole Fleet sailed toward the Hollanders great Fleet, and
are in pursuit of them.

We do observe, that the Hollanders do much vapor, and make shows, and
boastings where they come, at a distance from us, and they find themselves
able to deal with some smaller party then themselves, but when any
considerable Party, any ways able to deal with them come near them, then
they sail away.

And they are most often seen, and appear in view toward the evening, that so
in the night they may slink away out of sight, we cannot tell where.

Were not the Hollanders puffed up in pride and hardness of heart like Pharaoh
and the Egyptians, they would not go on in their obstinacy as they do.

But though hand join in hand the wicked shall not go unpunished. Plymouth 14
September. 1652. By other Letters from other Ports it is certified, That there
came lately ten ships from Brittany in France, 3 men of War, the Swan and 2
more were a guard to the rest, which were Merchants, the lading very rich, of a
considerable value.

One of the Dutch fleets had a dise^very of them, and engaged them, but the
English stood out courageously, and opposed them, and by the blessing of God
brake through them, charging the Dutch with a great deal of gallantry, and are
all safely arrived in the Downs.

Dover 15 September. 1652.


A List of the ships taken by General Blake and Sir George Ayscue, from the
Dutch, since they set sail from Plymouth. From Wednesday 8. September, to
Tuesday 14 September 1652.
1 Man of War, a very considerable Vessel 1 Pickeroon, a notorious plunderer.
10 Merchants ships, all laden with Wines Salt, Strong-water, Vinegar, and other
Merchandises. The whole Dutch Fleet pursued about 12 Leagues from Scilley.
FINIS.

