A Duel between a Jesuit and a Dominican, begun at Paris, gallantly fought at
Madrid, and victoriously ended at London, upon friday the 16 day of May, Anno
Dom. 1651. by Thomas Gage, alias the English American, now Preacher of the Word
at DEAL in KENT.
Courteous Reader,
THE cause of my being at present at London requiring some satisfaction and
just vindication, I thought fit to set my self in the public view of my
Country, and once more to appear with the poor and beggarly Cloak of my former
American Style. The object of my discourse being a Jesuit and a Dominican,
both professors of a sole fancy-pleasing Religion, my pen shall drop before
thee a dream, the relation whereof may peradventure delight the sense and fancy
of some, and from thence get further into the hearts of some others now holding
the Stern of the weather-beaten ship of this Commonwealth. It is a most true
and well experienced saying, that odia Religionum sunt acerbissima, and may be
instanced both at home and a broad, but especially between the Jesuits and
Dominicans, both clothed with outward weeds of dissembled mortification, but
both inwardly Lupi rapaces, ravening Wolves, with sharp teeth of Passion biting
and devouring one another* This Passion begun with the birth of Ignatius,
founder of the Jesuits Order, a fiery birth seconded speedily with a fiery
name; what else signifies Ignatius, but Igninatus, born for fire of mischief
and sedition? This fire began to burn at Paris, and with it that ever since
lasting quarrel between the Ignatians (now Jesuits) and the Dominicans. There
it was that Ignatius like a Cobbler beyond his Last, took upon him to soar above
his reach, and to search into the mystery of the blessed Trinity, which proving
too hard for his weak brain, brought him to a public censure and judgment,
and for his speedy trial the Dominicans (being the Grand Inquisitors of the
Inquisition Court) were nominated Judges; who finding Ignatius too saucy with
the secret Trinity of one glorious and Immortal God, and traducing it with
blasphemous and erroneous principles, condemned him to a public punishment, no
less then whipping. Lashes they were, that did not only gall Ignatius his back,
but ever since have caused lashing and clashing between Ignatius his children
and the Dominican Whippers. And if Ignatius his name betray his fire, still
blown and further kindled in most parts of the world by his train of Jesuits;
so likewise do the Dominicans in their Legend Confession, acknowledge fire to
be blown by them, who boast that when their founder Dominick was born, his
mother saw in a dream stand by her a Dog with a lighted Torch in his mouth and
a Globe; which, if true, may better signify that he and his children also
should kindle fire of rebellion and sedition in the world, then what they most
foolishly fancy upon it. Thus Gentle Reader, if you please, you may take notice
of these two fiery brands of Christendom, the Ignatian Jesuit, and the
barking and biting dog with fire in his mouth the Dominican. But as two
firebrarnds laid together upon one hearth, strive with the fire that is in
them, not only to burn what comes near or is laid upon them, but further are
active in burning and consuming each other. Even so where ever these two, the
Jesuit and Dominican do meet, they according to their from hell infused
Activity endeavor to kindle not only the fire of discord and rebellion in the
Commonwealths or Kingdoms where they live, but also burning passionately each
against the other, do endeavor like firebrarnds one to consume the other. Oh
how did Ignatius his fire with a violent flame about the year 1620 run in
Spain over all the houses and Cloisters of the Dominicans, who by the Jesuits
then were so prosecuted that with weapons they were forced to defend their
lives in their Cloisters against the fury of the common people stirred up
against them by the fiery Jesuits, and were like to be banished that Kings
Dominions for heresy imputed to them, because against the Ignatians and Suarez
his Crew, they held that Mary Christ's mother was conceived in sin, and not like
Jeremy sanctified in her mothers womb. Tedious I might be in relating their
clashings in China, Iapan, in Rome, yea and in England; but I must make have to
Madrid, and from thence give thee, Reader, intelligence of a single Combat or
Duel fought before the King and his Court in the Kings Chapel between
Florentia a grand Jesuit and Domingo de Torres a Dominican, both Chaplains to
that Majesty when my self was living in Valladolid in Spain. Florentia envying
the Dominicans fortune and honor, who by the Laws sof Arragon are constant
Confessors to the Kings of Spain, and ambitious of that place himself, thought
if he could any ways banish them from the Court of heaven, he might soon cause
them to be banished from the Court of Madrid, and from hearing that Majesty's
Confessions. Whereupon he plotted a feigned dream and sleep that should befall
him in the Pulpit, ready to preach before his Majesty and his Nobles. Up to the
Pulpit he goes to act in public his secretly contrived plot; before the naming
of his Text, he faineth a sleep, resting upon his hand and Elbow, the Court
being for a while in suspension, wondering what had befallen the sleepy and
drowsy Jesuit, at last he awakes with a dissembled amazement, and craving
pardon of his Majesty, relates his dream, as follows. Sacred Majesty, being
in a sleep I have dreamed that I was in heaven, (Well said Jesuit, thou may
dream of heaven, that is all thou art like to have) and there I saw the glory
of all the Saints, and among them Herme, Negildus, and many other Kings of
Spain, with Philip your Father, whose glory may be your Majesty's
encouragement, I saw also of all religious Orders some, but above all Ignatius
was most glorious with his train of Saints; but prying earnestly amongst them,
and casting a careful eye about all the Corners of that capacious Court, I
could see no Dominican Saint, which has made me Judge that surely their lives
here upon earth are unworthy of eternal life in glory, and that their ambition
to be great here, especially about your Majesty, is cause of their loss of any
greatness hereafter in heaven. Thus having with a lying Dream unthroned all
Dominicans from Seats in glory (who doubtless without a lie may be said to
have none there) and banished them that Court, hoping to work a banishment of
them from the heart and affections of his Majesty and his Nobles, he went on to
his Text, suiting his discourse with his feigned dream and fancy. But the
Dominicans hearing of this Jesuiticall plot against them, made choice of one of
their best Champions by name, Domingo de Torres, who might enter into Duel
with Florentia, having Goliah-like defied the host of the Guzman or Dominican
families. Therefore upon the next Lord's Day, Domingo de Torres being appointed
to preach in the Kings Chapel, no sooner gets up into the pulpit, but like as
Florentia before, he falls a sleep for a small time and dreams. But awaking out
of a dissembled slumber before any choice of Text was made, he relates unto his
Majesty his dream thus. May it please your Majesty, This place as it breeds too
much sleep and dullness in the hearers of our Sermons (which therefore work so
little upon their hearts) so it seems the Preachers themselves are here subject
to slumbering, yea and to dreaming, as has appeared in Father Florentia; and
now again in my self; who have dreamed that I saw hell opened before me, and
that by some chief Devils I was carried about all the corners thereof, where I
saw many Kings damned for their wicked lives, unjust commands, and tyrannizing
power over their subjects, whose damnation I hope will prove a terror to your
Majesty from acting like them: there also I saw some who have bin of yours and
of your Fathers Council; yea let flattering of Princes be far from my mouth, I
dreamed that near unto the gates of hell I saw a Coach driving furiously, and
in it your Majesty with many of your Nobles here present, and that the Count of
Olivares did drive the Coach. I hope it will but prove a dream, and that none
about your Majesty will for the time to come drive your soul by wicked
Counsels to that dismal house of darkness and eternal ruin. Further I saw
many Friars of mine own Order damned, yea and of all other Orders with them,
beside Bishops, Abbots, Prelates, and many Priests for lewd and carnal lives;
yet I must confess, that in all the places I had gone through, I saw not one
Jesuit, which made me wonder that they all should live so holily that none of
them should go to hell. But being at the gates ready to come out, I demanded
of some chief devils, whither they had no Jesuits in their dark and horrid
dungeons; and unto me they replied, they had more of them then of any other
Orders, and that if I would go back, I should see the place and number of
them. I went back, and at the furthest part of hell was showed unto me, a Well
covered with a stone of a vast and mighty bigness, and for the taking of it up
Legions of Devils were gathered together; the Well being opened, I saw a
bottomless pit burning with fire and brimstone, wherein were thousand thousands
of Jesuits; And further demanding why they were kept in hell by themselves
under more restraint of so weighty a stone then others. Answer was made by some
chief devils, that they feared the Jesuits power and liberty more then all
others, and that as in the world where they have power, they are Masters of
Kings, people and Laws to subvert and ruin all; so if they should in hell give
Jesuits liberty, and not keep them under great restraint, they would there
also become Masters; and as in the world they rule by breeding rebellion and
sedition, so if power and liberty were given to them in hell, they would to
eternally racking torments add a further fire of mutiny, faction and sedition.
Thus much affrighted with the sight of so many damned Jesuits, and fearing
they should rise up and master all hell before the Well were covered again, I
made have to depart. I was not far gone out, when like as father Florentia in
the way, I saw heaven also opened, and looking carefully where the Dominicans
were, that could not be seen by Florentia in his dream, I saw that at the
furthest part of heaven, they were hid under our Ladies mantle, and that as in
the world they serve her most, so in heaven they have protection under her
glorious garment and mantle. Thus Torres having delivered his dream freely,
went on to preach suitably against the Jesuits over ruling power in States,
Commonwealths, Courts or Kingdoms. The Duel being ended between these two
dissembling dreamers, the event followed that Torres was promoted to the
Archbishopric of Saint Foy in the West-India's, and Florentia his ambitious
thoughts with other his brethren were stopped, and with great care and
vigilance their too great power prevented and weakened. Thus, Gentle Reader,
with dreams I have pleased thy fancy; indeed they were dreams, but according to
my true and faithful relation they were really acted before the King and Court
of Spain; Let them therefore enter beyond our fancy, to work a horrid
detestation of such firebrarnds, dissemblers and dreamers amongst us, that our
Nation and People may not be deluded with doctrine of mantles in heaven, nor
our State and Commonwealth subverted with indulgence of power and liberty to
them, to whom devils (according to Torres his dream) dare not indulge too much
command and power in hell. But lastly, Reader, I must show thee a further foil
and fall of a Jesuit in our City of London, and so give satisfaction to some
of my present being here, because my coming out of the country has been
misconstrued by some, who will not know that high Powers have commanded me up,
and by those that know it, aspersions have been laid upon me, that for
delinquency and siding with some Gentlemen in Kent now prisoners in London, by
warrant from high powers I was commanded to come and answer for some
misdemeanors against the present Government. Know therefore that upon the
second of February, 1650. at the Marquis of Winchester his house in Coven
garden was apprehended a Jesuit, by name Peter Wright, alias Bele, and for
high treason committed to Newgate; whither also was transported from the Clink,
one Thomas Dade, a long time prisoner, upon suspicion of being Superior of all
the Dominican friars in England. These men being to be tried at the Sessions
and general Gaol delivery holden at the Old Baily upon the 14. 15. and 16. day
of this present month of May, and the right honorable Henry Roll Lord chief
Justice of England and member of the Right Honorable Council of State, being
informed that I was able upon Oath to give in evidence against both the Jesuit
and the Dominican, by his warrant commanded me up from Deal in Kent, the place
of my abode. In obedience unto which Order I came up, having no thought of
Peter Wright the Jesuit, but confident that with safe Conscience I could give
evidence against Thomas Dade as a Friar and Superior of the Dominicans, for
that he was formerly mine own Superior, when I professed obedience to those
superstitious ways, and particularly to the Order of the Dominicans. Being
come to town I began to weigh with my self the danger on the one side I might
be in by reason of the bloody Tenants of Popish enemies, and the greatness of
the Marquess his friends, whose cause must needs be published with the
public trial of his Priest. On the other side I weighed the service of my
Country and the State, whose bread I eat and whose protection I enjoy, and
resolved that no danger could be great that I should undergo, nor death more
glorious the what I should suffer for the Commonwealth of England as now
settled by authority of this present Parliament. Being therefore commanded by my
Lord chief Justice of England in company of Mr. Clark of the Warrants, and
others to visit first in Newgate Peter Wright and Thomas Dade, with other
prisoners there in hold, to see if I did know them; I was by words uncivilly
entertained by them, whose tender mercies would prove cruelties against me, if
they could with advantage find me here, or beyond Sea catch me within the
command of their tyrannical Court of Inquisition, instituted by the bloody men
of Belial the Dominicans. Thomas Dade, I found to be indeed the same man that
he was indicted for, Superior of the Dominicans, who also had formerly owned me,
(when a Dominican) for his inferior, and had exercised authority over me.
Peter Wright I found to be a Grand Jesuit, formerly Chaplain to Colonel Gage
my brother and to his Regiment in Flanders, who from thence came over with him
to Oxford, took up Arms with him against the Parliament of England; whom I had
often seen say Mass in and about Gant in Flanders, where out of a deadly
inbred spite against Dominicans he was a means to cast out of my Brothers
Regiment one Peter Martyr, alias Craft, a Friar of that Order. This man was
actually Chaplain and heard Confessions of the Papist Soldiers and Commanders
when one Captain Vincent Burton of the same Regiment harbored Satanicall
thoughts of murdering my person, and with such base continued thoughts (no
doubt but formerly confessed) came from Flanders into England, where he
indevoured an assault upon my Lodging, and murder upon my body, but by the
watching providence of God was prevented, and himself escaped. The Dominican
pleaded for mercy and found it, the evidence not being very strong to prove
Orders or Mass saying, but only to prove him a Friar with command in England
over that Order. The Jesuit having nothing to say against strong evidence was
cast and condemned; and so let ever justice and righteousness spring forth,
and flourish in the State and Commonwealth of England: So let men of Belial be
destroyed, Shebaes cast over the wall, Zimries and Cozbies be slain, and no
doubt but the plague will cease. Now, Gentle Reader, if after this my public
service any untimely or violent death or mischief shall befall me here in town
or in my return to Kent, or any time hereafter, I desire thee from this my
declaration to take notice, that through spite, malice, hatred and envious
contrivances of blood thirsty enemies, I have been butchered, and by their
butchering of me, a door has been opened unto me to let me go through a
dark and dismal entry into a glorious place of Rest, which I doubt not but
that I shall enjoy it, when once I have finished my course and fought a good
fight as faithful to the Lamb against all Antichristian Abettors, and so I
take leave of thee, well affected Reader, with the Angels Carroll and Doxology;
Glory to God on high, on Earth peace, and good will toward men, especially in
mine and this States enemies, that they may learn with good will and affection
better to affect those that seek the glory of God, the Kingdom of Christ here,
the inward peace of God and their Consciences. Vale, veni, vidi, vici.

Dixi.
Printed at London for Tho. Williams dwelling at the Bible in little Britain,
1651.

FINIS.

