Innocencies Triumph. OR AN ANSWER TO THE BACK-PART OF A Discourse lately
published by William Prynne, Esquire, entitled, A full Reply, etc. The said
Back-part beginning at the foot of page 17. with this Superscription; Certain
brief Animadversions on Mr. JOHN GOODVVINS Theomachia, etc.

PROVE. 29. 26. Many seek the Rulers favor: but every man's judgment comes
from the Lord.

Ye are the salt of the earth: if the salt has lost his savor, wherewith
shall it be salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and
trodden under foot by men.

Matthew. 5. 13. Veritati nemo potest praescribere, non spacia temporum, non
patrocinia personarum.

Tertull. Been instituti, accipere plagam malunt, quam turpitur vitare.

Cic. Sunt qui volunt verum esse quod credunt, sed nolunt credere quod verum
est.
Vngentem pungit --
By JOHN GOODWIN, Pastor of the Church in Colemanstreet.

Published by Authority.

LONDON; Printed for, Henry Overton, in Pope's Head Alley. 1644.

A BRIEF ANSWER TO CERTAIN BRIEF OBSERVATIONS Upon my late book, entitled
THEOMACHIA, By WILLIAM PRINNE, Esquire, in Justification of some passages in
his Independency, etc.
COme now, and let us reason together (says the Lord himself to his people,
Esa. 1. 18.) If the learned Gentleman, the Author of the mentioned
Observations, would vouchsafe that courtesy to himself and me, that we might
reason together the points in difference between us, without either undue
aspersing one the other, or wresting the sayings one of another, or
exasperating those that stand by to behold the encounter, against one another;
he were a man with whom I could willingly live and die; yea and could make
treasure of the least interest that should be vouchsafed unto me in his
acquaintance. For my part, I trust, that thorough his Grace who has commanded
me, not to be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil with good, I shall be
able to carry along my Answer without any of those miscarriages: but whether my
Antagonist has steered the course of this Christian equity and fairness in
his Observations, the first part of this Answer shall inform: In the latter,
the strength of his reasonings shall have a fair and Christian Trial.

To begin with that, wherewith he ends, (which yet was the beginning of the
whole systeme of this discourse against me; for that which is ultimum in
executione, is still primum in intention. Whereas he incenseth the Parliament
against me, as one that has presumptuously undermined the undoubted
privileges thereof by the very roots; and with all charge me with several
Anti-Parliamentary passages, diametrally contrary to my National Vow and
Covenant; yea and (that which is the firstborn of all his bitter and bloody
insinuatious against me) preaches this Doctrine to the Parliament, that they
cannot without highest perjury permit any wilfully thus to violate their
Privileges in the most public manner; I answer,

1. That I have no ways undermined (least of all, done any such thing
presumptuously) any undoubted privilege of Parliament, but have from the first
to the last, with all uprightness and singleness of heart, as in the presence
of God, with all my might, and all my strength, by Preaching, Writing,
Conference, and otherwise, endeavored to assert and vindicate the Authority,
power, and privileges of Parliament, to the utmost height, I was able by the
most diligent and unpartiall contemplation to discern their elevation. If I
have not been, or yet am not so quick-sighted, or so able of discerning to take
their true altitude and height, as some others, I trust this weakness and
incapacitie in my judgment and understanding, may be atoned with a more gentle
sacrifice, then to be arraigned as a presumptuous underminer of the undoubted
privileges of Parliament, or to suffer after the insupportable rate of such a
charge. If I have denied the least dram or scruple of that Power, which is
truly Parliamentary and consistent with the word of the great and glorious God
(of which misdemeanor I am not in the least measure conscions to my self as
yet) I most seriously and solemnly profess in the presence of this God (my
conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, that I lie not) that I did it
out of a loving, tender, and affectionate jealousy over the Parliament, lest
possibly they might dash their foot against that Stone, by which all Rule, and
all Authority and power, will one day be broken in pieces. So that if either
my tongue or pen have in the least miscarried upon that point, I may truly say
that it was, Error amoris, not amor erroris, which caused that miscarriage. I
confess I am in the habitual and standing frame of my heart and spirit,
tender and jealous over all the world, and much more over those who are dear
unto me, but most of all over those who being dear unto me, are likewise more
exposed then others unto the tentation and danger of the sin; extremely jealous
and tender (I say) I am over such, lest they should touch with any title or
claim the most sacred and incommunicable royalties and privileges of Heaven,
and so count it no robbery to make themselves equal to God; knowing most
assuredly, that this is a high provocation in the eyes of the most High, and if
continued in, will kindle a fire in the breast of him whose Name is Jealous,
which will consume and devour.

But. 2. positively to determine and judge, That I should transgress the
transgression charged upon me, presumptuously, is little less then to claim
part and fellowship with God himself in the incommunicable property and
privilege of his Omniscience, or heart-searching. It is to the height of the
line of the greatest and wisest of men, positively to determine and conclude
that to be a sin, which men of excellent and singular endowments as well of
grace and Holiness, as of Learning, Judgment, and Understanding, (and these not
a few) have not only demurred upon, whether it be a sin, or no; but (many of
them) upon grounds and reasons of very noble and considerable importance,
determined the case in oppositum, concluding the fact in Question to be no sin:
but to determine and conclude further, that he that has done such a thing,
has not only sinned, but sinned with such or such a frame of heart, or upon
such and such terms as are secret, and discernible only by God (as wilfulness
and presumption in sinning, for the most part are) is to magnify a man's self
above all that is called man, and to set himself down in Gods Throne.

3. In case it could be proved that I have either said or written any thing
derogatory to the undoubted privileges of Parliament, yet that I should do
either, wilfully or spresumptuously, (as the tenor of my endictment runs from
the forenamed pen) is such a charge which men, whose ungrounded zeal has not
eaten out the heart of their charity, cannot lightly but re-charge with
unreasonablenesse, and utter unlikelihood of truth; and that upon these two
grounds, (besides many others:)

I. Because the uninterrupted and constant tenor of my deportment and carriage
from the beginning of this Parliament, until this hour, has been fully
Parliamentary. If I should boast, that to my power, I have not been behind the
very greatest of those, that have built up the Parliamentary cause with the
highest hand, and with the loyallest heart; I know that I should not be ashamed
in this behalf. Some of my Adversaries themselves in place, have given a large
testimony of my faithfulness and diligence in this kind. Now, as the Poet
says, Nemo repent fuit turpissimus: It is the most unreasonable and
incredible thing under Heaven, that a man on the sudden, within the space of a
day, and less, without any cause or provocation given, should of a friend
deeply engaged, and firmly resolved for the Parliament, be transformed into a
presumptuous and wilful underminer of their undoubted Privileges.

II. The Grounds and Reasons which I have given in by way of account for that
opinion, which is the great strife-maker between the Gentleman's pen and mine
(together with many others engaged in the same warfare, and which are in every
man's hand; particularly the ten Reason propounded and argued in a Treatise not
long since published, called M. S. to A. S. p. 56, 57, etc. which have not been
answered hitherto, no, not so much as with Answer so called; and which the
Gentleman could not lightly think, but that I should have seen) being of that
weight, and worthy that consideration which many sober and knowing men
acknowledge, cannot but in the thoughts and apprehensions of all reasonable
men, justify me, at least from any presumptuous or wilful undermining the
undoubted Privileges of Parliament thereby.

4. How can the Gentleman call that a good pen (as he does mine, p. 23. l. 4.)
which is a presumptuous and wilful underminer of the undoubted Privileges of
Parliament? is not his pen of the conspiracy, and made an accessory, by giving
such a testimony to the principal?

5. Whereas he charge me, with I know not how many Anti-Parliamentary
passages, diametrally opposite to the national Vow and Covenant, but
instanceth in none, save only that, wherein himself was touched, and that (God
knows) very gently, and with far more honor then censure, I answer; that
certainly no part or passage of the Covenant, did intend Omnis lex obligat
secundum rectam voluntatem legislator is obligantis.
that any man should obliege himself by oath or otherwise, either unto God
orman, to maintain either such a Power or such Privileges, as the Power and
Privileges of Parliament, which he sees no sufficient ground or reason to call
or judge such, at least, that he should maintain them for such, during this
state and posture of his judgment and conscience; because this had been to
require of men, Surely the Divines and Commissioners of the Kingdom of
Scotland, who were accessaries, if not principalls in the first penning of the
Covenant, must needs be presumed to know the intent and meaning of it, as well
as any other: and yet they publicly, and in print, profess and maintain the
same doctrine (for substance, as will presently appear) for which I am cast at
the bar of Mr. Prinne's tribunal, as one of the greatest delinquents
throughout the whole kingdom.
that they would engage themselves by Oath and Covenant to sin; which
intention, if any such had been in those that imposed the Covenant, had been
diametrally opposite to the end of the Covenant it self, which was the safety,
benefit and blessing of God upon the three kingdoms; yea, that supreme
Authority it self, from which the Covenant issued with an injunction to have it
generally taken, gave liberty of interpretation thereof, both unto the
Ministers, who were to explain it unto, as well as to press it upon the
people; and likewise unto those who were respectively required to take it.
Without which liberty of interpretation, evident it is to those that converse
with men, that many thousands would have refused it, who have now submitted
themselves and their consciences unto it. So that the Gentleman does but beat
the air in this charge of Anti-Parliamentary passages diametrally contrary to
the National Vow and Covenant: He has not as yet proved any one passage of
mine to be so much as Anti-Parliamentary; much less any diametrally contrary
to that Vow and Covenant.

6. (And lastly, for those lines mentioned) whereas he seeks to baptize the
Parliament into a spirit of much severity against me, by suggesting to them,
that they cannot without highest perjury permit any thus wilfully to violate
their Privileges, etc. I answer, and subscribe to him with both my hands; they
cannot indeed without sin permit any wilful violation of their undoubted
privileges: nor do I desire, nor have I any need or occasion to desire of
them, that they should dispense with so sacred an obligation upon them for my
sake. Let either Mr Prynne, or any other, evict me of any wilful violation of
these Privileges, and no man shall be more ready then I, to crave their
pardon, or else to undergo their justice; nay, if I shall be convinced of any
violation at all of those Privileges, wilful or unwilfull, (and I shall be as
willing as willingness it self can make me, to further such a conviction all
that may be) I shall repent my self, and abhor mine error in dust and ashes.
I should be the maddest worm under heaven, to give offense to that foot which
is so able to crush me, if I had not full consideration for the hazard I run
thereby in mine own soul.

But as concerning that Opinion or Doctrine, which Mr. Prynne burdens with
Anti-Parliamentarisme, and whereby I am charged presumptuously to undermine the
undoubted privileges of Parliament by the very roots; I desire both him and
all the world, to consider, whether it has not a great concurrence, of the
judgments and consciences of men of greatest worth and learning; yea, of whole
National Churches in their authorized writings; yea, whether the substance and
import of it to the full, yea, and more in this kind then I have ever said, or
printed, or think safe or fitting to say, has not been publicly, and in print
delivered amongst us, by persons no ways suspected of Anti-Parliamentarinesse
in any kind; yea, and in such books, for which the Author (if he mistakes
not in casting up the account of his own thanks and praises) has had large
considerations in both from many Parliament men.

I begin at home; and appeal to any man of unpartiall thoughts, whether these
ensuing passages faithfully transcribed out of that much admired piece,
entitled, Antapologia, set forth by Mr. Th. Edwards, do not contain, and that
secundum sub and supra (as the Schoolmen speak) the height and depth of that
Doctrine, for which I must not be innocent, except the Parliament means to be
guilty of perjury, and that of the highest.

Page 163. He affirms, that Junius, Zanchius, Amesius, etc. make the subject
matter of Political administration to be, res humanae, humane things and
matters; but of Ecclesiastical, Divine, and Sacred, etc.

Again, p. 166. of this same Discourse, he has this passage: Or, 3. Is it
that you do give a power to the Magistrate in Ecclesiastical things, of the
ultimate determination of matters purely Ecclesiastical, which the
Presbyterians principles do not, as in matters of Doctrine, Scandal, etc.

Yet again, p. 168. When the Question is of Church matter, and matters of
conscience, and of the inner-man, and of the Kingdom of Christ, the remedies
and means appointed for these are Spiritual and Eccesiasticall, viz.
spiritual punishments; Christ says, My Kingdom is not of this world, etc.
and the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5. The weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, etc. Spiritual remedies and means must be used in the Kingdom of
Christ, and by them Christ does his work. And hence in Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and those scandalls in the Church, which are the point in hand;
punishments in the body, or in the purse, which can be by the power of the
Magistrate, have no place.

Again, p. 170. First, there be many sins and errors, which the Christian
Magistrate meddles not with, are not matters of his cognizance, if you would
have recourse unto him: Or, if the sentence of non-communion be pronounced
against a Church, because of impenitency in them, he has nothing to do to
assist or back it, etc. According to the tenor of this Doctrine, the civil
Magistrate has nothing to do, to fortify or back any sentence, determination,
or decree of the Church:

Yet again, p. 174. of the same Treatise: Has not the wisdom of Christ
provided remedies in the Church, for all the internal necessities of the
Church, and constituted it a perfect body within it self?

Again, p. 256. He speaks plainly, and speaks no Parable; that the
Parliament interposeth no Authority to determine what Government shall be;
therefore his opinion appears to be either that the Parliament has no
Authority, or at least intends not to make use of it in determining a
Government.

Page 74. of the same Discourse, he presents Cameron allowing the Church a
power to ordain and appoint Rites, etc. but with this caution and proviso: dum
tamen nihil officiant aut sinceritati doctrinae, aut libertati conscientiae;
cui proprie leges praescribit non nisi Deus, i. upon condition that they
neither prejudice the soundness of Doctrine, nor the liberty of men's
consciences; unto which God himself alone properly is the Lawgiver.

Page 170. He cites this testimony in the margin out of Zanchy, and that with
full approbation of the contents of it Adhaec, multa etiam sunt scelera, in
quae ne Magistratus quidem Christianus animadvertere solet, aut tenetur ex
legibus suis, veluti sunt privatae in imicitiae, simultates, participatio
cu^ldololatris in aliquo impio cultu, dissimulatio verae Religionis: denique
multi mali mores, tum domestici tum publici, qui non turbant aut pacem
publicam, aut honestatem, and commodum publicum Ecclesia ne ista quidem far
debet, sed corrigere juxta Christi institutum. Zanch. de Discip Ecclesiast.
Moreover, there are many evils which the Christian Magistrate is not wont to
meddle with by way of punishment, nor yet is bound by his Laws to do it, as
private quarrels, and heart-burnings between man and man, partaking with
Idolaters in an impious or unlawful worship, dissembling the true Religion;
and to conclude, there are many evil carriages, both private and public,
which do not trouble or disturb either the public peace, or honesty, and the
public profit. The Church indeed ought not to suffer these, but to reform
them according to Christ's institution, etc.

But lastly for this Domestique Author, whose judgment and abilities for the
cause he undertakes, I find so much magnified, he has a saying, page 169. of
the forementioned Treatise, dishonorable indeed (in my apprehension) to the
Civil Magistrate, and wherein I can at no hand subscribe unto him. The power
of the Magistrate (says he) by which he punishes sin, does not subserve to
the Kingdom of Christ the Mediator. I conceive far otherwise of this power,
and that the maine end and most excellent use of it, consists in a subserviency
to the Kingdom of Christ the Mediator. The most noble exercise and employment
of civil power, is (doubtless) to provide for the immunitie and peace of the
Saints within their jurisdictions, to protect them against all injuries and
violence of men, by Edicts, Statutes, and Laws, with the due administration
and execution of them, 1 Timothy 2. 2.
to provide that such may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty (as the Apostle speaks) that the Gospel may run freely, and without
interruption, (and be glorified, if God shall vouchsafe to prosper the
ministry of it accordingly) thoroughout their dominions. In a word, whatsoever
makes for the benefit, safety, and honor of the whole Community and
Society of persons fearing God within the limits of their jurisdiction,
without the pressure or just grievance of others, the Civil Magistrate (I
conceive) has not only a power, but a necessity by way of duty lying upon
him, to interpose for the procuring and establishing of such things. Of this
nature were all those engagements, Statutes, and Decrees, of Cyrus, Artaxerxes,
Darius, and other heathen Princes and Magistrates, for the building of Gods
Temple, and advancement of his worship, which Mr. Prinne insists upon, p. 23.
but quite besides the point in difference between him and me. For these Princes
and Magistrates did not by any of their Statutes or Decrees, impose any thing
upon the people of God in point of worship under mulcts and penalties, much
less did they so impose any thing upon the generality of them, which was
controversiall, and matter of conscience between them, by means of which
imposition the one half of them should have been gratified, and the other half
ruined and oppressed. But those Statutes and Decrees equally respected the
common and public good of them all, and contained nothing oppressive to the
judgments or consciences of any, nor any new determination of any thing
appertaining to the worship and service of God, under mulcts and penalties.

But concerning the point which is made matter of such high accusation against
me, besides the judgment of Mr. Edwards, so significantly and expressly, and
that over and over, concurring therein, there are other Authors of our own,
who have every whit in as public a manner as I held forth the same unto the
world, and that without the least check or controulement by any, that ever I
(or I think any man else) heard of. All the chief Writers of our age (says
Mr. Hayward Haywarad in his answer to R. Dolman, dedicated to King James, cap.
9.
) are now reduced to the former opinion, affirming with Arnobius that Religion
is of power sufficient for it self: with Tertullian, Lactantius, Cassiodorus,
Josephus, Bernard, and others, that Religion must be persuaded, not enforced.
And that is most remarkable in this testimony, that the Author therein affirms,
that this opinion against the enforcing of Religion, was both the ancient
opinion in the Church of God, and is now again become the general opinion of
the best Writers in our age. The same Author in the same Chapter (somewhat
before the words last cited) lays down these as Maxims or common rules; That
it is foolish to add external stay, to that which is sufficient to supsort it
self; That it is senseless to attempt that by force, which no force is able to
effect; That that which has a proper rule, must not be directed by any other.

Bishop Jewel, in his Answer to Hardings Confutation, page 432. has this
saying to him; As for our part, we were never yet guilty to one drop of your
blood: we seek no aid at fire or sword. Let this Text be truly interpreted, and
it will afford the same doctrine with mine.

The Divines of the Church of Scotland, Discipl. lib. 2. p. 89. write thus: The
National assemblies ought always to be received in their own liberty and have
their own place -- And all men, as well Magistrate as inferiors, to be subject
to the judgment of the same in Ecclesiastical causes without any reclamation
or appellation to any Judge, Civil or Ecclesiastical, within the Realm.

And again, p. 71. of the same Book; The Magistrate neither ought to preach,
minister the Sacraments, nor execute the censures of the Kirk, nor yet
prescribe any rule how it should be done, but command the Ministers to observe
the rule commanded in the Word, and punish transgressors by civil means. --
The Magistrate OUGHT to assist, maintain, and fortify the Jurisdiction of the
Kirk: the Ministers SHOULD assist their Princes.

The same Divines in another book of theirs, called A Dispute against the
English Popish Ceremonies obtruded upon the Church of Scotland; p. 146. write
thus: Now therefore, we firmly hold, that the Prince may not innovate any
Custom or Rite of the Church, nor publish any Ecclesiastical Law, without the
free assent of the Clergy, etc. yea, further, that so far as is possible, the
consent of the whole Church ought to be had, whenever any change is to be
made of some Order or Custom in the Church. A few lines after, p. 147. they
cite this saying (with approbation) out of Baldus De Cas. Consc. l. 4. c. 11.
Cas. 2. They who were Orthodox did ever withstand such a Magistrate as would
have by his commandments tied the Church to that which was burdensome to their
consciences. And yet again in the same page: It belongs to the Synod (the
Clergy having the chief place therein to give direction and advice) not to
receive and approve the definition of the Prince in things which cocerne the
worship of God, but it self to define and determine what Orders and Customs
are fittest to be observed, etc.

Again, p. 149. The Prince may command a Synod of the Church to judge of
Ecclesiastical things and actions, and to define what Order and Policy is most
convenient to be observed in divine worship; yet he may not by himself define
and direct such matters, nor make any Laws there anent.

Again, p. 148. having cited much out of Junius, concerning the difference
between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Administration, in respect of the
subject matter of either, the close of this long citation they make thus. But
humane things, we call such duties as touch the life, the body, goods, and
good name, as they are expounded in the second table of the Decalogue: for
these are the things in which the whole Civil administration stands. Yet
again, p. 150. It follows that Christ has committed the power of judging,
defining, and making Laws about those matters, ( viz. which concern the
worship of God, not to Magistrates, but to the Ministers of the Church.

Again, p. 150. Surely, if it belong to Princes to define and ordain what Order
and Policy should be observed in the Church, for the orderly and right managing
of the exercises of Gods worship -- then must Princes take also upon them a
great part of that charge of Pastors, to watch for the souls of men. Learned
Mr. Rutherford, one of the Commissioners for the Church of Scotland, in his
late Book, entitled, The due Rights of Presbyteries, part. 2. p. 403. writes
thus: The King as King, has not a nomothetick or Legislative power to make
Laws in matters Ecclesiastique in a constitute Church, nor has he a
definitive sentence as a Judge. Another passage he has to the same effect, p.
389. yea, he professedly handles, and maintains this conclusion, that the
ordinary power of the Magistrate is not to make Church-Lawes, from page 404. of
the second part of that work, to page 423. inclusively.

Master Fox, Act. and Mon. p. 1338. ( of the ancient impression) records this
passage out of a book, written (as is affirmed) by that worthy Martyr, Master
Tyndall, and censured by the Popish Bishops of those times, as heretical: The
new Testament of Christ will not suffer any Law of compulsion, but only of
counsel and exhortation. And again, p. 1337. All things necessary are declared
in the new Testament: but no man is compelled, but according to their own will.

Calvin Institut. Nam cum Ecclesia cogendi non habeat potestatem, neque
expetere debeat (de civili coercitione loquor) piorum Regum ac Principum parts
sunt legibus, edictis, judiclis Religione sustentate.
l. 4. c. 11. 16. denies the Church to have any compulsive power in it; yea,
and denies it to be lawful for the Church to seek for any such power, at the
hand of the civil Magistrate: only affirming, that it is the duty of Religious
Kings and Princes to support Religion, by Laws, Edicts and Judicatories, (
viz.) of that kind and nature, of which the Laws, and Statutes of Cyrus,
Artaxerxes, and Darius, before mentioned were.

Beza likewise in his Tractate De Haereticis, a magistr. puniendis, p. 93. has
these words: Condendarum enim conscientiae legum potestatem Deus nulli hominum
fecit: neque far potest quenquam hominum animis praeter se unum dominari;
that is, God has not given power unto any man whatsoever, to make Laws for
the consciences of men: nor can he endure that any but himself should bear
rule over the minds of men.

Jacobus Acontius, a man of much piety and worth, who fled for his Conscience,
took Sanctuary at this Kingdom, in his book entitled, Stratagem ita Sathanae,
dedicated to Queen Elizabeth, reprinted at Oxford 1631. page 166. writes to
this effect; Ut veroru^ Dei servorum saluti consulet^t, negavit [Christus] pii^
ac prudentibus magistratibus in vero, hareticos animadvertendi potestatem, ne
eorum exemplo impii atque imprudentes in pios abuterentur Dei servos.
That be (meaning Christ, in the parable of the tares) might provide for the
safety of the true servants of God, denied all power, even to pious and prudent
Magistrates themselves, of punishing Heretics, lest those that are impious
and unwise, should make an evil use of their example against the good servants
of God.

Again, page 164. thus; Dominus profecto definite declaravit, Magistratus non
esse idoneos dogmatum Judices, interdixitque illis talis jurisdictionis usu
omni, etc.
The Lord verily definitively declared that Magistrates are not competent
Judges of opinions [ in matter of Religion,] but prohibited all such
jurisdiction unto them.

Yet again the same Author in the same Discourse, page 165. Haec quide^
judicioru^ genera ad Magistratum non pertinent, sed ad solum Dei filium, qui in
novissimo die per Angelos separaturus sit a tritico zizania.
These kinds of judgments appertain not to the Magistrate, but only to the
Son of God, who in the last day will separate the tares from the wheat by his
Angels. Besides much more to the same purpose.

Junius, Controvers. 3. lib. 3. cap. 26. sect. 12. has these words; Cum res
aliae sunt conscie^tiae, ad forum coeli (ut cu^ Canonistis loquamur)
pertinentes, aliae sunt humanae atque (...), ad forum soli; in rebus sacris,
divinis, ecclesiasticis nunquam judicium Magistratui Civili, ac ne Imperatori
quidem delatum est legitime: quia res sacrae sunt regni and cognitionis
alterius.
Whereas some things are matters of conscience, and (to speak with the
Canonists) belong to the judicatory of Heaven; others, humane and temporal,
appertaining to an earthly judicatory; the judicature of things that are
sacred, divine, and ecclesiastique, was never lawfully consigned or given to
the Civil Magistrate, no not to the Emperor himself; because holy things are
of another kingdom and cognizance.

P. Martyr. Loc. Com. Clas. 4. loc. 4. sect. 1. As he is cited by Apollonius,
Jus Majestatis circa sacra. part. 2. p. 261. Hinc Martyr scribit tantum
spiritualibus rerum divinarum judicia deferri oportere.
affirms, that the judicature or judgment of spiritual things, ought only to
be granted unto spiritual men.

Gulielmus Apollonius, a learned Minister in Zealand, and yet living, in his
writings entitled, Jus Majestatis circa sacra, is full of the Doctrine
contained in the former testimonies. In the former part of the said book, he
begins his fifth Chapter thus; Conscientiae hominum in rebus, pure
spiritualibus, non subjacent Imperio hominum: potestate coactiva armata, non
imperantur res conscientiae, quae secundum naturam regni Christi, quod
voluntarium maxim populum deposcit, procurandae sunt.
The consciences of men, in things purely spiritual, are not subject to the
commands of men: matters of conscience are not commanded by a coactive armed
power, but to be promoted according to the nature of Christ's kingdom, which
mainly requires a willing people. And a few lines after adds, that Solo Christo
sibi Imperium and legislationem in Ecclesiam reservante.
Christ alone reserves unto himself, the command and legislative power over
his Church.

Again, page 260. Potestas igitur Magistratus coactiva est, and invo lu^tario
etiam imperat, juxta Apostolum, Romans 13. Muneris igitur Authoritate judicia
Religionis, quae suasoria sunt, and tantum volu^tario imperant, non
administrat, qua Princeps.
Therefore the power of the Magistrate is coactive, and commands even him that
is unwilling, according to the Apostle, Romans 13. Therefore by the Authority of
his place, and as a Prince, he does not interpose or rule in judgments
concerning Religion, which are suasive, and bear rule only over him that is
willing. It were easy, if necessary, out of the writings of men of the most
approved judgments, and greatest abilities and worth in every kind, since the
Reformation, to make the pile of testimonies, for the confirmation of the
premises, far greater. To which also, if I intended any large discourse, diverse
Authorities out of the ancient Fathers might be added; But I shall conclude
with that of Hierome in Esa. who expresses himself thus; Utinamsilios
hereticorum and omnium qui decepti sunt, spiritualibus interficiamus sagittis,
i. testimoniis Scripturarum.
I wish we would kill or slay the sons of heretics, and of all those that are
deceived, with spiritual arrows, I mean texts and testimonies of the
Scriptures.

I shall not for the present make any further breach upon my Readers patience,
by any further accumulation of Authors or Testimonies. I trust it fully
appears by those already presented, that I have neither said nor written any
thing, but what for the substance, scope, and import of it, runs parallel with
the judgments and writings of the most orthodox and approved Writers of all
ages, both ancient and modern, as well domestique as foreign. In which respect
I have a pregnant ground of much confidence, that I have not any ways
(especially not wilfully, not presumptuously) violated the least of the many
and great undoubted privileges of Parliament, having kept my self so close to
the so generally received and professed principles of mine own profession. The
least glimmering of that light, which should discover such an impious and
unchristian miscarriage in me as this, would be as the shadow of death unto me.

But besides that grand and bloody suggestion against me, that I should
presumptuously and wilfully undermine the undoubted Privileges of Parliament
by the very roots, (a crime which my soul from the very root abhors) there
are others of like nature, though not degree, wherewith the Gentleman has
stained his paper here and there, which will prove dead flies in his own box,
not in mine. He charge me, p. 21. that in stead of my Parishioners, I have
gathered an Independent Congregation to my self, out of diverse Parishes, and
mine own; that I prescribe a Covenant to them before they be admitted members
of it: that I neglect my Parishioners, preaching but seldom unto them, though
I receive their tithes. If these things (or almost any one of them) be true,
let Mr. Prynne keep his honor and place at the bar, and let me be hoysted;
but if otherwise, contrariorum contraria sint consequentia. But let me answer.

1. I am, and ever have been so far from neglecting my Parishioners in
preaching seldom to them, that it will be acknowledged (I verily believe) by
some hundreds of them, that scarce any Minister in or about the City, or
throughout the whole kingdom, have been more diligent, laborious, frequent or
constant, in the work of the Ministry, then I have been amongst them from my
first coming unto them, unto this day: For several years together (without
some special hinderance) I preached constantly thrice, often four times;
sometimes five or six times in a week unto them. And whereas their Covenant and
agreement with me was (under the hands of some of them in writing) upon my
condescending to their request, of preaching two expository lectures weekly
unto them, to find me an assistant to preach once on the Lords Day, this
assistant, after some short continuance, departing to a place of better
accommodation, whilst I was able, I both continued my two weekly Lectures, and
besides preached twice unto them on the Lords Day by my self, when I was able;
by the ablest I could procure, when I was not able my self, notwithstanding, I
never received so much as a penny (to my knowledge) from any of them, for a
whole years labor in preaching those two weekly Lectures; nor did I receive
above 12. 1. 10. s. a year for them at any time. Since I was necessitated to
discontinue these two weekly Lectures (for which, as I have said, I received
nothing for a whole year together, nor was likely to receive any thing any
more; though this was the least ground or reason of their discontinuance) I
have upon the request of some of them, and that without either promise or hope
of any pecuniary consideration at all from any man, engaged my self (and
performed hitherto, and that with advantage) to expound some part of the
Scripture before Sermon on the Lords day, as often as I should have liberty and
opportunity to preach my self. Nor did I ever diminish my Parishioners portion
in my ministerial labors or attendance in the least, for that Congregations
sake, which the Gentleman is pleased to baptize by the name of Independent; nor
did I ever preach to this Congregation apart from my Parishioners. Sometimes (I
confess) I prayed with them, and now and then debated a question in mine own
house, but ever with my door open, and liberty given to any of the
Parishioners to come and partake in those exercises; which several of them
have from time to time accepted of, and been present with us. The reason why I
preach not to some of them as often as I was wont to do, is only because they
do not come so often to hear me, as they were wont, yea my innocence in respect
of this part of my charge, was fully attested under the hands of 45. of my
Parishioners (the greatest part, if not the whole number of them, being of the
best affected both to Parliament and Religion in the whole Parish) in a
Petition tendered unto the Honorable Committee, before which I was called, for
my continuance with them.

2. Whereas I am charged with receiving their tiths; my answer is, The
Parsonage is impropriate in the Parishioners hands: the vicarage only endowed
with 11. l. per Annum.
that I demand no tiths of any of them; nor have I, or ever had I any right to
do it; Nor have I ever received any thing from them in the nature of tiths,
but as their voluntary Contribution; For this last half year I have received
very little above 20. l. (excepting only the one half of the yearly rent of a
small house, let sometimes but for 12, never for above 14. l. a year.) Out of
which sum, 12. l. 10. s. being deducted for the rent of my house, the
remainder is of as low a proportion, as envy her self lightly can desire for
the maintenance of a Minister, his wife, and 7 children, (most of them very
small) in such an expensive place as this City is. But if Mr. Prynne knew how
small a proportion of subsistence it is that I now receive, and what my labor
and pains are amongst my Parishioners notwithstanding, I verily believe, that
in stead of upbraiding me with receiving Tithes, he would pity me that I
receive no more. It is well known that there are many Ministers in and about
the City, that receive more for preaching once a week; yea diverse for
preaching but once a fortnight, then I do for preaching twice weekly, besides
my labor in expounding, not much short of that in preaching; and yet I think
there is no man that judges their consideration greater then their work. But
as for those who found themselves aggrieved, and appeared petitioners against
me, I understand by the Churchwarden, who gathers that slender allowance which
my Parishioners amongst them think me worthy of, that they have made a very
provident use of their exceptions against me, and have saved their purses
harmless for a long time.

3. Whereas he charge me to have gathered an Independent Congregation to my
self out of diverse Parishes and mine own, I answer:

1. That I know not what he means by gathering. If his meaning be, that I have
gone about from place to place (as gathering, especially of several things
into one band or bundle, imports) to desire or persuade any man, man or woman,
rich or poor, young or old, to be of my Congregation, or to the way wherein my
Congregation walks, I utterly deny the truth of this charge. I I never opened
my mouth to any person whatsoever to any such purpose, save only what I have
publicly preached in the course of my Ministry in the face of my Parochial
Congregation. And what I have here said in this kind, there are many hundreds,
if not some thousands to testify. If by gathering such a Congregation as he
speaks of, he means the receiving of persons upon their Christian requests and
desires in a Church relation, and so as to become a Pastor unto them, in this
sense (which is yet very unproperly called a gathering) I confess this part of
the charge (or commendation rather) to be in part true; I have with the consent
of my Parishioners in a public Vestry, received some out of other Parishes in
such a way; who yet have liberty upon request at any time (yea and without
request, if they think not good to make it) to withdraw themselves to any
other Pastor or Congregation, for their better accommodation in their
spiritual affairs. Of what I have done in this, I am ready to give an account
with meekness, unto any man that shall require it of me. But

2. Whereas I am further charged to prescribe a covenant to them before they
are admitted, I answer, let them all be called before a Magistrate, and (if it
be thought meet) examined upon oath, (though I believe there be very few of
them but will speak the truth without any such engagement) I do not think
there is any one of them that can say that there ever was any other covenant
prescribed to them in reference to their admission, but only their consent of
walking with us, and that testified by themselves (without any prescription or
injunction by me or others) in their own free desire and request of coming in
to us. As for those agreements that were drawn in writing in a Parish Vestry,
and which were brought in by me to the Committee before which I was called,
besides that I had no more an hand then diverse others in the draught or forming
of them, they were never urged nor pressed upon any for their admission; but
whosoever expressed any desire of coming in unto us, and joining with us, if
there were any Christian ground to judge them meet for such a relation, they
were without any further covenanting entertained by us.

3. (And lastly to the charge in hand) whereas he calls this Congregation of
mine, Independent, by way of opposition to the Parishionall Congregation; my
answer is, that I cannot understand, why or wherefore the one should be termed
Independent, more then the other. I verily believe, that that which is called
Independent, depends every whit as much upon God, upon the Scriptures, upon
Principles of reason and equity, as the other, and claims as little exemption
from the authority or jurisdiction of any of these, as the other. And the truth
is, that dependency upon these, is as much (for matter of dependencie) as can
with reason or good conscience be required or expected from any man.
Dependencie upon man, is pronounced accursed by God. Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, Jer. 17. 5. Or if by Independent, he
means, that which will not submit in the government of it, to that which shall
be recommended or imposed upon i^ by an Ecclesiastique authority superior to it
self; I answer, 1. That that which bears the heat and burden of the name,
cannot as yet (however) be called so, more then the other; because there is
nothing at all yet either recommended unto, or imposed upon either, by any such
authority 2. Though happily it likes not Imposition so cordially altogether as
the other, yet let that which shall be imposed, be according to the will of
God, and mind of Christ, if God will please to give eyes unto it, whereby to
see it, confident I am, (and do hereby engage my self for it as far as my
interest reaches) that it will and shall submit as willingly, as cheerfully
thereunto, as the other. If he therefore asperseth it with the name of
Independent, because it will not say, God speed to him that brings the
Doctrine of blind obedience unto it; I trust it will (I am sure it may) sit
down by the reproach, as by its glory. I am all thoughts made with the fullest
assurance, that (for the generality of them) as well the Persons as
Congregations in the land sir-named (but far out of the propriety of the word)
Independent, will as soon submit to be led by a young child (as the Prophet
speaks) in a way of reason and truth discovered unto them (much more by men of
wisdom and place) as any other either Persons or Congregations whatsoever in
the land.

Whereas my learned Accuser further taxes me, as having refused to baptize
some children, and to administer the Sacrament to my Parish for some months; I
answer,

1. That for the latter, I have done nothing in it, but what has been done by
very many godly Ministers in and about the City, (as is known to thousands)
yea most of them (if not all) of a different judgment from mine in the point of
Church government, yea some of them (if my memory deals faithfully with me) of
the Assembly it self.

2. I proffered unto that honorable Committee before whom was called, that if
either themselves, or any other would please to assign me a rule by which I
might safely walk in that administration, I should be willing to take up again
what I had laid down for a season, and to accommodate with my Parishioners in
that ordinance. For as for the rule prescribed by the Rubric in the book of
Common prayer, themselves seemed not so well satisfied with it.

3. For some of those, who out of the smart of this soar petitioned against
me, I believe they are so far disadvantaged by an incapacity of this
ordinance, that the largest charity of a conscientious Minister (of what
judgment soever for Churchgovernment) would not redeem them.

4. Whereas several Ministers in and about the City, yea some of good report
and esteem; nor should I mistake for matter of truth (whatever I may do in
point of good manners) if I should say, some very near related unto the
Assembly it self, have demanded and had pretty considerable sums, some
twenty pound, thirty pound, yea some forty pound a year of their Parishioners
only for their consent and leave that the Gospel might be preached unto them
out of their Pulpits, by such a Minister or Lecturer as they should choose; I
have been so far from tying my Parishioners to this appletree, that I not only
gave my consent freely unto them to choose what Minister they pleased, either to
preach or to deliver the Sacrament unto them, but further offered them twenty,
thirty, yea, if it were forty pound a year out of mine own allowance (in case
they would still continue it to their former proportion; for otherwise I could
not be able) toward the making up a valuable consideration unto him for his
pains whom they should choose in such a way.

5. (And lastly) for the latter; I confess, that since my first coming to the
place and people with whom I yet am (which wants but a little of eleven years
complete) I have refused the baptizing of two or three children of my Parish;
but upon such grounds, the opening whereof (if it were meet to publish them)
would (I verily believe) make all contestation and complaint against me in this
behalf ashamed. I fear, I have made my self a far greater transgressor, by
not refusing, then by refusing in this kind. And besides, if my intelligence
will bear the weight of that confidence which I lay upon it (as I think it
will) in case such omissions or refusals as these, be just matter of offense,
the Assembly it self will not in all the Presbyterian members thereof be found
innocent.

The third and last grievance of which I complain in my overoffended adversary,
and petition the wits and charity of men in all their conjunctions throughout
the world for relief; is his extraction of so many crooked conclusions of his
own out of my straight premises. It is somewhat an hard case, when one man
shall beget children, and another be made to keep them. Because I say in my
Epistle, that there is cause to fear, lest the truth, which only is able to
make us free, should by being rejected and opposed by us, increase our bondage
and misery: And because I only cite that saying of Nazianzene, p. 44. that he
never saw good end, or desirable success of any Council, or that they
procured any decrease, but rather increase of evils, with some few other as
innnocent and well meant sayings as these, he charge me (p. 18. l. 1.) with
tacitly reflecting upon the present religious Parliament and Assembly, raising
needless fears and jealousies of them both in matters of Religion and Church
government, as if they really intended to increase our misery and bondage, by
rejecting and oppressing Truth. Surely the worst digestion that ever was, never
made such gall of such honey in any man's stomach. I wonder what Logical
sympathy, or Symbolicall property there is between my foundations, and Mr.
Prynnes superstructions? They have not so much as a quartile aspect the one
upon the other. Because I say, There is cause to fear, lest the truth being
rejected and opposed, should increase our bondage and misery, (which is nothing
else but what the Scriptures themselves will abundantly justify and warrant)
does it therefore follow, that I reflect, or raise needless fears and
jealousies, either of Parliament, or Assembly? When the Apostle Paul wrote thus
to the whole Church of Corinth: Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor thieves, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God;
did he reflect upon the chief persons amongst them, or raise needless fears
and jealousies of them in the minds of the rest, as if he suspected them more
then others for the practice of such sins? Was it not a serious admonition, a
cautionary doctrine that equally respected them all, without the least
accusation of any? I do not say, that there is cause to fear lest the truth
should be rejected or oppressed by any, or any sort or rank of persons amongst
us; I only profess my fear, that in case it shall be no better entreated by
us, it will increase our bondage and misery, from what rank or sort of men
soever amongst us it shall suffer in that kind. Such dealings as these with a
man's harmless and in offensive sayings, are a temptation of like tendency and
danger, with that which David encountered, when he reasoned thus with himself;
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence. If a
man had the least mind to pick a quarrel against all fair and faultlesse
speaking, and to speak nothing but swords, and spears, and hot burning coals
for the time to come, such constructions as these are, are proper nourishment
for such an inclination to feed fat upon; yea enough to set the smoking flax
into a lightsome flame. But that God, whose Grace has been shield and buckler
unto mine innocence in this kind hitherto, will (I trust) protect it by the
same hand, in the midst of these and all other provocations whatsoever, until
the day of its coronation. Jesus Christ did not give over his gracious
occupation of casting out Devils, because some charged him that through
Beelzebub he cast them out. Male audire, cum been feceris, Regium est. Some
other impeachments there are of like nature with this, managed against me in
that paper, which has interrupted my peace and studies hitherto; but it is the
fate of ungrounded imputations, Spreta exolescunt, they soon wax old and
vanish away, if they be neglected.

Thus have I fairly, and (I trust) fully acquitted my self in all things
charged upon me, by way of demerit, and crime, in Mr. Prynnes Observations.
What further is charged herein upon me by way of weakness, and insufficiency,
in point of argument and reason; I must crave a few days respit, and I doubt
not but I shall bring in a fair account of this charge also. As for that
empty Pamphlet, called Faces about; the Author of it, what face or faces
soever he had (for it may be he carries two in a hood) it seems he dares show
none. He fears his Name would have suffered, if it had been seen in the
company of such a piece. Yet the truth is, that the paper is a glass, and
there is the face of a man (such as it is) to be seen in it. The man that
looks out from behind the lattises of the lines of it, is ignorant that the
Lord of glory was numbered amongst transgressors, and crucified between two
thieves: or else he would never have thought to disparage me, by putting me
into the same account with Socinians and Arminians. It is the saying of a Roman
Historian: Post Carthaginem, vinci neminem puduit; After Carthage was taken by
the Romans, no City or Nation thought it any discredit to be overcome by them.
Jesus Christ being crucified with malefactors, has spoiled their market, that
desire to sell men's reputations under disgrace, by coupling them with names or
persons of any infamous resentment whatsoever.

FINIS.

