THE Apologist Condemned: OR, A VINDICATION OF THE Thirty Queries (Together
with their Author) Concerning the Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of
Religion. By way of Answer to a scurrilous Pamphlet, published (as it seems) by
some Poposalist, under the Mock-title of An Apology for Mr John Goodwin.
TOGETHER With a brief Touch upon another Pamphlet, Entitled, Mr J. Goodwin's
Queries Questioned. By the Author of the said Thirty Queries.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. Exodus 20. 16. And
there arose certain, and bare false witness against him, saying, We heard him
say, I will destroy this Temple that is made with hands, and within three days
I will build another made without hands. But neither so did their witness agree
together. Mark 14. 57, 58, 59. Quicunque desideraverit primatum in terra,
inveniet in coelo confusionem. Chrysostom. Ita perit judicium, ubi res transit in
affectum, and nostram volumus qualemcunque praevalere sententiam, quia nostra
est. Aug. London, Printed by J. M. for Henry Cripps and Lodowick Lloyd, and are
to be sold at their Shop in Popes head Alley. 1653.

A VINDICATION OF THE Thirty Queries, (Together with the Author) Against the
Mock-Apology for Mr John Goodwin.
THe Gentleman the Apologist, being (as I understand) a Graceling of the
Greatness of this World, can have (in my understanding) no other reasonable
ground for his taking sanctuary behind the Curtain, but only some
conscienciousness that his Pamphlet is beneath him, and that it would rather
take from, then add to, him, if his Name were known. He seems to be of that
race of men, whose Conscience will allow them to do evil, but their prudence
will not allow them to bear the shame belonging to it, if they know how to help
it.

It is obvious to every eye that looks into the said Mock-Apology, that the
main projecture of it, was only the propounding of this main Query and Wonder
(as the worthy Author terms it, page 1.) How the same hand could subscribe the
Ministers Proposals for advancement of Religion on to the Supreme Magistrate,
and yet propose this Question; Whether the Magistrate stands bound by way of
Duty to interpose his Power or Authority in matters of Religion, etc. He seems
to promise unto himself the present downfall of the credit and esteem of the
Querist; and consequently, of his Queries also, upon the sound of his Rams
horn, the bare proposal of this Query.

But suppose the hand he speaks of had subscribed the said Proposals upon the
terms insinuated in this main Query and Wonder, (which yet will be found to be
an undue insinuation,) is it such a strange Query or Wonder, how Peter that had
denied his Lord and Master before a Damosel, could yet confess him with so much
courage, as he did, before a Council afterward? Or is it such a Wonder, how he
that does weakly once, should at any time after do more wisely? Nay
(questionless) of the two it is the greater Wonder, that He, who has stumbled
and fallen to the Earth, should not rise and get up, then that he should not
always lie upon the ground.

But may not the Apologist bear the shame of being a false Witness against the
Querist, upon the like account, on which they that witnessed against Christ,
that he had said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in
three days, are stigmatized by the Holy Ghost, for false Witnesses Mat. 26. 61.
? For does he not represent the Subscription of the Querist to the Ministers
Proposals, as if he subscribed the reasonableness of the said Proposals, or the
meetness of them to be put in execution; when as he expressly declared, together
with a Friend of his, who subscribed at the same time with him, unto Mr Nigh
(who importunately solicited our said Subscriptions) that he was not satisfied
with the Contents of the said Proposals, neither could be own or subscribe
them, as mere to be put in practice. Hereupon the said Mr Nigh, affectionately
pursuing his motion to us for our subscriptions, expressed himself to this
effect, That though we were not satisfied touching the lawfulness or meetness
of things contained in the said Proposals, to be practiced, yet we might
lawfully subscribe them, as meet to be delivered unto, and to be taken into
consideration, by the Committee. We at present apprehending no snare, danger,
or inconvenience in it, to subscribe them in such a notion, and with such a
declaration of our selves, as this, and being desirous to go as far with our
Brethren of the Ministry, as ever our Judgments and Consciences would permit
us, yielded accordingly, and subscribed. But to mention this by way of Apology
for Mr J. Goodwin, had been to prevaricate with the design: and besides, to act
at any such rate of fairness, is a strain of ingenuity higher (I fear) then the
heart of a Proposalist is willing to be wound up unto. It is no marvel that he
hates the light, this (as our Savior observes) being the property of him that
does evil. In the mean time, I find how hard a thing it is, so much only as to
touch pitch, and not be defiled. I shall (I trust) from henceforth remember,
that that generation of men, with whom I had to do in this business, Foenum
habet in cornu: long fugiam.
A lock of hey tied to their horn they have:
Far from them I shall flee my self to save.


But suspecting (it seems) that the Wonder he speaks of, will not procure
sufficient credit to his cause against the Querist, and his Queries together,
having (as he supposes) by his lensey-woolsey story done well toward the
laying the honor of the one in the dust, he attempteth the disparagement of the
other also. Amongst the Thirty Queries (he says) propounded by him, there is
not one to be found, but is either, 1. Impertinent, or, 2. Impotent. Page 7. he
smites me with his Censorian rod for an imaginary defect in a
contradistinction I make between evil doers against the light of Nature, and,
worshippers of God in a false manner; but himself in saying, that all my
Queries, are either impertinent, or impotent, contradistinguisheth twice two
against four. For that which is impertinent, must needs be impotent, unless he
will say, that that which no ways concerns a cause, may yet have strength
enough in it to overthrow it. And again, that which is impotent, must needs be
impertinent, or to little purpose, unless he will say that that which has
nothing in it to countenance or support a cause, is yet pertinent to it. Yea
impotency, and impertinency, are identical, after the manner of things which
are mutually exegetical the one of the other.

But what may the Gentleman mean by his, Impertinency? Impertinent imports
Relation, or rather a want of relation in point of usefulness, and this either
to some special and particular term, or else to a general. He seems by charging
the Queries with impertinency, only to imply that they are irrelative to such a
special or particular term, unto which he was afraid they might have proved
more pertinent, then he could have wished. And for all his rejoicing in face
over their impertinency, in reference to such an end and purpose, as he
specifieth, yet I believe his heart partaketh not with his face in this joy.
For when he says (page 2.) that Mr Goodwin not only may, but indeed must be so
understood (viz. as not to query, at least in the major part of his Queries,
the exercise of the Magistrates power in matters of Religion, save only that
which is coercive, and like a Spanish Inquisition, or English
High-Commission-Court, etc.) he tacitly grants (I will not add, and is inwardly
troubled) that in sundry of my Queries I am guilty of suggesting pertinent
scruples even against the interposure of such a Power by the Magistrate in
matters of Religion, which falls much short of that which is compulsive by
mulcts, fines, imprisonments, etc. to a conformity unto the public Profession
and Practice. Yea they who shall please to peruse the First, the Seventh, the
Tenth, the the Eighteenth, with most of the Queries following, will find me
guilty of suggesting scruples of that pertinency even against the interposure
of such a Power by the Magistrate, which the Apologist claims for him, that he
fairly passes by them, leaves them as he finds them; and in stead of healing
or removing them, only dawbs with a little untempered mortar, telling the
Magistrate (page 4.) that things of a Religious nature, are either absolutely
such, or mixily; and telling him again (without any limitation or caution) that
He may intermeddle, though not in the former, yet in the latter. And how does
he prove this? Only by putting it upon Mr Goodwin to resolve, whether a
Christian Magistrate were obliged to suffer a Heathen under his Jurisdiction to
sacrifice his Child to Moloch, etc. A worthy Demonstration!

(...).
O, let King Priam, and King Priam's Sons
Make joy together.
Mr Goodwin's sense about the case propounded, is, That a Magistrate, whether
Christian, or Pagan, is obliged not to suffer the perpetration of Murder,
whether by an Heathen or Christian, under his Jurisdiction; nor to suffer
either the one, or the other, to sacrifice their child, not only not to
Moloch, but not to God himself. He that from this Resolution of the case is
able to gather a Ground or Argument to prove, That a Magistrate may use what
power he pleases, or umpire as he pleases, in matters of Religion, so they be
not purely, but mixtly sch, as the public circumstance of Time, Place,
Revenue, some opinions, etc. may as well (for ought I understand) bring up the
Element of fire from the bottom of the Sea. For what face of a consequence is
there in this Enthymeme: A Magistrate may interpose his power, against the
commiting of Murder in his Jurisdiction: Therefore he may interpose his power
also to punish men in his Jurisdiction for what Opinions he thinks meet, to
constrain men to allow to what Ministers he pleases what proportion of their
estates he pleases, to compel them to repair to such places for the public
worship of God, as he pleases, etc. P. 4. 5. he be-jeareth (after his manner)
the poor Querist, as proposing (in his last Querie) this considerable question,
Whether the Civil Magistrate be not a kind of Bat, that is confined to the
twilight of nature. I confess such a question as this (though the Querist
owneth it not for his, but must charge it upon the Apologist to answer for the
calumny) might be more reasonable (of the two) proposed concerning such
Proposalists, who reason at the rate lately specified, and decline the light,
then concerning the civil Magistrate. Only they seem to be confined to a light
many degrees inferior to the twilight of Nature, I mean to such a light, which
our Savior term's, darkness Mat. 6. ^3. If therefore the light which is in thee
be darkness, how great is that darkness?
; (speaking, I conceive, of by-ends, undue Interests, etc. which take upon them
the proper office and work of light, which is to direct and guide men in their
way, but perform it after the manner of darkness, leading them into boggs and
precipices, and places of danger.) And besides the Apologizing Proposalist,
has several properties of the Bat, viz. to fly up and down in the night, or
evening, and to hide his self from the light of the day, to frequent houses,
not woods or solitudes, as other birds do, to cry, or to complain lightly, or
upon small occasion, etc.

Conataeque loqui, minimam pro corpore vocem
Emittunt, peraguntque leves stridore querelas.
Tecaque, non sylvas, celebrant, lucemque perosae
Nocte volant, seroque tenent a vespere nomen. ( i.)
They try to speak, but voice they utter none:
They pule, and scrike, with a poor-sounding tone:
Of matters small with scriking they complain:
'Bout houses, not in woods, they still remain:
In The night they fly, because they hate the light;
The dusky evening does their name endite.
But the Gentleman Apologist indulging himself above measure in his
Democritical wit, instead of speaking soberly to the business he had in hand,
hopes to afford it better promotion by a mixed discourse of an unchristian
composition, the ingredients predominant, being only falsehood, and flearing,
page 5.

But lest the Reader be mistaken, he must remember, that the Book of Nature,
according to Mr Goodwin's Edition, comes forth in a just volume: the light of
Nature, in his Astronomy, is a Star of the first magnitude. And therefore
whilst he allows the Magistrate a Power to punish Offenders against the Light
and Law of Nature, he outvies the Proposals, if he be true to his own
principles. If he that writes these things, be, in so doing, true to his own
principles, most certain it is that he is Principled by the Prince that rules
in the air, and not either by the Light, or God, of Nature. For what ground he
should have, excepting (happily) his Devotion to the Goddess Mendacina, to utter
such things as these, is not easily imaginable. For what edition of the Book of
Nature has Mr Goodwin published, that comes forth in a just volume? Or what
has he ever said, or written, that administreth so much as any tolerable
occasion, color, or pretense, for such a saying? I no where ascribe to the
Light of Nature so much as the least ability of discovering or discerning any
truth, but only in conjunction with the Grace or good Spirit of God. It may be
I do not always mention this Conjunction, when I speak of the Light of Nature;
but I frequently, and upon sundry occasions, declare my sense and meaning in
this behalf. If the Apologist himself, saying, that the Light of Nature may
discover the Truth of his few (i. e. six) Corollaries, or at least being
discovered, must assent unto it, means by the Light of Nature, any principle,
faculty, or ability vested in Nature, capable of such actings, as here he
ascribes unto it, without the gracious and merciful assistance or concurrence
of the Spirit of God with it, he sets forth the Book of Nature in a far larger
and fairer Edition, then ever it was, or is like to be, set forth by me.

And whereas he says, that whilst I allow the Magistrate a Power to punish
Offenders against the Light and Law of Nature, I outvy the Proposals, etc. if
by, Offenders, he means, all Offenders, his suggestion is most untrue: I no
where allow him a Power to punish ALL Offenders against the Light of Nature,
but Offenders only against the CLEAR Light of Nature, (see Query 2. and 30.) If
by Offenders, he means, some Offenders only, I cannot outvy the Proposals in
such an allowance, unless it be supposed, that these allow no Power to the
Magistrate to punish any Offender whatsoever against the Law of Nature; which
far be it from my good Friend, my Apologist, either to say, or think.

I made a while some Treasure of those words of his (page 2.) With such a Power
(i. e. a Coercive Power in matters of Faith, and Worship, a Power which would
compel unto the public Profession and Practice) the Ministers hold as little
correspondency, as Mr Goodwins Queries. But (...), this my supposed Treasure
proves Coals. For if the Magistrate be allowed a Coercive Power for raising a
revenue and maintenance for what, and how many, Ministers he pleases, and
withal, what proportion of revenue and maintenance he pleases (which is the
golden Apple for which my Apologist chiefly runs, and unto which all the
rest of his pleadings for the Magistrate, are Debtors) this, being rightly
construed, makes the perfect sense of a Coercive Power, even in matters of
Faith and Wirship, and which compels unto the public Practice, etc. For,

1. Is it not a branch of the Faith of many in the Nation, and these not of the
worst, nor worst-conscienced men, that they shall sin against God in paying
Tithes, yea in allowing any maintenance at all to such Ministers, whom they
judge Antichristian in their Office, and Call?

2. What does it ease or advantage me, that the Magistrate should force me to
allow, or part with, such or such a proportion of my Estate, for the
maintenance of such or such a Minister, more then it would, in case he should
compel me to pay a fine of like value for holding such or such an Opinion, or
for joining in such or such a way of worshipping God? I am equally damnified in
my Estate in the one way and the other: nor is it any ways material unto me,
upon which account I part with my substance. Or if there be any difference in
the case, certainly it would be more passable with me, to suffer for an
Opinion, or Practice, which I conscientiously love and profess, then for the
sake of such a person, be he Minister, or other, to whom I am a stranger, and
no ways obliged, yea who (happily) is an offense and burden unto me. Therefore a
Coercive Power in the Magistrate, about public Circumstances, as of Time,
Place, Revenue, and some Opinions, etc. differs only in face, not in heart,
from a Coercive Power in Faith and Worship.

Whereas he informs me (in his fifth Corollary, p. 6.) that The wise and
faithful Christian Magistrate may be assured of some Truths in Christian
Religion, and their opposite Errors;

1. I marvel how (the Principles of the Apologist salved) the Light of Nature
should discover any such Truth as this, that there is such a thing in rerum
Natura. as a CHRISTIAN Magistrate; or being discovered, should assent unto it;
which notwithstanding he affirms concerning this, and all the rest of his
Corollaries. For if the Light of Nature be in no capacity to discover that
there is a Christ, nor so much as to assent to any discovery that is made of
him (which is one main Article, it seems, of the Apologist's Faith) how should
it discover, or come to own or acknowledge, a Christian Magistrate? Can a man
believe or think, that the Stars derive their light from the Sun, and yet be in
no capacity of believing that there is a Son, or so much as knowing whether
there be a Sun, or no?

2. What if the wise and faithful Christian Magistrate may be assured of some
Truths in Christian Religion; can any Christian, or Christian State (so called)
be assured, that all their Magistrates, are, or always will be, wise and
faithful? If not, then is it not safe, or reasonable, to entrust the
Magistrate, as a Magistrate, or simply as bearing the additional external
denomination of Christian, with such a Power, of the regular administration
whereof only such Magistrates are capable, who are not only Christian, but wise
and faithful also.

3. Suppose not only the wise and faithful Christian Magistrate, but every
Christian Magistrate (so called) without exception, may be assured of some
Truths in Christian Religion, what follows? Does it either (in the first place)
follow, that therefore he may raise, or force from the people, what Maintenance
or Revenue he pleases for the supporting, or enriching, what Ministers he
pleases? Or, 2. Does it follow, that therefore he may punish men with mulcts,
fines, imprisonments, etc. for such Opinions as he pleases, or which he
deemeth erroneous? yea or such, concerning which he thinks himself most assured
that they are erroneous? Or was not Paul before his Conversion to Christ
assured of many Truths in that Religion, which was delivered by God himself
unto the Jews, (and consequently, of their opposite Errors) and yet thought
verily that Jesus Christ was not the promised Messiah, (which yet was a main
Point to be known, and believed, according unto the Principles of that
Religion,) yea and that he ought to do many things against him, and those that
believed on him, and practiced accordingly? Or, 3. (and lastly) Does it from
the specified premises, follow, that therefore the Christian Magistrate may
appoint what persons he pleases to elect and reprobate whom they shall please,
either to, or from, the work of the Ministry, and preaching of the Gospel? If
all these consequents, or deductions, be palpably irrelative to the said
Premises and Corallary, why does the Apologist present the Magistrate with
such ashes as these to feed upon?

But how comes it to pass that we hear so little (or rather nothing at all)
all this while, for the Justification of the Ministers Proposals touching that
investiture of some Clergymen with Authority and Power to put the Ministry and
Preaching of the Gospel into what hands they please; considering that this is
one of those Irregularities, at which the Queries principally strike? The
Master of the Feast (it seems) judged what he had to bring forth upon this
account, to be his best Wine, and so kept it to the last. Therefore page 6. 7.
etc. we have this cause mooted (though little promoted) thus:

Besides, who can deny it to be the privilege and duty of a Master of a family,
to admit such only to teach in his house as his Conscience shall be satisfied
in, and warrant him to receive? Or to come yet a little nearer [ even as Nigh as
you will] will the Churches distinguished by the Name of Independents, and
Anabaptists (suppose Mr Goodwin's Church) admit of any person, either wholly
unknown, or known to be either grossly ignorant, or scandalous (suppose a known
Mahumetan, or one of their own judgment, and without scandal, but wholly
unknown) to teach in their Congregations without their approbation, and assent
first obtained? If not (as it is presumed they will not) let no man scruple to
allow that thing to be the right of the Magistrate as a public Parent, in the
disposal of public places and revenues to persons to be approved by himself,
or such as he shall think meet to be trusted therein, which is claimed as a
right by every private Parent and Congregation. Thus far our Apologist: but
quite out of his way. For this Discourse is built upon sundry loose and
groundless suppositions; As,

1. That the respective Congregations of Men under the Magistrates
Jurisdiction, have no more right, are in no more, no better capacity, to choose
their own Teachers, then children or servants in a family, are to choose theirs.
This is (...).

2. That the respective Congregations within the Magistrates Jurisdiction are
no more bound in Conscience to afford maintenance unto him that teaches them
(I mean, faithfully, and with their own consent) then children or servants in a
family are bound to maintain him, who by the Master of the family is appointed
to instruct or teach them. This is (...).

3. That the said respective Congregations may have Ministers or Teachers
imposed upon them by the Magistrate, upon the same account of reason and
equity, on which they may choose them themselves, or on which Children may have
Teachers provided for them by their Parents. This is (...).

4. That the Magistrates providing maintenance for Ministers of Flocks and
Congregations, does not make void that Commandment of God, (in our Saviors
sense to the like expression and charge, Mat. 15. 6.) by which these
Congregations stand charged to make provision for them themselves. This is
(...).

5. That there is any such thing, or things, as those here termed public
places and revenues, wherein the Magistrate has the like Interest, or right of
property, with that, which every Master of a family, and so every respective
member of a Congregation, has in that estate, wherewith the Providence of God
has blessed him, and the just Laws of the Land adjudg his. This is (...). For
Tithes are not a public Revenue, at least not in such a sense, which gives
the Magistrate a like, or the same, right in the disposal of them, which every
private man has in the disposal of his Estate. A private man may remove his
Estate from, and to what place he pleases, may bestow it, or what part of it
he pleases, upon persons of what calling he pleases, yea or may keep it to
himself: but I presume it to be the sense of the Apologist himself, that a
Magistrate has no such right to dispose of the public Revenue (as he terms
it,) as, viz. to dispose the Tithes growing in one Parish, to the Minister or
Teacher of another, much less to a private man who is no Teacher at all, least
of all, to himself.

6. (And lastly) That the public Revenue of the Ministry (by which I suppose
the Apologist, either only, or chiefly, means, Tithes) is such a Maintenance
or Revenue, which by the Law of God may be forced or extorted from the people
by the Magistrate, and that upon such terms, that when he has so extorted it,
he has as absolute a right in the disposal of it, as the persons from whom he
extorteth it, have in the disposal of the remainder of their Estates. This is
(...). No Law of God can be produced, by which the lawfulness of these things
can be evinced, or maintained. So that our Apologist in all this quarter of his
discourse extra oleas vagatur, and begs his bread in desolate places.

Whereas he adds (page 7.) that in my last Query I have appealed to the Law of
Nature, as to my Caesar; let him but read this Query the second time, and then
I shall appeal to his Conscience, whether there be any truth in such a saying,
or no. And when he desires that this may be remembered, that so far Power is
granted by me to the Magistrate in Religion, as the Law of Nature does dictate,
he desires a remembrance of that which (I believe) was never known; at least if
his meaning in the clause be (for the words are ambiguous, and hardly
intelligible) that I grant a power to the Magistrate in all such matters of
Religion, which by the light or Law of Nature may be proved to be unlawful, or
unseemly to be done. I have already disowned any such grant as this; and
elsewhere given an account at large of my sense in this behalf. The brief hereof
is this: By the light or Law of Nature, covetousness, penuriousness in giving
upon occasion, timidity or fearfulness, diffidence or distrustfulness in the
Divine Providence; and generally, whatsoever comes short of that worth and
excellency, which by the light of Nature may be discerned such (I mean matter
of worth and excellency) in men, may be the same light be discovered to be
unlawful, or uncomely. Yet it is far from me to think, that therefore the
Magistrate has power to punish men for such infirmities or defects as these.
Laws, especially such as are punitive, are not wont to be enacted against
persons who do not attain that pitch of worth and excellency, which is
desirable in all men, and which if accordingly found in all, would highly
conduce to the honor and prosperietie of a Commonwealth; but against such
persons only, who either do such things which are notoriously destructive to
the peace and well being thereof, and from which the generality of men, do, and
easily may, abstain; or else who refuse or neglect the doing of such things,
which in certain cases are necessary to be done, and may easily, and without
much prejudice or danger, be done, for the preservation thereof.

Presently after the Gentleman finds himself aggrieved at the Contradistinction
(as he called it) in my last Query, as being unsound, because here I
distinguish the worshipping of God in a false manner, from evil doing against
the Light of Nature. I suppose his offense taken here (though he represents my
contradistinction but by halfs, and to the obscuring of my meaning in these
words, the worshipping of God in a false manner) is not with the good leave of
his own principles otherwise. These (I presume) form his Judgment on this wise;
viz. that the Light of Nature is not sufficient to discover the worshipping of
God in a false manner, at least, not every worshipping of him in such a manner.
For then, wherein should the light of the Scriptures themselves, exceed the
light of Nature, in that important affair of Christian Religion? Therefore
certainly there is a real Distinction, and this broad enough, between
worshipping God in a false manner, and, doing evil against the light of Nature.
And if he would have pleased only to peruse those few Pages in another Treatise
of mine, which (for brevity sake) I refer unto, in the end of this Query, he
might (I suppose) have been better satisfied touching the Apostles meaning (
Romans 13. 4.) by, him that does evil; and that by this expression, he could not
mean, or intend, any such Spiritual Delinquent as I describe by some particular
instances in the said Query.

He yet adds: that the Law of Nature teaches the Magistrate to make Laws
against false Worship, and Idolatry.

I believe my Apologist speaks this without Book. For what Laws against false
Worship and Idolatry, can he produce, or instance, the making whereof was
taught by the Law of Nature? All Laws of this kind made by Christian States and
Magistrates, he has no reason to judge were taught by the light of Nature, but
rather by the Scriptures, (whether rightly, or amiss, as to this point,
understood, I now dispute not.) If there were any such Laws made by Pagan
States or Magistrates (I mean, Laws made against some particular kinds of false
Worship and Idolatry) the spirit and intent of these Laws was rather for the
countenance and support of one kind of Idolatry or false Worship (viz. that
which was more generally practiced, and perhaps commanded, in this State) then
for the punishing, or suppressing, of those prohibited, and made punishable, by
such Laws; as Lerinensis reports of Nestorius the Heretic, that to make way
for the credit and propagation of his own, he fiercely opposed all other
Heresies Hic ut utini haec est suae aditum patefaceret, Cunctarum haeres^ on
blasphem as i^ sectabatur.
. In which case, supposing the Laws we speak of (made against particular
Idolatries) were taught by the Law of Nature (which yet is evident enough in
the case in hand, that they were not) they cannot be looked upon as Laws made
against, but rather for, Idolatry and false Worship.

2. If the Law of Nature teaches the Magistrate to make Laws against false
Worship and Idolatry, I would gladly know of my Apologist whether it teaches
him to do it against all, and all manner of false Worships, and Idolatries
whatsoever; or whether against some particulars only in this kind. If against
all in general, then are the teachings of the Law of Nature in this great
Affair of Christian Religion, as complete and absolute, as the teachings of the
Scriptures, yea and of the Spirit of God himself, which (I know) is none of my
Apologists thoughts. If against some particulars only, let my Apologist, either
by the light of the Scriptures, or by any other light that shines clearly,
particularize them, and separate them from their fellows, against which the
said Law of Nature teaches no making of Laws, and his reward shall be this:
Erit mihi magnus Apollo.

As Great Apollo he shall be to me.

If he shall not do this, and that secundum sub and supra, i. e. as well in all
particulars, against which the Law of Nature teaches him to make Laws, as in
all those also, against which this Law of Nature teaches him no such thing,
but rather prohibiteth him the doing of it, he does but entangle and ensnare
the Magistrate, in telling him, that the Law of Nature teaches him to make
Laws against false Worship and Idolatry.

These Premises of my Apologist, p. 7. warily understood, are good: Ignorance
of the true God is the greatest plague [I presume his sense is, causalis, not
formalis] of all Commonwealths: And again; He pulls down the foundation of all
humane Society [I suppose he speaks of the best, and most worthy foundation]
who takes away Religion, or abolisheth it out of the minds of men. But the
Conclusion which he infers from hence is extremely inconsequent: Whence it is
that all Impiety is to be punished with the greatest and most grievous
punishments. How does the man wring the nose of his Premises to force the
blood of this Conclusion from it? Certainly this grape, that all Impiety [i. e.
all, and all manner, and all degrees, of Impiety] is to be punished with the
greatest and most grievous punishments, is so harsh and sour, that it never
grew upon any vine of Gods planting. Nor has the said inference any tolerable
connection with his Premises. For if the Ignorance of God be the greatest
plague in all Commonwealths, then ought the Magistrate to use all wisdom and
diligence, and good conscience, to introduce and plant the knowledge of the true
God in his Commonwealth. But to punish ALL Impiety with the greatest and most
grievous punishments, is so far from being a prudential, or likely method, or
means, to produce this effect, that of the two, it is more proper and likely to
abolish all Religion, and true knowledge of God, out of the minds of men. And
where a Nation is generally profane, or Atheistically disposed, as all those
are, who deny God in their works (which is more then to be feared, is, not
morbus Epidemicus, but Oecumenicus also, the temper of the generality of all,
or the greatest part of, the Nations under the whole Heavens) in case my
Apologist's Conclusion should take place, and ALL Impiety be punished with the
greatest and most grievous punishments, the Inhabitants of such a Land, though
before as the stars of Heaven for multitude, would soon be left few in number,
that a child may write them. So that the Conclusion we now speak of, may very
properly be called, The Abomination of Desolation.

Whereas (in process of discourse, viz. p. 8.) he says, He disturbs Religion,
who speaks, or writes, impiously of the Nature of God, therefore he is to be
punished, and truly with death, has he not spoken this against himself, and
his own life, (yea and against the lives of all his beloved
fellow-Proposalists,) if the severity and strictness of his own Law should be
put in execution upon him? For does not He that represents God, whether by
words, or writing, either as unmerciful, or as unjust, as tyrannical, as a
Dissembler, as walking contrary to his Oath, as imprudent, as mutable, etc.
speak, or write, impiously of the Nature of God? And has not the Apologist
himself, if not by writing (which whether he has done, or no, certain I am
that many of his Judgment touching the Nature of God, have) yet by words,
represented him under the Reproach and deep dishonor, of some, or all, of these
Abominations? Dies indicabit: The day will declare it. I know the men of this
demerit and guilt, will resent the Charge with as much indignation, as the Jews
did that of our Savior against them, wherein he charged them with going about
to kill him: Thou have a Devil (say they) who goes about to kill thee John 7.
19.
? as if they had been the most innocent persons under Heaven in respect of any
such vile and bloody intentions, and He a person of a Diabolical spirit to lay
any such thing to their charge. Yet we know they were never the more innocent
(but the more guilty rather) for their peremptory and high rejection of their
Charge: nor he at all guilty, or blameworthy, for charging them,
notwithstanding their deep offense and exulceration of spirit thereat. Most
certain it is, that all the water in the Sea will not wash the heads (whatever
it may the hearts) of the men I now speak of, from the guilt and crime of
writing, and speaking impiously of the Nature of God. They may, Proteus-like,
turn themselves, their tongues and pens, into twenty several shapes, and ten,
of shifts, evasions, pretenses, provisions (and what not?) but all their
washings will not make the Blackamore white: all their wrestings and wringings
it this way, and that, notwithstanding,

-- Haeret lateri laetalis arundo.
The deadly arrow still sticks fast in their sides.
Concerning the Testimonies both of Gentiles and Jews (for it seems he lays
his hands across upon the heads of his two Compurgators, placing the Gentiles
at his right hand, and the Jews at his left) wherewith he concludes his worthy
Apology; first, he gives instance in the first founding of Rome (bonis avibus,
for good success sake) telling us, that Romulus and Numa Pompilius, the first
Kings, laid the Foundations of their Law-making in Piety and Justice; and that
of Romulus it is particularly said, that before all things he began with the
Divine Worship, etc. I marvel to what account these Instances turn for his
purpose? Do they not rather prove, that Kings and Magistrates, and Rulers of
the Earth, have (more generally) an itching humor, and love to be tampering in
matters of Religion and Divine Worship, and to have Religions and Worships of
their own calculation and contrivance, how blind or insufficient soever they be
for the managing or regulating such an affair, then that they have any regular
Interest or right of Power to intermeddle therein? Or does the Apologist intend
to commend the examples of Romulus and Numa Pompilius in setting up what
Religion, and what Divine Worship they thought best, amongst their people, unto
the Christian Magistrate for his imitation, or encouragement? Certainly that
Religion, and kind of Worship, which these Kings set up in their dominions, was
not taught them by the Law of Nature, unless it be supposed that the one was
the true Religion, and the other, the true Worship. For the Law of Nature
teaches no man any false Religion, or false Worship; much less does it teach
any man to compel others to submit either to the one, or the other. Therefore
the Gentleman is no Debtor unto the Gentiles for any contribution from them
toward his cause.

For what he cites from Mr Selden's Book De Jure Naturae, etc. about the
Opinion of the Jews concerning the Light of Nature, condemning Idolatry, making
Laws against it, etc. not having the Book by me (nor leisure at present to
enquire after it) I cannot examine the truth of his citations. But whereas he
attempts to overawe me with Mr Selden's learning and judgment, saying, that
perchance Mr Goodwin will think fit to comply with them, rather then to
contest; I freely and clearly say, that I am most ready to comply with the
learning and judgment of a man by many degrees inferior to Mr Seldom in the
honor which belongs unto Learning, who shall teach me that, which I am able
to comprehend, or to conceive at least as probable: but otherwise, Angels from
Heaven, and Scarabees, or Beetles from the dunghill, are Teachers alike unto
me: unless the light of Reason shows me a difference between them, I have no
more Faith for the teachings of the one, then of the other. Were Mr Seldom,
Socrates, and my Apologist, Plato, I must commend them; but not forsake my
ancient and fast Friend, Truth, for their sakes. But touching the Jews (in a
word)

1. By the course and current of the Scriptures it appears, that they were no
Great Students in the Law of Nature; neither had they the like occasion, or
necessity, which other Nations had, to engage themselves much in this study.
For they, from their great Progenitor and Founder of their Nation, Abraham,
were discipled and trained up to a religious and holy Conversation, by
Miracles, Signs, and Wonders, by extraordinary Appearances of God, by literal
and express Revelations and Discoveries from Heaven of the Mind and Will of God
concerning them: Behold (says Moses to this people) I have taught you Statutes
and Judgments, even as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do so in
the Land, whither ye go to possess it. Keep therefore and do them: for this is
your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all
these Statutes, and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding
people. For what Nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them Deuteronomy.
4. 5 6. 7, etc.
? etc. Therefore this Nation, having God so nigh unto them (as it follows) to
instruct and teach them all things, that were needful for them, either to know,
or practice, had no occasion to pore much on the Book of Nature, nor to seek
that by labor and travel, which was brought unto them in such abundance by the
immediate hand of God himself. Whilst they were daily fed with Manna from
Heaven, ploughing and sowing had been but lost labor. The case was otherwise
with the rest of the Nations on the Earth.

2. (And with more particularity to what the Apologist alleges concerning the
Jews their making Laws against Idolatry, and false Worship) What occasion, or
necessity, can it be imagined they should have to interpose their Laws or
Constitutions (Laws I mean of their own framing and enditing by the Light of
Nature) against, or about, Idolatry and false Worship, when as they had so many
particular, full, and express Laws touching matters of this nature, delivered
unto them by God himself? Nay,

3. They had not only no occasion, or necessity upon them to trouble themselves
with making Laws against Idolatry and false Worship, being so plentifully in
this kind provided for by God himself; but they were restrained by an express
Law given unto them in that behalf by God, from setting their threshold by his,
I mean, from super-adding any Laws of their own unto those which he had
delivered unto them. Ye shall NOT ADD unto the Word which I command you,
neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that you may keep the Commandments of
the Lord your God Deuteronomy 4 2.
. And again: What thing soever I command you, observe to do it: thou shall NOT
ADD thereto, nor diminish from it Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
. Doubtless though my Apologist judges the Laws against Idolatry and false
Worship delivered by God unto the Jews, to be defective and insufficient, and
such, whose defects were supplied by additional Laws made by the Jews
themselves upon consultation had with the Light and Law of Nature; yet God
himself, both his God, and my God, judges otherwise of them; otherwise he
would not have so expressly and severely prohibited a super-addition of other
Laws unto them. Therefore,

4. In case all that be true which the Apologist cites from Mr Seldom and his
Rabbis, touching the Jews making Laws against Idolatry and false Worship, by
the Light of Nature; yet their practice herein being evidently unwarrantable,
and condemned by God himself, he does rather prevaricate with his Cause, then
any ways promote it, by insisting on it, or so much as mentioning it.

5. (And lastly) Concerning the Laws delivered unto the Jews against Idolatry
and false Worship, by God himself, I have heretofore demonstratively proved
that they are, or were, so appropriate to this Nation, that they were not
intended by God as obligatory upon the Gentiles, the tenor and import of them
being proportionable and fitted unto such a people, or Nation only, who had
such extraordinary, miraculous, and supernatural Appearances of the true God,
ever and anon vouchsafed unto them, as the Jews had. See and consider to this
purpose, Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16, 17, etc. And if these, or any the like, Laws should
have been put in vigorous execution in the Gentile part of the world, that
universal over-spreading of Idolatry considered, which covered (in a manner)
the face of the whole Earth, they would have drawn more blood then the world
could have spared without fainting, and sinking right down. Yea if such Laws as
he speaks of, had been only executed among the Jews themselves, who are known
to have been formerly as much addicted to strange ( i.e. false) Gods, and false
Worships, as other Nations, of their multitudes like unto the sand of the Sea,
they would have left them a small remnant only. The Discourse in which I make
the proof mentioned, together with the Pages where the said Proof is managed, I
direct the Reader unto in the close of my fifth Query.

And thus I have dispatched with my Apologist; Only (for a close) desiring the
Reader to take knowledge, that He has taken little or no knowledge in his
Apology of those scruples suggested in the Queries about the competency or
meetness of such persons, whom the Magistrate, according to the advice of the
Proposals, must set over the great business of repelling from, and authorizing
unto, the preaching of the Gospel. It is like herein he has followed the
wholesome advice of the Poet:

-- Et quae
Desperes tractata nitescere posse, relinquas: i. e.
What thou despair'st to manage plausibly,
(Take my advice) pass by it silently.
An Answer to the Pamphlet, Entitled, Mr J. Goodwin's Queries Questioned.
COncerning the Author of the Pamphlet, styled, Mr John Goodwin's Queries
Questioned, together with this his Discourse, I shall not need to say much,
since he has befriended me with the gentle opposition of one Query only, to my
Thirty; and this so well conditioned, that it may be easily resolved, without
the least detriment, or damage, to the Cause pleaded in my Queries. For is not
his one Query, this; Whether the fourth Commandment does not sufficiently
justify and enjoin the Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion? I
must confess that this Commandment does (in one sense) sufficiently justify
and enjoin the Power of the Civil Magistrate in matters of Religion; but in
this sense, the first, and the second, or any other of the nine, does both
justify and enjoin the same, altogether as sufficiently as this. For that
which is neither justifiable, nor meet to be enjoined, may be said to be
sufficiently justified and enjoined, when there is nothing at all said, or
done, either for the one, or the other. An innocent person is sufficiently
punished, when he is not punished at all: and the Gentleman the Author of the
Query in hand; is sufficiently commended for the same, when he is not commended
at all. I presume the treasure of the duty, or power, of the Civil Magistrate,
as such, was never judged by any sober man to be hid in the field of the fourth
Commandment, nor in any part of the first Table, nor did ever any labourer in
Gods vineyard dig here to find it. It is the sense of all judicious men, as far
as my reading extends, that the first of the two Tables does not prescribe,
or intermeddle with, the duties of one man to another, nor yet the duties
appertaining either to any natural, or politic Office, or Relation; but only
enjoins such duties, wherein the Worship of God consists, and which equally
relate to all persons whatsoever. Of this mind is Calvin In duas enim parts,
quibus tota continetur justicia, legem suam sic divisit Deus, ut priorem
religionis officiis, quae peculialiter ad numinis sui cultum pertinent, alteram
officiis charitatis, quae in homines recipient, assignaverit. Calv. Inst. l.
2. c. 8.. 11.
, Peter Martyr Prima tabula est, quae circa Deum absque ullo medio versatur:
Altera vero ad proximum dirigitur. P. Martyr. Loc. Com. Class. 2. c. 3.. 21.
, Musculus Si cogites de dilectione Dei and proximi, prima tabula dilectionem
Dei; altera, dilectionem proximi requirit. Musc. Loc. in Praecept. Octav. Et
paulo post: Prima tabula, quid Deo; altera, quid proximo debeamus praescribit.
, Rivet Nec in prima tabula continentur mandata de officio nostroerga nos, and
proximum, sed erga Deum. Rivet. Explicat. Decalogi. p. 109. Secunda tabula
continet sex alia praecepta, quae nos erudiunt de iis, quae proximo debemus, ut
prioris praecepta nos direxerunt ad ea, quibus specialiter and immediate Deo
sumus astricti. Idem. p. 170.
, and many others.

Besides, the tenor of the words in this Commandment running after the same
manner, and carried on by the same pronoun, or term of address, thou, thou, as
well in the subsequent part of the Command, as in the two first clauses, it is
extremely incongruous to say, or think (as my Anti-Querist does) that in the
two first clauses the personal observation of the Command, is commanded to all
in general, and to men, as men, and that in the rest, the observation of it
should be commanded unto Parents, as such, and unto Magistrates, as such. For,
according to this notion, the first and second, Thou, must signify, Thou man,
and again, Thou man: The third Thou, Thou Parent, and Thou Master too: the
fourth and last Thou, Thou Magistrate. If my Anti-Querist can show any other
period, or sentence throughout all the Scripture, of like interpretation, with
this, and wherein the same pronoun and term of address, must import and
signify such variety of capacities, relations, and formal considerations, it
is probable I shall consider further of his notion about the fourth
Commandment, then yet I think it worth the while to do; although a parallel in
this case would be no sufficient demonstration of the truth or soundness of the
conceit.

2. If the Master of the Family (whether Father, or Master) or Magistrate, be
empowered and enjoined by this Commandment, the former, to compel, and by
punishment force, his children, or servants, to the outward Worship of God; the
latter, to do the like unto strangers, by mulcts, fines, imprisonments, etc.
then are they equally empowered, and enjoined, to exercise the same compulsive
authority upon their Cattle also (their OX, Ass, and Horse) and commanded to
force these also unto the outward means of Gods Worship. For the tenor of the
Commission, or Injunction (so fancied by the Anti-querist) imposed by this
Commandment upon Magistrates, and Masters of families, respects as well, and
as much, the one, as the other. In it thou shall not do any work: thou, nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy CATTLE,
nor the stranger within thy gates, etc. Here is not the least difference made,
nor intimated, between the Power given to the Master, or Magistrate, over their
children, servants, strangers, etc. and that given them over their CATTLE.

3. If there were any Injunction intended by God in this Commandment to be laid
upon the Magistrate, to compel those under his Jurisdiction, unto the outward
or public means of Gods Worship, doubtless such an Injunction should rather
respect, and be extended unto, the generality of his own people, and native
Subjects, then Strangers only: Whereas here is not the least mention, or
intimation, of any other person, that can with any color be pretended to be
made obnoxious to the (imaginary) compulsive Power of the Magistrate, but the
STRANGER only.

4. One main end of the Institution and gift of the Sabbath by God, was that
such persons (especially) who were under such a Power and Authority of others,
by which they might be, and ordinarily were, compelled to labor, work, and
pains-taking, as children and servants, together with laboring cattle, might
have a seasonable and competent rest, and refreshing, from their accustomed
labor. This is evident from several places. Six days shall thou do thy work,
and on the seventh day thou shall rest: THAT thine OX and thine Ass may rest,
and the son of thine handmaid, and the stranger may be refreshed Exodus 23. 12.
. So again: But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou
shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thine OX, nor thine Ass, nor any of thy
Cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates; THAT THY MANSERVANT AND THY
MAIDSERVANT MAY REST AS WELL AR THOU. And remember that thou wast a servant in
the Land of Egypt Deuteronomy 5, 14 15
, etc. This last clause, and remember that thou wast a servant, etc. added by
way of motive, and enforcement of obedience unto the preceding Commandment,
from those, to whom it was more peculiarly given (as viz. Parents, and Masters)
plainly shows, that God in this Commandment did in a very signal and special
manner, aim at and intend the ease, comfort, and refreshing of those, who
otherwise were subject and in danger to have been over-wrought, surcharged, and
oppressed with labor, by others. Now then, if it shall be supposed, that these
Parents, or Masters, who have the Command of their childrens and servants
labors, all the week besides, are either empowered, but especially enjoined,
by God in this Commandment, to compel or force them against their wills by
stripes, or otherwise, to the outward means of Divine Worship, he should give
them a Commission, nay lay an Injunction upon them, to make the day intended by
him for the comfort, rest, and refreshing of these children and servants, a day
of greater sorrow, trouble, and discomfort unto them, as the case might be (and
was frequently not unlike to be) then any, or all the days of the week besides;
and so should plainly prevaricate with one of his chief intentions in the
Command, and be divided in himself.

5. If the Magistrate be empowered, or enjoined, by the Commandment before us,
to compel (either by fines, imprisonment, or the like) strangers or others, to
the external Worship of God, then in case that Worship, whereunto he is
supposed to be empowered or enjoined to compel them, be, in the Judgment and
Conscience of him that is compelled, superstitious, idolatrous, or unlawful,
then the Magistrate has not simply a Power, but a Command laid upon him by
God, to force men, and particularly strangers, to pollute their Consciences, or
at best to play the hypocrites by drawing near unto God with their lips,
whilst their hearts are far from him.

6. (And lastly) If the Magistrate has a Power or Command from God to compel
strangers, or others (by the means aforesaid) to the outward Worship of God,
then must he be supposed to be anointed by God with an infallible spirit of
discerning, which is the true Worship of God, and instituted by himself.
Otherwise God must be supposed not only to give a Commission unto, but even to
lay an Injunction upon, the blind to lead, yea to hale and drag, the blind; and
not only so, but as the case may be, and is like to be very frequently, to lay
an Injunction upon the blind, to lead, hale, pull, and drag, even the seeing
themselves: which is a much more unnatural absurdity, then the other.

These things (with some others, which I shall not trouble either my self, or
Reader, to mention, at present) considered, make it a thing very apparent unto
me, that that which led my Anti-querist out of the way of the mind of God in
the fourth Commandment, was partly his pre-conceived opinion of the Magistrates
Power in matters of Religion, together with his inability where to find a more
plausible or colorable ground for it in all the Scripture; partly his
non-advertency that the external or bodily rest from labor, is the only
literal and express end of God in this Commandment, (however this literal rest
was typical, pointing at both those rests spoken of, Heb. 4. 9, 10, 11.) partly
also the tenor and carriage of the Commandment it self, expressly calculated
according to the exigency of such an end.

For the reason why this Commandment was delivered by God in this tenor, or
form of words, -- in it thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
stranger, etc. rather then in this, No person whatsoever, bond or free, young
or old, stranger or homeborn, no Ox or Ass whatsoever, or the like, shall do
any work; the reason (I say) why God used the former tenor of words in drawing
up this Commandment, was to intimate, that the Rest of the Sabbath was not like
to be violated, or the Commandment it self broken, but by the covetousness,
cruelty, or oppression of Parents and Masters, and such who had power to exact
and require labor and work, from others, whether persons, as children,
servants, and strangers, or other creatures, as OX, Ass, or the like. As the
Apostle says, The Law was not made (i.e. was not so much made) for a righteous
man [meaning, for such a man who is under no likelihood of sinning] but for the
lawless and disobedient 1 Timothy 1. 9.
, etc. i. e. for such, who without the bar of the Law and the punishment
therein threatened, were, or would be, very propense and apt to do wickedly,
etc. upon a like account we may very reasonably conceive and say, that the Law
of the Rest of the Sabbath was not so much made for children, or servants, or
Oxen, or Asses, because there is so little propensity in these, to work, or
labor, when they are not necessitated unto it by their Superiors, in as much
as they are no gainers by their labors, but losers rather; but for Heads of
Families, Masters of Servants, Parents, of Children, Owners of laboring Cattle,
etc. who by reason of those covetous and hard dispositions, which are so
incident unto men, that have the opportunity of enriching themselves by the
labor of others, were likely to transgress in this kind. Or in case there
should be found any disposition in a child, or servant, man, or maid (and there
is the same reason of the stranger) to work on the Sabbath day without being
compelled unto it by their Parents, or Masters, this disposition is sufficiently
reproved, or restrained, by God, partly in his restraining their Masters and
Parents themselves from working, partly by restraining them from imposing any
burden of labor upon them on this day. These two particulars are sufficient
to inform them, that his will and mind is, that they should rest from labor on
the Sabbath day.

So that when God in the Commandment turns himself so particularly unto
Parents, and Masters, charging them they shall not do any work, they, nor their
children, nor their servants (of the one sex, or the other) his meaning is not,
that they should compel them to keep the Sabbath (which is my Anti-querists
notion) but that they take heed that they compel them not to break it, viz. by
imposing any servile work, or labor upon them on this day. Thy children, thy
servants, shall do no work; i. e. they shall not be employed, or required, or
constrained by thee, to work on the seventh day. This to be the meaning of God,
is yet more evident from hence, viz. that the same Charge or Injunction is laid
upon the Parent, or Master, in reference to his Cattle, which is laid upon him
in respect of his Children, or Servants. In it thou shall not do any work,
Thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor
thy CATTLE. Now sure enough it is, that men are not commanded to compel or
force their Cattle to keep the Sabbath day, but only not to compel them to
labor on this day, which is their breaking of it. But as touching the work or
interposure of the Magistrate in one kind or other, as such, about the
observation of the Sabbath, here is altissimum and profundissimum silentium,
most perfect and profound silence from the one end of the Heaven of this
Commandment unto the other.

To conclude, whereas the Anti-querist informs his Reader, that my 18. 19.
20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. Queries concern only the Ordination of Ministers, which
(he well says) is nothing to the Question about the Magistrates Power; the
truth is, that to my best remembrance, the Ordination of Ministers was not so
much as once in all my thoughts, whilst I was drawing up the said Queries: nor
do any of them concern the Ordination of Ministers in the least. Or if the
Gentleman will needs, by an Acyrology, term the subject of those Queries, the
Ordination of Ministers; then I must crave leave to inform him, that although
the said Queries do not concern the Question of the Magistrates Power about
matters of Religion, in the general, yet do they mainly concern a particular
branch of that Power, which is asserted unto him about such matters in the
Ministers Proposals; as the Reader, if he judges it worth his time to compare
the one with the other, will readily find. But by the sense of this
Anti-querist, and the Apologist touching the interposure of the Magistrates
Power in matters of Religion, it appears sufficiently that if the Land had a
Phalaris King over it, there would be found more then one Perillus to make him
brazen Bulls for the tormenting of such Christians, who are either too weak, or
too wise, to swim down the stream of a State Religion, or to call men, Rabbi.

ERRATA.
Page 11. line 1. for, Wirship, read, Worship. Page 13. l. 30. for, Nigh, r.
nigh.

FINIS.

