The Good-Fellows Counsel: Or, The Bad Husbands Recantation.
Proving by Arguments both Just and fit,
That he which spends least money has most wit.
To the Tune of, Tan Tivye.




I Had no more wit, but was tred under feet*
and all was for want of money,
I daily did walk in the fear of a Writ,
and all, etc.
But now i am resolved to be more wise,
And early each morning I mean for to rise,
There Is none for a sluggard that shall me despise,
when I have no want of money.
I was such a drudge, that it made me to grudge,
because I had got no money,
On each man's occasions I for'st was to trudge,
because I had got no money.
But now i am resolved i will do so no more,
I Will drink no strong Ale upon the old score,
And then I do hope I shall never be poor,
when I have no want of money*
I was such a thrift, that I could not make shift
and all was, etc.
I was ready to hide my head in a clift,
and all, etc.
But now i am resolved my trade for to mend,
I*le work and get money to keep and to spend,
And then Iam sure my foes will me be friend,
when I have no, etc.
I was like a Fool, that is sent unto School,
and all* etc.
And every vile fellow my actions did rule,
and all, etc.
But now i am resolved I will mend my trade,
I Will get as good clothes as I can get made,
And then I shall be a bonny bonny Blade,
when I have no want of money*
The second Part,
To the same tune.
FOr when I was poor, and had not a store,
of that which we use to call money,
Then all my proud Neighbors would pass by my door,
because they knew I had no money.
I Will warrant you they would never ask me to go,
To drink a strong pot because they did know,
My purse and my credit was grown very low,
for want of this raskally money.
Then all my acquaintance my person did slight, and all was for want of this
money,
and some withheld from me that which was my right heed
because they knew I had no money.
Let me go, let me come, there was no man would
When I try*d to be trusted I never could speed
But all my friends failed at the time of my need,
because they, etc.
Now all my dear friends be advised by me,
all you that have wanted this money,
Observe but rich people they are not so free,
because they do love to get money.
though presant you be all the whilst that they dine
You Will find them as free as a hungry Swine,
Then i le not be lavish of that which is mine,
and I shall have plenty of money.
For a Nigardly gallant i will not be a slave,
that is not the way to get money,
Their clothes are so gay they are forced to crave,
and to pinch the poor Laborers money.
These needy young Gallants they are not for me,
Your ordinary people are always most free,
And it is better to work for a Farmer ^han he,
for then a man's sure of his money.
From a paunch-belly'd Hostiss I am to refrain,
if ever I mean to get money,
For she both my purse and my credit will stain,
in making me spend all my money.
She Will ask me to eat when she thinks I have dined,
Or of some salt bit she will put me in mind,
That will make me to drink, and be spending my coin,
that she might be taking my money.
With a Pick-pocket longer I am not to deal,
if ever I mean to get money,
For they have broke more than ever they will heal,
in cheating poor men of their money.
I never will give to a counsel a Fee,
An Atorny shall never take a penny of me,
For I with my Neighbors so well will agree,
when I have got plenty of money.
All roystering blades I do mean to forsake,
if e're I intend to get money,
They Will tempt me to Wrestle and cudgels at wake*
and cause me to spend all my money.
We sing, and we dance, and we fuddle about,
And when we are in we can never get out,
Until we have given our pockets the rout,
but that*s not the way to get money.
But here comes a danger that is worse then the rest*
that will tempt a youngman to spend money,
A beautiful Whore when she is handsomely dressed*
will quickly consume a man's money.
But all such decoys I intend for to shun,
And honester ways I do mean for to run,
My c^edi^ shall raise in the face of the Sun,
when I have got plenty of money.
I Will buy me a house, and i le buy me some Land,
when I have got plenty of money,
And I will keep servants shall be at command,
when I have got, etc.
And after all this I will get a rich Wife,
For I shall be free from care and from strife,
And I shall live richly all days of my life,
when I have got plenty of money.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooks by next the Golden Ball by the Hospital-Gate in
West-Smith-field.


