THE Butchers Blessing, OR THE BLOODY INTENTIONS Of Romish CAVALIERS against
the City of LONDON above other places, Demonstrated by 5. Arguments,

To the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the Sheriffs, and other the religious
and worthy Inhabitants of the said CITY.

Delivered by way of Prologue before a Sermon the last public FAST DAY,

By J: GOODWIN.

GENESIS, 19. 9. And they said, stand back: and they said again, this one
fellow came in to Sojourne, and he will needs be a Judge; now will we deal
worse with thee, then with them.

Sic ego torrentem, qua nil obstabat eunti,
Lenius, et modico strepitu decurrere vidi:
At quacunque trabes, obstractaque saxa jacebant,
Spumeus, et fervens, et ab obice saevior ibat.
Ovid. Met. LONDON: Printed for HENRY OVERTON, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Pope's Head Alley, 1642.

Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and you the rest of the worthy
Inhabitants of this great and famous CITY.
TO engage you all as one man, to rise up at once in your might, for the
preservation and defense, as well of your selves, as of your City, against that
whirlewind of cruelty and blood, which rends and tears the Kingdom in pieces
where it falls. You shall do well to consider; That your selves in particular,
and this your City, are the great hatred and wrath and indignation of these
men: What they have done unto others, whether great or small, in ways of
hostility, violence and blood, throughout the Land, they have done it chiefly
in relation to you and your ruin; all the Mountains they have cast down, and
the valleys they have filled up, have bin to prepare themselves away to you and
your City. They have practiced in cruelty hitherto, and trained up their right
hand in blood, that by that time they come to you, they may be Butchers by
occuppation: they have taught their right hand terrible things against others,
that their right hand might teach them terrible things against you: they have
forced a disposition of cruelty upon themselves, to practice cruel things upon
others, that so by custom it might become natural to them, by that time they
shall come to do execution upon you. They have tempred a cup, the mixture
whereof is red and they power out hereof daily, but you are their wicked ones
that must be made to wring out the draggs thereof, and to drink them up. The
rods wherewith they chastise your Brethren elsewhere favorers of the same
cause with you, will (you must look) be turned into Scorpions when they come
to you: and if Cheshire and Shropshire and other parts of the Land have bin
punished sevenfold, London (doubtless) shall be punished seventy times seven
fold if they shall enter and possess the Gates thereof. These heights and
depths of their rage and fury against you and your City are demonstrable upon
these 5 grounds.

First, That purity of Religion, which is a scourge in their sides, and thorns
in their eyes, has its Throne amongst you. That generation, which is the great
abhorring of their souls, I mean the generation of the righteous, of men and
women feareing God, which are in other places by tens and by fifties are with
you by hundreds and by thousands, your gleanings of them are better then the
Vintage of other places; your City is a Sanctuary unto them, and place of
refuge from all their quarters: you are looked upon as the great friend, and
favorers and protectors of them: You and your City have been the great
Bullwark against those Prelaticall invasions, wherewith the Kingdom was so
sorely infested and annoyed of late, and wherewith the truth and purity of
Religion professed in it, was in danger of being turned upside down, Had not
this City of yours bin a morsel too big for them to swallow, had it not stuck
so long in their Throats as it did: the whole Kingdom would have gone down
merrily without any straining; but now this sticking in their throat as it did,
has caused them to vomit and cast up what they had devoured otherwise. And
this (doubtless) is one maine ground and cause of their advancing and
heightening themselves in malice, and purposes of revenge against you: you are
the principal shield and Buckler of that Religion which they labor to destroy
and root up root and branch, not out of the Land only, but out of the whole
world, if it were in their power.

Secondly, You and your City are looked upon, as the chief protection and
safeguard of that Honorable Assembly and Court of Parliament, and those worthy
Members thereof who have not prevaricated, or turned head upno the Kingdom,
and the great trust reposed in them but stand by the cause they have undertaken
against all the fiery encounters and oppositions both of men and Devils.
These being the men, whose blood must be the ransom of these Sons of Belial,
if ever they be redeemed out of the hand of death and condemnation, which they
have drawn upon their heads by those desperate courses they have run, and you
being the men (as they judge and herein judge not much amiss) that chiefly
stand between them and their ransom, and will not suffer them to drink that
blood that should heal them: You can expect none other but that that Spirit of
malice and blood which possesses them, should rage and roar against you more
then others, and that the furnace of their indignation shall be het seven times
hotter then ordinary for your burning; when men are bent and have any strong
desires to offer violence or do mischief unto others, and are opposed in the
execution of their desires herein, it is commonly found, that they double the
strength of their desires to do mischief to those that oppose them in such a
way, above the desires they had of doing mischief to those others. Thus the
men of Soaom, having an (...) to offer violence to those two men (as they
supposed them to be) that were come to Lots House, and Lot interposing himself
to prevent and inner the execution of those evil intentions, they threatened
him, that they would deal worse with him, then they would with them, Genesis 19.
9. and the reason hereof is plain; because men seldom desire any thing with so
great a desire, as they do not to be opposed or hindered in the prosecution of
their desires: They can more willingly quit their desires of many things which
yet please them, freely and of themselves, then they can endure strongly to be
opposed and interrupted in the satisfaction of them: This then is another
reason, why you should be the height of their malice and revenge.

Thirdly, They know that you and your City are the Parents (as it were) that
have begotten and brought forth all that opposition which has appeared
elsewhere, or been raised against them and their proceedings in the Land: that
it has bin your zeal, in raising men and arms and moneys, that has provoked
multitudes in the Land to do likewise. They look upon others as partly passive
in that very activenesse wherein they have declared themselves against them,
and so make them (it is like) an allowance accordingly in their hatred and
thoughts of revenge against them. But upon you they look not only as merely
active against them out of an inward principle of your own, but as actuating
and animating others also. And therefore what they deduct from, or abate in
their hatred toward these, they will add to their hatred and malice against
you: you must look to pay for your selves and for your Children too. Men use
to be more merciful to those that are drawn by others to practice evil
against them, in case they come under their power, then to those that provoke
and whet them on to do it. God himself laid a heavier punishment upon Eve,
then he did upon Adan, because she was the temptresse, and partly by her
example, partly by her solicitation wrought upon his infirmity, and drew him
into part and fellowship with her in the sin. Your righteousness, is their
sin.

Fourthly you are the great remora and bar in the way of their proceedings
you separate between them and their desires, between them and their so dearly
beloved ends: there is a contrary gale blows so strong and stiff from your
quar^er that, they cannot make he port or Haven, that they have been bound for
this long time; You are they that multiply their sorrows, and increase their
pains in bringing forth: you make them buy their gold at a dearer rate, then
they are willing and had hope to have bought it: you keep them still in the
sweat of their brows, whereas they had hoped before this, to have bin eating
their bread. You are to them as Moracats sitting in the Gate was to Haman, all
his honor and greatness and favor with the King, did not avail him, he was
not himself for all his great enjoyments because Mordacai was not yet brought
under, to likc the dust at his feet: so all the success that these men have in
other parts of the Land, their plundering of this town and of that, all the
rapine and spoil they have made, all the prey and booty they have taken their
seizing upon this man and upon that, in a word, all that they have done or have
hope to do otherwise, will give them little satisfaction, will not make them
fat, so long as you and your City are in peace, and able to withstand them. And
therefore as Haman hated Mordicei more then all the nation of the Jews
besides, and sought the ruin and destruction of these only or chiefly by way
of subordination and reference to his (as appears by the Story) for he had no
quarrel to them, but for Mordicais sake, and upon occasion of that offense
given by him. Even so (doubtless) those men of wickedness we speak of burn in
hatred and desires of revenge against you, more then they do against all other
places in the Land besides: and what outrages and insolences of violence they
practice elsewhere is chiefly to accommodate and strengthen their hand, and to
be subservient unto them for the rapine and ruin of you and your City. Their
plundering and pillaging and spoiling in other places, is but the tuneing of
their instruments, the plundering and pillaging of you, would be playing out of
their song or dittie: were it not for you, they might have all things according
to their hearts desire: they might eat those apples their souls so much lust
after, they might feed fat upon the sweet bread of Romish superstitions and
Doctrines. They might have Organs and Altars, Cringings and Crouchings, they
might have Copes and Surplisses, Wafers and Tapers Crucifixes and Crosses,
Pilgrimages and Pictures, with all the accourements, and the whole profane
glory of the Romish Sinagogue. Were it not for you, they might have Lucifer put
again into Heaven, and Angels of light thrown down into Hell instead of him;
Prelates I mean restored to their former thrones and dignities and faithful
Ministers of the Gospel the great troublers of the Israel of the Devil,
trodden and trampled on like clay and mire in the streets: they might were it
not for you have every man of them a door open: which leads to his hearts
desire. They that desired to live loosely; might do it without paying any
tribute of being checked or reproved for it: and so they that had a mind to
live profanely, to oppress, to tyrannize, to be drunken to be unclean, etc.
they might have gone roundly to Hell every man his way no man asking them why do
you so, which (indeed) is the sum of all happiness that these men desire or
seek after. Whereas you and your City not being made their footstool, they
cannot get up into those thrones; the summer fruits that their souls so much
lust after, do not ripen because of the cold air that breaths upon them from
your City. So that it is no marveile, if the spoil and ruin of your City, be
the first borne of all the designs of their rage and crueltys You are the
heir that stand between them and the inheritance, if they can kill you, the
inheritance shall be theirs.

Fifthly and lastly, you and your City are looked upon as the great Magazine of
wealth, riches, and treasure in the Kingdom: the garden of the Hesperides,
where the trees grow that bear the golden apples, is known to be compassed
about with the walls of your City. Now the love of these men is so above
measure excessive to your Silver and gold, their souls cleave so to it, that
except you will give it them into their bosoms quietly, and in a way of peace,
they must needs, though with the extremest peril and hazard of their own
lives, attempt yours, for your moneys sake. This wine of yours looks so red and
pleasantly in the glass upon them; that their hearts are inflamed with it: yea
the zeal of it has so far eat them up that they cannot live without it; you
must give it them, you must let them have it one way or other, or else they
die. And therefore their resolution to make the adventure howsoever upon you,
may well be like that of the four Lepers (2 King. 7. 5.) to adventure
themselves into the camp of the Aramites; If they sat still, or if they went
into the City, they were certainly dead: and if they went amongst the
Aramites, if the worst came to the worst, they could but die; but by making the
attempt they might possibly live; so that desperate Generation we speak of,
being not able to live, not knowing how to do, how to subsist without the
spoil of your City, and the possession of your treasure looking upon
themselves as dead men without it, may in a way of ordinary discourse and
reason, come to this issue in point of resolution against you, to make the
attempt and venture upon you howsoever, if they shall miscary inmaking the
attempt, they were but dead men if they shall sit still and make no attempt
upon you, they were but dead men neither: and this was more certainly death,
then the other, in making the attempt they might (happily) prosper and so live,
you have this passage, 2 Chronicles. 14. 14. that Asa and his men spoiled all the
Cities of the Ethiopians, for this reason, because their was much in them: And
they spoiled all the Cities (says the text) for there was exceeding much
spoil in them. The abundance of wealth and treasure in them, was the reason
why they were plundered and ransacked and destroyed. Plenty of silver and gold
are of dangerous consequence and influence, to advance the courage and
resolutions of enemies; to turn weak men into strong, and cowards and such as
are fearful otherwise, into men of valor and resolution. So that now this is
another reason very considerable, why you and your Cities above all other
persons or places in the Kingdom should be predestined to spoil and ruin
in these men's councels, intentions and decrees: because in other places they
can but gleane; but here they know they shall have a full harvest.

Now then, it being a thing so apparent and evident upon these reasons (and
many more possible of like importance might be added) that you and your City
are principally intended for the great sacrifice to be offered upon the service
of the rage, malice, hatred and cruelty of these men, does it not concern you
in special manner; more then all the Kingdom besides, to look about you, and
quit your selves like men, yea and more then like men (if it were possible) to
cast if it were your whole substance into the treasury of your preservation
and peace? Let any thing you shall keep back of what is in your power to do or
give for the advancement of the great service that has been recomended unto
you, every time you see it or think upon it, be as an omen or presage unto
you, of the loss and spoil of your City, if you shall still detain it. You
know that whereas ordinarily men use to cut or clip their hair with sheeres or
sissers, in some diseases which are dangerous and violent, they shave it close
with a razor preferring baldness and nakedness for a time, before loss of
life. In like manner, though moderation and sobriety of expense be the
commendation of wise men at other times; yet cases of exigencie alter the rule,
and make any thing less then what men are able to do with their utmost might,
extremity of weakness and misprision. Nothing less then all things, is like
to do any thing.

Vt jugulent homines, surgunt de nocte, Latrones.
Vt teipsum serves, non expergisceris?
Horat.
FINIS.

