HAGIOMASTIX, OR THE SCOURGE OF THE SAINTS DISPLAYED In his colors of
Ignorance and blood: OR, A vindication of some printed Queries published some
months since by Authority, in way of Answer to certain Anti-papers of
Syllogismes, entitled a Vindication of a Printed paper, etc.

Wherein all the most seemingly considerable Exceptions (for truly considerable
there are none) imputations, inferences and conclusions made, and exhibited in
the said Anti-papers of Syllogismes against the said Paper of Queries, are
nonsuited, and demonstratively proved to be malignantly importune and
frivolous; the said Queries containing nothing, insinuating nothing
prejudicial in the least either to the lawful Authority of the Civili
Magistrate; or to any orderly, due or effectual course for the suppressing of
errors and Heresies.

Every day they wrest my words: all their thoughts are against me for evil,

Ps. 56. 5. My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace. I am for
peace: but when I speak, they are for war,

Psalm. 120. 6, 7. Vide miserrimam impiorum and calumniatorum conditionem; Deus
est iis onus, nos sumus iis onus, ipsimet sibi sunt onus.

Lutherus. By JOHN GOODWIN, Pastor of a Church of christ in Colemanstreet.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton in Popes-head-Alley.
1646.

TO THE READER.
READER, I know not whether thou have Sect. 1.
taken up the observation before me: but whether thou have, or have not, it is
worthy of not a few of thy thoughts, to consider, 1. what manner of estate,
condition, or being that is, which God as yet reserves amongst his treasures,
as the utmost line and period of that Blessedness which his infinite wisdom
and goodness met in consultation, have projected for the creature of his grace
and love. 2. How, and after what manner, upon what terms, and by what degrees,
he has designed the accomplishment and execution thereof.

For the former, that great Secretary of Heaven, the Apostle Sect. 2.
Paul gives a brief description of it, 1 Cor. 15. 28. And when all things
shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto
him, who has put all things under him, that GOD MAY BE ALL IN ALL. God has
always from the beginning, been the sovereign and chief Good, in, i. unto,
or among his Saints: but he never was, nor will be, their only or alone good,
until he shall cause all dispensations of himself unto them whatsoever, by
means, or things inferior to himself, how excellent or glorious soever, to
cease; and vouchsafe to be himself, the alone, and only dispenser of himself
unto them; In which case, he shall be ALL IN ALL. As long as meats or drinks,
silver or gold, houses or lands, friends, or other Relations, Magistrates, or
Ministers, Bibles, or other good books, yea as long as habits of Grace and
Holiness, yea as long as Jesus Christ himself as Mediator, shall be any thing
at all unto the Saints, any ways necessary, any ways useful; God shall not,
cannot be ALL IN ALL unto them. And therefore, we see in the Scripture recited,
that Jesus Christ himself, who is here called, the Son, who has made way, as
it were at a distance, for the advancement of his Saints to this height of
blessedness and glory which we speak of, by a gracious acceptance, and
faithful performance of the Great Office of a Mediator; must yet make further
way for it, by devesting himself of that very Office, by which, he did not
only lay the foundations thereof, but shall further bring the Creature to the
very door and entrance of the possession; where himself yet stands, yea and
shall stand, until the fullness of time appointed by the Father for the Saints
entrance, or admittance into it, and then he shall, and will with unspeakeable
gladness and joy, give place unto his Fathers counsel concerning that
transcendent blessedness of his Saints. For this (doubtless) is that which
the Apostle means, when he says, that when all things shall be subdued unto
him, then shall the SON also himself be SUBJECT unto him, who put all things
under him. By that SUBJECTION, which the Son shall now exhibit and yield unto
God the Father, is clearly meant, his submission unto the counsel of his will,
concerning the resignation of the Mediatory dignity and office; and that
precisely for this end and purpose, (as the Apostle himself expresses it) that
God may be ALL IN ALL; which counsel of God, cannot (as has been said) take
place, whilst Jesus Christ acts, or executes any thing at all for the
benefit of the Saints, as Mediator. And in as much as this submission of
Christ, though it be unto his Father, and his counsel, yet is for his Saints
sake, I mean, to make way for their highest exaltation; and i^ that respect,
he is and will be herein serviceable unto them; it may (possibly) be the
meaning and fulfilling of that promise, Luke 12. 37.

For the latter; that condition of the Saints spoken of, Sect. 3.
wherein God shall be ALL IN ALL, as it is, and must of necessity be,
absolutely the best and richest in blessedness of being; so has God,
according to his usual method in such cases, assigned unto it, the hindmost
and last place amongst all the several estates and conditions, thorough which
he intends to carry his Saints (which I conceive to be more, and more various,
then generally is thought, or believed) but this being the most absolute and
perfect condition, whereof the creature is capable, has the days of eternity
set out for the continuance of it.

First, as we know it is natures method and manner of proceeding, Sect. 4.
to begin with what is less perfect, and to go forward to that which is more;
so is it the method likewise of the God of nature, to be still upon the rising
hand, more liberal and gracious in his succeeding, then in his ante-ceding
dispensations. Howbeit, (says the Apostle) that was not first, which is
spiritual, but that which is natural: and afterward that which is
spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord
from Heaven 1 Cor. 15. 46, 47.
. And elsewhere: For we know in part, and prophecy in part. But when that which
is perfect is come, then that which is in part, shall be done away 1 Cor. 13.
9, 10.
. God will alter, and change, and lay by dispensation after dispensation,
until he comes to such a dispensation, wherein he will be fully satisfied, and
never change more. And this is that which we have described (with the Apostle)
to be when himself will be ALL IN ALL, dispenser, dispensation, and dispensed,
unto all his Saints.

Again, 2. that this Dispensation, wherein God will Sect. 5.
thus be ALL IN ALL, must needs be the most absolute and perfect, and the
creature enjoy the greatest blessedness of all other under it, is evident from
hence. After what manner soever, or in what kind soever, or to what degree
soever, he shall please to dispense or communicate himself unto men, by the
interveniency or mediation of what creature, or creatures soever, there must of
necessity be found some relish or taste (at least) of the weakness or
defectibilitie of the creature, in the dispensation, and consequently it cannot
be so rich and full, as if no created being whatsoever had to do, little or
much in it, but only God himself. Where there is no defect in the efficient,
this being simply one, there can be no defect in the effect, at least not from
any deficiency in that action, by which it is produced; as on the contrary,
where there is a juncto of efficients, whether two or more, all joining and
concurring to the production of one and the same effect, if there be any one of
them defective and weak (as second, or created efficients evermore are, in
respect of the first, or increated) the prints or footsteps of this weakness
must of necessity be found in the effect. It is a true observation, that such,
whether actions, or substances, which received their beings, by way of miracle,
or of immediate efficiencie from God; have ever been more excellent and perfect
in their respective kinds, then others of the same kind with them, in the
production whereof, natural or second causes have had their interests, and
cooperations. Never were the walls of any City so dismantled or mall'd by any
engine of war, or battery of Cannon whatsoever, as the walls of Jericho were
upon the blowing of the trumpets of Rams horns. Et cecidit murus sub se
(says the Text) i. and the wall fell down beneath it self Josh. 6. 20.
: That is (as Lavater interprets) absorptus est in terram, was swallowed down
into the earth. In like manner, Naamans cure of his leprosy by washing in
Jordan, was so absolute and perfect, that the Text says, that his flesh came
again like unto the flesh of a little child 2 King. 5. 14.
. So the healing of the Cripple, who had been lame from his mothers womb, was
so complete, that immediately upon it, he leaping up, stood, and entered into
the Temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God Acts 3. 8.
. In like manner the wine, wherewith our Savior recruited the wedding feast in
Canaan of Galilee, out of the water-pots, is said to have been the good wine
Joh. 2. 10.
. i. better then that which the vine or grape affoorded. And from this
observation, probably arose that idiome or propriety of speech among the
Jews, to signify the excellency of things in their kinds, by calling them
the things of God; as fair and goodly Cedars, are called (Psalm. 80. 10.) the
Cedars of God. So great and high mountains, the mountains of God, Psalm. 36. 6.
So a great and potent army or host, the host of God, 1 Chronicles. 12. 22. This by
the way.

The reason why God is pleased, so to order and contrive the Sect. 6.
passage and conducture of his Saints to that their utmost blessedness and
glory, when he will be All in All, as to carry, and cause them to pass under
many less perfect dispensations of himself, wherein creatures like themselves
shall administer unto them, is (doubtless) the most exquisite proportition,
which such a method and projection holds, as well with the advancement of his
own glory, as of the contentment and blessedness of the Saints themselves. The
saying is, Fessum quies plurimum juvat; Rest has ever the best relish with him
that is weary: and that pleasantness, which (as Solomon says) is in the light
of the Sun, is preferred to an higher degree of acceptance in the eyes of
men, by the sadness and darkness of the night. God indeed made both Summer and
winter Psalm. 74. 17.
, (as David observes) but certainly with this subordination, Winter for
Summers sake. The weak thoughts and expressions of childhood, do much
commend the solid wisdom and discourse of men. And generally, that which is
imperfect, ushereth in perfection with the greater acclamation and triumph.
God, if so it had seemed good in the eyes of his wisdom, might have begun with
his Saints, where now he purposes to end; and never have suffered any created
being to have interposed, or been any thing at all unto them: he might have
been unto them, not only Alpha and Omega, but also, Beta, Gamma, Delta, and
all the letters of the Alphabet besides, from the first to the last. But then
Israel had wanted sour herbs, wherewith to eat the Paschall Lamb: and the God
of Israel himself had wanted those large contributions, which the weakness and
imperfections, and unacceptable deportments of the creature in her
subministrations unto his Saints, have already, and further will, cast in to
the treasury of his glory. It is the best and highest improvement of the
sowrenesse of the creature, to commend the sweetness of God; and of the
weakness of the creature, to advance, quicken, enlarge, and raise our
apprehensions in the contemplation of the strength, fullness and perfection of
God. It is said of Augustus, a wise and politic Prince, that he adopted
Tiberius, a man of a rugged and unpleasanc disposition, to succeed him in the
Empire, for this end, Ut ipse quandoque desiderabilior foret, that the people
being offended and discontented with rough behavior of the Successor, might
remember the Predecessor with the more honor and desire. What this Emperor
projected for his honor (as he supposed) in his Successor, God has designed
for his glory in his Predecessors (for Successors he means to have none) I
mean, in those creature* Ordinances and Dispensations, whereby he first
communicates himself and his gooddesse, but in an under manner and degree, unto
his Saints, until the year of that Great Jubilee comes, when Christ himself
shall deliver up the Kingdom unto the Father, and God be ALL IN ALL.

Amongst many others, there are two great Ordinances Sect. 7.
and Dispensations, by which the good pleasure of God is, to communicate of
himself, his goodness, and love unto his Saints, during the present state and
condition of things in the world; the one is that of the Ministry of his Word;
the other, of Civil Magistracy; the one intended for their calling out of
this present world, in respect of their hearts and ways, and for the fitting
of them for their future glory; the other, for their protection in this present
world, that under the shadow of it, they may lead a quiet and peaceable life,
in all godliness and honesty 1 Timothy 2. 2.
. And though God sometimes said unto Israel, that he both gave them a King in
his anger, and also took him away in his wrath Hos. 13. 11.
; yet the contrary may be truly affirmed of his intentions in giving both those
Ordinances we spoke of, unto the world: He gave both the one and the other, as
well Magistracy, as Ministry, and again, this, as well as that, in love; yea,
and continues them in love; and in time, will take them away too in love unto
his Saints. First, that God gave them both in love, is evident, from the nature
and proper tendency of their respective offices and employments, as God himself
has declared them. Concerning the Magistrate, the Holy Ghost says, That he is
the Minister of God to thee for good Romans 13. 4.
; and that he attends continually upon this very thing Verse. 6.
; i. the doing of thee good in his place and office; with many other things of
like consideration elsewhere, relating unto the import of this Ordinance.
Again, concerning the ministry of the Word, it is said to have been given by
Christ, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man* unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.
. So that there i^ no question, but that as well the one, as the other, were
given by God in love, unto the world, and in special manner unto the Saints.

Again, 2. there is as little question to be made, but that Sect. 8.
they are in love also unto the Saints, continued, and kept on foot by God in
the world. This appears, partly by the continuance of those respective Laws of
engagement (which were lately mentioned) upon both the one, and the other, God
not having reversed, nor intending to reverse the least jot or tittle in
either, whilst he intends to continue the Ordinances themselves; partly also
from hence, because, though these Ordinances, as well the one as the other, may
very possibly, in regard of the undue qualifications of the persons in whom
they shall be vested, and by whom, executed, prove now and then very trouble
some and afflictive unto the Saints; yet they can hardly fall into such hands,
so unworthy or vile, but that the community (at least) of the Saints, though
not all particulars, will be in a better condition by the means of them, then
they would be without them, until the Great wheel of the world be turned
round, and that part of it which has been below hitherto, and is like yet to
be lower then it has been, for a season, be brought to stand above.

Thirdly (and lastly) that God will in love also unto his Sect. 9.
Saints, abolish and take away both the one and the other of the said
Dispensations, is yet more evident (if more may be) then either of the former.
Because, 1. the native intentions of God in the giving of them, will be so
far perverted by those, into whose hands they will in process of time come,
that no man looking upon them in their execution and manage, will be able to
say, these are Ordinances of God. 2. Because, God will make the abolition and
dissolution of these, the introduction and bringing in of other Dispensations,
far more rich, and blessed, and desirable, in their stead. The former of these
reasons, with the conclusion it self, is plainly asserted and laid down by the
Apostle. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom unto
God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule Tunc enim
abolebitur omne imperium, and omnis potentia, and virtus, politica, and
Ecclesiastica. Parcus in Apoc. 21. 22
(as well Ecclesiastique, as Civil) and all Authority (as well
Ecclesiastique, as Civil) and power. For (says the Apostle, as giving a
reason of the said dissolution by Christ) he must reign, till he has put all
enemies under his feet 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25.
, Clearly implying, that that enmity, which Christ shall find against himself
and his Saints, in all Rule, Authority, and power, will be, if not the proper
and adequate cause, yet the maine occasion, upon which he will proceed to their
dissolution. The latter reason, is held forth unto us by John, who having first
described, and taken a perfect survey of that Holy City, new Jerusalem, which
came down from God out of Heaven, (by which, according to the sense almost of
all Expositors, is meant the Church of Christ in her Great and Blessed
Reformation) toward the close of his discourse upon this subject, he tells us
what he missed, and did not see amongst all the glorious or naments and
rarities of this City, viz. a Temple, meaning, a material Temple, or a Temple
properly so called. And I saw (says he) no Temple therein. But because it
might seem strange that such an holy City as this should be without a Temple
in it; he therefore explains himself of what kind of Temple he spoke, when he
said, he saw no Temple in it, by showing what manner of Temple there was in it
notwithstanding. FOR (says be) the Lord God All-mightie, and the Lamb, are the
Temple thereof. By this causall particle, FOR, he clearly implies, that had it
not been, that the Lord God All-mightie, and the Lamb (i. by the figure,
Hendiadis, elsewhere used in this book) the Lord God almighty, in, and by the
Lamb, [Christ] vouch safed to become the Temple thereof, i. to perform the
work of the Ministry unto the Inhabitants of this City, and to teach them
the knowledge of God, and of the Lamb himself, viz. by way of immediate
impression, or inspiration, there should have been a material Temple in it, i.
the present function and office of the Ministry should have taken place
there. But by reason of the excellency of this metaphorical and supernatural
Temple, out of which all the inhabitants of the City, from the greatest to the
least of them, were constantly furnished with such a perfect knowledge of God,
and of his ways, that there was no place for any unrighteousness, or unworthy
act amongst them; therefore John adds; And the City had no need of the Sun,
nor of the Moon to shine in it, i. had no need of any Civil Magistracy,
either sovereign or subordinate, (frequently signified in Scripture, by the
Sun and Moon Isa. 60. 19, 20 M^l. 4. 2. Rev. 7. 12. 13. cum 15. And Genesis 1.
6. The Sun and the Moon, are both said to rule. Jam in isthoc coelo
Antichristiano (ad naturalis coel^ typum) plurimae sunt stellae, diversaeus
magnitudinis, Principes, duces, Praesules, Reguli, Reges. Sunt and magna
Luminaria instar Solis and Lunae, etc. Mede. Apoc. p 270.
) to keep them in order: for (says he) the glory of God did lighten it, and
the Lamae is the light thereof: that is, the abundant and glorious influxes of
the light of the knowledge of God, which God by Christ still dispensed and
conveyed into the hearts and souls of the Saints (the inhabitants of this
City) caused them to walk in all the ways of righteousness, and true
holiness, without the least stumbling or offense. So that the sword of
Magistracy would be but an impertinencie in this City. In this estate of the
Saints, these prophetical promises will receive their full accomplishment; And
all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of
thy children Isa. 54. 13. Ioh. 6. 45.
. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, know the Lord. For they shall all know me from the least of
them unto the greatest of them Jer. 31. 34. Sect. 10.
. And yet (by the way) I do not conceive this to be the last estate or
condition of the Saints, wherein God will be ALL IN ALL.

Reader, I have drawn up this brief Discourse in this place, chiefly to give
unto thee, and to all the world, a plain and ingenuous account, what my
judgment and thoughts are about Civil Magistracy; because I have been (most
unduly, and untruly, and in the very face of many demonstrations to the
contrary, both real, and nominall) represented as an enemy to it; and
particularly by the Authors of that Vindication, which, not thorough any
substance or weight in it self, but by reason of the weakness of others
giving a loud testimony of strength unto it, occasioned the following
Discourse. I clearly and freely acknowledge it to be an Ordinance of God; yea,
an Ordinance of very gracious intentions unto men, in him who is the Author and
founder of it. And though I conceive it to be a very tender Ordinance,
extremely obnoxious to take soil, and apt to lose the grace and beauty of it,
when it comes to be handled by men; yet when it does fall into clean and
tender hands, it makes the Sun ashamed, and the Moon abashed, at the
brightness, beauty, and blessing of it. Yea I conceive it to be an ordinance
of that grand import and concernment unto the world, during the present state
of persons and things in it, that it cannot lightly fall into hands so far
unsanctified, or unworthy the administration and manage; but that it will do
more then bear its own charges, more then balance the inconveniences, which
shall at any time attend the execution of it. I look upon it, as the only
preventive appointed by God to keep the world from falling foul upon it self,
and being destroyed by its own hands. And as I judge those very impolitique
Christians, and as men rejecting the counsel of God (for their spiritual
good) against themselves, who by casting off Church-Ordinances by Pastors and
Teachers, seem to catch at the spiritual privilege of new Jerusalem, before
it be come down from Heaven; so do I judge those very unchristian
Politioians, and as men rejecting the counsel of God likewise (for their
politic and civil good) against themselves, who think they should, or might
anticipate that other great privilege of this Heavenly City, which we spoke
of, (freedom from Magistracy,) by a present ejecting of this Ordinance out of
the world. Alas! though God (as the Apostle informs us) has provided better
things for us who live under the Gospel, then he did for his people under the
Law; yet if they who lived under the Law, had cast off those Leviticall
ordinances and observations appointed by God for their generation, upon
pretense of weakness and unprofitablenesse in them, saying, that they would
not worship God at Jerusalem, but only in spirit and truth; because this was
more Evangelicall and perfect; had they not attempted to put God himself to
rebuke in his dispensations, and withal consulted loss and disadvantage to
themselves and their own souls, in their spiritual, if not in their temporal
affairs also. Those fruits, which being gathered and eaten in the spring of
the year, whilst they are yet green and sour, are apt to cause diseases, and
to prove destructive unto health, if not unto life it self; if let grow upon
their trees until Autumn, or the due season of their ripening, may now be
gathered and eaten, not only without danger, but with delight also, and
advancement of health. In like manner, though the days be acoming, when
deliverance from that, both Ministry and Magistracy, which now support and
accommodate the Christian world, though with a mixture of many
disaccommodations in both, will be as a resurrection from death unto life, unto
the Saints; yet to attempt a deliverance from either, until the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb shall vouchsafe to interesse themselves in such
dispensations, which shall eminently be both the one and the other (as we
heard) must needs be as a covering of the Sun with sackcloath, and a turning
of the Moon into blood, I mean of a dark and dismal consequence unto the
world.

For mine own part, if I have, or hereafter shall at any time Sect. 11.
suffer any unjust or hard measure from either, I may possibly plead the
righteousness of the cause, for which I suffer; yea, out of the case of
suffering from either, I may declare the mind of God as well touching the
respective bounds, limits, interests, and duties of either, (at least
negatively) as concerning the qualifications requisite in the persons, to whom
the dispensation, either of the one, or of the other, ought to be committed
[thus far, I presume, I keep within the compass and bounds of my Profession]
but as I have never, so I shall never (God assisting) disparage either the one
Ordinance or the other, in the least, nor yet seek or counsel the devestiture
of any person lawfully called to the administration of either; except it be in
submission and subserviencie unto that Magistracy, which has a lawful power
to divest, upon just and lawful grounds; yea and to command my assistance in
such a case; as I make no question but that the Parliament of England has,
within the circumference of this Kingdom. Neither is there (I am confident)
the least jot or tittle to be found in any of my writings, which has the least
affinity with either of these positions or assertions; 1. that there ought to
be no more, no other kind of Authority in the Civil State, then in the
Ecclesiastique; 2. that the people have a lawful power, to divest or depose
Magistrates lawfully called, when, or as they please: Both these positions have
been charged upon me, as enmity against Caesar, was upon Christ. But as Christ,
though charged as an enemy unto Caesar, was notwithstanding Caesar's best
friend, and the greatest assertor of his Empire and power; so however an undue
representation has been made of me, as if I were of opposite affections to our
present Magistracy and Parliament; yet (without the least touch of vanity, or
disparagement unto any man's, either affections, or service, to the Parliament,
be it spoken) I have been (and yet am) as real in affection, as faithful
(that I say not, even fruitful also) in my service to the Parliament, as any
man whatsoever.

It has been the hereditarie portion of the best and faithfullest Sect. 12.
servants of God for many descents and generations, from the hand of their
enemies, and those that sought their ruin, to have all their sayings and
doings, any ways capable of the form, perverted into matter of opposition,
and argument of disloyal intentions against the Rulers and Governors of this
world. Jerusalem was represented by her enemies as a rebellious City, and
hurtful unto Kings and Provinces Ezra. 4. 15.
. The refusal of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, to worship the golden image
which Nebuchadnezzar set up, was represented to him by their enemies, as done
in contempt of him. These men, O King, (say they) have not regarded thee Dan.
3. 12.
. So Daniels praying unto God, was brought to King Darius by his enemies, in
the form and shape of a disloyal contempt of the King. This Daniel, which is
of the children of the captivity of Judah, regards not thee, O King, nor the
decree that thou have signed, but makes his Petition three times a day Dan. 6.
13.
. To pass by many other instances, the Lord Jesus Christ himself only
asserting unto himself a Kingdom, though with an express declaration, that it
was not of this world, was for this notwithstanding accused before Pilate, as
an enemy unto Caesar, (Whosoever makes himself a King, speaks against Caesar
Ioh. 19. 12.
.) Whereas, nevertheless, it is he by whom Kings reign, and Princes bear
Rule Pro. 8. 15, 16.
. In like manner, those who at this day, are most single and sincere in their
affections, most loyal and faithful in all their expressions, to the honor
and safety of the Civil Magistrate amongst us, are notwithstanding by men of
sinister and unworthy ends, personated as men of destructive principles and
practices to all Government and Magistracy, only because they dare not
calculate the power of the Magistrate, for the meridian of the torrid zone of
High Presbytery; and give unto Caesar, the things that are Gods, that so
Caesar may have wherewith, not to accommodate or gratify himself (in the
least) whether in point of honor, or advantage in any kind; but only the
lusts and desires of unreasonable men.

For, as for the word, Presbytery, and the Government of Sect. 13.
that denomination, concerning which some things are argued here and there upon
occasion in the Discourse ensuing, I desire to be understood toties quoties,
not of that Presbytery, which the Parliament has thought meet to establish
for a season in this Kingdom, but (as I clearly distinguished in my thirty-one
Querie) that which is so importunely desired and maintained by the Ministers;
between this latter Government, and the other, there is a difference not much
unlike that, which is between the Lion and the Lamb. The latter, is like the
fourth beast in Daniel, which had great iron teeth, dreadful and terrible Dan.
7. 7.
; which devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the RESIDUE [i. whatsoever it
did not, or could not convert into its own substance] with the feet of it;
having notwithstanding a presumptuous Inscription of JUS DIVINUM written in the
forehead of it; the former resembles the wisdom which is from above, being
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated James 3. 17.
; and in these considerations, of a far better resentment (I believe) with
Congregationall men, then with those, who (in effect) pretend and say, that
they can do nothing, without both powers, the one formally, the other,
eminently, vested in them. I commonly, if not constantly, characterize the
Presbytery, which is the Great Contention of the Kingdom, and contestation of
my pen, with the signal and proper Epitheton, HIGH.

And so if my pen at any time bewraies, either by reproof, Sect. 14.
or otherwise, any offense taken at my Brethren in the work of the Ministry,
who are of a dissenting judgment from me in the point of Government; I desire
in all such passages to be understood, as speaking only of such, who violently
contend for the High and Anti-Parliamentary way of Presbytery; and who being
of Gangrena's gang, and Procrustian race, breath out nothing but fire, fury,
and fierceness against all those, who are either weaker or stronger, either
more foolish, or more wise, then themselves. As for those, whether Ministers,
or others, who are led by the light of their consciences to serve their God
(both theirs and mine) in the way of Presbytery; but are tender in obtruding
their judgment or practice, as the pattern in the Mount, upon others; my heart
is with them; their persons and piety I reverence and honor; nor do I, nor
shall I, in any parallel opportunity for Christian service or converse, make
the least difference between them, and those of mine own judgment.

As for Gangrena, because I perceive that they who speak Sect. 15.
reason and truth, are but Barbarians unto her, and speak a language which
she understands not; and though she has been brayed in a mortar among wheat
with a pestill Prove. 27. 22.
, yet nothing of her foolishness is departed from her* I shall here take my
leave of her (in a few lines) as not judging her worthy of being smitten any
more with the pen; but rather with the whip, of correction; yet not this for
her conscience sake in matters of Religion; but for her moral misdemeanors,
practiced and persisted in against the common light and law of nature, in her
unworthy defamations and revilings of worthy and well deserving men; and that
by forged and vile reports, published and spread abroad against them. For
doubtless she pleases her self, with the consolatorie discourse of the
drunkard, presented in the book of the Proverbs by Solomon: They have stricken
me; but I was not sick: they have beaten me, and I felt it not. When shall I
awake? I will seek it yet again Prove. 23. 35.
. Nonsense in the highest, found in her writings, she avouches for elegancies
of phrase: fell and fiery contradictions, by tens, by fifties, by hundreds,
putid self-dawbing, and self-admiring expressions, arguings without any color
or semblance of reason in them, Christian promises of candor and fairness
performed in most Unchristian wrestings of words and actions, and other
hateful and malign expressions, forging of circumstances, yea sometimes of
whole substances, in matters of fact, to the reproach of godly, learned, and
well deserving men, with the like; these are but light matters, and no more
considerable in any way of disparagement, being found in her works, then some
straws lying upon the surface of a rich piece of land, or some sticks broken in
an hedge, or a pane or two of glass cracked in the windows of a fair dwelling
house, are to prove a Lordship or Mann^r not to be excellent Gangr. 3d. p. 285.
. But if Gangrena's Antapologie be excellent, such boyles and botches, such
putrified sores and ulcers as these notwithstanding, I would gladly know of her
how vile and obnoxious she intends to be, before she means to cry, unclean,
unclean; I am sound, neither moralls, nor intellectualls. Some are of opinion,
that the Devils, though they commit many foul and horrid acts continually,
yet they are Extra statum demerendi, they sin not. It seems Gangrena* claims
part and fellowship in some such privilege as this; the misdemeanors of her
pen, how ridiculous soever, in point of ignorance and folly, how foul and
abominable soever in forgery and untruth, are no errors, no miscarriages, no
more offensive, or worth the taking knowledge of, then strawes upon the ground,
or sticks broken in an hedge, or panes cracked in a window; as if she knew not
well what comparison to compare them with, to express the neernesse of their
neighborhood unto a mere nothing. But, Reader, what will thou say, if his
Great self-admiresse, who thinks her self either above, or beneath, all
misprisions whatsoever, whether in matter of learning, or of manners, (being
indeed in the very midst and thickest of them both,) has in that very
sentence, wherein she labors to similitude her self out of the dishonor
and disparagement of either, pr^phaned the excellency of her learning yet once
more, by dealing so ingrammatically with her nominative case, (that man who
has a Lordship or Manor propounded to him) that she hangs him up in the air,
without the help of any verb to take him down. Doubtless, he that then does
not put the nominative case and verb together, when he ingageth with the best
of his skill to vindicate himself from the disparagement of an insufficiency
that way, may well be conceived to give a pregnant demonstration, that he is
insufficient indeed. When a man does not find the way to such or such a place,
where being come, he knows that he shall receive a great sum of money,
otherwise in danger to be lost, is it not a sign greater then r^proofe, that
this man knows not, cannot find the way to the said place? The signal story
in her third Part, under whose banner and Authority all the rest in their
respective troops and squadrons serve, is the relation of a March beaten upon
an invisible Drum in Ducking field-Chappell in Cheshire, whilst an Independent
Church was performing of their worship and service there. This relation, this
relatresse solemnizeth, 1. with an exact description of many circumstances of
weighty cognizance. 2. With two theological and grave observations upon it.
First, she lays her foundation for the credit of the whole, in the relation of
a godly Minister (at least, if not a Presbyterian also) of Cheshire, who
related it, not with some, nor with a little, nor with a deal, but with a
GREAT deal of confidence; and that not simply as a Truth, nor yet as a certain
Truth, nor yet as a MOST CERTAIN Truth; but as a MOST CERTAIN Truth, known to
many of that County. Secondly, she takes notice, that there was not only a
sound, but a perfect sound, as of a man beating a March on a Drum. Thirdly,
that this perfect sound of a March was heard, 1. as coming into the Chapel;
2. as going up all along the I Will thorough the people, and so about the
Chapel. Fourthly, that this sound notwithstanding, yet nothing was seen.
Fifthly, that this perfect sound of a March, was heard, whilst Mr. Eaton was
preaching. Sixthly* that it was heard by Mr. Eaton, and the people that sat in
several parts of the Chapel. Seventhly, that Mr. Eaton and the people were
terrified with it. Eighthly, that it caused Mr. Eaton to give over preaching.
Ninthly, that it caused him, in stead of preaching, to fall to praying.
Tenthly, that the said March still beating, they (Mr. Eaton and the people with
him) broke up their exercise for that time. Eleventhly, (and lastly) that they
were glad to he gone. Tou have heard the Text ( this passage of Providence, as
she calls it, toward these Independents) hear now the grave and learned
Commentaries of the Relatresse upon it, which consist in two worthy
Observations. First, she conceives, that this passage of Providence, speaks
thus much to the Independents, and to the Kingdom, that the Independents are
for wars, desirous of wars, and thirst for a new war with Scotland, etc.
Secondly, that the wars which they would have, and occasion, shall prove
their ruin, the means to overthrow all their Conventicles, etc. and cast them
out of England for ever; as the Bishops and their faction were greedy for a
war against the Scots, to support their greatness, etc. But, Reader, if the
Author of Gangrena, were a man in any reputation for wisdom or honor, here is
a dead fly that would cause his oyntme^t to send forth a stinking savor for
ever. This passage of Providence, (as this Son of shame and inconsiderateness
calls it) this perfect sound of a March, beaten on an invisible Drum, etc.
asserted with as much confidence, as pen could well express, and by the tenor
whereof this false Prophet and Diviner of follies, undertakes to know and to
declare, the secret thoughts and intentions both of God and men, was nothing
else (as many that were present when this Tragi-Comedie was acted, and some of
them Presbyterians; yea some, that saw the invisible Drummer, do report,) but
a dog scratching his ear, and with his foot, upon every advance thereof to
scratch, beating the sounding side of the pew wherein he was. And as for the
greatest part of those circumstances, wherewith the maine body of this
notorious -- is dressed and beautified, as the sound of the March was heard as
coming into the Chapel, and then as going up all along the I Will, etc. that Mr.
Eaton and the people were terrified with it; that Mr. Eaton gave over
preaching, and fell to praying; that they broke up their exercise, because of
the March still beating, etc. All these are nothing else, but sparks of that
unhallowed fire, which burns in the bowels of Gangrena's race, and consumes
the very foundations of ingenuitie and Truth in High-Presbyterian Spirits. If
Gangrena her self had a forehead made of any other metal, then brass, or
iron, any sense or touch of ingenuitie, or true honor, she would bind her face
in the dust, and keep her sin and shame company in darkness for one seven
years, at least, after such a shameless and prodigious abuse of the world and
her self, as this. But (as Seneca says) one tree, though it be never so tall,
is not wondered at, when the whole forest or wood bears others of the same
growth and stature Non est admirationi una arbor, quando totum nemus in eandem
altitudine^ surrexit.
: So I fear, that Gangrena being conscious of no more credit or truth in any
other of her tales, is not much affected or stirred in spirit with the
discovery of her nakedness, or foul falsifications in this. I believe (and
not without ground) that a very great part of the foul stories which she
relates with truth in the matter of fact, would upon due examination and
trial, be found the perpetrations, not of that sort of men, on whom she
fathers them under the Names of Sectaries and Independents, but of persons of
her own judgment, and fellow members with her of the Church of England;
witness the story of him who mingled with silver, base metal of lead,
brass, iron, and so carried it into the Tower in great Ingots, etc Gangr. 3d.
p. 192.
. This man (as I understand) is by this time known not to have been a great
Independent (as Gangrena blazoneth) but of more affinity both in judgment and
practice with one Mr. Edwards. So that Sectary, who snatched the man's band, and
tore it in pieces before his face, if Sectarie he was, or is, it is of that
Order surnamed Presbyterian. The like may be said of the Baptizers of Ball-Esau
Gangr. 3d. p. 18.
, with many others. But for Gangrena, and that service which she has done unto
Satan against the Saints, by reproaching, calumniating, aspersing, traducing
them in the sight of the Sun, I shall leave them from henceforth unto him who
judges righteously; not intending to rake in this dunghill any more, which
begins to be very noisome and offensive, even in Presbyterian nosthrills
themselves. So little cause have either I, or my party to fear her writings
more then any other man's, who has yet appeared, (as she most vainly, but so
much the more like unto her self, boasts) though it were no great honor to
a thief that uses to rob on the highway, to be more feared by travailers,
then an hundred honest men. For the present I shall add; that as some Great
Benefactor to the Popish Religion, bestowed a Legend of lies upon it, which
they call Legenda aurea, the golden Legend, for a prop or pillar to support it,
because it was crazie; so has Gangrena's master, out of his tender affections,
and bountiful respects to the cause of high-Presbytery, being extremely
jealous (as it seems) that it will never stand strong upon foundations of
Truth, been at the cost and charge to compose a great body of the same kind of
materials, which we may very truly and properly call, Legenda plumbea, or the
Leaden Legend, to supply that which is wanting in the Truth for the supportment
thereof. But certainly it will be more tolerable for the Golden, then for the
Leaden Legend, in the day of judgment. First, because the Golden Legend belies
only, or for the most part, Saints of her own, or her friends making; and
secondly, belies them still on the right hand; whereas our Leaden Legend,
advances only stories on the left hand; and with these, dishonours, either
only, or for the most part, Saints made such by God. In so much, that had
Gangrena pretended to plead the cause of that Government by Presbytery, which
the Parliament has established, and not that, so importunely desired by her
self, and her friends, (which is opposite to it) she had been a notorious
Trespasser against the late Ordinance of Parliament, which prohibiteth any
thing, to be either preached, or written, in derogation of that Government,
which they have established. For as be that should come, and under prop or
apply to a strong and new-built house, a company of crooked and ill-shapen
shoares, or pieces of old worme-eaten timber, should derogate from the strength
of the building, and notoriously disparage the Architect; so whosoever shall
go about to confirm, strengthen, or uphold the Government settled by the
Parliament, by any base, unworthy, and indirect means, cannot reasonably be
judged but by such practices, to act in derogation thereof, and that in an high
degree. And so, Gangrena, farewell: Res Tuas, and historias tuas, habeto tibi.
They shall from henceforth be to me, as things which are not; excepting only
my promise of a further addition unto my Answer to the Antapologie; whereunto
(God willing) I shall apply my self, when I see the times in a state of
convalescencie, and likely to gather strength to bear such a subject. In the
mean time, thy preferment, which (it seems) is to be Principi Tenebrarum ab
historia, I shall lament, not envy. Persecute the Saints, reproach the
righteous; traduce the friends of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ: but know
thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee to judgment Eccles. 11. 9.
.

Having dispatched with Gangrena, I have only a word Sect. 16.
or two to speak with some of her friends, about another business. There are
of this Generation, who (it seems,) having a faculty to make verbal
victories of real disasters, importunely applaud their Champions (which were
four, if not five to two) and congratulate their great success in a
disputation lately held in Christ-Church-Parish, about the lawfulness, not so
much of the payment, as of the demand, of tithes by the Minister. By means of
which dispute, though there was nothing said but had tantum for quantum, answer
for argument in full return; not so much as any one man, that I can hear of,
who came scrupul'd in the point, that went away satisfied, (except it were in
the justness of the ground of his scruple and of the unlawfulness of that,
which could not by all that was there said be justified) yet some of the
party, as if they were bound by their Covenant to provide, perfas, and nefas,
that Presbyterians may in all things have the pre-eminence, or were acted by
that Maxim of the Consistory Quod non potest fieri per viam justiciae, fiat
per modu^ expedientiae.
of Rome, That which cannot be done in a way of right, let it be done by way of
expediency; have (as I understand from several hands,) filled the City with
this vapor, that Mr. Goodwin and his Colleague in the dispute, had their
mouths stopped, and were not able to answer a word to those who opposed them. I
was once under some thoughts, of penning and publishing the contents of the
said Disputation, looking for this puff of wind from that point of the
Compass, from whence it now blows; and may yet, upon the occasion given, do
it, if I could clear my hands of some other work, which as yet sticks close to
them. In the mean time (Reader,) thou may please to understand, that there
were only two arguments produced, and insisted upon, by the Patrons of Tithes;
which (I speak unfeignedly) being thoroughly examined and looked into, are of
no more strength to carry the cause of demanding tiths, then a couple of silly
Lambs yoked in a teame, are able to draw a Western waine of twenty hundred
weight, thorough the deepest ways, or up the steepest hills. I had not touched
upon this string, had not others played too loud upon the base.

One thing (amongst many others) seems very unreasonable Sect. 17.
unto me in the way of High Presbytery, which I judge worthy advertisement in
this place. The Sons of this judgment and way, judge it Christian and meet (as
they have reason in abundance to do) mutually to tolerate one another in
lesser differences (as they use to call the^) that is, in such differences
about such opinions, which lie off at some distance from the fundamental
Doctrines or Principles of Christian Religion, and which are deducible from
these by process of rational discourse. And the truth is, that without a
reciprocal Toleration in such differences as these, they would hardly ever
cement, or hang together, or grow into the unity of a body; unless they
agreed to cast lots amongst them, whose judgment should be King, to prescribe
Doctrines and opinions for Laws unto all his fellows. Now considering that the
maine Principles, and fundamental Doctrines of Christian Religion, are much
more difficult to be comprehended by reason, or to be assented unto as Truths,
then such deductions or conclusions, which in an ordinary way of discourse, may
be inferred from, and resolved into, their known or granted Principles; it
seems repugnant to all grounds of reason and equity, that men should have
favor in their dissentings about these, and be judged worthy of death for
dissenting in the other. Penal Laws are not wont to be enacted amongst men,
against any such miscarriages or deficiences in men, which require an
excellency in virtue, wisdom, or understanding to prevent* but only against
such, which the common and known principles of reason, justice, and honesty,
are sufficient to restrain. It is proper indeed, that Laws of encouragement,
and of rewards, be made to provoke and stir men up to actions of honor, and
which are difficult to perform, especially such, which are like to be of
public benefit, or service to the State; but not to enact any penalty
against those, who shall not perform such actions, unless it be the loss, or
non receiving the reward promised by Law to those that shall perform them. I
have often heard, of an ancient Law in England, by which there was a reward
appointed for every man that should kill a Wolf, but I never heard of any,
which imposed a penalty upon those who killed none. And if men desire to
insure all those to the way of High Presbytery, who do not religiously, and
out of pure conscience, dissent in judgment from it, their only course is, to
procure some Law or Statute to be made, wherein some considerable reward shall
be appointed by way of encouragement to all those that shall adhere to this
way; only with this proviso, (for righteousness and conscience sake) that
this reward be not assigned unto them out of the due rights and privileges of
those, who notwithstanding shall dissent from them.

And now, good Reader, I have nothing more, wherewith Sect. 18.
to d^tain thee from the discourse it self. The God of Heaven give thee a
free, clear, and dis-ingaged judgment, to examine, try, and narrowly
consider, into what Opinions or Tenets in Religion, thou suffer thy soul
and conscience to be Baptized. The Holy Ghost speaking (doubtless) of these
times, prophesied long ago, that many should run to and fro, and [by this
means] knowledge shall be increased Dan. 12. 4.
. In the times of Popery, men generally stood still, made no inquiries beyond
the lips of their Teachers, and knowledge then was at a stand, and advanced
not. But since God has been pleased to put it into the hearts of men to
conceive and think, that there may be Tracts or Regions of knowledge, beyond
the line of the travailes, and discoveries of their Teachers, and have made
many studious expeditions themselves to find them out, knowledge has
increased; yea and will increase daily more and more, if we relapse not into
the lethargy of Popish sloathfulnesse and servilitie, and suffer our Teachers
to exercise a Dominion over our Faith. Some of the principal weapons, by which
a compulsive power over the judgments and consciences of men has been
defended, are here, by strength or argument, and pregn^ncie of Scripture
demonstration wrung out of the hand of those, who have fought with them, not
the good fight of Faith, but the bad fight of the flesh, hitherto. The good
will of him that dwelt in the Bush, be thy portion for ever.

Thine in the service of
From my Study in Colemanstreet. Jan. 22. 1646.
ERRATA.
Page 2. after, Atheist, r. I trust. p. 9. l. 7. for, suffer, r. suffered. p.
15. l. 26. for, of, r. out of. p. 15. l. 14. for, (...), r (...). p. 16. l. 24
for conscence, r. conscience. p. 20. l. 27. for, Peteter, r. Peter. p. 22. l.
12. for, n (...), r. ne (...) p. 25. l. 14. for, Authors, r. Author. p. 25. l.
17. for, understanding, r. undertaking p. 26. l. 21. for, hoase, r. house. p.
30. l. 35. for, conceid, r. conceived. p. 33. l. 27. for, donee, r. donee. p.
36. l. 14. for, of the Canonicallnesse, r. of the Ancients who questioned the
Canonicallnesse. p. 40. l. 22. for, commanded, r. command. p. 40. l. 27. for,
enemies, r. enemy. p. 60. l. 34. for, coporation, r. corporation. p. 70. l.
36. for, Trush, r. truth. p. 71. l. 27. for, Parliament man, r. Gentleman. p.
88. l. ult. for, matters, r. matter. p. 95. l. 31. dele, to. p. 113. l. 10.
for, anh, r. and p. 106. l. 15 for, carriage, r. carriage. p. 119. l. 6. for,
either in, r. either, in. p. 122. (in the margent) for, reluet, r. relucet.

The principal Contents, as well of the Epistle, as Discourse, are the
unfolding of these particulars.
1. What the Authors judgment is touching Civil Magistracy, Ep. sect. 10. 2.
With what affection or intentions, God both gave, continues, and at last will
dissolve Civil Magistracy. Ep. sect. 7, 8, 9. 3. What the reason is, why God
will have creature-dispensations to precede his being All in All. Epist. sect.
6. 4. Who they are, that have still been represented as enemies to Magistracy.
Ep. sect. 12. 5. In what sense the Author takes the word, Presbytery; and
against what manner of persons he argues in his discourse. Ep. sect. 13, 14.
6. How unworthily that great self-admiresse, Gangrena, acquitteth her self in
her stories and pamphlets. Epist. sect. 15. 7. How unworthily a late
Disputation in Christ-Church-parish about Tithes, is reported by some. Epist.
sect. 16. 8. Whether differences in fundamentalls, be not to be tolerated, as
well as (if not rather) then differences in such points, which are far more
easily determined by reason. Epist. sect. 17. 9. What (most probably) the
Anti-querists design is in their Antiquerisme. Dissect. 2. 10. What the
design of the Querist clearly was, in the Queres. sect. 3. How near the zeal
of High-Presbyterie has eaten some men up. sect. 4. 11. Whether there be any
touch or tincture of Blasphemy in the second Querie. sect. 5. 12. How the
Prelaticall, and High-Presbyterian proceedings comport. sect. 6. 13. Whether
the Contra* Querists Syllogismes, be not too hard for their answers. sect. 8.
14. Why the Counter Querists answer by way of Syllogism. sect. 7. 15. Whether
the Querist reproacheth all punitive Justice, etc. sect. 11. 16. Whether he
makes Christ's Spirit now, contrary to Gods Spirit in the old Testament. sect.
12. 17. Whether the story of Ananias and Sapphira's death, does any ways
justify putting to death for matter of Conscience, or Religion. sect. 14. 18.
Whether the second Querie, supposes, that the makers of the Ordinance do not
certainly know the opinions therein threatened with death, to be damnable
heresies. sect. 16, 17, 18. 19. Whether it be contrary to the manifest word of
God, to say, that God is not one in three persons. sect. 21. 20. What belongs
to a certainty of knowledge in matters of Religion. sect. 24, 25. 21. What
opinions sentenced with death in the Ordinance, are not contrary to the
manifest word of God. sect. 26. 22. How hard it is to know, what the Ordinance
means by the word, Scriptures, when it sentenceth with death the denial of
them to be the word of God, sect. 28. 23. What infallibility the second Querie
intends. sect. 29. 51. 24. How passionate the Anti-querists are against the
second Quere, and wherefore. sect. 30. 25. Whether all the Opinions sentenced
by the Ordinance, be the known Principles of Christianity. sect. 33. 26.
Whether the Laws of God in the old Testament, which commanded false Prophets,
Blasphemers, Idolaters, to be put to death, be in force under the New. sect.
34, 35, 36, 37. 27. Whether our Savior reproved either the Jewish Church or
State, for tolerating errors and sects amongst them. sect. 41. 28. Whether
ways of violence and blood for the support of true Religion, be according to
the light and law of Nature. sect. 43. 29. How the Counter Querists prove, that
Luther maintained no error about freewill. sect. 52. And whether
Consubstantiation be not as gross, yea and as dangerous an error, as some
threatened with death by the Ordinance. sect. 53. 30. Whether, or what clearing
or settling of Truth there is amongst us, more then in the beginnings of the
Reformation. sect. 54. 31. Whether the open and public profession of errors,
be more or less pernicious, then the practice of sins in a like kind and
degree. sect. 57, 58, 59. 32. Whether any great difference between imprisonment
for life, and death. sect. 59. 33. In what sense only it is true, that they
who hold damnable heresies, have no true grace, etc. sect. 64. 34. Whether the
Parable of the tares, be meant only of Heretics and false Teachers. sect.
69. 35. Whether, and how the Ordinance is bent against the faces of many that
are conscientious. sect. 75. 36. Whether they be always instruments of evil,
who publish Doctrines (in any sense) hurtful to the peace of the Church and
State. sect. 76, 77. 37. Whether zeal, or lukewarmnesse, the more likely
cause, of the Bishops casting out. sect. 79. 38. What the wisdom of the
Parliament can, and their Justice will do, for the undoing of all the
Ordinance intends to do. Sect. 81. 39. Whether the Anti-Querists sufficiently
prove, the Moral Law in the ten Commandments, to be the rule of a Christians
life? and whether the Christian Sabbath be included in the general scope of
the fourth Commandment? Sect. 82. 83. 40. Whether the Anti-Querists know what
they mean by Arminian free will? Sect. 84. 85. 86. 41. Whether their
Description of Blasphemy, and impugning the word of God be competent? Sect. 87.
42. Whether, and how far, they concur with the Querist, about the necessity
of Reason, to direct or lead their Faith? Sect. 89. 90. 91. 43. Whether any of
the Querists Friends are to be thanked, for that strong opposition, which is
between the two Governments by Presbytery, the one established by the
Parliament, the other, importunely desired by the Ministers? Sect. 93. 94. 95.
44. Whether the Anti-Querists have sufficiently justified the Ordinance about
the words presumptuously? Sect. 96. 97. 45. Whether they do not grant the
Ordinance to be neither Christian, nor reasonable, in the punishment of
Blasphemy there enjoined? Sect. 99. 46. Whether the duties of Magistracy rise
and fall, are more, or fewer, according to the different qualifications of the
Magistrates themselves? Sect. 99. 105. 47. Whether it be lawful to teach
Children, or others, to pray, whom we cannot reasonably judge capable of our
Instruction in this kind? Sect. 102. 48. The two mountains, from the tops
whereof the fairest prospect of High-Presbyterie in her exaltation, may be
taken. Sect. 104. 49. Whether persons engaged, be so much the more meet to be
Judges? Sect. 105. 50. Whether it be probable, that there is not any one point
in Religion, but has been controverted? Sect. 106. 51. What is the true ground
of Gangrena's satisfaction about the truth of her stories? Sect. 97. 52.
Whether God made any controverted point in Religion, especially between Priest
and Priest, etc. matter of death or imprisonment under the Law? Sect. 106. 107.
108. 53. In what sense the Civil Magistrate is said to be custos utriusque
tabulae. Sect. 109.
Texts of Scripture, unto which some light is given either in the Epistle, or
discourse it self.
1. COr. 15. 24, 25. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the
Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all Rule, and
all Authority and power. For he must reign, till he has put all enemies under
his feet. Epist. Sect. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 28. And when all things shall be subdued
unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him, that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all. Ep. Sect. 2. Rev. 21. 22. 23. And
I saw no Temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple
of it. And this City has no need of the Sun, or of the Moon to shine in
it: for the glory of God did light it: and the Lamb is the Light of it. Ep.
Sect. 9. Dan. 12. 4. -- Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased, Epist. Sect. 18. Job. 1. 9. Does Job serve God for naught? Disc.
Sect. 3. Romans 5. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God
by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by
his life. Sect. 13. Matthew. 23. 8. But be not ye called Rabbi. Sect. 31. Deuteronomy.
13. 5. And that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, etc.
Sect. 34. 35. 36. etc. Levit. 24. 16. And he that blasphemeth the name of the
Lord, he shall surely be put to death. Sect. 36. 35. etc. 1 Cor. 10. 11. Now
all these things happened unto them for ensamples, or tipes. Sect. 35. Deuteronomy. 4.
2. Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye
diminish ought from it, etc. Sect. 37. 2 Cor. 10. 4. For the weapons of our
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong
holds. Sect. 44. Romans 13. 4. -- For he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. Sect. 45. 46. 47. etc. Deuteronomy. 12. 48. No
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof. Sect. 48. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. -- This we
commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should he eat. Sect. 48.
Gal. 5. 12. I would they were even cut off that trouble you. Sect. 61. Matthew.
13. 29. But he said, nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye pluck up the
wheat also. Sect. 69. 70. 71. etc. Matthew. 25. 15. -- And the Children crying in
the Temple. Hosanna, etc. Sect. 102. Psalm. 8. 2. Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings have thou ordained praise. Sect. 103. Deuteronomy. 17. 12. And the man that
will do presumptuously; and will not hearken to the Priest, or Judge, even
that man shall die. Sect. 107. Esa. 49. 23. And Kings shall be thy nursing
Fathers, etc. Sect. 109. 110.
HAGIO MASTIX, OR THE SCOURGE OF THE SAINTS.
IT was a sad expression of Luther in his days, when he said, we should find
cause to melt and be dissolved into tears, if we seriously consider what
strange errors we have stumbled upon, that there is not so much liberty now
allowed to any man, as to speak the Truth In lachrymas merito solveremur, si
nobiscum perpenderemus in quos errores impegerimus, ut n^c ^odie liberum sit
veritatem dicere. Luth. Postill.
. Yet if this were the worst of those times he complains of, he lived in a
golden age, in comparison of the days which are already in part come, and
attempted by some with an high hand to be brought yet in fuller measure, upon
the faithful servants of God in this Land. It is a small thing for the Spirit
which works in many of the sons of high Presbytery, to deny men liberty of
speaking the Truth; the very inquiring and asking after Truth, is made
wickedness and blasphemy, impudence, audaciousnesse, yea little less then
Atheism, or Devilisme it self, by the angry suggestion and clamorous
imputation of this Spirit. That in saying these things I put this spirit to no
other rebuke, then what the Truth it self, and its own professed noonday
actings and workings do witness against it, needs none other Sect. 2.
proof or demonstration, but only the perusal of the fifth page, of a late
Pamphlet, entitled, A vindication of a printed paper, etc. against the
irreligious and presumptuous exceptions (irreligiously and presumptuously so
called) called, Some humble and modest Queries. In the said page, that
importune spirit we speak of, foameth out his own shame in these words
(amongst many others of like unchristian inspiration) Who are you sir, that
have dared in your heart to conceive such A WICKEDNESS AND BLASPHEMY, as
this Querie contains in the bowels of it? And again -- I summon all Readers
in the name of God and Christ, to look upon them, and to stand amazed at your
IMPVDENCE, that have been so AVDACIOVS as to AFFIRM, or insinuate etc. -- The
man (if yet he be a man) has not yet the one half of his mind in railing and
revenge upon a Christian and honest action and design, but querieth the
Querist further, with this modest and humble Querie: what are you that speak
thus? An ATHEIST, or a DEVIL? If he be an Atheist, he is one of that Order, who
worship the true God in Spirit and Truth: If a Devil, it is in such a sense,
wherein his Lord and Master was the Prince of Devils. If they have called the
Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his
household Mat. 10. 25.
? He that takes pleasure in the Dialect of a railing and reviling pen, without
any mixture or allay of sense, Reason or Religion, may satiate himself when he
pleases, with the fragments and remainders of the said page, with the better
(or rather, worse) half of that which follows.

Who is the Syllogizer, or Author of this vindication, I am not Sect. 2.
in the least desirous to know; nor do I intend ever to bestow two words upon
the inquiry: I can pray for him, though unknown, upon that ground, on which
our Savior prayed for those that crucified him, (if his condition will admit
it) Father, forgive them: for they know not what they do Luke 23. 34.
. Many conceive that the Licencer, and Author, have but one Name between them;
of which apprehension though there be more reasons and grounds then one, and
more especially the many loose assertions (that I say not falsifications) in
the discourse it self, yet for my part I determine it not; only this I
conceive, that whoever is the Author, is but a personated, though highly
pretended, Friend to the Parliament; but that what he is in love and friendship
indeed, he is to their enemies, Sect. 3.
and those that labor to lay the honor as well of their persons, as
proceedings, in the dust. And whereas in the very frontispiece of his book, he
flourishes over his design, as if it were (at least in the principal branch
of it) the Assertion and maintaining of the Magistrates Authority both in
Civil and Ecclesiastical matters; yet this outside compared with the inside
of the book, shows it to be but like the Apothecaries box, which has
Pharmacum in titulo, in pixide venenum; physic in the title, but poison in the
vessel. For first, he that shall not only teach and encourage, but even
necessitate and compel (urging by way of duty, and conscience, being an high
compulsion, in the kind,) Caesar, not to be content with the things that are
Caesar's, but to lay claim unto, and hand upon, the things that are Gods: and
secondly, shall (in the same sense) necessitate and compel the Parliament, to
such actions, which apparently tend to the deep discontenting, if not to the
utter destroying of those persons in the Land (at least the most considerable
part of them) of whose fidelity unto them even in the face and presence of
death, they have had proof upon proof, and proof upon proof again, and
that above, and beyond all contradiction, (both which are clearly the
material, if not the formal design, of the said vindication) Whosoever I say
shall lift up his hand to either of these, is (without control) no friend to
the Civil Magistrate, much less to the Parliament; except that be friendship
to sow discord between friends, or to persuade men upon specious pretenses, to
destroy their Preservers, yea and those, who if the clouds should return after
the rain, are more likely then any other generation of men that I know this
day under Heaven, to be their Preservers the second time. It is a shrewd sign,
that they that set men on work to tread down the hedge, would willingly have
the corn trodden down also.

Whereas the Syllogizer undertakes to know (for he asserts it Sect. 3.
without scruple) that the Queries were put forth, as to stop, if it were
possible, the Houses proceedings in it, (he means the printed paper) so
howsoever to blast what they should do in the pursuance of it, and the
Parliament also, (as if the two Houses were one, and his Parliament another,)
if they do, or shall do, any thing therein etc. does he not lift up himself
into the throne of God, and fit and judge the reins, and secret intentions of
the hearts of men? I will notasperse Sect. 3.
him with the filth of his own kennell, or ask him, whether he be an Atheist,
or a Devil, to write thus: but certain I am, that the tenor and strain of
this accusation is purely Satanicall; being drawn to the life according to
that pattern, Job 1. 9. Does Job serve God for naught? For as the Devil
seeks here to traduce and imbase that external course of sanctity and
uprightness which Job held, by falsely charging it with sinister ends and
motives; so does the Syllogizer (be he one, or be he more, or be he Legion) in
the words tendered, most unworthily calumniate, and deprave the Christian and
candid intentions of him who advanced that honest paper of the modest and
humble Queries; his ends therein being neither to stop, whether possible, or
impossible, the Houses proceedings in it, nor yet to blast what they should do
in the pursuance of it (as this angry Dreamer surmiseth;) but only to minister
occasion unto the members of both the Honorable Houses religiously to
consider, how they might proceed and walk with a straight foot in the pursuance
of it; and keep off at a due distance from the importune and violent counsels
and suggestions of Presbyterian Interests; which without all peradventure, are
of the most sad and threatening portendence, amongst all our dangers to this
State and Kingdom, if they be not reduced by the wisdom and courage of both
Houses of Parliament. Lord, make thy servants in both Houses, wiser then their
enemies: Lord, make them wiser then their teachers: Lord, keep them from such
Teachers, who are their enemies. But as for the Querist, he in his, both
intentions and desires, in order to the Parliament proceedings for the
suppressing of errors and Heresies, is so far from seeking to make a stop of
them, or to blast whatsoever they shall do in this kind, that his soul
longs as for summer fruit, to see the methods of Heaven, the wisdom and will
of God for so blessed a purpose, as the suppression of errors and Heresies is,
first discovered, and then vigorously prosecuted and pursued, by the
Parliament, or whoever otherwise shall be found lawfully interessed therein.
Yea he is so far from intending to blast any thing the Parliament shall do
according to the will of God, for this end, that if any such course as this
shall be effectually advanced by them before the term of his breath be
expired, he professes, as in the presence of God, that he shall rejoice over
it as the characteristicall felicity of his days. Sect. 4.


Which Christian and clear Intentions of the Querist, in putting Sect. 4.
forth the said Queries, considered, it had been no such supererogating act of
Charity in the Syllogizers (for being in the way of my Reply, tidings are
brought unto me, that they are certain striplings of the Assembly, that have
laid their Logic together to advance that sum of Syllogismes with their
Answers, which must as it seems, serve in stead of a sufficient Answer to the
Queries) but be they sons of this, or of what other Interest soever, it had
been no such supererogating act, or work of Charity, as to have drawn the
suspicion of Popery upon them, in case they had not, for a word, suppose
unproper, or less considerate, arraigned the Author at the bar of their
Tribunal, as a man guilty of impudence, wickedness, blasphemy, Atheism, yea
and Devillisme it self; yea and besides all this, have so devoutly, solemnly,
and Apostle-like, commanded and charged, that he be delivered up unto Satan by
his own Church or Congregation Page 5. and 6. of the Vindication.
. If this be the spirit that rules in the air of Presbytery, it is like to be
an element agreeing only with the constitution of Iim and Ojim, of Owls and
Satyrs and doleful creatures, and not for Christian, sober, or peaceable men.
But the Church or Congregation he speaks of, know well (I question not) that
the wrath of man neither works, nor advises, the righteousness of God; and
that the zeal of Presbytery has so far eaten up the reasons, Judgments,
Consciences of many of her children, that they have not so much of any of these
left as wherewith to discern any thing from Blasphemy, or what deserves
casting out unto Satan which courteth not the Classique cause. It is no hard
matter, either for them, or any other men, to see thus far into the chambers
of high Presbyterian secrets, by the glassewindow of the Antapologie, (in the
light whereof the children of that way can hardly give over rejoicing to this
day) the Author hereof requiring of the Churches of Christ, as they would
vindicate the glory and honor of Christ to call their Pastors to an account
and admonish them, and bring them to public Repentance for their public
sin, (the emphasis whereof is their anti-presbyterializing) or else upon
impenitencie and obstinacy, to cast them out of their Churches Antapol* p. 307.
; as if the power of Excommunication and delivering up unto Satan, were given
by Christ unto his Churches, chiefly to take vengeance upon the enemies of
High-Presbyterie, as Blasphemers, and Sect. 5.
the grand enemies of the honor and glory of Christ himself. Though I
conceive that my Anti-querie-men ploughed with Mr. Edwards heyfer in drawing
that long furrow upon the back of the Querist which has been complained of,
and have learnd of him to charge Churches as they regard the honor of God, and
our Lord Jesus Christ, with that super* christian duty, of delivering up their
Pastors unto Satan; yet reflecting upon themselves (it seems) as men of a more
Apostolical, sublime and sacred investiture then he, whose merits were never
as yet crowned with Assemblian glory, they think it not worthy their grandeur
or Authority, to talk or take notice of the little finger, (I mean, of
calling to an account and admonishing, before Excommunication, as the Author of
the Antapologie, decently enough to the tenuity of his Interest does) but the
first word they speak, is the weight of the loins of this Dreadful sentence
it self: he that shall ask as question which by the interpretation of their
jealousy, may possibly tend to the disservice of High-Presbyterie, deserves
ipso facto to be posted away to the Devil, and not to have the favor of so
much respit from the shame and torment, as the time of being called to an
account, or admonished, does amount unto. Reader if thou be not amazed,
Heaven and Earth, and whatsoever is capable of the impression in either, will
be astonished at the insufferable height, the prodigious insolences of these
men.

But it may be the occasion of this un-manlike impotencie, and Sect. 5.
extravagancie of passion, will balance it: the provocation or offense given
was (...), so hideous and horrid, that the nature of man was no more able to
bear it, then the sight of Medusa's head without being disnatur'd by it. There
is no soar but may have a plaster broad enough to cover it. And is there any
deportment of men at so deep a defiance with all principles of reason, equity,
humanity, Christianity, but what by the mediation of productures may be
reconciled? Reader, if the whirlewind of these men's ecstasie has not ravished
even thee also into the gyre or circle of it, prepare thy self either for
double astonishment, or treble indignation, against the discovery and discourse
of that, in the monstrousness whereof these men put their trust, not only for
shelter and protection against all those that shall say unto them, black is
their eye, for any miscariage of their pen; but for applause Sect. 5.
also, for solemn and sacred acclamations, as well over the light, as the heat
of their zeal; over their profound Learning in confuting, as well as over
their Religious indignation, in declaming with so much ardencie and raisednesse
of soul against it, as they have done. I know no parallel worthy that
deportment of the men, in both, unless it be that of the High Priest, who upon
some words spoken by our Savior, resented by him as of no good correspondencle
with his ends, though otherwise full of soberness and Truth, (the Text says)
rent his clothes, saying, He has BLASPHEMED: what have we any more need of
witness? Behold, now ye have heard his Blasphemy Mat. 26. 65.
. The Blasphemy here charged upon Christ by the High Priest, is of that kind
of Blasphemy, for which the Querist is arraigned by these high-spirited sons of
Levi: the supercilious and importune confidence in the High Priest, that Christ
was a Blasphemer, had spoken Blasphemy; (ye have heard his Blasphemy: what
need we any more witness? etc.) exactly answers the rage and height of these
men's plerophorie, that the Querist is a Blasphemer (at least) all ambiguities
and doubtfulnesses discounted, in his second Querie. Thirdly and lastly, the
exemplary Devotion and high-borne zeal of this High Priest in rending his
clothes, because of the great dishonor which the Lord Christ had done unto
God, by his Blasphemy, portraictureth to the life the stupendous elevation of
these men in all ardencie of pious affections, to render the Querist, the
supposed Blasphemer, a man of all ignominy and reproach, the hatred and
abhorring of men; a man worthy of no better quarter in the world, then to be
delivered up unto Satan, that he may learn not to blaspheme; i. not to querie
any further the spirit or proceedings of High-Presbytery, which (it seems) is
a duty much taught and urged in Satan's School. These men may well style
themselves the sons of Levi; for they give a sufficient account that they are
(...) Acts 4. 6.
, of the kindred of the High Priest: -- Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora
ferebat.

Only herein the pattern seems to be more passible, then the portraicture.
That which Christ spoke, though it was as far from Blasphemy, as any thing
asserted, or affirmed, lightly could be, yet it was an assertion, or
affirmation, as Blasphemeis frequently Sect. 6.
are: but the Querie arrested for blasphemy by the angry sons of
High-Presbytery, is a pure Querie or Question; nothing is affirmed, nothing
denied in it. And though I will not deny, but that possibly such questions may
be invented, and with study thought upon, which may (in some sense of the
word) be blasphemous; yet do I not remember that ever I heard, or read of any
such; nor can I readily conceive how any such can be framed. But as the
Philosophers maxim is: Quicquid recipitur, recipit^^ ad modum recipientis; i.
whatsoever is received, is not necessarily received, either according to the
disposition or intention of the Agent or giver, or according to the nature or
proper tendencie of the thing it self received; but always according to the
nature and disposition of the Receiver. If the High Priest we spoke of, had
not waited for the halting of the Lord Christ, yea had not his soul longed for
somewhat against him, wherewith ^oth to comfort his Conscience within him under
those faint and feeble thoughts it had of his being a dissembler and wicked
person, and to render him obnoxious also, and hateful unto the people; it is
no ways credible that ever he would have found blasphemy in the words now
triumphed over, as unquestionably guilty of that demerit, there being another
interpretation and constructure of them far more obvious and nearer hand,
then that which found Blasphemy in them. Nor do I, nor can I, impute that
construction of the Querie, which makes blasphemy of it, either to the
persons, or to the learning, or to the Judgment, or to the grace of the
Anti-querists; but unto the enemies of all these, viz. their deep hatred
against the person of the Querist, the impatiencie and impotencie of their
desires to represent him to the world as a stigmaticall infamous and
irreligious man, their sworn service and devotion to the cause of
High-Presbytery, with a non obstante etc. Had not these evil spirits extremely
wronged the men, and stripped them stark naked of the soft clothing of their
ingenuity; the Querie had been as innocent, and as far from Blasphemy, as the
Antapology, yea as the Vindication it self.

It was no impertinent or truth-lesse observation in him, who so Sect. 6.
far minded the proceedings of the Antichristian and Papal Clergy in the
days of their Interests amongst us, and likewise of the Pontifical and
Episcopal Clergy, In theirs, as to be able to Sect. 6*
see, and say; that as well the one as the other did still so state and
represent unto the people all such practices and actions, whether of their own
or other men's, wherein their secular pomp and Interests were concerned, as to
make God and Christ a party with them; to entitle them to part and fellowship
with themselves, as well in whatsoever they did, as in whatsoever they suffer.
The device was to persuade the world, partly that whatsoever they did, in
order, either to the support, or enlargement of their own Greatness, they did
it out of Conscience, and as persons trusted by God with the affairs of his
glory; partly, that whosoever cast honor upon them, or yielded subjection unto
them, did it not so much unto them, as unto God himself; and again, that
whosoever opposed, or neglected them, opposed and neglected God himself much
more. How near all things are now carried according to this pattern in the
mount, I shall not declare; but leave unto men, who have eyes to see, to
consider of The Presbyters of the Assembly, and others, are so far from the
domineering humor of Diotrcphes, that they could gladly and heartily have
quitted all intermedling in Church Government, if Jesus Christ had not by
office engaged them thereunto; Jus Divinum Regim. Ecclesiast. lately published
in the Name of sundry Ministers of the City of London, page 11. of the Preface*
. Only this I shall take leave to observe, and say; that these
Antiquerie-masters, are their crafts-masters in this Pontifical artifice; for
(oh!) how are they troubled! how are they pained, and afflicted in soul, about
the Queries; not (good men!) that themselves, or their Interests in the cause
of Presbytery are any ways disturbed, struck at, or in danger to suffer by
them; we hear ne (...) quidem, not the least mutter or whisper of this
sorrow, or complaint throughout the whole discourse; but the great anguish and
vexation, the amazement page 5.
of their devout souls is, that the honor of God, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Authority of the Spirit page 6.
, are blaspheme^ in them; that in stead of bringing the true Doctrine of the
Father and the Son, the Queries have brought all the Doctrines of God into so
absolute an uncertainty. O thou that searchest the reins and the hearts, wilt
those not judge the hypocrisy of these men (if yet they be hypocrites) and
give to every one of them according to their work Revel. 2. 23.
? For what? are the men so super-superiatively zealous, for the honor of God
and of our Lord Jesus Christ, and for the Authority of the Spirit, and yet all
their Faith, all their knowledge, all the Doctrines they have received
concerning God, brought into an absolu^^ uncertainty by one poor Querie, or
Question? If a question has so dangerously shaken the Religion of these men,
surely even a weak Argument would turn it upside down. O Church of England,
Sect. 7.
whatsoever thou art, tremble to build thy Faith upon the foundation of these
thy Teachers: for they confess (if they mean as they say) that in all these
Doctrines concerning God and Christ, they are brought into an absolute
uncertainty; and that by the force of one Question only. It seems that their
belief of all they know, of all they teach concerning God and Christ, is
suspended upon the hope they have of the goodness of the cause of High
Presbytery: so that when the goodness of this cause is any ways made
doubtful or questionable unto them, a pang of a proportionable uncertainty in
those other things also seizes on them. They say that they perceive that
(which no man perceives besides themselves) viz. that the Querist is in the
gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity; but the Querist perceives that which
is of a far cleerer vision; viz. that ^f all the Doctrines of God and Christ
be with them brought into an absolute uncertainty, they are, if not in, yet
very near to, that gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity whereof they
speak.

But what strange accident befell the learning of these men, that Sect. 7.
intending to go to Dothan, they should take the way to Samaria? that
intending, or (at least) pretending, to Answer Questions, they should gird
their Logic to them, and make Syllogismes, and fall upon answering these? Is
Soul also among the Prophets? Are the members of the Assembly come to their new
lights too? For to this day (doubtless) it was never known or heard, that men
should frame Arguments and Syllogismes of their own, and call their Answers
unto these, Answers to the Questions of another. When they taught the late
Catechism of their present Church, and asked the child, What is your Name?
and, who gave you this Name? did they teach the child to answer, first by
framing Syllogismes out of, or upon the Questions; and then, by answering these
Syllogismes in stead of the Questions? If they had meant fairly, and nothing
but what was upright in the sight of God and men, in addressing themselves to
Answer the Queries, these being fairly and directly proposed, why did they
fetch about by the way of the fullers field, by which Rabshekah came against
Jerusalem Esa. 36. 2.
; I mean by the way of Syllogismes and Arguments, by which the truth is wont
to be opposed by her adversaries, not the Questions of the friends of Truth
answered? why did they not answer to the particulars demanded, immediately and
directly, Sect. 7.
either by affirmation, negation, or distinction; which is the way and method
by which Christ and his Apostles answered all the Questions proposed to them,
which they thought meet to answer? Or howsoever, they never made Syllogismes,
calling their Answers to these, Answers to the Questions proposed unto them by
others. Certainly these men would not have traveled out of the Kings highway,
but to lie in wait to rob and steal from those, who travel honestly and
peaceably in it: There was (out of all doubt) some Clergie-Classique fetch, or
reach in the projecture: the men are better husbands of their Syllogismes and
Logic, then to pursue or hunt after Truth or spiritual things with them:
these they still take, and come by with as much ease and expedition, as Jacob
came by his Venison, which he fetchd out of the stock. Genesis 27. 9. 14.
Therefore when they take their Bo (...) and their quiver, when they come to
Syllogismes, and painful reasonings and debates, it is a great sign they
have some secular game or other in chase, which for the most part is not so
tame, nor so easily brought to hand, as the other. But is it lawful for me
upon this occasion, to do as these men frequently do in their preaching, I
mean conjecture? Reader, with thy leave, I shall take the boldness to present
thee with my notion, upon the case. These contraquerists prudently considering,
that in the Queries, as they came from the Author, there was nothing at all
either affirmed or denied, so that whatsoever the tenor or purport of them
was, they could not with any tolerable color or pretext, fasten any opinion,
either (...) (...)
negative, or affirmative, upon him that framed them, wherewith to blast either
the reputation of his person, or his Queries; therefore to blind vulgar eyes,
and to set a face upon a backsidebusinesse, they judged it of best comport with
the Classique cause presumptuously to conclude, that whatsoever the Querist
questions in the negative, he holds and asserts in the affirmative; as on the
contrary, that whatsoever he querieth in the affirmative, he holds in the
negative; and so to take of these affirmatives and negatives, and digest them
into Syllogismes, as they please; which Syllogismes (forsooth) the simple
Presbyterian, for his better edification in the delusions of his Teachers, must
compel his fan^^^ to believe, to be mine; and the Answers given to them, to be
theirs, and these insoluble (at least) and more sacred then to be Sect. 8. 9.
touched with the least finger of an Examination.

But, o^ all you, that are the Sons and daughters of God, Sect. 8.
whether in the way of Presbytery, or in a better, stand still, and behold your
Heavenly Father at this day in the same posture of working wonders, wherein he
stood in the yesterday of old. Therefore behold (says he) I will proceed to
do a mavelous work amongst this people, even a mavelous work and a
wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding
of their prudent me^ shall be hid Esaias. 29. 14.
. These politic and prudent sons of High Presbytery, thought they had spread
a table for themselves of their Syllogismes; but that God who takes the wise
in their own craftiness 1 Cor. 3 19.
, has turned this table into a snare unto them; and hid their understanding
out of the way when they lift up their hand to the Syllogismes. For in the
framing of these, their answers considered, they are like such Conjurers, who
being novices in their profession, sometimes raise those spirits, which, their
skill failing them, they know not how to lay, or conjure down. Though I own
not any one of the Syllogismes, as intimated or asserted, either Majors,
Minors, or Conclusions, by me in the Queries; yet to let the Kingdom and whole
world see, upon how broken a reed they shall lean, if they trust to the
Learning or Judgment of these men in the great things of their peace, I shall
be willing to undertake for the Syllogismes (at least for the most of them)
against their Answers. For doubtless the Arguments do by their Answers, as
Aarons rod did by the rods of the Egyptian Sorcerers Exodus 7. 12.
; they swallow and eat them up.

In my Vindication of the Gentlemen's Syllogismes against their Sect. 9.
Answers; to save as much as may be without detriment to the cause, the labor
of transcribing, and so to contract the whole discourse into as narrow a
compass, as the Subject of it will bear; I shall not repeat the Syllogismes
themselves, but only lay open the weakness and insufficiency of the
respective Answers; and this by a manifest disabling and overturning the
Principles, reasons, and grounds, on which they are built. I could wish the
Reader, who shall have the opportunity, and please to peruse these papers, had
the Vindication it self, or those Anti-papers by him, to which these, by way
of opposition, relate: it is like he might apprehend the particularity and
appositenesse of what is here insisted Sect. 10.
upon for the dissolution of those Answers, more fully, and with some ^dvantage
to his satisfaction; yet by what he shall he^e find, he may be able, even
without that aid, competently to conceive and judge, what is the strength, and
what is the weakness, of the said Answers.

First then, their Answer to their first Argument or Syllogism, Sect. 10.
framed by occasion of my first Querie, is built upon this distinction: The
making of snares of any of the Doctrines of Christ for the destruction of the
lives of men, may be taken two ways; first, for a malicious intention, and
formal desire to take away men's lives: Secondly, for no more but the
appointing of the punishment of death for such as shall WICKEDLY oppose any of
the Doctrines of Christ. In this latter sense, they conclude it lawful, yea
and necessary, to make snares of the Doctrines of Christ, for the destruction
of the lives of men, and deny it in the former. But

First, the Ordinance does not say, who shall WICKEDLY preach, teach, publish,
any opinion contrary, etc. but that, all such who shall WILLINGLY preach,
teach, etc. shall, without abjuring, suffer the pains of death. Therefore the
said Distinction is impertinent, and reaches not the cause in hand. For who
with half an eye, is not able to see a vast difference, between preaching, or
publishing a point, WILLINGLY, and WICKEDLY? when Presbyterian Ministers
preach false Doctrine, as that tithes, or Presbyteriall Government are Jure
Divino, that it is unlawful either to sell or buy Bishops Lands, that the
Parliament is bound to do as the Assembly would have them, that legal
preparations are simply and absolutely necessary before Conversion, that men
are bound to believe that which they have no reason to believe, that Repentance
goes before Faith, that Christ suffered the torments of Hell, with twenty and
ten vain speculations, and visions of their own hearts besides, wherewith
they corrupt and poison the Judgments of their simple and credulous
Auditories, I presume they do all this WILLINGLY; but whether they do it
WICKEDLY, or no, let themselves judge and say. But

Secondly, suppose the Ordinance had said, WICKEDLY, as the Syllogisme^s
speak; I demand of them what they mean by the word, WICKEDLY, and who shall
judge and determine of this modification or aggravation of the offense? Suppose
a man Sect. 10.
should preach very zealously, and with fervency of Spirit against any of those
Tenets which these men call the Doctrines of Christ, as against the Jus
Divinum, or lawfulness of tithes, or of Presbytery, or the like; will they
call this a preaching WICKEDLY? If so, then themselves preach WICKEDLY, as
often as zealously. If by WICKEDLY, they mean, obstinately, or with obstinacy
(an expression which the paper called, The Ordinance, uses) this is to give
light by darkness: and I demand, as before, what they mean, by obstinately?
For neither does the Ordinance, nor the Asserters of it, (who yet undertake too
to be the Interpreters of it, when, and as they please page 1, 2.
) declare, or determine any thing at all herein. If by preaching, or publishing
a Doctrine obstinately, they mean, a preaching it after admonition, or after
means used, yea or after sufficient means used (I mean, sufficient, in the
Judgment of those that use them; yea or of those who are interressed in the
same judgment with those that use them) then themselves, as often as they preach
the point of Infant Baptism, preach obstinately, and consequently, WICKEDLY?
For they have been admonished again and again by the Anti-poedo-baptists, both
by writing and otherwise; who also have used means upon means, and those by
themselves and all of their party, judged to be abundantly sufficient to
convince them, of the error of this Doctrine (for so they judge it to be.) So
again, (according to this interpretation of the word) when they preach against
the lawfulness of selling and buying the Bishops Lands, they preach
obstinately, and so WICKEDLY, for by the late Ordinance of Parliament
published in that behalf, they are admonished, yea, and in the Judgment of
the Parliament, sufficiently informed, of the lawfulness of both. Instance
might be given in twenty points more of like consideration. If they have any
other sense or meaning in the word, Obstinately, which is more crypticall, or
mysterious, it is but reasonable and equal, that it be declared and made
known; before the life's or liberties of the Saints, or other men be endangered
by it. It is most un-christian and repugnant to the law and light of nature it
self, that any such Laws or Statutes should be made, wherein either the life's
or Liberties of men are touched; and yet the sense and meaning of them, by the
ambiguity of the words, wherein they are conceived, be of doubtful
interpretation unto those, who are so Sect. 10.
deeply concerned in them. Laws and Statutes, wherein the precious lives and
Liberties of men are concerned, ought not to be like Aristotle's acroamatiques;
concerning which he said, when he had published them, edidi, and non edidi. i.
I have published them, and I have not published them; meaning, that as he had
set them forth, few were able to understand them: but to be plain and
transparent in their sense and meaning; that even persons of meanest capacity
may without an Interpreter, see to the bottom of them. Or Thirdly, (and
lastly,) if by WICKEDLY, in their distinction, they mean, maliciously, (which
the word seems most properly to import) I desire to know of them, whom they
will constitute or make Judges of this inward and soule-misdemeanour; or what
(...), what Symptoms, (...), or signs they will Authorize, as infallibly
demonstrative of this malignitie? For it is no ways Christian or equal, that
the Saints (or indeed any other sort of men) should be deprived of their lives,
or precious Liberties, upon what Interpretation of the Law, either the Jurie,
or the Judge shall please to make. But the case and condition of the Saints
would be most deplorable upon such terms as these; in as much as there are very
few either Juries, or Judges, but being strangers to the work of Grace,
inwardly hate this generation of men; according to that (with many the like)
saying of the Scriptures: Marvel not my Brethren, if the world hate you 1 John
3. 13.
: whereunto that of our Savior himself also agrees; Because ye are not of
the world, but I have chosen you of the world, therefore the world hates you
Joh. 15. 19.
. Now it being the genius or property of this affection of hatred, to desire
and seek the destruction of that which is hated, ( Quem quisque odit, periisse
expetit) it were most sad with the Saints, if they that hate them, should have
the Liberty of interpreting not only their actions and practices, as they
please; but also of the Laws themselves too, by which these are to be judged.

Thus then it fully appears, that the Distinction, upon which the Syllogizers
build their Answer to their first Syllogism, is, by reason of the ambiguity
and doubtfulnesse in one of the most signal and important terms in it,
altogether insufficient and null; and in exactness of truth, no distinction at
all; no more, then a dish, with an hole in the bottom of it, is a dish, or a
man without a soul, a man. Miserable is the condition of those, whose Faith
Sect. 11. 12.
must be pinned upon such sleeves as these.

There are several other importune, reasonlesse, and false assertions Sect. 11.
and suppositions made to support the said Answer and Distinction. As

1. That he that shall but insinuate a reproach upon the Ordinance in such a
phrase as this, of making a snare for the destruction of the lives of men, does
with the same hand or tongue cast a reproach upon ALL the punitive Justice that
ever was, or will be in the world page 3.
. Certainly these Gentlemen's Logic stood at their left hand in stead of their
right, when they advanced such a consequence, or saying, as this? Does he that
insinuates it as a thing unlawful, to put an Heathen to death for asserting
the principles of his false Religion, cast a reproach upon the Justice, which
shall punish him with death for murder, rebellion, or insurrection? Or does he
that insinuates it as a thing unworthy a Christian Magistrate or Judge, to put
a man to death for professing, or affirming that for truth, which he verily
believes to be so, though indeed it be false; cast a reproach upon such
Magistrates or their punitive Justice, who shall punish murder, perjury,
incest, or any the like sins committed against the light of nature, and the
knowledge of the perpetrator, with punishments suitable to the respective
natures and demerits of them? It seems that to sin out of ignorance, and
with knowledge; with Conscence and against Conscience, are of one and the ^ame
consideration and demerit, with these men. Oh England, if thou suffer thy
self to be led by such Guides as these, take heed of falling into the ditch,
out of which there is no rising again.

Secondly, the said Answer leanes upon the broken reed of this Sect. 12.
supposition; that the Spirit of Christ now, should be contrary to Gods Spirit
in the Old Testament, if it should not justify and allow, yea and require the
punishment of death under the Gospel, for the violation of such Doctrines and
Laws, as well of the first, as second Table, for the violation whereof this
punishment was expressly appointed by the Authority of God then. If the pens
of these men were not intoxicated with the new Wine or Must of Presbytery,
they would never utter such Atheologicall stuff as this. Was the Spirit of
Christ in the New Testament, contrary to Gods Spirit in the Old, because he
discharged a woman taken in adultery, only with this admonition, Go, and
sin no more; permitting none but such to stone her, who were, Sect. 13.
without sin Joh. 8. 3. 7. 11.
; whereas the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, appointed that both the
adulterer and the adulteress should SVRELY be put to death Levit. 20. 10.
Deuteronomy. 22. 22.
? Or because Christ prohibited calling down fire from Heaven to consume those
who refused to receive him Luke 9. 55.
was his Spirit contrary to the Spirit of God in the Prophet ELIIAH, by which
he called for fire from Heaven to do that sad execution, and that upon person^
of an inferior delinquencie in respect of them (at least as the tenor of the
Histories compared together seems to import?) Or what reason can these
irrefragable Doctors give, why the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, which is
but one and the same Spirit with the Spirit of Christ in the New, should not be
at as much liberty to alter the punishments or penalties, as the Ordinances of
worship appointed in the Old Testament, under the New? Are the former so much
more sacred then the latter, that though these be changed, yet those must of
necessity abide for ever? Is there nothing in that great dispensation of God,
by which he shook the Earth also, as well as the Heavens Heb. 12. 26.
, I mean the sending of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ in the flesh
into the world? was there no occasion hereby ministered unto God, to vary from
his ancient oeconomie of governing his Church and people, as much as an
alteration or change of some external penalties, amount unto? But we shall
have occasion once and again to discourse Old Testament matters with our new
Masters, before they and I part: therefore for the present we leave them under
the shame of this supposition also.

Thirdly, the said Answer halts shamefully upon this leg also; Sect. 13.
it affirms, that that speech of Christ Luke 9. The Son of man i^ not come
to destroy men's lives, but to save them, has a peculiar reference to his being
on Earth in the form of a servant, which implies, that when he laid aside the
form of a servant, and ascended up into Heaven, he ascended, not to save men's
lives, but to destroy them; or at least, that now, being in Heaven, he is more
inclinable to destroy the lives of men, then he was whilst he remained in the
form of a servant: Both which are emphatically false; the Lord Christ, even
after his receiving up into glory, being altogether as tender of the preclous
lives of men, as before; yea and giving out his Divine virtue and power every
whit as bountifully, as well for the comfort and preservation of men's lives
whilst they Sect. 14.
stood by them, as for the restoring or recalling of them, when they were
departed Act. 9. 40. Act. 20. 9, 10.
. Yea the Scripture teaches us to look upon the blessed condition of Christ
glorified, as a more hopeful ground of obtaining grace and favor from him in
every kind, then his being in the form of a Servant was. For if when we were
enemies (says the Apostle) we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son;
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved BY HIS LIFE Romans 5. 10.
.

Fourthly, the said Answer blusheth also with the red of this inference, or
supposall: viz. that because that negative expression of Christ mentioned, that
he came not to destroy men's lives, is not necessarily an absolute negation, but
rather a preferring of one thing before another; therefore it is necessarily
and absolutely a preferring of one thing before another; and the meaning of it
necessarily and absolutely this, that Christ came not only, or so much, to
destroy men's lives, but to save them. Does the possibility, or non-necessity of
the being of a thing either so or so, necessarily and absolutely imply the
being of it otherwise? This (it seems) is one of the Logic pillars, upon
which Presbytery has built her house.

Fifthly (and lastly) the Answer we speak of, vanishes away, and dies in the
hand of this most senseless and importune reasoning. Sect. 14.
If Peter by his word struck Ananias and Sapphira dead for their sacrilegious
dissimulation; and Christ himself threaten destruction to Jerusalem for
rejecting him their Messiah, then is the destroying of men's lives by the Civil
Magistrate for contradicting the most fundamental Doctrines of Christ,
agreeable to the Spirit of Christ. Does the Antecedent and consequent in this
hypotheticall proposition agree any whit better then harp and harrow? Is the
contradicting of what a man knows no sufficient ground or reason, why he
should judge, or think it to be a Truth, nor with his best endeavors is able
so to judge of it (which according to the common Tenet of these men themselves,
is the case of all unregenerate men, in respect of the fundamental Doctrines
of Christ) a sin of the like nature, or equally punishable, with the sin of
Sacrilegious dissimulation; which the sinner cannot but know to be an
abomination? See before, Sect. 11. Or is the threatening of destruction by
Christ himself to Jerusalem upon an old score of all manner of provocations
and abominations, which had run on for many generations together; which
threatening notwithstanding was not Sect. 14.
put in execution till almost forty years after it was denounced; is such a
threatening (I say) as this by Christ himself, of a like consideration with the
actual and present inflicting of the punishment of death upon a man by a
Civil Magistrate, only for contradicting in words such or such Tenets in
Christian Religion, suppose the most fundamental, of the Truth, or likelihood
whereof the miserable wretch has no assurance, nor (perhaps) knows how to
come by any? Whatsoever an Apostle may do by the immediate and infallible
direction of the Holy Ghost; nay, whatsoever Christ himself may do by virtue
of his Authority and Interest, having all power of Judicature put into his hand
by God, may a Magistrate do by virtue of that limited Authority and Interest
which he has, and by the suggestion or direction of his own spirit only, or
of those that are subject unto error and misprisions, as well as his? Is it
reasonable to say that a child may undertake as much as a man? or a Subject, as
much as his Prince? Take a parallel of these men's reasoning: if the Vine may
bring forth grapes, why not the thorn? if the fig tree figs, why not the
thistle? Take another: If Presbytery be Jure Divino, why not Episcopacie? why
not Independencie? If something be something, why not nothing? The Faith of
these men had need be strong; for their reasonings (I am certain) are
extremely weak. But their salve for this soar is; to injoyne their Proselytes
upon pain of death to cast their Reason out of their Religion; and then quid
libet will serve to prove quodlibet. But before I discharge them at this point,
I must know of them, or at least demand of them, by what light, new, or old,
did they discern this for a truth, that Peter by his word struck Ananias and
Sapphira dead for their Sacrilegious dissimulation? Do these men justify the
Argument of the Romish Disputants, from Ecce duo gladii, Behold, here are two
Swords, to prove that Peter was invested, as well with secular, as a Luke 22.
38.
Ecclesiastic power? Or do they conceive, that smiting with death is an
Ecclesiastic, or Church Censure? Or suppose it be, had Peter power to inflict
it by his word? Did God impart his omnipotency unto him? Concerning Ananias it
is indeed related how Peter according to the duty of his place, admonished him
of his sin; and that Ananias upon hearing the Admonition or Reproof, gave up
the Ghost Act. 5. 5.
(or, died) but it is no where said, nor is it any ways Sect. 14.
probable, that Peter intended any such severe execution in his admonition; and
consequently it cannot be said, that he struck him dead with his word; except
only in such a sense, as a man may be said to kill his Brother, who does it at
unawares: and if a Magistrate shall thus slay with death an Heretic, or
opposer of the Doctrines of Christ, viz. at unawares, I shall do my utmost to
excuse him; and the rather, if he shall do it, only by admonishing, or
reproving him for his errors. Concerning the death of Sapphira, it is said
indeed that Peter foretold it, before it was inflicted; behold (says he, unto
her) the feet of those which have buried thy husband, are at the door, and
shall carry thee out. But from these words, it cannot be concluded that Peter
struck Sapphira dead with his word, except only in such a sense, as the
faithful Ministers of this Land, may be said to have struck it with all those
heavy Judgments or plagues that have fallen upon it, in as much as they
foretold and preadmonished the Nation of them before they came. The greatest
difference is, that Peter had his prediction of Sapphira's death, by a more
immediate revelation from God; the Ministers have their predictions of the
Judgments executed upon this Nation, by the mediation of the Scriptures, which
hold forth grounds for such predictions. If Magistrates be able upon
substantial grounds to foreshew what Judgments will fall upon those that
shall oppose the Doctrines of Christ, in case these Judgments shall fall upon
them accordingly without the Magistrates interposall for their procurement, I
shall freely allow them this imitation of Peteter in striking Ananias and
Sapphira dead with his word. For I much doubt, whether it had been lawful for
Peter, having prophesied of Sapphira's death, to have slain her with a Sword
for the vindication of his Prophecy. But surely these men were not aware of
their friends, (if of themselves) when they pleaded the example of Peter
smiting Ananias and Sapphira with death for dissimulation, to strengthen the
hand of the Civil Magistrate to punish offenders accordingly. For I verily
believe, were it his duty, and he conscientious in the performance of it, to
smite hypocrisy and dissimulation with the Sword, that great and numerous
party, which the Anti-Querists have for the present in the Land, would soon be
reduced to the shaking of an olive tree, and to the gleaning of grapes after
the vontage. In the mean while Sect. 1^.
we clearly see with what rotten timber the house of the Lord (so called) is
now built by the great Architects of it. We have now done with the Answer of
our Syllogists, to their first Argument: and have found the Argument laughing
the Answer in the face to scorn.

Proceed we in the next place to the examination of their Answer Sect. 15.
given to their second Syllogism, which by the strength of their imagination
and Logic together, they hale and pull out of my second Querie (that unhappy
Querie of Classique indignation) at which so many of this way have made
shipwreck of their patience and man-like ingenuity; discovering themselves, not
to be (...), Jam. 5. 21.
subject to like passions with other men, which was Eliiah's infirmity; but to
be (...), i. subject to passions appropriate to themselves, of a worse and more
deplorable nature then other men's. But let us hear how they answer this
Argument of their own: this they attempt to do, first, by Reason; secondly,
by Passion.

For the first: this Answer (or rather, this part of their Answer) stands upon
two legs, (with much ado) the first is this: That they who after admonition,
maintain damnable Heresies, are no longer to be esteemed Brethren, but enemies
to Christ, etc. and therefore are to be accordingly dealth with page 4.
. This ground is true: but as true it is, that it is nothing to the purpose.
For first, there is no mention of any such thing, as damnable heresies, in the
Argument which they propose to answer; but only of such opinions, which for
ought the inflicters of death know, may be the sacred Truths of Christ. If they
will grant, that such opinions, may be damnable Heresies which for ought the
men they speak of know, may be sacred Truths of Christ; I grant both the Truth
and pertinencie of the supposition or ground: but if they grant it, it undoeth
them in all they further have to say, either in way of Reason, or of passion,
in this Answer (as will appear presently.) And

Secondly, whereas they say, that such who after admonition, shall maintain
damnable heresies, etc. are to be dealt with all accordingly, (i. either as God
has commanded, or as otherwise is reasonable, in such cases) I know no man
(...) in this gainsayeth them. But what is this to the inflicting of the heavy
censure of death upon men* these are the terms of the Syllogism, which they
pretend to answer. Sect. 16.
Are these equipollent expressions in their Logic; to deal with an offender
according to his offense; and, to inflict the heavy censure of death upon him?
Surely these men are Stoics, and hold the Paradox, Omnia peccata esse
aequalia, i. that all sins are equal. The question between them and their
Syllogism, is not, whether they who maintain damnable heresies after
Admonition, be to be dealt with accordingly; no, nor yet, whether such are to
be punished with death; but whether it be agreeable to the mind of Christ, for
men to inflict the censure of death upon men, for holding forth such opinions,
which for ^ught they know may be the sacred Truths of Christ. But to this
Question, (...) quidem is to be found in all their Answer; neither in the more
lightsome part of it, which should have been reason (had it proved), nor yet in
the dark of it, which is passion without dispute.

The second leg made of reason (such as it is) upon which this answer Sect. 16.
stands, in the rational part of it) is this: that the Opinions threatened with
death in the Ordinance, the makers of the Ordinance do CERTAIN^Y know to be
damnable heresies. This they prove by this Reason; because they are contrary to
the MANIFEST word of God, and overthrowing the very foundations of Christian
Religion. But

(By the way) what if the makers of the Ordinance (which I and many more,
suppose to be men of Clergie-orders, rather then persons of any other Interest
or capacity) have that certainty of knowledge which is here with so much
confidence asserted to them, though this (I confess) were it granted, would be
somewhat to the Syllogism (though not much neither) yet is it nothing at all
to the Querie, from whence the Syllogism pretends legitimacie of descent. For
certain I am that the Querie denies it not. If it be replied; yea, but it
intimates a denial of i^. I demand, upon what ground is this supposition
built? or what reason is there to charge the Querie, with such an intimation?
if it be answered; because it was framed upon occasion of the Ordinance, and
ownes relation to it. And therefore, except some such supposition as this be
vertually contained in it, viz. that the makers of the Ordinance do not
certainly know the opinions threatened therein with death, to be damnable
heresies, the Querie is altogether eccentricall, and irrelative to the point,
to which it pretends. I answer, that this is a most simple and unclerk-like
allegation, and no ways demonstrative. Sect. 17.
For

First, what though the Querie was framed upon occasion of the Sect. 17.
Ordinance, yet is it not necessary that it should speak to, or of, any of the
particulars contained in the Ordinance. When a man being below, intends to go
up into a chamber, or upper room, he does not set his first, nor second, nor
third step into the room it self, whereinto his desire is to enter, but
steppeth at first upon lower stairs, which are at some distance from it.
Nothing is more usual, then in examinations, and inquirings out of matters,
whether by Justices of Peace, Judges, or others, at first to propose Questions
or Queries to the persons that are to be examined, that are preparatory only,
and introductive to such further Questions, which strike at the business
principally intended to be inquired after, and found out. I presume the intent
of the late Catechism of the present Church of England (so called) was,
neither to teach the persons that were to be cathechised, what their Names
were, or who gave them their Names, nor yet to inform the Catechist of either
of these: but to instruct those that were to be catechized, in the fundamental
points of Christian Religion. Yet we know that the framers of this Catechism,
thought meet to begin with those questions, What is your Name: and, Who gave
you this Name; which do not concern immediately or directly any point of
Religion, but to serve only by way of introduction to those questions which
follow, and whose tendencie was, the instruction of the persons catechized in
things worthy to be known. So that to plead or to pretend, that, because the
body of my Queries was compiled upon occasion of the Ordinance, therefore the
first or second Querie must directly and particularly strike at the Ordinance,
or any thing contained in it (much more at the makers of the Ordinance,) or
else be altogether irrelative to it, is a kind of arguing, which cannot lightly
proceed but from men of one of the worst constitutions that are to be found
amongst Christians, namely, such, who are men only in malice, and children in
understanding. Therefore all that passionate and un-christian bluster, of
wickedness, blasphemy, impudence, are you an Atheist, or a Devil, with all
the rest of the black Regiment of unhallowed expressions, which spread
themselves upon the fifth and sixth pages of the Vindication, is occasioned only
by that kind of ignorance in the Antiquerists, Sect. 18.
which the Philosopher calls ignorantia Juris, the Ignorance of the Law, and
excludes from all excuse. The men certainly were sick of their disease, who
sought amongst all the doings and sayings of Christ, wherefore to stone him;
and at last, for want of a better or a better colored for their purpose
pitched upon that, which was as innocent as any of the rest, viz. his making
himself the Son of God Ioh. 8.
. The Counter-Querists, being desirous above measure, to find some, one, or
more, amongst my Queries, that would take compassion on them, and ease the
burden of their great grief by furnishing them with an occasion to disgrace
both me, and their fellows; have cast their eye, and se^ their heart upon the
second, as best of countenance for their design; which yet in truth and
evidence of interpretation, as little favors them in the way of this
unrighteousness, as any other.

Secondly, let the Querie in hand be sifted to the bran, there Sect. 18.
will not so much as the smallest dust be beaten out of it, to asperse the
MAKERS of the Ordinance, whoever they be, with any such insinuation, as that
which the Syllogisme-makers charge upon it; viz. that the opinions therein
threatened with death, may, for ought the said MAKERS know, be the sacred Truths
of God. The Querie speaks only of those, who shall inflict the heavy censure
of death upon men for holding forth such, or such Doctrines and opinions; no^
at all of the Ordinance-makers. Now a Jurie, who shall pass a verdict against
a man, which in ordinary course of Law, touches his life; and so a Judge that
shall give a sentence of death against him; yea and the executioner of this
sentence may every whit a^ properly be said to inflict the censure of death
upon him, as they that make the Ordinance, or Law, by occasion whereof he
suffers. So then, though it should be granted, that the Querie intimates or
supposes this, that the inflicters of death upon men for holding forth such
opinions, which by the Ordinance are threatened with death, may very possibly
not certainly know, but that they are the Truth^ of God; yet it no ways
follows from hence, that this intimation i^ levelled against those who made
the Ordinance, (much less against the Parliament, who made it not:) which yet
the Anti-queriemen most in^ulfly and ignobly, but so much the more like unto
themselves, charge the Querie with) because there are diverse others, Sect. 19.
to whom, according to the tenor of the Querie, it may relate, yea and to whom
men of ingenuity and understanding, might easily have conceived, that,
according to the intention of the Querist, it did belong, rather then to the
makers of the Ordinance. For whatsoever may either reasonably, or charitably be
thought of these; confident I am, that upon due consideration it will be found,
that many men who are put upon Juries, yea and some Judges too, and
executioners especially, know nothing certainly by those Doctrins in the
Ordinance threatened with death, but that they are, or may be the sacred Truths
of God. And thus we see how grievously an innocent Querie has been handled,
racked, and tortured by the Sons of violence, to force an accusation from it
against the Authors. Well ^^ the comfort is, that what men make crooked in
their day, God will make straight again in his.

And now, having abundantly justified the Querie against the Sect. 19.
Syllogism, let us according to our understanding, see whether, or how far
the Syllogism it self notwithstanding, is justifiable against the Answer
given in by the Cata-Querists to it. We have vindicated it in part already; and
have clearly showed, that the first thing they answer to it, is either a mere
impertinencie, or else a Sword to slay their own opinion with. See Sect 15.
We exhibited the second particular of their Answer, at the beginning of Sect.
16. which amounted to this; that the makers of the Ordinance must needs
certainly know that the opinions sentenced with death in the Ordinance, are
damnable Heresies, because they are contrary to the manifest word of God,
overthrowing the very foundations of Christian Religion. To this I answer
(earnestly desiring the Reader well to observe, and to carry in mind the
tenor and substance of the allegation.)

First, if all the opinions sentenced with death in the Ordinance are damnable
Heresies; contrary to the manifest word of God, overthrowing the very
foundations of Christian Religion, etc. How came it to pass that the
Honorable House of Commons (as we have been once and again informed by your
weekly Intelligence concerning their proceedings) after a long and serious
debate, judged the contrary; not suffering the denying of God to be one in
three Persons to pass as a damnable Heresy, or contrary to the manifest word
of God, etc. which yet is one of the opinions threatened with death in Sect. 20.
the Ordinance? If they had judged this a damnable heresy, contrary to the
manifest word of God, overthrowing, etc. What reason can be given, why they
should be more favorable to it, refusing to charge it with death, then unto
many others, upon which the thought meet to lay this heavy sentence conceiving
them to be opinions or Doctrines of that deep demerit, and dangerous import?
Will these Anti-Querists charge this Honorable House with injustice or
partiality between Doctrine and Doctrine, Opinion and Opinion? Howsoever,

Secondly, It is evident from the tenderness of this Honorable Sect. 20.
House in not suffering the said Opinion to pass for a damnable heresy, etc.
that if the makers of the Ordinance did certainly know, that all the Opinions
sentenced therein with death, were damnable heresies, contrary to the manifest
word of God, overthrowing, etc. that they knew more then all the said
Honorable House besides. Which considered, I summon all Readers and persons
under Heaven to consider and give sentence, whether these sons of shame and
folly, had not much more reason (if they durst) to have vented that outrage of
senseless choler and most unchristian passion against this Honorable Hoase it
self, then against me, which they pour out, page 5. of their Vindication (or
Revenge rather) in these words. First to the Querist: Who are you sir, that
have dared to conceive in your heart such a wickedness and blasphemy as this
Querie contains in the bowels of it? Look again upon the Opinions which the
Ordinance threatens with death: or if you will not, I summon all Readers in
the Name of God and Christ to look upon them, and to stand amazed at your
impudence, that have been so audacious, as to affirm or insinuate (which yet I
have not done in the least, as has been sufficiently proved, though these
sons of Levi be so impudent and audacious as to calumniate me with it) that
all those things, OR EVEN ANY OF THEM, may (for all that the Parliament knows,
or any that will not make himself infallible) be the sacred Truths of God. And
presently after: What are you that speak thus? an Atheist? or a Devil?
Behold, oh England, a mapp of thy misery! Thy teachers imagine mischief in
their heart: they sharpen their tongues like a Serpent: adders poison is under
their lips. Psalm. 140. 3.
Are such lips meet to preserve knowledge? But why do they charge me, and not
the Parliament rather, with wickedness, Blasphemy, Impudence; audaciousnesse?
Sect. 21.
Why do they not ask the respective Members thereof; What are you that speak
thus; are you Atheists? or are you Devils? Yea why do they not charge the
Assembly, as they regard the honor of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
to deliver them up unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme? They are
the persons against whom the pretended ground of all these brutish
vociferations lies, not I. They are they, who (if the forementioned
intelligence be authenticke and true) have affirmed, or at least thoroughly
insinuated, that all the Doctrines and opinions threatened in the Ordinance with
death, are not CERTAINLY known to them, either to be damnable heresies, or
contrary to the manifest word of God, or overthrowing the foundations of
Christian Religion. They have declared their sense to the contrary, and that
upon a most weighty and Christian ground. For in as much as the Scriptures, or
manifest word of God does no where affirm, that God is One in three Persons,
they had the greatest Reason in the world, not to sentence the denial thereof
with death. If once this door be opened, that the expositions or
Interpretations of Scripture, or deductions from Scripture, made by men, shall
be made binding upon the Judgments and Consciences of others, under civil
mulcts and penalties in any kind, where, or when, or in what cases shall it be
shut? Or who shall be found meet to separate the vile from the precious in this
kind? I mean, to determine, what expositions, or deductions they are, the
denial whereof shall deserve to be punished; and again, what, or which of
either kind they are, that may be refused without danger?

Reader, give me leave to try to cut the comb of these men's Sect. 21.
confidence, by propounding a Question to them. I shall not ask them, what
they are? whether they be Atheists, or Devils? they may possibly have learned
by this how to answer these Questions. But the Querie I shall put to them is
this; How, or by what means, or upon what grounds they themselves CERTAINLY
know, that this Opinion (which is one of those, which as has often been said,
the Ordinance threatens with death) viz. that God is not one in three Persons,
is either a damnable heresy, or contrary to the manifest word of God, or
overthrowing the foundations of Christian Religion? Certain I am, that the
Scriptures, which we vulgar and unlearned ones call the word of God (it may be
the Seraphicall Doctors, to Sect. 11.
whom we now address, have some other word of God, which we know not of) no
where affirms, or holds forth this, that God is one in three Persons; nor does
it any where use the term, or word, person, in reference unto God. If it be
replied and said; yea, but it plainly affirms, God to be One in Three: and
it as plainly ascribes to every of these Three, such things, which plainly
evince them, to be so many Persons. I answer,

First, that my memory serves me, as ill as the Consciences and reasons of
these men served their masters in drawing up their Vindication, that is, quite
fails me, if the Scripture any where plainly affirms, that God is One in
Three. This certainly is a phrase, or expression, which the Scripture knows
not. It is indeed said, concerning the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost,
that these three are one 1 John 5. 8.
. But to say, that God is one IN these, or any other, Three, is the voice of
men, not of God. Therefore these Gentlemen, cannot reasonably or with Truth
say, that they CERTAINLY know the denial of this to be a damnable Heresy,
etc. by the Scriptures, at least not by the Scriptures alone, without the
mediation and interveening of their own reasons and understandings, to draw it
forth by way of inference or deduction. Now then, if the knowledge which they
have of any conclusion, suppose it be a Truth, depends, though but in part,
upon the actings and workings of their own reasons and understandings, which
are confessedly fallible, and very obnoxious to mistakes, especially in the
things of God; unpossible it is that this knowledge should be CERTAIN, yea
though the grounds or principles, from whence they derive it, be never so
CERTAIN or infallible. It is a known maxim in Logic; that Conclusio
sequitur deteriorem partem. If either of the Premises be but probable or
contingent, the conclusion raised from them, will never be a necessary, or
CERTAIN Truth. I confess there is a great difference between deduction and
deduction, inference and inference, in point of cleerenesse and
satisfactorinesse to the Judgment and Conscience of a man: one may have such a
kind of certainty or evidence in it in respect of him, that he is able to lay
down his life in attestation of the Truth of it, whereas (happily) he is not
willing to sacrifice the least hair of his head upon the service of another;
yet the greatest evidence or certainty to me in this kind is no sufficient
Argument to evince an absolute or universal Sect. 21
CERTAINTY in the thing, I mean a certainty in respect of all other men,
considering that (as one says) the same things Eadem possunt ali^ni videri man
f^ste vera, quae alteri videntur manif^ste falsa.
may seem manifestly true to one man, which seem manifestly false unto
another; nor can any man have any such assurance of another man's judgment or
understanding, as that they must needs be without error or mistake in such
things, wherein himself remains doubtful.

Secondly, how much less can these impatient and importune boasters of their
CERTAIN knowledge, know certainly that God is One in three Persons (the
denial whereof the Ordinance threatens with death) by the Scriptures alone,
when as these no where assert it? So that (for ought I certainly know) to
vindicate the CERTAINTY of their knowledge in this point, they must flee to
the Familists, and crave quarter with them in their Sanctuary of extraordinary
Revelation.

Thirdly, (and lastly, to this) confident I am, that if these great
Confidentiaries of the certainty of their knowledge being three in number (if
report mis-counteth not) were but dealt with upon this occasion, as those base
and bloody Elders are reported in the Apocryphal story of Susanna, to have
been served by Daniel upon another occasion, I mean, were they presently taken
and examined apart each from other, what they mean by the word, PERSON, when
they say, God is one in three Persons, they would agree no better in their
Answers, then those Elders did in theirs; but one would answer, that a Person,
was a Myrtle tree; the second, a lentish tree: the third, a tyle tree; my
meaning is, that no one of them would agree with either of his fellows, in his
notion or definition of a PERSON. And then with what face, can these enemies
both of nature and Grace, require of poor, weak, simple and illiterate
people, that they under pain of death, believe, that God is One in three
Persons, when as themselves, who conceive they ride upon the wings of all
knowledge, Learning, and understanding, cannot agree among themselves what a
PERSON is; or if they do agree, it is ten to one but it is an agreement in
error, and disagreement with the Truth. Poor English souls! Were you
ransomed with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, to sell your selves under the
hand and power of such hard and cruel Masters as these? But

Thirdly, I would gladly know of these Classique Authors, why, Sect. 22.
Sect. 22.
or how this should be a reason, to demonstrate, that the makers of the
Ordinance must needs certainly know, that all the Opinions threatened with death
in it, are damnable heresies; viz. because they are contrary to the manifest
word of God, and overthrowing the very foundations of Christian Religion.

For first, if this be a demonstrative reason to the makers of the Ordinance,
of the conclusion specified, why is it not so to all others? and particularly
to those, who are supposed either for the present to hold, or at least to be in
a possibility of holding, the Opinions threatened with death in the Ordinance?
God forbid that I should cast the least prejudice or aspersion upon the makers
of the Ordinance, whose Persons are to me altogether unknown: I am willing to
hope the best, and to judge charitably of them, as viz. that they are men truly
fearing God: But yet if the strength or stresse of these men's Answer to their
Syllogism, lies in this supposition, I shall crave leave (I hope without
offense) to require of them a probate of it. Nor for any doubt I have of the
thing; but because I do not love to gratify men in loose disputes. But this I
confess is no part of my charity toward them, to judge that to be
demonstrative unto them, which unto others of equal capacity and
understanding, if not superior, is not so much as Topicall, or probably
concluding. Porphyrie, Julian the Apostate, with many other adversaries of
Christian Religion, of great abilities and Learning, knew that all, or most of
the Opinions threatened with death in the Ordinance, were contrary to the
manifest word of God, I mean the Scriptures, and likewise overthrowing the
very foundations of Christian Religion; and yet they were so far from knowing
CERTAINLY hereby, that they were damnable heresies, that they apprehended them
not in the least, to be so much as errors. And in case any root of this
bitterness shall at any time spring up amongst us, if any such person, one or
more, shall arise in this City, or elsewhere in the Kingdom, teaching or
publishing any of those perverse things (a possibility at least whereof the
Ordinance it self supposes) it cannot well be conc^ied, but that they must
needs know them to be contrary to what these men (I suppose) call the manifest
word of God, and likewise overthrowing the foundations of Christian Religion;
and yet if we shall suppose them to be CERTAINLY KNOWN unto them for damnable
heresies, we Sect. 23. 24.
cannot with any good accord to this supposition, suppose they will ever hold,
or publish them. Or

Fourthly, if we shall suppose that these men, who shall, or may Sect ^3.
hold or publish any of those Opinions sentenced in the Ordinance, may possibly
not know them to be contrary to the manifest word of God, or overthrowing the
foundations of Christian Religion: how can this contrariety, or destructive
nature to Religion in these Opinions, be any sufficient proof or
demonstration, that the makers of Ordinance must needs CERTAINLY know them to
be damnable heresies? That which one man living in England, is ignorant of,
there is a possibility (at least) that another may be ignorant of it also. Now
then if there be but so much as a possibility, that the makers of the Ordinance
may not know, that the said Opinions are contrary to the manifest word of God,
or destructive to Christian Religion; these ill properties in them can be no
sufficient or demonstrative proof, that they do CERTAINLY KNOW them to be
damnable heresies. For that which a man may possibly b^ ignorant of, can be no
suffient ground to another, upon which to conclude any CERTAINTY OF KNOWLEDGE
in any point whatsoever, in such a man. If I suppose (for example) that Peter
may be ignorant whether James be in London or no; I cannot conclude that Peter
knows any thing, much less knows any thing CERTAINLY, by means of James his
being in London, though it be never so true that there he is: yea, and that he
has informed Peter of never so many things. It is not the ground, cause, or
reason of any thing which necessarily furnishes a man with the knowledge of
the thing; but the apprehension and knowledge of them, and that in their
relation of causality unto the thing. So that the Vindicators are quite out, in
assigning the contrariety which is in the Opinions sentenced in the Ordinance
to the manifest word of God, together with their destructivenesse to the
foundations of Christian Religion, as a reason or ground why the makers of the
Ordinance must needs CERTAINLY know them to be damnable heresies.

Fifthly, whereas our Querie* opponents talk with so much peremptorinesse Sect.
24.
and importune confidence of a CERTAIN knewledge, in the Ordinance-makers (and
consequently, in themselves) that the Opinions condemned in the Ordinance, are
damnable heresies; I am half jealous, from the air of their confidence, that
Sect. 25.
they understand not what they say, nor whereof they affirm 1 Timothy 1. 7.
, I mean that they know not, or at least consider not, what belongs to a
CERTAINTY OF KNOWLEDGE in matters of Religion, and the things of God. It is a
gracious and excellent degree of persuasion concerning the truth of the Gospel,
and much more concerning the Truth of particular Doctrines in it, when men
being called to it by God, are made able and willing thereby to lay down their
lives for them, or in confirmation of them. If themselves have attained such a
persuasion or knowledge of the Truth of Gospel-Doctrines, as this, they have
cause to be thankful, and to glorify God abundantly in this behalf. He has
no^ dealt so with many of his children: nor have thousands of Professors any
such persuasion or knowledge of them. Yet these Gentlemen may please to
understand, that such a knowledge of spiritual Truths, which is sufficient to
strengthen a man's hand to die for them, may very possibly be far from a
CERTAIN knowledge of them. We have read and heard of man(...) who have been
enabled to die, yea and have died, for some Doctrines or Opinions, out of that
strength of persuasion which they had of the Truth of them, which
notwithstanding we generally know were not true. Now most certain it is, that
there can be no CERTAIN knowledge of the truth of any thing, that is false.
Therefore such a knowledge or persuasion of any Gospel Truth, which makes men
willing and ready to die for it, is no sufficient proof of a CERTAINTY in this
knowledge. Which considered, that opposition between a necessity of being
Scepticks in Religion, and a necessity of knowing some things certainly (which
our Answer-men make in the sequel of this part of their Answer) gives no
testimony at all either to their learning or understanding. For no man (I
presume) will call him a Sceptick in Religion, who is so far persuaded and
confidenced of what he holds in it, that he is willing and ready to die in
attestation of the Truth thereof. And yet (as has been said) such a persuasion
or confidence as this, does no ways import a CERTAINTY of knowledge.

Sixthly, It is the common Doctrine and Opinion of those Authors, Sect. 52.
which are generally by Protestants reputed Classique and Orthodox (though mine
own Jugdement I confess, rather inclines another way, that all other
Arguments and proofs, which Sect. 25.
are usually (yea, or which can be) brought, to prove the Divinity of the
Scriptures, and the Truth of this Gospel, are but Dialecticall, and probable,
not demonstrative, or conclusive without all fear of Truth on the other side,
or however not sufficient to persuade men to a firm assent unto them. They
only allow the supernatural and immediate work of the Spirit Atque hoc
argumentum [nempe Testificatio Spiritus Sancti, etc.] ut est renatorum
proprium, ita solum corda eorum, non solum de veritate and Authoritate
Scripturae sacrae convincit, sed etiam persuadet, ut assentiantur, and in ea
firmiter acquiescant: reliqua omnia communia sunt etiam non conversis, quos
quidem etiam convincunt, atque ora contradicentibus obturant, sed SOLA NON
PERSUADENT NEC MOVENT AD ASSENTIENDUM, NISI INTUS TESTIMONIUM SPIRITUS SANCTI
ACCEDAT Ursimus Catech. Proleg. c. 4. Sect. 14. Haec cer^e a legentibus and
audientibus percipiuntur. Sed ut cum fructu fiat and vera fide, necessarium
est, ut suorum uniuscujusque afflatu Spiri^ls sui, cor tangat, ut veritatem
Divinam in his Scriptis elucentem agnoscat, ad quorum lumen alioqui ambulare
non possunt qui spirituali caecitate detin^ntur, donee Deus iis, quibus verbum
illud legitur aut praedicatur, CORDA ILLUMINET; sine quo Spiritus motu,
Ecclesiae verae testimonium, quod medium ad fidem utile etiam censemus, sed
neque unicum, NEQUE SUFFICIENS, prorsus esset inefficax. Andr. Rivet. Isag.
cap. ^. Sect. 8. Quare quod piis hominibus sole clarius est, illis [qui sunt
mentibus obtenebratis] quavis est caligine obscurius. Musc. Loc. De sacris
Scripturis. Quare si nostrum illud, credere Scripturae, pendet a Spiritu
Sancto, quid obstat, quo minus concl^damus, quod proposuimus, Scripturae
authoritatem, quoad nos pendere a Spiritu Sancto agente in Conscientiis
nostris? Probatur jam minor. Nemo c^edit iis quae continentur i^ Scriptura
Sancta nisi doctus a Deo. At quicunque credit Scripturae, credit iis omnibus,
quae continentur in ea. Ergo nemo credit Scripturae, nisi doctus a Deo, id est,
per fidem insusam. Minor per se patet: quia Scripturae credere, in hac saltem
controversia, est eam habere pro vere Divina, extraque omnem comparationis
aleam. Chamier. Panstrat. lib. 6. cap. 3. Sect. 2, 3. Et postea, loquens de
Augustino: Sic bonus ille Pater propria experientia didicit, eam fidem, qua
amplectimur Scripturarum Authoritatem, esse a Deo, NON VERO ACQUISITUM ALIQUID.
asserting and sealing up the Truth of both in the Consciences of men, as an
Argument of that Interest, I mean as an Argument demonstratively and
infallibly conclusive. Is it then such an hideous or enormous supposition, as
these men desire to inform the world in thunder and lightning; or is it at any
such distance from their own Principles, to suppose, that men may possibly not
know CERTAINLY the great Truths of the Gospel, to be Truths? and consequently,
not know CERTAINLY, that the opinions threatened with death in the Ordinance,
are damnable heresies? Is there any thing more horrid or strange in such a
supposition, then there is in this; that God has not by the supernatural,
infallible, Sect. 26.
immedate work of his Spirit, revealed and sealed up to the Consciences of
many men, the unquestionable Truth of the Gospel? And is it any thing more
strange to suppose this, then it is to suppose, that all men are not Kings, nor
all Princes, nor all Nobles, nor all wise, nor all rich, with the like? Surely
these men through the abundance of their zeal, will shortly vote it,
wickedness, blasphemy, impudence, Atheism, Devillisme, an impiety calling
for an Anathema, a delivering up unto Satan, etc. for a man to suppose or
intimate, that light is not darkness; or that darkness is not light; that
sweet is not bitter, or, that bitter is not sweet; that a man's feet are not his
hands, or that his head is not his feet. The most clear and pregnant truth is,
that the intimation, wherewith they charge the Querie now in Sanctuary, (and
this undeservedly too) and against which they rise up in the might of their
indignation, is of no more demerit, no more worthy censure, then one of these;
yea and that the most innocent of them, if any be suspected. Dear English
souls, take heed of putting a Scepter into the hands of these men. For they
can be angry and become Lions, and call ears, horns, when they please.

By the way, before we leave this point, I desire, by occasion of the ground
lately mentioned, as the common, if not the general, Tenet of our best and
most Orthodoxe Writers, that it be taken into serious consideration; whether,
or how far it is meet to punish or censute poor miserable men, for not
holding, or not asserting the Truth of those things; which they cannot come,
without much labor and contention of mind, yea not without some good degree of
reason and understanding too, to judge so much as probable; nor at al to come
to believe or know them CERTAINLY, but only by an immediate and supernatural
work of the Spirit of God? Are men to be punished, because God has not
imparted unto them his Spirit of Grace, and supernatural illumination?

Seventhly, and lastly; Neither is it true (as has been proved at Sect. 26.
large) that all the opinions threatened with death in the Ordinance, are either
contrary to the manifest word of God, or overthrowing the foundations of
Christian Religion. Therefore no such (...), or properties in them as these,
can be any reason, to prove, that the makers of the Ordinance must needs
CERTAINLY know them to be damnable Sect. 27.
heresies. For non entis, nulla est efficacia, nulla operati^. That which is
not, cannot be a reason or cause, of that which i^. A man's person cannot be
protected by a Castle in the air. By the way, I suppose that by the manifest
word of God, the Answerers mean, Texts, or passages, first, of such Scriptures
which are manifestly, i. unquestionably, and without all dispute, the word of
God. And secondly, which are capable of no other exposition, sense or meaning,
but what as plainly and directly as in the very terms themselves, exhibit and
give out the opinion, whether one, or more asserted by them. If they intend or
mean any thing less then this, by their, manifest word of God, they speak
snares and ambiguities: therefore in this sense I understand them, and
counter-argue with them thus. First, that all the Opinions sentenced with death
in the Ordinance, are not contrary to the manifest word of God, is evident by
what has been already argued, concerning this (which is one of them) viz. that
God is not one in three Persons Sec Sect. 19, 20, 21.
. This, how untrue or erroneous soever, in a sense, it may be, is not contrary
to any manifest word of God. Nor have the Syllogismers proved so much as one
jot or title of this: and yet I believe they have proved as much of it, as ever
they will do, or can do. So again, That Christ is not God coequall with the
Father (which is another of these Opinions;) neither is this contrary to any
manifest word of God in the sense declared: though I judge it contrary to the
Truth. Probatio incumbit affirmanti: Let the assertors of it to be so, prove
their assertion; but to say much, and prove little, is one of the principal
pillars in their School. So again, that Christ's death is not meritorious in
the behalf of believers, is another of these Opinions: I marvel what manifest
word of God they will find, unto which this is contrary. That the Scriptures
are not the word of God, is another: taking the word, Scriptures, for all the
books of the Old and New Testament, divifim and conjunctim as they are now
received and acknowledged amongst us (which is the only sense the Ordinance
can reasonably mean) if they can find me any manifest word of God, whereunto
this is contrary, I will in recompense of such a favor, abate them three
absurdities and four, in the sequel of my examination of their Vindication.
Again Sect. 27.


Secondly, neither are all the said Opinions sentenced in the Ordinance with
death, overthrowing the very foundations of Christian Religion. Sect. 27.
Taking the word, Scriptures, in the sense even now declared, viz. for all, and
every the books of the Old and New Testament, this Opinion, that the
Scriptures are not the word of God, does not overthrow the foundations of
Christian Religion. The book of the Revelation is Scripture, or a parcel of
the Scriptures; yet was this book for a long time together denied to be the
word of God, by far the greater part of Christians in the world; who yet
remained unshaken in the foundations of their Religion. Luther denied the
Epistle of James to be the word of God; and yet was built as strongly upon the
foundations of Christian Religion, as these severe Taxe-Masters themselves (no
disparagement to their Faith:) Musculus himself so far professes himself
to reverence the judgment of some of the Canonicalnesse of the latter Epistle
of Peter, the two latter Epistles of John, the Epistle of Jude, the Epistle to
the Herbrewes, and the Apocalypse; yea and of some later writers also (for he
speaks in the plural number) who discanon the Epistle of Jude, that he
judges himself less tied or bound up in his judgment by these Scriptures,
then by other. Inter libros Novi Testamenti sunt nonnulli, d^ quibus etiam
veterum sententiae variant: utpote Epistola posterior Petri, duae posteriores
Johannis, Epistola Judae, Epistola ad Hebraeos, and Apocalypsis Iohannis, quae
in Concilio Laodiceno cap. 39. and ultimo, inter Canonicas Scripturas non
recitatur: quibus etiam eam, quae Iacobo inscribitur, quidam reccen^iores
connumerant. M^^ modestiae non est ut de his pronunciem, sintneeorum, sub
quorum nominibus extant, vel secus. ludicia tamen veterum hoc efficient, ut
minus simillis, quam coeteris Scripturis astrictus; l^cet haud facile quaevis
damnanda cens^am, quae in illis leguntur. Musculus Loc. De sacris Scripturis.
It were easy to add more instances of like nature. And though for my self,
I can, and do without sc^uple, subscribe to the Truth of this Doctrine, yea
and am ready, God assisting, to die for it, that God is one in three Persons;
yet I know some who deny it; who notwithstanding this denial, I know also in
part by my own experience and acquaintance, but more fully by the testimony of
others (worthy credit in as great a matter as this) to be of exemplary life,
fruitful in good works, holy, heavenly, Christian in all their Conversation;
as far as men are able to judge or discern. Shall we say, that such men as
these, hold not the foundations of Christian Religion? But it is none of least
or lowest of our Classick intrusions to umpire among the Stars (I mean the
Doctrines of Christian Religion) and to determine positively and above all
possibility of mistake, which are of the first, which of the second, which of
the third magnitude; Sect. 28.
and with all, to call them all by their Names; as if they knew them as
exactly, as he that made them.

Besides, when the Ordinance sentenceth a denying of the Scriptures Sect. 28.
to be the word of God, with death; I desire to know, whether by the
SCRIPTVRES, it means, the English Scriptures, or that book or rather volume
of books, called the Bible, translated (as is said and as I believe) out of
the original, Hebrew and Greek copies into the English tongue: Or, these
Original or Greek copies themselves: or my third thing really differing from
either of these. I suppose, it is no foundation of Christian Religion, to
believe that the SCRIPTVRES, in the first sense, are the word of God: these
Rabbis themselves, do not hold it for an Article of their Faith, that God
spoke to his Prophets, or Apostles in English; no nor yet that our English
Translation does agree in all things with the true sense and meaning of the
Originalls. If they do believe either of these, I must thus far profess my
self an Anti-sidian to them. If by the SCRIPTVRES, the Ordinance means, the
Original Hebrew and Greek copies, out of which the English Bible is said to be
translated; I desire to know, upon what grounds, either of Reason, or Religion,
these men, or any others, can require of men under the pain of death, yea
under the pain of eternal death The Vindicaters, call the denying of the
Scriptures to be the word of God, a DAMN BLE heresy.
, to believe such writings to be the word of God, the matter, or contents
whereof they neither know, nor are capable of knowing, upon any better terms of
assurance (I mean in an ordinary way of providence) then the testimony, Common
Report, or Authority of men? For what other or better assurance, can plain and
unlearned men, and such who are altogether ignorant of the original Languages,
and not in any capacity of learning them (which is the case of thousand
thousands in the Land) attain or come unto, that such and such things, as the
English Translation presents unto them, are contained in those Original
Copies? Yea in case they were expert in the Original Languages themselves,
according to what is called expertnesse or skilfulnesse in them at this day;
what other, or what better assurance can they have, then the Testimony and
Authority of those men, from or by whom they have gained this knowledge, that
this skill or knowledge of theirs is according to the Truth; or that those
respective significations, meanings, importances of words and Sect. 29.
phrases, which they have learned from men, are the very same with those, which
the Penmen of their Original Copies intended respectively in their writings?
It is well known amongst Scholars, and men but of ordinary reading, that words
and phrases in other Languages, by continuance of time and succession of
generations, lose their primitive and ancient force and significations, and
contract such, which are very much differing from them. Many instances might be
given hereof both in the Latin tongue, and our own: but I leave this for men,
the face of whose studies is set toward such observations. And put the case
there were no such mortality as we speak of in the significations and
importances of words, but that they also were yesterday, and to day, and the
same for ever; yet the Scholar can have no better assurance then his Masters
honesty or word, that he is taught by him according to the best of his skill or
knowledge; except (happily) it be the concurrent testimony of other Teachers in
the same Profession; whose words and testimonies are but of the same line of
fallibility, with his. So then, the holding the Scriptures to be the word of
God, in either of these two senses, or significations of the word, can with no
tolerable pretext or color, be called a foundation of Christian Religion;
unless their foundations be made of the credits, Learnings, and Authorities of
men. If the Ordinance intends any third sense, of the word, SCRIPTVRES, when
it threatens the denial of them to be the word of God, with death; these
undertakers for the Innocence of it, shall do well to declare and explain
this sense, and not to leave it as a Lion hid in a thicker, to break out upon,
and destroy those that pass by at unawares.

Thus have we proved at large, that the two legs, on which Sect. 29.
the Anti-Querists Answer to their second Argument stands, to be but two sticks
covered with rotten or proud flesh, and this skinned over only with a
superficial or washie color of Reason; and consequently, that the said
Argument remains still in full force, strength, and virtue; and so the
Querie, from whence it was drawn, to be impregnable, honest, sober, and
harmless, as well in the proposal, as consideration of it, no ways
unbecomming the wisdom, gravity, or zeal of a sound Christian. As for that
distinction which they subjoyne, concerning a man's being infallible, I cannot
likely think but that they are self-condemned in it. Sect. 30.
For surely they could not imagine, that the Querie speaks of any absolute or
universal infallibility; or that the Querist does not partake so far in
common sense with the Anti-Querists themselves, as to know, that an
infallibility in discerning some one thing from another, does not necessarily
require an universal or infinite infallibility? And th^fore to what purpose
come they forth with this grave Aphorism; that ^^^ may certainly know some
things, and yet not be infallible in all things? Had it not been a saying of as
much savor, if they had said; certainly men may be worth an hundred pound in
estate, though they be not worth a thousand; a Sparrow may be as big as a
Partrich, though it be not as big as a Swan. And yet notwithstanding, though
they build their Answers with such hey and stubble as these, they must needs
glory over the work of their hands with this acclamati^n; Thus this second
Querie is sufficiently answered, etc. Surely the word, SVFFICIENTLY, in these
men's Dialect, imports the manner of all actings and pleadings for the
High-Presbyterian cause: so that whatsoever they shall say, or argue in order
unto this, it receives this modification from between the efficient, and the
end; it is SVFFICIENTLY argued and proved. May they no^ (in a manner) as well
pretend and say, when they have only cited those first words in Genesis, In
the beginning God made Heaven and Earth, that they have by this Scripture
SVFFICIENTLY proved the Jus Divinum of Presbytery; as make their boast, that
they have SVFFICIENTLY answered my second Querie with those impertinent, weak,
reasonlesse, truth-lesse allegations (as has been abundantly proved) of which
this Answer (so called) is made? But as it was in that old saying amongst the
Romans, between their two Captains, that Ode^^^u^ conquered, but Gallienus
triumphed: so is it between the present Syllogism, and the Answer to it: The
Syllogism conquers, and the Answer triumphs. Oh England, my heart is
enlarged toward thee, and I will open my mouth proportionably unto thee: Take
heed of the grand Imposture, of this word, SVFFICIENTLY, in the writings, and
in the teachings of thy Teachers: they have learned, to call their chafe,
wheat: and to say of stones, that they are bread.

But in what degree these men were straightned for want of reason, Sect. 30.
in answering their own Argument, they are enlarged in Sect. 30.
passion against my Querie. But what? were they so super-superlatively incensed
against it, because they were able to make no better work of answering it? Or
di^ the spirit of it touch the apple of their eye, and so through the
extream^ty of the pain, their imaginations suffered, yea and their Consciences
also, through a consent and sympathy with the part affected? But whatsoever
the true cause of the accident is; I verily believe, that never did there such
a flood of profane and senseless passion, break out of the spirits of men
that were called Christian, from the first day of this Denomination in the
world, to this very hour, as these men pour out upon a Querie, whose
innocence, (I say not, weight and worth) has been vindicated upon such
grounds of evidence and Truth, that the light of the Sun is not more apparent
at noonday, then it. Were not the Fountains of the great deep of Corruption
within them all broken up, when this Deluge of bitter waters issued from them?
And as Joshua, that he and the people with him might be avenged of their
enemies, spoke unto the Sun and Moon to stand still; Sun, stand thou still
upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon Josh. 10. 12.
; so did not these men, their hearts being set to take revenge upon the
Querist, when they girded themselves to the work, commanded their reasons and
consciensces to stand still, and cease from their motions; each of them
respectively directing themselves to their own, and saying, Reason, stand thou
still over passion; and thou, Conscience, in the valley of Indignation, until
we have avenged our selves in fire and brimstone upon our enemies, that
Arch-Enemy of our most beloved Designs? But if in the day of their Answer, (I
mean, in the Rational part of it) we found nothing but night and darkness;
can we hope in the night thereof, I mean the passionate part of it, to find
day, or so much as the dawnings of reason, truth, or understanding? I had once
thoughts of speaking particularly to every strain and passage herein: but upon
more mature debate with my self about the undertaking, I considered, that in
case I were an Engineere, I should do but childishly, to load a Cannon only to
batter a mushrome, or a bubble which children raise with soape and spittle out
of a nut-shell.

And thus our second Querie, that great abomination of Classick souls, has
fully recovered her self out of those fogges and Sect. 31.
mists, which partly by the ignorance, partly by the ill will of her
adversaries, were spread round about her, and shines in perfect beauty; being
only troubled and full of sorrow for this; that ever she should be an
occasion to men pretending to Religion, of so much rebuke and shame, as must
needs fall upon those who have opposed her. Sect. 31.


Their third Argument rejoices against their Answer given to it, because this
also is built upon sandy foundations. As 1. that to be called Rabbi, is to
require men to believe that which they teach them, merely because they teach it
without any Authority from God in his Word. This is a most strange, and
truthlesse saying; and excuses Scribes and Pharisees, (and who not?) from ever
desiring to be called Rabbi. For certainly none of these were ever so simple,
as to require men to believe that which they taught them, MERELY because they
taught it without any Authority from God in his word. There was none of them
all, but pretended Authority from God in his word, for what they taught; but
especially, it is the firstborn of incredibilities, that they should require
men to believe what they taught them, upon this ground, MERELY because they
taught it without any Authority from God in his word. Can it enter into the
heart of a man, especially of any man that professes the service of the true
God, and belief of the Scriptures, to think honorably of his Teacher, MERELY
and simply because he teaches without any Authority from God in his word?
Certainly if the Scribes and Pharisees had fished with this bait, especially
amongst the Jews, for the acclamations of Rabbi, they had caught nothing but
contempt and shame in stead thereof. Therefore for men to enjoyne or compel
men to call them Rabbi, is (in the sense of the Querie, and in the Scripture
import of the phrase) either to enjoyne them (especially under any penalty, as
of their dis-favour, or the dis-favour of God, or otherwise) to receive or
believe any Doctrine, as the Truth of God, because they teach it for such, viz.
either as a true Interpretation of, or deduction from the word of God, whether
they give any sufficient account that it is either the one, or the other, unto
those, on whom they impose upon such terms, this tribute of belief; or else to
prohibit them, on the like terms, the holding and maintaining of such or such
Doctrines, because they judge them to be contrary to the word of God, without
giving any sufficient account or reason unto the prohibited, Sect. 32.
to prove them so. Now I querie the Anti-Querists, whether the makers of the
Ordinance do not in this sense, compel men to call them Rabbi; i. Whether
they do not prohibit men under penalties, and those most grievous, from
holding forth such and such Doctrines, as being contrary to the word of God,
without giving any sufficient account (or indeed any at all; that I say not,
without being able to give any that is sufficient) unto the persons thus
prohibited, that they are indeed contrary to this word.

2. The Answer now under correction, is polluted with this unclean Sect. 32.
supposition; viz. that the makers of the Ordinance do nothing else therein,
that can be interpreted a desire to be called Rabbi, then to charge men that
they teach no other Doctrine, then what the word of God holds forth, and the
Prophets and Apostles have taught Page 7.
. Most unworthy men! First, there is not one jot or tittle of any such charge
as this in the Ordinance. 2. There is that in the Ordinance (which was even now
mentioned) which in the strictest and most proper sense of the phrase, is to
compel men to call them Rabbi; and this of no affinity at all with the tenor
or substance of such a charge. And whereas it further adds; that if any
Church Censures be to be used for any matter of Doctrine, this will be as much
to force men to call them Rabbi, as the Civil Magistrates making this
Ordinance, forces any to call them Rabbi: I answer, this assertion or
comparison is true, only with this explication, viz. when any Church-Censure
shall be used for any matter of Doctrine, without any sufficient account given
by this Church of the erroneousnesse of this Doctrine, unto the person, or
persons, against whom the censure shall pass. In this case, Church Censures
for matters of Doctrine, and the Ordinancecensures, are much of one and the
same consideration*

3. As this Answer says, that for the proof of the minor, it is nothing else,
but a reiteration in other language of the former blasphemies against the
Doctrine of God and Christ, belched out in the former Querie, and needs no
other answer then that; so say I of this assertion; it is nothing else but a
reiteration in fewer words, of those truth-lesse, reason-lesse, sap-lesse,
sence-lesse imputations, belched out against that Querie, and needs no other
Answer, then what has been already at large given to it. But

4. (And lastly) This Answer is a most notorious Delinquent Sect. 33.
against the truth, in asserting, that those that have any sense of Religion,
Sect. 40.
know (whether the Magistrate should recommend them, or not) those Doctrines
(viz. which are any ways sentenced in the Ordinance; for the Querie, on which
this Argument pretends to be built, queries concerning all the Doctrines
specified in the Ordinance) to be the sacred Truths of God, as being the KNOWN
PRINCIPLES OF CHRISTIANITY, and clearly to be proved out of the word of God.
Certainly there have bin and are, thousand thousands in the world, who have had
as rich and deep a sense of Religion, as our Anti-Querie-masters themselves,
who never esteemed, either the Government of the Church by Presbytery, or the
lawfulness of Baptizing Infants, or the being of the Churches of England, true
Churches, (with many Doctrines more punishable by the Ordinance) to be any of
the known principles of Christianity. Nay did there any until now, even among
those whose judgments stood for Church Government by Presbytery, or that held
the Churches of England to be true Churches, ever assert these for the known
Principles of Christianity? That N. B. ought to be Parson, or Pastor of the
Parish Church of D; or that M. N. ought to stand in the same relation to the
Parish Church of another D. are not these also the known Principles of
Christianity? O Church, or Churches of England, be ye true, or be ye false; as
you love the things of your peace, look out better Oracles then such Teachers
as these, to consult with about the Principles of your Christianity.

In their fourth Argument, as likewise in their Answer to it, they Sect. 34.
take no notice at all, of what the Querie honestly desired to remind them,
viz. of any dying themselves for the maintenance and defense of their Religion;
but only of putting others to death for th^se ends. I hope they do not
intimate hereby, that their lives are dearer to them, then their Religion,
though other men's lives be not. Well, but how do they prove that it is
Christian to maintain Religion by putting others to death? (though they know
not, it seems, what to say of maintaining it by dying themselves.) Their proof
is that staple commodity in the Classiq^e Trade, viz. the Law of God in the
old Testament, which commanded false Prophets, and Blasphemers, and those that
seduce to Idolatry to be put to death. But if I should go about to prove,
that the man Moses is now alive, by this argument, viz. because he was alive
under the old Testament, should I not spread a table of mirth for these men? Or
if I should go about to prove, that such or such an habit, is of the French
fashion, because it is of Sect. 34.
the Spanish, would they approve my Logique? If they did, I should scarce
approve of their approbation. And is there any better sinew in their reasoning,
wherein they prove a thing to be Christian, because it is Jewish? Yea, but they
were aware of this exception, and way-layed it thus. This Law of God given
under the old Testament, for putting false Prophets, Blasphemers, and seducers
to Idolatry, to death, is still in force, even for the maintenance of
Religion. But how do they prove this? thus: because the reason which God gives
of such a Law, is this; that all the people may hear and fear, and do no
more so wickedly. Deuteronomy. 13. 11. The ground upon which this reason stands, and
must be made Orthodox, (if there be any such thing in it) is this; that whilst
the reason of any Commandment or Law takes place, or is in force, the Law or
Commandment it self, grounded upon that reason, must take place, and be in
force also. But of how ill a compliance such a reason or assertion as this, is
with the Truth, will sufficiently appear by these parallels; Abraham received
the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of Faith Romans 4. 11.
; i. in the nature of a seal, or, that it might be a seal, unto him, and his
posterity, of the righteousness of Faith. But this end of Circumcision, the
sealing of the righteousness of Faith, still takes place; i. it is still
necessary, that the righteousness of Faith be sealed unto men. Therefore
Circumcision, or the Law commanding Circumcision, is still in force. Take
another; God commanded the children of Israel under the old Testament, to make
them fringes in the border of their garments, thoroughout their generations
(there is no such clause as this in the Law for putting blasphemers or
Idolaters to death, for the perpetuation of it,) and that they put upon the
fringe of the borders a ribband of blue; And that it should be unto them for a
fringe, that they might look upon it, and remember all the Commandments of the
Lord, and do them, and that they seek not after their own heart, and their own
eyes Number. 15. 38, 39.
. But the end of these fringes, and of the looking of them, viz. the remembering
of all the Commandments of the Lord, and the doing of them, and the not
seeking after our own heart, or eyes, takes place, and is still in force under
the New Testament. Therefore the commandment which enjoins them for such an
end, is still in force: and consequently the Anti-Querists ought to wear
fringes with a ribband of blue upon their garments.

If it be here answered and said; it is ^^ue, the Laws enjoining Sect. 35.
Ceremonies, or things typical, as Circumcision and fringes were, Sect. 35.
though the end of them still takes place, and remains under the New
Testament, yet the Commandments themselves, and the Ceremonies or typical
things commanded, are abolished by Christ; but the putting of Idolaters,
blasphemers, false Prophets to death, are not Ceremonies, or things typical;
Therefore the Laws injoyning these may remain in force, though the other be
abolished; and the rather, because their end (as has been said) remains. But
for Answer,

1. Be it so; that these latter commands were not abrogated by Christ, (though
the Truth will appear on the other side) yet the Gentlemen's reason urged for
their non-abrogation, is lame; viz. that their end is still in force. If this
were a sufficient reason for the non-abrogation of a Law, those other Laws
enjoining Ceremonies, would be still in force, and as much un-abrogated, as
these; their ends (as has been proved) remaining in force, as well as the end
of these. And these Gentlemen (I make no question) know by this time, that they
are in a Logique praemunire in this argument, as being guilty of treason against
that sovereign Maxim; A quatenus, ad de omni, efficax est illatio. And yet
the truth is, that if the continuance of the ends in force, of those Laws they
speak of under the old Testament, be altogether impertinent and insufficient
(as we have showed it is) to evince a still-standing, or a non-abrogation of
the Laws themselves; I know not how to relieve them in this case, nor where to
find a reason better coloring with such a supposition. But

2. Neither is it such a Sunshine Truth, to say that the punishments enjoined
by God under the Old Testament, were not typical. Certain I am, that the
Apostle Paul, having spoken particularly of several punishments executed by
God upon his people under the Old Testament, upon the occasion concludes thus:
(...). i. All these [things, or, punishments] befell them as types 1 Cor. 10. 11
. And as the common opinion (I suppose of these Divines themselves) is, that
the promises made unto the Jews, of the Land of Canaan, and external
happiness and peace there, in the Old Testament, were typical, as well as
literal, carnal, historical, whereas the promises made unto the Churches of
God under the New Testament, are generally more spiritual, having less of the
Earth, and more of Heaven in them; So if I shall say, that the Sect. 36.
threatenings, or punishments also enjoined by God then, (I mean under the
Leviticall Law) to be inflicted in his Church upon delinquents, were more
bodily, and afflictive to the outer man, then the punishments enjoined under
the Gospel, and consequently, were not only carnal or bodily, but typical
also, and presignificative of those greater and more spiritual in the Gospel;
I say, if I should reason thus a comparatis, I believe I should receive no
better answer to my Argument from my Classique Antagonists, then I have done to
my Queries in their Vindication. For certainly, the Analogy is savourie and
Scripture-like: that as God, when he discovered and opened Heaven more then he
had done formerly, thought good to put more of it, and of things relating to
it, and less of the Earth, and of the things thereof, into those promises of
his, by which he now intended to gather in the world unto him; in like manner,
when he had discovered Hell also, and the dreadful terror thereof, far
beyond all former discoveries, that he should put more of it, and of things
relating to it, and less of outward or bodily sufferings, into those
threatenings or punishments, by which his purpose was to vindicate the Gospel,
with the Grace thereof from disobedience and contempt in his Churches. Cutting
off from his people, under the Law, is exchanged, for casting out from his
people, under the Gospel. And if the expression of cutting off, be any where
found in the Gospel, it is metaphorical, and allusive only to the usual
manner of dealing with, or at least of threatening offenders under the Law;
being such a figurative expression, as that wherein Believers, are called
Priests Revel. 1. 6.
; and their distributions, or almsdeeds, Sacrifices Heb. 13.
.

3. There is this clear reason, why that Old Testament Law, for Sect. 36.
the putting of false Prophets, Blasphemers, and seducers to Idolatry, to
death, should not now be in force upon any such terms as it was, when, and
where it was given; because in all difficult cases that happened about matters
of Religion, the Jews to whom this Law was given, had the opportunity of
immediate consultation with the mouth of God himself; who could, and did from
time to time, infallibly declare what his own mind and pleasure was in them. So
that except those that were to give sentence in cases of Religion, had been
desperately wicked, and set upon blood, and had despised that glorious
Ordinance of the Oracle of God amongst them, they could Sect. 36.
not do injustice; because God himself was always at hand, to declare unto
them what was meet to be done; and what kind of Blasphemer, and so what kind
of Idolater particularly it was, that he by his Law intended should be put to
death. Whereas now, the best ^^acles that Magistrates and Judges have to direct
them in doubtful cases about matters of Religion, are men of very fallible
judgments, and every ways obnoxious unto error and mistake. Yea confident I
am, that the wisest and most learned of them, are not able clearly or
demonstratively to inform the Magistrate or Judge, what Blasphemy, or what
Idolatry it was, which was by God sentenced to death under the Law. I cannot
but think that they will (for acquaintance sake) be merciful unto that
Idolatry, (and not vote with the old Law against it) which yet the Apostle
Paul condemns, and commands to be mortified, (Col. 3. 5.) And for many other
things or practices, which are commonly called Idolatry, and so (I question
not) voted by these men; I must (for conscience sake) so far be merciful
unto them, as not to judge them neither sentenced by God to death in that Law.
And for that Blasphemy, which was made punishable with death by this Law; some
of the Jews restrain it only to the naming or expressing of the Name
Jehovah; others of them, extend it no further then to the naming of this, and
that other Name of God, Adonaic. I presume that our Anti-Querie-masters
themselves do not judge the naming of either the one, or the other, or both of
these Names, to be a Blasphemy worthy death: no nor yet to be the Blasphemy
sentenced by God to death under the Law. Where our English Translation reads,
Blasphemeth, And whosoever shall blaspheme the Name of the Lord, (Levit. 24.
16.) The Chaldee translateth, expresses: the Septuagint, names; (which they
do also, verse. 11. See M. Ainsworth upon the places.
) Junius and Tremellius read the clause thus: Qui vero execratur nomen
Jehovae, i. But who so curses the Name of Jehovah. So that it seems the
greatest Doctors, both of Jews and Gentiles, differ, and are at a loss, the
light of their great learning notwithstanding, about the nature, quality, or
kind of that Blasphemy, which was by God made punishable with death in his
Law. But our Anti-Querists (it seems) are wiser then either Jews or Gentiles.
Therefore to go about to prove, that the Law for putting Blasphemers, and
seducers to Idolatry to death, is now, or amongst us in force, because it was
once given unto the Jews; Sect. 37.
is as if I should prove, that a man may safely and without danger walk among
bogges, and precipices, and ditches at midnight, because he may well do it at
noonday.

4. They that will have the ancient Law for putting Blasphemers Sect. 37.
and Idolaters to death, to be now in force, by virtue of that ^^nction or
promulgation which it received from God under the Old Testament, must
consequently hold, that it is in force, not simply as to the inflicting of
death upon the offenders, but in all other particulars also that were commanded
by the same Authority with this. As 1. the person tempted to Idolatry, must
not conceal the tempter, be he brother, son, daughter, wife, friend, never
so d^are, but must kill him himself; for so the Law run^; But THOU shall
surely kill him; thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death Deuteronomy. 13*
9.
. 2. Though he must kill him himself, yet it must be with the joint
concurrence and assistance of all the people; for so it follows in the Law: And
afterward the hand of all the people Ibid.
. 3. Nor must he kill him after any manner, nor with any kind of death; but
with stones only. For so says the Law: And thou shall stone him with stones,
that he die Verse. 10.
. 4. Not only the seducer unto Idolatry, but even the seduced themselves,
especially if they be a whole City, must be put to death. The Law is as
express in this, as in any of the former. Thou shall surely smite the
Inhabitants of that City with the edge of the sword Verse. 15.
. 5. Not only the inhabitants of this City must be slain, but the cattle
also therein. The Law is punctual in this also. And the cattle therein with
the edge of the sword Ibid.
. 6. Not the men and beasts only must be slain, but the City it self must be
utterly r^^'d, ruined, destroyed: Destroying it utterly (says the Law) and all
that is therein Ibid.
. 7. This City must be an heap for ever, and never built again Verse. 16.
. These are the plain words of the Law. 8. (And lastly) it was not lawful to
preserve any thing, though never so little, of the stuff or goods belonging to
this City; but it was, even every whit of it to be burnt with fire. And thou
shall gather (says Moses) all the spoil of it into the midst of the street
thereof, and shall burn with fire the City, and all the spoil thereof, every
whit Ibid.
. So then, if the men with whom we have to do, will needs raise the dead unto
life, and give present vigor and force to the Commandment of God under the Old
Law for putting Blasphemers and Idolaters to death; I must say unto them, as
Paul says to the Galatians in the case of Circumcision; Sect. 37.
For I testify again (says he) to every man that is circumcised, that he is
a debtor to do the whole Law Gal. 5* 3.
. In like manner if men will urge the Law for putting those oft-named Offenders
unto death, as being still in force, they make themselves debtors, to require
and urge the execution of this whole Law, in all the particularities and
circumstances thereunto belonging, as they have been mentioned. For who has
any power to make an Election and Reprobation amongst the Commandments of God,
where God himself has made none? Or to say unto him, in this, or in that we
will obey thee, but in a third, and a fourth, we must be excused? Is this the
Divinity, and conscience of these men? If therefore there be no persuading of
them, but that the said Offenders must needs die by virtue of that Law so often
specified, let them first provide and press it as matter of duty and
conscience upon the Magistrate or Judge, that they die no other death, then by
stones: 2. In case themselves shall at any time be the accusers of such
persons, they must make conscience of it to be the executioners likewise of
death upon them themselves, or with their own hands. 3. They must enjoyne all
the people to join with them in the execution; and so go along in all the
other particulars, teaching for Doctrines, and pressing for duties, all the
respective branches of the Law, as they have been presented from the
Scriptures. For the Commandment of God is express and strict in this behalf.
Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall yo^
diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your
God, which I command you Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
. Which clearly implies, that they do not keep the commandments of God, who
maime and mangle them, who take and leave of them at their pleasures. The men
we speak of, making somewhat of the Law contended about, to be in force, and
some things of it, not; make this Law of God like unto a man struck with a dead
palsy, who has one half of himself alive, and the other half dead; or like
those imperfect animals, that were bred of the slime and mud which the Deluge
le^t behind it, as the Poet describes them. Altera pars vivit, rudis est part
altera tellus,
i. One part's alive; the other, dead lumpish Earth.
Yea, these men by umpiring the commands of God as they do, make themselves as
so many Nebuchadnezzars amongst them; who acted that power which he had on
earth upon such terms, that Sect. 38.
(as the Prophet Daniel told his Son) whom he would, be slew, and whom he
would, be kept alive: and whom he would, he set up, and whom he would, he put
down Dan. 5. 19.
. Oh England, if thy Teachers claim and exercise this arbitrarie power over
the Precepts and Commandments of God, take thou heed of their Kingdom. But

5. Those particularities which have been mentioned, a^ annexed Sect. 38.
unto, and co-injoyned with the commandment for putting Idolaters and
Blasphemers to death, (with some others) as, 1. the kind of death, viz. by
stoning: 2. the enjoining the accuser, to be the first in the execution, and
that with his own hands. 3. The slaying of the cattle also with the sword. 4.
The burning of the stuff or goods of the offenders with fire, and that every
whit, (with the rest;) these (I say) do sufficiently intimate, that the Law or
Commandment it self, was appropriate unto the Nation of the Jews, and not
intended for other Churches, States, or Kingdoms, under the Gospel: none of
which ever practiced, or thought themselves bound in conscience to practice any
of them: nor indeed had any sufficient ground, whereon to judge themselves
bound in conscience to practice them; no nor yet were any of them ever taught
by any of their Teachers, though many of these were resolute enough for that
Church Government, which now acts with so much impatiency for her exaltation.

6. If the obligation of the Mosaicall Law for putting Blasphemers, Idolaters,
etc. to death, was intended by God to continue under the New Testament, why was
the Apostle Paul, so far from enjoining a believing Brother, to detect, or to
put to death, his infidel, or Idolatrous wife, that he does not permit him so
much as to put her away from him, in case she please to dwell with him 1 Cor.
7. 12.
? And why does ^e not enjoyne the believing wife, to seek to take away the life
of her Idolatrous or unbeleeving Husband, according to the Law, but on the
contrary requires of her not to le^ve him, if he be pleased to dwell with her?
Certainly this Doctrine of the Apostle holds no tolerable correspondency with
the opinion of our severe Inquisitors, about the non-abrogation of the Law for
putting Idolaters to death.

7. If the Law in Question, was by the in^e^^ of God, the Lawgiver, Sect. 39.
to continue in its native vigor and force under the New Testament, then was
every person in an Idolatrous State or Kingdom, Sect. 40.
whilst it remained wholly Idolatrous, bound thereby, to seek the death one of
another, yea and to destroy one another with their own hand. Yea the civil
Magistrate was bound to sentence all his Subjects that practiced Idolatry, to
death, without exception; and consequently to make a bloody desolation
thoroughout all his dominions. To pretend, that the said Law takes hold only
of Christian Magistrates, and binds them to the execution mentioned, not on
Magistrates whilst they are yet Heathen; is a ridiculous pretense. For what
duty soever belongs unto a Magistrate, as such, belongs to every Magistrate,
of what capacity or condition soever he be otherwise. Or if the pretense were
admitted as legitimate, yet would not the absurdity be at all healed by it,
but rather heightened. Because even then it would follow, that in case the
Supreme Magistrate in an Idolatrous State or Kingdom, were first converted to
the Christian says, he were bound by virtue of this his conversion, to destroy
the lives of all his subjects without exception, whom the present case are
supposed to be all Idolaters. If it be said; yea, but he ought first to
instruct and admonish them, and by all good means to endeavor to reclaim them
from their Idolatry: If after sufficient means used in this kind, they shall
still persist in their Idolatries, then he is to put the said Law in Execution.
I answer; there is no such clause of mitigation or respit, as this, in the said
Law; but the Idolater, and the Blasphemer, were forthwith, upon the truth of
the fact evidenced by witnesses, to be put to death Levit. 24. 14. 16.
. Therefore if this Law be still in force, it must be put in execution without
any such explication, or reserve: the addition of such an interpretation makes
a new Law, and does not establish, but rather disanulleth the old, as if it
were weak and unprofitable.

8. If the said Law be in force under the Gospel, then were believers Sect. 40.
in Idolatrous States and Kingdoms, upon their respective conversions to the
Christian Faith, bound to accuse their neighbors being Idolaters, and
Blasphemers, round about them, before the Magistrate, especially if he were
Christian; and to require the execution of this Law of God upon them, i. to
have them put to death. Whereas the Gospel requires a quite contrary deportment
in Christians toward such, viz. that which was loving and harmless, and apt
to gain upon them, and to persuade them into the Christian Faith. That ye
walk honestly toward those that are without 1 These. 4. 12.
. And Sect. 41.
again: Walk in wisdom toward those that are without Col. 4. 5.
. As we have opportunity, let US DO GOOD UNTO ALL MEN, especially, etc Gal.
6. 10.
. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak
against you, as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall
behold, glorify God in the day of visitation 1 Pe^ 2. 12.
. So that it is so far from being the duty of Christians to seek the
destruction of the lives, either of Idolaters or Blasphemers under the Gospel,
by accusing them unto the Magistrate for either of these crimes, that there is
a solemn engagement laid upon them by God to seek the salvation of their
souls. Yea that Ecclesiastique or Church-punishment which the Gospel it self
inflicts upon such offenders, is in special manner calculated by God for the
saving of their souls 1 Cor. 5. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 20.
.

9. (And lastly) If it should be granted, that all and every the Sect. 41.
Laws hitherto contested about, as well that for putting to death the false
Prophet, as those for inflicting the like punishment upon the Idolater and
Blasphemer, were still in force under the Gospel, yet what is this to the
justification of the Ordinance; at least in far the greatest part of it? Is
there any thing in any of these Laws, which so much as colors, much less
cotteneth, either with the inflicting of death upon those that shall err any
of these errors, though very dangerous in their kind, as that the bodies of
men shall not rise after they be dead, or that there is no judgment after
death, or that Christ is not God coequall with the Father, with diverse others,
which the said Ordinance threateneth with death, if published; or with the
inflicting of imprisonment upon those, that shall hold and maintain, either
that the Churches of England are not true Churches, or that the
Church Government by Presbytery is unlawful, or that a man by nature has no
free will to turn to God, with several others of like consideration, no whit
more favored by the Ordinance? Evident it is, that the Great Sect or party
among the Jews, which are called Sadduces, with their Disciples, held and
maintained publicly, those Great Errors or Heresies; 1. That there is neither
Angel, nor Spirit; 2. That there is no Resurrection of the dead Acts 23. 8.
, (which is one of the opinions made death by the Ordinance,) yea and (as some
learned Authors report) rejected all the Prophets besides Moses. And yet these
were not only tolerated amongst them, and not put to death, but they were in
equal credit and esteem with those of sounder judgment in these points; yea
and had great Interest, not Sect. 41.
in the common sort of men only, but also in those who were in chief places
of power and Authority Acts 4. 1. Acts 5. 17. etc.
. The Scribes and Pharisees also both held and taught many most dangerous and
erroneous Doctrines, yea such by which (as our Savior himself charge them)
they made the Commandments of God of none effect Mat. 15. 3, 4. 6.
. Yet were these also in great honor and esteem in this Church and State. And
though our Savior upon occasion reasoned against, yea and reproved them all,
for holding and teaching these errors, and gave warning unto the people to take
heed of them; yet did he never charge this Church or State, or those that bare
office in either, with sin, or unfaithfulness in their places, for not
proceeding against them, in regard of their errors, either by imprisonment, or
death. And yet we know, that the zeal of his Fathers house did eat him up;
and that he attempted a Reformation amongst them, especially in matters of
Religion, and the worship of God, with an high hand of zeal, wisdom, and
Authority Joh. 2. 14, 15, etc.
; Yea, as Solomon spoke of trees, from the Cedar that is in Lebanon, even unto
the hyssope that springs out of the wall 1 King. 4. 33.
; so did Christ teach and press upon men, all, and all manner of duties, from
judgment, mercy, and faith, (the mighty things of the Law) even unto the
paying tithe of mint, anise, and cummin Mat. 23. 23.
. Therefore by the false Prophet, who was commanded to be put to death, Deuteronomy.
13. 5. was not meant every Heretic, or erroneous person, (as men in these
days count heresy and error; who sentence every opinion, which opposes,
either their ease, or their honor, or their profit, either as the one, or the
other) nor yet those who taught or published any false doctrine, though of
dangerous consequence; but only those, who endeavored to persuade men to the
worship of a false God; and that by affirming, that they spoke by the
inspiration of some deity, and that their sayings were to be esteemed Oracles.
What doctrine it was, which made the Prophet or Teacher of it guilty of death,
is expressly determined in the Law it self, and asserted to be this; Let us go
after other Gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them Deuteronomy. 13. 2.
. And that the Law of God made against false Prophets, and worshippers of false
Gods, was not intended against those, who otherwise held that the Law of God
was to be kept, but were infected with some other error, is sufficiently
evident from hence; because in former times among the Jews, who were affected
with a vehement love and zeal toward their Law, Sect. 42.
Heretics notwithstanding (as has been already observed) were tolerated; and
particularly the Sadduces, (of whose errors and heresies we spoke before.)
These, although the greatest part both of the People and the Rulers believed
them to err exceedingly, nevertheless they were not expelled the City,
neither exempted from being Magistrates, or bearing any other civil office:
yea they were not hindered from coming to the Temple or the Synagogues.

All these things considered, I refer it to the arbitrament of all men of
understanding, whether of the first, second, or third degree, whether our
Anti-Querie-men, or their accomplices, who so passionately rejoice over the old
Law for putting false Prophets, Idolaters, and Blasphemers to death, as if it
countenanced their occupation, of traducing, troubling, molesting, persecuting,
even the Saints of God themselves, for holding and professing such opinions,
which they are pleased to call errors or heresies; whether (I say) the said Law
has any more communion with such practices or proceedings, then light has
with darkness, or Christ with Belial. And yet this Law is the firstborn of
their strength, whereby they edify themselves in this Doctrine of violence and
blood. O Church of England, and you that number your selves amongst the members
thereof, beware of men, I mean your Teachers, lest they become Jews unto you,
and go about to persuade you, that they have a Law; and that by their Law
Christ himself ought to die Joh. 19. 7.
.

They faulter in their Answer to their fifth and sixth argument, (as Sect. 42.
they call it) first, by affirming, or, which is equivalent to it, clearly
supposing, that stratagems, methods, and ways of violence and blood, (viz. so
ordered, and put in execution upon such occasions, as the Ordinance directs;
for except this be their meaning, they answer nothing to the purpose, nor at
all to the Querie) are those ways which God himself commanded to be used for
the support of the true Religion. This we have lately proved to be notoriously
false. God never commanded any violence to be used, nor any blood to be shed,
nor any civil penalty to be inflicted, for any error, or misprision in
judgment about matters of Religion; but only in case of seduction to the
worship of false Gods; which notwithstanding the Ordinance does not at all
touch or mention. Whereas they add, as soon as they had any civil
Magistrates, they speak like themselves, that is, unlike men of much
understanding. For 1. who do they mean by Sect. 43.
this Pronoune, THEY? we have no substantive, one or more anteceding, unto
which it can relate, but only Papists, or wicked men. And did God himself
command those ways of violence and blood, which the Ordinance insisteth upon,
to be used by either of these for the support of true Religion, as soon as
they had any civil Magistrates? Tight Divinity! Secondly, if by the pronoune,
THEY, they mean the Jews (which seems to be their meaning) I wonder, and
would willingly learn, how long it was, after the pretended Command given unto
them for the support of true Religion, before they had Civil Magistrates?
because these learned Clerks suppose some Interim. Doubtless they had Moses,
both before, and when, and some while after, the said Command was given unto
them by God: and I have not heard that ever Moses was voted out of his civil
Magistracy by any Synod or Assembly. And besides Moses, this people had, even
before the giving of the Law specified, as well as after, Civil Magistrates
Exodus 18. 24, 25, etc.
. Again

2. This Answer shameth the Authors, by Asserting, that Ezra Sect. 43.
blessed God for putting such a thing (viz. as the supporting the true
Religion, by those stratagems, methods, and ways of violence and blood,
whereby Heathens support their Idolatrous worships) into the heart of King
Artaxerxes. Whereas it is evident from the very text of Scripture, which they
cite ( viz. Ezra 7. 27.) that the thing, which Ezra blessed God for putting
into the heart of this King, was, precisely and particularly this, the
beautifying of the house of the Lord which was at Jerusalem. As for that part
of this Kings Edict, wherein he makes the transgression of his own Laws, i.
the dictates of his ow^ will, equally punishable with the transgression of the
Laws of God, v. 26. certainly this was never of Gods putting into his heart,
nor did Ezra ever so judge; nor (consequently) ever bless God for it.

3. Nor have we yet the compass of the folly in this Answer. For it further
argues a confirmation, that ways of violence and blood for the support of
true Religion, are according to the light and Law of nature, from hence,
because they have been used by Idolatrous Heathens, to maintain their
Idolatry, and by Antichristian Papists to maintai^^ their abominations.
Because the WHOLE world (as John says) lies in wickedness 1 John 5.
, is it an argument, that wickedness, or to lie in wickedness, is therefore
according to the light or Law of nature? Did it ever enter in the heart of an
understanding or considering Sect. 44.
man, to imagine, that those ways, or moral practices, wherein even the worst
or vilest of men (as Heathenish and Antichristian Idolaters are) generally
walk, are according to the light and Law of nature? Certainly this saying, was
rather spoken according to the light and Law of nature; Recti argumentum est,
pessimis displicere. i. That Sen.
which displeases the worst, is like to be good. And if it be according to the
light and Law of nature, to support Religion by methods and ways of outward
violence and blood, I desire to know, of what Religion this is asserted,
whether of that which is true, or that which is Idolatrous and false. If of the
former, then is it notoriously contrary to the light and Law of nature, to seek
to destroy the true Religion by methods and ways of violence and blood; and
consequently, the heathenish and Antichristian Idolaters, who attempted the
destruction of the true Religion for the support of their own by such means,
walked not according to, but directly against the light and Law of nature in so
doing. And then this practice of theirs, is so far from being any argument,
that ways of violence and blood for supporting Religion, are according to the
Law and light of nature, that it argues the contrary. If it be understood of
the latter, viz. of an Idolatrous or false Religion, certainly no support of
this by any means whatsoever, is according to the light or Law of nature; in as
much as these directly lead to the abhorring and detesting of all such
Religions, not to the supporting of them in any kind. Dear English souls,
take heed of your Teachers; especially when they plead for themselves, and
their own Kingdom; very seldom in these cases do they speak words either of
soberness or Truth.

Their seventh Argument or Syllogism is not framed according Sect. 44.
to the tenor of the Querie to which it pretends, and in this respect we may
well wave their Answer given to it. Yet to let the world see how superficial
these men are in their divinit^e, we shall animadvert a few things upon it.

First, they here affirm, that whoredom, adultery, murder, theft, are the
strong holds of Satan, mentioned 2 Cor. 10. 4. as well as heresies and errors.
But how do they prove this? only by the threadbare argument of their own
Authority; which, both reason and Scripture ever and anon failing them, as
being neither of them calculated for the meridian of their affairs, they are
necessitated to use so frequently, that familiarity has bred contempt. Certain
I am, Sect. 44.
that the best Expositors, and some of their best friends otherwise, leave them
to themselves in that notion. Strong holds (says Calvin) the Apostle calls
Counsels, and height lift up against God, of which he speaks afterward: but
thus he calls them properly and significantly. For his intent is to glory (or
boast) that there is nothing so fortified in the world, but that he is able to
throw down. As if he should say, I know how carnal men pride it with their
swelling conceits, how presumptuously and securely they despise me, etc.
Munitiones vocat confilia, and celsitudinem adversus Deum elatam de quibus
po^tea loquitur: sed proprie and significauter it^ app^llac. Vult enim gloriari
nihil esse tam munitum in mund^, cui diruendo non sit p^r futurus; acsi
d^ceret: Scio equidem quam superbiant suis ampullis humines carnales, and quam
fastuose ac secure me contemnant, etc. Calv. in 2 cor. 10. 4.
. Musculus is of the same mind, about the same expression. Of what strong
holds (says this Author) the Apostle speaks, he presently declares, saying,
casting down imaginations. Some translate the Greek word (...), counsels; but
it properly sounds, reasonings or ratiocinations. He means the counsels of
humane reasoning, not sincere, but corrupt, in which especially Satan reigns
amongst men. And then cites Chrysostomes Exposition, for the confirmation of
his own. Chrysostom (says he) expounds it of the pride of the Greeks, and the
strength or power of their Sophismes, and Syllogismes with more to this
purpose, De quibus autem munitionibus loquatur, evestigio subjungit dicers,
(...). Vertunt autem, (...), confilia: Vox ipsa so^a^, ratiocinationen.
Intelligit de confiliis ratiocinationis humanae, (...), sed corrupt^, in quibus
potissimum Sa^an r^gna^ inter homines. Chrysostomus expo^it, (...). Muscul. in
2 cor. 10. 4.
.

Besides, whereas they most unworthily, and contrary to all reason, and without
the least occasion given, insinuate, That he who will maintain from that Text,
2 Cor. 10. that none but properly spiritual weapons are to be used against the
strong holds of sin (there is not the least intimation of such a thing in the
Querie) he wholly denies all civil punishment, and all the exercise of the
Magistrates sword against evil doers; the clear truth is, that themselves by
numbering whoredoms, adulteries, murders, thefts, etc. amongst the strong
holds there spoken of, are the men that dash their foot against this stone.
For, if spiritual weapons, be mighty through God, to cast down the strong
holds here spoken of, and murders, thefts, adulteries, etc. be some of these;
to what purpose is any civil punishment, or what necessity is there of any
exercise of the Magistrates sword against evil doers? when there is any one
means appointed by God, which is MIGHTY through him, to effect Sect. 45.
that which is necessary to be done, what necessity is there of any other, of
any more means to be added hereunto for the effecting of it? Is it agreeable
to any rule of Scripture, or principle of reason, to multiply means for the
bringing any thing to pass, when there is one means, not only sufficient,
but mighty, or potent also through God to effect it? Certain I am, that it is
none of Gods method so to do. * If there had been a law (says the Apostle)
that could have given life, surely righteousness should have been by the Law
Gal. 3. 21.
: implying, that if God had sufficiently provided for the justification, and
salvation of his creature, one way, or by one means, he would never have added
another, as a competitor with it. Upon this principle, that reasoning also of
his stands, I do not abrogate the Grace of God: For, if righteousness be by
the Law, then Christ dyed in vain* Gal 2. 21. ^
. Clearly implying, that to assert a sufficiency (much more a mightiness, or
potency) in the Law for justification, plainly abrogates and makes void the
grace of God in giving Christ to die for our justification. In like manner,
they who grant, that spiritual weapons are mighty, through God, to cast down
adulteries, ^^rthers, thefts, etc. abrogate the sword of the Civil Magistrate,
in relation to the casting down of these and such like sins. Therefore,
certainly the Gentlemen do but beat the air, in affirming, that whoredom,
adultery, murder, theft, etc. are some of the strong holds mentioned, 2 Cor.
10. 4.

Secondly, the said Answer leans in the best of its strength, Sect. 45.
upon this supposition (or, assertion rather) that the spreaders of errors and
Heresies are certainly ranked in the Scriptures amongst those evil doers,
against whom the Civil Magistrate is the Minister of God to execute wrath Romans
13.
. This (I confess) is the most manlike argument or plea, which this generation
of men, either are wont, or, indeed, able to produce, to color over their
bloody Tenet, for a necessity of civil compulsion, in matters of Conscience
and Religion: yet how effeminate and weak it is, will clearly appear by these
considerations.

First, evident it is, that the Apostle, Romans 13. sets forth the duty,
interest, and power of a Magistrate, simply, as a Magistrate, not as a
Magistrate qualified in one kind or other, least of all as qualified with the
true knowledge of God, or with the knowledge Sect. 46.
of the controversies and questions in Christian Religion. If such a thing as
this shall be supposed, then must there be some appointed to examine and judge,
who are lawful Magistrates, ( i. e. endued with the true knowledge of God,
etc*) and consequently may lawfully, as Ministers of God, execute wrath against
them that do evil. And if so, who shall these examiners and judges be? or
according to what rules or directions shall they proceed in this important
affair? But this (I presume) is so apparent, that we shall not need contend
further for it.

Secondly, it is altogether inconsistent with the wisdom and goodness of God
in the Government of the world, so much as to interesse, much more to lay a
necessity upon, his Deputies, the civil Magistrates or Rulers hereof, to
interpose with their power in such things, whereof, for the generality and
far the greatest part of them, he knew they would be not only ignorant, but
incapable; yea, and not only they (I mean the Magistrates themselves) but even
far the greatest part of men also; yea, even those men themselves, who he
knew would pretend with as much height and confidence to a knowledge of them,
as any others. And certain it is, that matters of Error and Heresy in
Christian Religion, are of this nature; at least a very great part of them. For
who did ever pretend, challenge, or claim, a deeper insight into matters of
Error and Heresy in Christian Religion, a greater sufficiency or dexterity to
judge and determine, what was Error, what not, what was Heresy, what not,
then the Papal Bishops and Clergy, in the day of their power, and especially
the Pope himself? And yet we know, and generally confess, that al these were
incompetent and insufficient judges in such matters as these, and that they did
from time to time put darkness for light, and light for darkness; bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter; condemned Truth to death, instead of Error;
advancing Error instead of Truth.

Thirdly, If Magistrates, as such, be incapable themselves of Sect. 46.
discerning between Error and Truth in Christian Religion, as put the case,
between the Congregationall Government, and that of Presbytery, which is
agreeable to the word of God, and which not, or whether both, or whether
neither: to whom, or to what generation of men can they safely entrust their
judgments and consciences in this case for regulation and direction, so as to
run Sect. 46
no hazard of incurring the wrath of God, for smiting with the sword without
cause? If it be said, they must and may safely trust the godly, orthodox, and
faithful Ministers, amongst whom they live;

I answer first, Put the case there be no such vein of Ministers as these, or
however, none whom they can look upon as such, within their territories; what
shift shall they then make for such an address?

Secondly, If they themselves be incapable (which is the supposition now argued
upon, and it has been proved, that generally they are incapable) of discerning
between Truth and error in questions, and matters of doubtful disputation in
Christian Religion; how shall they be able to know, or satisfy themselves, who
are faithful and orthodox, and who not? He that cannot judge what is erour,
and what is truth, cannot determine what men or Ministers are Orthodox, and
what not.

Thirdly, In case the Ministers living under the jurisdiction of the
Magistrate, (th^se I mean who are reputed godly, faithful, and orthodox) shall
be divided in judgment among themselves, and one part of them adjudge that for
truth and orthodox doctrine, which the other shall condemn for error and
Heresy; (a case of daily occurrence) under which of these shadows shall the
Magistrate repose with peace and safety? To say, that in this case he is bound
to cleave unto the major vote or party amongst them, and to smite, where they
shall say smite, is (upon the matter) either to say nothing, or else that which
is extremely obnoxious. For first, what if they be equally divided? in this
case a major vote is but a castle in the air. Secondly, In case they be not
equally divided; what if the judgment or conscience of the Magistrate shall
incline to the lesser party, as conceiving their grounds and reasons to be of
more pregnancy and weight, then the other, and cannot concur or go along with
these? Thirdly, Take any society, coporation, or company of men of what
capacity soever, under Heaven; as well reason, as experience evinceth, that the
major part of them are ever the weaker in judgment and understanding; and that
commonly it is found in greater meetings and conventions, that the elder serves
the younger, I mean, that matters are carried and concluded against the sense
Sect. 46.
of men of greatest abilities and worth, when there is any division of votes
amongst them. Fourthly, and lastly, if the Magistrate be bound, in the case
under consideration, to cleave either to the one party or the other, whether
the lesser, or the greater, and to smite that with his sword, as error or
Heresy, which either of them adjudgeth for such: he stands bound likewise to
punish and smite with the sword, that whole party of Ministers, as erroneous
and Heretical, whose judgment he rejects in the consultation; though when
he called them hereunto, he looked upon them as godly, orthodox, and faithful.
And if cases of this nature should frequently happen, I mean wherein the
civil Magistrate shall have occasion to advise with his godly Ministers, for
his information about errors, and Heresies, and these Ministers be divided in
their judgments about them; and the Magistrate be bound to punish errors and
Heresies with the sword, which that interpretation of the Scripture in hand now
opposed by us, imposes upon him as a duty; he should still, toties quoties,
and from time to time, be bound in conscience to destroy or molest one party of
the godly Ministers under him; and so ere long must needs make a sad desolation
in his territories of such men; Therefore.

Fourthly, and lastly, when the Apostle says concerning the Magistrates, that
he is the Minister of God, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil, etc. that indefinit expression, him that does evil, is not to be taken
or understood universally, for whosoever does evil, after what manner, or in
what kind soever; but with limitation, pro subjecta materia. 1. for the doer
of such or of that kind of evil, which appertaine^ to the cognizance of the
Magistrate, and whereof ordinary Magistrates, or Magistrates in general, as
well Heathen, as Christian, are competent judges, as all such evil is, which
is manifestly such, and of a Political consideration, as that which is
contrary to the light and law of nature, as Whoredom, Adultery, Murder, Theft,
Injustice, Sedition, Treason, etc. that this is the true interpretation and
meaning of this Scripture, is further confirmed.

First, by the like expressions of frequent occurrence in the Sect. 47.
Scriptures, viz. where indefinit, yea, and sometimes universal, expressions,
are used to signify, not a simple or absolute, but a relative Sect. 48.
or restrained universalitie of things, i. e. either a universality of such
things, which are particularly treated of in those places, where these
expressions are found; or of such, whose natures or conditions are reasonably
capable of those things, which either are attributed to them, or enjoined
concerning them, in such expressions. As for example, God himself says, Exodus
12. 48. that no uncircumcised person should eat of the passover; Yet this
general or universal expression, is not to be extended unto women of the
daughters of Abraham, as if they were restrained hereby from eating the
Passover, because they are persons uncircumcised; the reason is, because the
note or universality, NO, in the prohibition, NO uncircumcised person shall
eat, etc. imports, not an absolute, but only a relative universality, viz. of
all that kind of uncircumcised persons, which the verse speaks of, which are
males; who also are the only persons capable of circumcision. So when the
Apostle commanded the Thessalonians, that if any would not work, he should not
eat; 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
his meaning was, not to forbid nourishment or food to be given, either to
sick or lunatique persons, or to young children, or to any person whatsoever
incapable of working; but only unto those, who changed an ability of working,
into idleness, and stubbornly refused to labor in a calling. So in the
Scripture in hand, when he says indefinitly, that Rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to evil; the word Rulers, does not signify ALL Rulers
whatsoever, but only such, who rule according to the will of God: for
otherwise, we know there are many Rulers, who act contrary to this rule or
assertion of the Apostle, and are a Terror, not to evil works, but to good.
In like manner, when the Apostle says, that the Magistrate is the Minister of
God, to execute wrath upon (or against) him that does evil; by him that does
evil, it is no way necessary that he should mean every man without exception,
who does that which is evil in one kind or other, but only every man that
does any such evil, which is of a political cognizance, and proper for a
Magistrate, as a Magistrate, to punish.

Secondly, if by him that does evil, in this Scripture were Sect. 48.
meant, every man without exception that does any kind of evil; then should
the Magistrate be the Minister of God, and consequently be enjoined by him by
way of duty, to punish men for conceiving Sect. 49.
evil thoughts, for committing adultery in the heart, for coveting that which
is another man's, without doing any thing outwardly which is evil, or injurious
to him, etc. For whosoever does any of these things, most certainly does that
which is evil: but if we shall suppose, that the Magistrate stands bound by
his office to execute wrath, upon such evil doers as these, we had need make
them Gods indeed, and give them knowledge of the hearts of men, or else we
shall make them little better then devils, by bringing the guilt of sin, and
of unfaithfulness in their places upon their heads, without end.

Thirdly, If God should require of the Magistrate to execute wrath upon
spreaders of errors and heresies as evil doers, he should be an hard Master
indeed, and think to gather, where he has not strewed, and to reap, where he
has not sown Mat. 25. 24.
. For doubtless, he neither has given, nor does give any sufficiency of means
to discern between Heresy and sound Doctrine, between Error and Truth, (at
least in many points in Christian Religion) to one Magistrate of an hundred; I
might (I believe) keep within the compass of Truth, and say, of a thousand.
Especially, if we shall look upon those Magistrates which were then in being
in the world, when this Scripture was written; and upon occasion of whose power
to execute wrath upon him that does evil, this admonition was given by the
Apostle unto the Romans, it will clearly be found, that they generally were
so far from being able to judge what was Error and Heresy, what Truth and
Orthodox, in Christian Religion, that they judged this Religion it self, to be
the grand Error and Heresy of the world.

Fourthly, That by him that does evil (in the clause under debate) Sect. 49.
the Apostle does not mean, spreaders of Errors or Heresies in Christian
Religion, but only the actours of such impieties, which were known to be such,
by the heathen Magistrates, who then bare rule over them, is evident from the
context it self, and the import of the same expression in the former part of
the same verse, which is this. For he (the Magistrate) is the Minister of God
to thee for thy good. But if thou shall DO THAT WHICH IS EVIL, be afraid: for
he bears not the sword in vain. By doing that which is evil in this
passage, cannot be meant, the spreading of Errors or Heresies; because they had
not Sect. 50.
so much reason of being afraid of the Magistrate here spoken of, for spreading
of these, as for publishing or preaching the most Orthodox Truths of
Christianity. They might without any danger at all from the Magistrate here
spoken of, have published and taught, that the Idols which the Romans
worshipped, were true Gods; that the worship of Christians, that Jesus Christ
was a deceiver, and not the Son of God, with twenty such abominable errors and
blasphemies more. They had ten times more cause to be afraid of the powers
that now were, for publishing the most Orthodox Truths, as that there is but
one God, that the Gods of the Romans were either dumb Idols, or speaking
Devils; that Jesus Christ is the natural Son of God, and only Savior of the
world, etc. Therefore, by that evil, upon the doing of which they had cause to
be afraid of the Roman powers or Magistracy, the Apostle only means such
wicked acts or practices, which they were apt to punish and take vengeance on,
as apprehending them prejudicial or destructive to the peace, safety, or
welfare of their state; and not any publishing or spreading of errors or
heresies, of the evil whereof they were wholly incapable.

Fifthly, That doing of evil, against which the Magistrate here Sect. 50.
spoken of, is the Minister of God to execute wrath, is opposed unto that
subjection to the higher powers, (enjoined in the first verse) and of the same
consideration with the resisting of these powers, so sharply reproved and
threatened, ver. 2. From whence it clearly appears, that by it is only meant
the doing of such evil, which was prohibited by the Roman Laws and Edicts Quod
bonum est facito, hoc est, legibus obtemperato. Contrarium est, si seceris
malum, id est, legibus fueris inobediens a^t refractari^s, Par. ad Romans 13. 4.
. For no man can be said, either to refuse subjection unto, or to resist the
powers, under which he lives, who lives in an orderly subjection and obedience
unto all their Laws. Now certain it is, that neither the Roman Emperor or
Senate in these days, had enacted any law against the publishing of Errors or
Heresies, in Christian Religion. Therefore the publishing of these could be no
branch or part of that evil, by the doing whereof the Roman powers should have
been resisted in their Laws.

Sixthly, and lastly, That doing of evil, against which the Magistrate is said
to be the Minister of God to execute wrath, ver. 4. is directly opposed to that
doing of good, spoken of v. 3. unto which Sect. 51.
there is a promise made of receiving praise from the Magistrate. * (...)
ma^^^, oppouitur (...), bono morali, de quo ver. 3. Idem. Ibid.
Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the sam^. Now certainly
that doing of good, for which the Apostle undertakes that they shall have
praise from the Roman Magistrate, was not the preaching or publishing of the
great and orthodox truths of Christian Religion, of the goodness of which
service they were wholly insensible, yea, rather enemies unto it (as has been
said) therefore, by that doing of evil, which is opposite hereunto, cannot be
meant the spreading of Errors and Heresies; but only the perpetration of such
moral impieties, of the evil whereof to their state and welfare, they were
fully sensible. Thus we have sufficiently, and by the clearest evidence of the
Scriptures themselves, vindicated the Scripture-passage in hand, from that hand
of violence, which goes about to force it upon a bloody service; yea, and to
draw the Magistrate by it into a dangerous engagement, (far above his abilities
and strength) only to promote the secular designs of Ecclesiastical men. O
England, England, make much of thy Scriptures, but take heed of the glosses of
thy Teachers. And when they shall say unto thee, Lo here is our Presbytery, and
lo it is there, believe them not: for they shall show great signs and wonders
of zeal for Reformation, and building (as they call it) the house of God, and
shall deceive many. Neither of those two pi^lars, neither the ancient law of
God for putting false Prophets, Idolaters, and Blasphemers to death, nor the
Magistrates being the Minister of God to execute wrath upon him that does
evil, were ever hewne by God to support that fabric of Church Government,
which these men labor in the very fire to build upon them. And yet these are
their Gods: and these being taken from them, they may lament with Micah, and
say, what have we more. Jud. 18. 24.


In their Answer to their ninth Argument, they sit down qui^^ Sect. 51.
besides the cushion. The major in this syllogism, is this: They who inflict
death upon men for maintaining a doctrine contrary to their interprecation of
Scripture, had need be as infallible, at least as touching the sense of that
Scripture, as God himself; or else they do what is not lawful for them to do.
Their answer is, This major is fals^, because it is blasphem^^^. It is
blasphemo^^ to assert ^r suppose, that any man, in any thing which he knows
never so certainly, is as infallible as Sect. 51.
God himself. This Answer of these men, is truly prophetical; and if the
people of England were but capable of the spirit that breaths in it, they might
clearly foresee, what they mean to do with an Ordinance of Parliament to
punish Error, Heresy, and Blasphemy, if they could procure it, together with
the managing and interpretation of it, to be put in their hands, (whereof their
hopes are pregnant if ever such an Ordinance shall be established) viz. to
accuse, molest, crush, whom they please, by making Error, Heresy, Blasphemy*
of what saying, or expressions of theirs they please, though never so innocent
and sound (in the genuine and true import of them,) if there be but a word that
is capable of wresting, or abuse from their hand. Was such an assertion,
especially such a supposition, as this* that a man in something which he
knows, may be a^ infallible a^ God himself, ever voted Blasphemy, until now?
nay, was there ever any supposition, or bare intimation whatsoever, called
Blasphemy until now? at least any such supposition or intimation, which is
only collected from the words of another, and not acknowledged or owned, as a
lawful inference, by the speaker himself? But suppose the Syllogism, had not
supposed, but in terminis asserted, that a man may in some particular of his
knowledge, ^e a^ infallible as God himself; by what law either of reason or
Religion, will this be evicted of Blasphemy? Certain I am, that there is no
communication of any of the incommunicable attributes of God in it, nor any
thing asserted to the creature, which is only vested in God* no, nor any any
thing tending in the least to the dishonor or disparagement of the divine
nature or being. And yet (by the way) every thing tending to the dishonor of
God, is not presently Blasphemy, except these Great masters can prove, that
every sin whatsoever, is Blasphemy. But first, infallibilty in God in respect
of every respective particularity of his knowledge, is no incommunicable
attribute of his, in any other sense then as all his attributes whatsoever are
incommunicable: for many things which are infallibly known unto God, are
likewise infallibly known unto men. Secondly, Though the infallibility which is
in God, be in respect of every particular of his knowledge, infinite, as
whatsoever is in God, is God himself, and so infinite; and in this sense or
consideration, no creature can be truly said to be as infallible Sect. 51.
as God* yet as the Divine infallibility imports a certainty, and that upon
unerring-grounds, that things are so and so indeed, as God apprehends them to
be; men themselves, in respect of some particulars of their knowledge, may
truly be said to be as infallible as God himself, i. e. to know certainly upon
unerring-grounds, or grounds that cannot deceive them, that things are so, as
they conceive of them, or apprehend them to be. And if the syllogism, whose
Answer is now under canvasse, be framed to the mind, or sense of the
expression in the Querie, then the syllogism Ego de caepis interrog^, et tu
respondes de alliis.
speaks of onyons, and the Answer answers concerning leekes. But between the
onyons and the leeks, the root of this jealousy grows rank, that there is
like to be old sharking, and straining, wresting, and wringing* tentering, and
tormenting, of the words and expressions of godly men, to make Error, Heresy,
and Blasphemy of them, and so to bring them under the dint of the Magistrates
sword, when once the Ordinance mentioned, shall be established, and the
construction of it entrusted in Ecclesiasticke-hands. For (as Christ long since
said to the daughters of Jerusalem, who wept for him) if they do these things
to a green tree, what shall ^e ^one to the dry? If these men can make the
^ull-rush of Blasphemy to grow without the mire of an obnoxious expression,
what will they do in case words shall be spoken, whose interpretation will
require some charity to make them innocent? As for the rest of this Answer, I
must clearly profess (though it may be to mine own disparagement) that I do
not well understand it; that gentle air of sense which breaths from it in the
face of my understanding, rather whispers an inconsistence, then any good
agreement between the parts of it. It supposes, that a man is neither to yield
himself to suffer, or to cast away his own life without certain knowledge of
Gods truth and will in the thing, (d^ quo tamen totus dubito) nor yet to take
away another man's life in a judicial way (quod potius cred^) and ye^ supposes
withal, that wars may be lawful on their part, who fighting under any
Prince or State, cannot in any degree be said to know infallibly, either the
right of the cause they fight for, or the guilt of all those they fight against
and slay. In which cross passages, the Authors first s^ppose (without any
proof at all) a plurality of ^^gre^s in an infallibility of knowledge: and yet
suppose also (with a greater defiance unto Sect. 52
reason, of the two) that a CERTAINTY of knowledge is none of these degrees. I
fear the whole fabrique of their Doctrine concerning Church Government, taken
together, is but a supposition.

In their Answer to their tenth Argument, first, they prove that Sect. 52.
Luther maintained no error about free will or election, by the testimony or
witness of his book De servo arbitrio. But first, they produce no testimony
from this book of any such import; viz. wherein the author affirms, that he
never maintained any error concerning these points. Secondly, If they had, or
yet should produce such a testimony, how incompetent a proof would it be of
their assertion? For who is there, though of the greatest integrity and parts
withal, that judges his own judgment to be erroneous, in what points
soever, how erroneous soever it be? Thirdly* it is very possible, that he that
writes a book entitled De serve arbitrio, may, even in this book it self,
maintain^ an error about free will; or* if not in this, yet in some other.
Fourthly, Augustins book of Retractions, does not prove that he never held or
maintained those opinions which he there condemns, but the contrary. So though
it should be granted that Luther in his book De serv^ arbitrio, rejects every
opinion that is erroneously held about free will, yet it no ways follows from
hence, that ^e never maintained a^y error about it; least of all does it
follow, that he never maintained any error about election. But these men's
dictates, though never so loose, must pass for demonstrations. Fifthly, Luther
himself, who saw one edition (if not more) of this book De serv^ arbitrio,
before he dyed, did not acknowledge it with any great confidence, as entirely
his. For in an Epistle written to his friend Capit^, in the year 1537 he
professes, nullum ^e agn^scere justum suum librum, nisi FORTE de serv^
arbitrio, et Catechismum Sculet An^al. Evang. Dec 2. i^ Anno, 1526.
. Sixthly* It was the judgment and assertion of some, and is at this day the
constant asseveration of many of Luthers followers, that he retracted the book
now in question before his death. A^ this day (says Scultetus) almost all the
Vbiquitaries are of this opinion, that Luther revoked his book De servo
arbitrio H^die omnes ^^re Ubiquitari^ in illa sententia sunt Lutherum revocasse
servum suum Arbitrium S^nl^^t. ^bi supra.
. Seventhly, The said Author acknowledges, that Philip Melancthon, who was
Luthers great friend and companion, in his latter writings waved the opinion
maintained in the book De servo Arbitrio, and joined Sect. 53.
with Erasmus in his judgment, for the freedom of the will. Therefore the
improbability that Luther himself also should have now declined it, is not so
great. Lastly, the generality of our late Protestant writers, who in their
judgments generally are more Calvin's then Luthers, do generally* upon
occasion, charge the Lutherans, or followers of Luther, with unsound opinions,
about Free Will and Election. So that it is every ways probable, (at least)
that Luther himself was peccant, (as peccancy in this kind is now called) in
his judgment about these points. But be it either so, or otherwise, the
witness of his said book De Servo arbitrio, is but a slim proof, that it was
not so. But we must (I see) be content with hay and stubble, who have neither
silver nor gold to build with.

Secondly, Whereas the Query supposes, the erroneous opinion Sect. 53.
of Consubstantiation to be far more gross and dangerous then many
particulariz^d in the Ordinance; these Gentlemen Answer, That Luther^ error of
Consubstantiation, is neither so gross, nor so dangerous, as any of the
opinions threatened by the Ordinance with death.

Do not these men deserve, and that ex abundanti, their places in the
Assembly* for this Seraphicall strain? The Queree querieth of them, whither
Luther d^served either imprisonment, or death, for his opinion about
Consubstantiation; To this they Answer, that this error is not so gross or
dangerous, as any by the Ordinance threatened with death.

So then, by the way, they grant, that the Civil Magistrate, under whom Luther
lived, was defective in his duty toward God, that he did not put his great
Ambassador and most faithful servant Luther into prison, and there keep him
fast from doing the devil any more harm all his days. But with what face of
sense, reason, learning or Religion, can these men affirm, that The Error of
Consubstantiation is neither so gross, or so dangerous, as any of the opinions
threatened by the Ordinance with death? Certainly, in point of grossness,
there is scarce any, if any at all, of these opinions from the first to the
last of them, to be compared therewith. The error of Consubstantiation is
apparently so gross, that the gross^st of the outward senses themselves (I
mean that of touching) is able to discover and confute it. Is the error of God
his not being one in three persons, or, that the Holy Ghost* is not God, Sect.
54.
with several others threatened by the Ordinance with death, are these, I say,
errors of so terrene a calculation, or so obnoxious unto a redargution by the
senses? And for matter of danger, I would gladly learn from these Grandees,
what difference there is, between holding the Error of Consubstantiation, and,
that Christ is not ascended into Heaven bodily, (which latter is one of the
opinions threatened by the Ordinance with death?) But

Thirdly, and lastly, this Answer goes out in this snuff. The Sect. 54.
opinions which he and others held which were erroneous, were in the beginning
of the Reformation, when three had not been such means of conviction, nor such a
clearing or settling of Truth, as there is amongst us, aspecially in the
fundamental Doctrines, etc. But

First, why were there not such means of conviction in the beginning of the
Reformation, as there is now amongst us? Certain, I am, that there was as much
learning, and as much labor, and as much conscience and faithfulness, in and
about the beginning of Reformation, in very many of those persons whom God
interessed in this honorable service, as there is amongst us. Luther,
Melancthon, Calvin, Zuinglius, P. Martyr, Bucer, Occolampadius (with many more
names of like note with these) have not their Superiors in any of these now
amongst us. I wish they had their equals. There is no more comparison, for
stature in learning, and in all manner of worth, between young Luther Mr.
Edwards Gang. 3. par. p. 77. printeth a passage of a letter, sent by a godly
Minister (as he uses to call all those, that will honor or rather flatter him)
wherein this minister affirms, that he spoke prophetically, that usually
called him (the said mr. Edw.) in Cambridge, ^^^g LVTHER.
, and old, then is between the thistle in Lebanon, and the Cedar in Lebanon.
And for countenance from heaven, the Histories of those times make it evident,
that the Worthies mentioned, had another manner of a Divine presence and
assistance with them, then all the cleerers or setlers of Truth (so called) now
amongst us, can with any color or face of Truth pretend.

Secondly, I shall write my self a debtor of a very high favor unto these
Gentlemen, if they will please to inform me, what clearing or settling of Truth
there is now amongst us, either in fundamental Doctrines of Religion, or in
any other, above what the primitive times of the late Reformation enjoyed. If
by settling of Truth, they mean suppressing of Truth, by casting the diabolical
aspersions of Socinianisme, Arminianisme, Popery, Antinomianisme, etc. Mr. Edw.
Began. 3 par. page 114.
upon it, that so it may stand still, and rest where it is, and propagate no
further, well may they glory (or indeed be Sect. 54.
ashamed) of that settling of Truth now amongst us. But if by settling of Truth,
they mean, a building, settling, or holding of it forth, upon substantial,
clear, and demonstrative grounds, what means the continual enterfe^rings and
clashings of our Presbyterian Pulpits themselves, one against another? yea, how
comes it to pass, that so seldom can any one Sermon be heard out of their
pulpits, but quarrels with it self? What mean the numerous Anti-Votes in the
Assembly it self, and some of these proceeding from persons of the most eminent
worth amongst them, if not against all, or the greater part, yet against some
of the main and most material Doctrines concluded there? what mean the
crosse-lines and contradictions of that frequent occurrence in books lately
printed; and these not only in, and about the point of Presbytery, between
Presbyterians themselves, and particularly between Mr. Rutherford, and Mr.
Edwards, (whereof instance might be given in sundry particulars) but in
Doctrines also of a far more fundamental consequence, as about the power of
man in his unregenerate, yea, and in his regenerate condition too, about the
nature of Justifying Faith, yea, about Justification it self (then which I
know no Doctrine more fundamental) concerning which notwithstanding, it is a
very rate thing to find any two, either of our late Writers, or our present
Preachers, uniforme in their judgments; yea, or to find any one of either of
these, entirely consistent with himself?

Several months since I heard a Parliament man of eminent worth and note,
reckon up six or seven several Sects or subdivisions amongst the Presbyterians
themselves; since which time I make little question, but that their Sects have
multiplied. So that whereas my Anti-Querists talk of so much clearing and
settling of truth amongst us, above the happiness of the first times of
Reformation in this behalf; the truth is, that that Truth they speak of, even
in her maine and most fundamental branches, was never more disturbed,
perplexed, intricated, obscured, made more inaccessible to the understandings,
capacities, and consciences of ordinary men, from the beginning of the
Reformation they speak of, then it is at this day amongst us. O England,
England, if thou dependest upon thy Teachers for truth, even in the greatest
points of that Religion which thou professest, thou must fish for it in Sect.
55.
their troubled waters.

In their eleventh Answer, having built upon the rubbish of the Sect. 55.
foundations lately demolished, and told us, First, that the doctrine of the
Lords day was not so cleared, as it is now, (I wonder by whom, or by what light
of demonstration) Secondly, that even now it is not so clear in any other
Churches, as it is here in England, (I see the moral of the fable verified; if
a man be the painter, the Lion shall be made to couch at his feet) Thirdly,
That the truth of it is not settled in other Kingdoms or States, as it is
amongst us (it seems they make a difference between clearing, and settling: and
so I believe, that in their sense, there is a very great difference indeed; the
former being Gods way, the latter, men's) In the fourth place they add; it may
justly be believed, that if he (Calvin) were now alive in this Kingdom, he*
would not publish or maintain any thing contrary to the observation of the
Lords day, as it is enjoined by the Laws and Ordinances of this Realm. But may
not the justness of these men's belief in this case, be justly questioned? Is
it a just or righteous thing to believe, or to suppose, that a man of worth, of
able parts, of eminent learning, of a composed judgment, of a tender
conscience, would baulk with God and his own soul, in shunning to declare,
what upon mature study, upon diligent and faithful inquiry, he judges to be
the counsel or will of God, thorough fear of an Ordinance or Law in a civil
State? I believe if Calvin were now alive, whether in this Kingdom, or in any
other, he would conne these Gentlemen small thanks for such a commendation.

The dregs settled in the bottom of this Answer, are these: can it be less
then a wilful slander, and malicious purpose of rendering the Ordinance
odious, to name death as a punishment for maintaining any thing against the
Ordinances and Laws about the Lords day, etc. But so this Querist deals in
other of his Queries, etc. But let charity, or reason, or common sense, or who
ye will, judge, whether it be less then a wilful slander, and malicious
purpose of rendering the Querist odious, without a cause, to charge him with
naming death as a punishment for maintaining any thing against the Ordinances
and Laws, about the Lords day? To Queree, whether Calvin deserved either
imprisonment, or death, for teaching and maintaining, etc. (which is the tenor
of the Queree) is this to charge Sect. 56.
the Ordinance with threatening death as a punishment for maintaining any thing
about the Lords day, against the Ordinances and Laws? If not, how can it render
the Ordinance odious, except (happily) it be either in the jealous consciences of
such men, who are under some regret, and secret counterworkings of conscience
through fear, lest the Ordinance, though pleasing to them, that is, to their
flesh, should yet be odious indeed in the sight of God, or else in the
over-jealous conceit of those, whose chief hopes and comforts on earth are
bound up in the honor and success of the Ordinance; and who lie under the
bondage of this fear, that if the Ordinance should prove odious in the eyes of
men, themselves should suffer and bear the same burden with it. To say that
Nicholas or Matthew, or any other person, is either homo, or BRVTVM; is it any
ways to name or intimate, that brutu^s, is either the genus, or species of
either? But when men's minds are set to do unworthily, they become incapable
of greater differences, then are between conjunctive and dis-junctive
particles, though there be no such affinity or likeness between these, which
need incumber any sober man's judgment, in or about their dijudication. But
Gangraena, and her Paramour has justified all the sons of* Presbytery besides,
in all their slanders, calumnies, false aspersions, malicious imputations, and
reports; they that are malicious, are not malicious, in comparison of him that
super-abounds in malice. Omnis Caesarea cedat labor Amphitheatro:
Vnu^^ pro cunct is fama loquatur opus.
Let all men's malice give Gangraena place:
Let Fame, instead of all, this one piece grace.


In their Answer to their twelfth Argument, if they mean as Sect. 56.
they say, they make some part of atonement for their delinquency against the
Queries hitherto. For here they grant, that no man is punishable for his mere
mistake, whatever his opinion be: but for being so pertinacious in his mistake
in matters of great consequence, as that he will not forbear to publish his
mistakes to the infection of others, and the mischief of their souls, and to
the ruin, or at least miserable Sect. 57.
disturbance of the Church of God.

I freely acknowledge that whosoever, out of pertinacy in his mistake, not
only in matters of greater consequence, but even of lesser, will not forbear
to publish his mistakes, to the infection of others, etc. i. e. with a desire
or intention to infect, and mischief the souls of others, etc. deserves
severely to be punished; nor shall I ever plead mercy for such a man. If the
Ordinance had explained it self after any such manner as this, I (I presume
with many others) should have been satisfied in it, without any more ado; and
not have needed to crave satisfaction about it, as now we have done. But in
case any man shall really and conscientiously judge that opinion of his, which
others call a mistake, and perhaps is so indeed, to be a truth of God; and
shall withal really judge, that he is bound in conscience to hold forth such
an opinion as being in his judgment and conscience the undoubted truth of God;
and withal necessary to be published and made known unto men, for their
spiritual benefit and good; in case (I say) the publishing of his opinion or
mistake, upon such terms as these, shall prove the infection of others, or
inconvenience, or (if you will) mischief the souls of others, etc. I have no
ground either in Reason, or Religion, to judge this man worthy, either death or
bands. Nay, if to publish such mistakes, and that even with pertinacy* which
tend to the infection of others, and mischief of souls, etc. were a matter
worthy either death, or bands, I have sufficient grounds both in Reason and
Religion, to judge and think, that very many Ministers of the Anti-Independent
interest, yea, many of very eminent repute amongst them, would upon due
examination and trial, be found in the condemnation.

The strength of their Answer to their thirteenth Argument, Sect. 57.
leanes upon this staff: That the open and public profession of errors, is
more pernicious, then the practice of sins in a like kind and degree: they
instance, To teach there is no Christ, is more dangerous (they say) then to
live as if there were no Christ, and yet make a profession of him. Well, but my
judgment (and the judgments I believe of many more) and this Doctrine, are at
odds. But these men attempt a reconciliation by the mediation of this reason,
for the proof of their Doctrine. The one (they mean, the public profession
of errors) justifies what it does, as lawful, under pretended Sect. 57.
grounds of truth: The other practices, and yet POSSIBLY not so impudently as
to justify his own practice: But

First, may not a man as possibly, publicly profess an error, otherwise then
under pretended grounds of Truth, as practice, or commit sin, without a
justification of what he practices? Certainly, he that practices a sin, has
the same necessity lying upon him to justify what he does; which he, who
publicly professes an error, has to justify this practice of his. Nor can
I understand, why, or upon what ground, our Anti-Querists should make any such
opposition, between a professing of error, and practicing of sin. Is it
their sense, that a public profession of error, is no practicing of sin?

Secondly, when they say, by way of opposition to him that publicly
professes an error, that he that practices sin, may yet possibly do it
not so impudently as to justify his own practice; do they not plainly suppose,
first, that he that practices sin, may practice it upon such terms, viz.
so, as to justify his practice (which supposition of theirs, I confess, is
attested for truth, by daily examples of Practitioners in this kind) and
secondly, that when men do thus practice, the practice of sin is every-whit
as pernicious, as the public professing of an error. And if so, does not the
reason which they bring to plead the cause of their assertion, prevaricate with
it; and set up that which is contradictory to it, in its stead. But this is no
news, amongst those, who think themselves too good to subject unto the truth.
But

Thirdly, the question is not, which of the two, a public profession of
error, or the practice of sin in a like kind, etc. be more pernicious; but
which of them is more punishable, which deserves the greater punishment? For in
many cases, practices or actions that are more pernicious, i. e. more
prejudicial and hurtful unto others, may deserve less punishment, then some
others which are less hurtful. The fact of a mad man, who in the heat of his
distemper shall fall foul upon a man, and dangerously wound him, is more
hurtful unto him, then the fact of him that shall fairly take his purse upon
the highway, or cheat him of a parcel of his money. But either of these
latter facts is more punishable then the former. Many instances, more of like
consideration might be added. Therefore,

Fourthly and lastly, as to the assertion or conclusion it self; Sect. 58
that the public profession of error, is more pernicious then the practice
of sin, etc. (if by pernicious, the assertors mean, punishable; which they
must mean, if they speak any thing to the purpose) the truth, or error of the
comparison, will be clearly tried by this touchstone. If the open and public
profession of error, has first more of the will in it, be more voluntary:
Secondly, if it be more against the light, and law of nature; and then,
Thirdly, and lastly, if it be more pernicious (as they speak) or mischievous
unto men, then the practice of sin in a like kind and degree; then have
these men judged righteously between them; the public profession of error is
more punishable, then the practice of sin, etc. But if all things be found
contrary between them, and the practice of sin in a like kind or degree, be
first more voluntary; and secondly more repugnant to the light and law of
nature; and Thirdly, of an equally, or a more, pernicious and dangerous
consequence, then the public profession, or holding forth of an error; then
have these men (it is much to be feared) taken a bribe, which has blinded
their eyes, and caused them to stumble in judgment. Now concerning the two
former, there is little question to be made, but that they are more rank in
such a practicing of sin, as they put in the comparison, as (for example) in
living as if there were no Christ, then in professing an error, as, viz. that
there is no Christ. For first, that which is done contrary to that knowledge
which a man has, of what he ought to do, cannot reasonably be thought, but to
have more of the will in it, then what is done out of ignorance, or with a
concurrence of the judgment of the doer. Now men may profess that there is no
Christ, with a perfect concurrence of their judgment: for they may verily
think that there is no such person, as many thousands in the world do: (yea,
it can hardly be supposed with any good consistence in reason, that any man
ever did, or will profess that there is no Christ, who does not really and
inwardly judge so) but they cannot practice or live in Adultery, Murder,
Theft, Oppression, Deceit, etc. (which is to live as if there were no Christ)
but they must needs oppose their judgments, and consciences, with the strength
of their wills. Secondly, the sins mentioned* Adultery, Theft, etc. are
clearly* and at first sight against the light and law of nature; but the
denial of the being of such a person as Christ, who is both God and Sect. 58.
man, is not contrary to any law or principle in nature; at least to none, that
is clearly such. Thirdly and lastly, for the degree of danger, or
perniciousnesse in either; (though the punishablenesse of a practice is not, as
has been said, so much to be measured by this) I conceive the practice of the
sins, to be equally pernicious (at least) with the profession of the error.
The degree of perniciousnesse in a practice, is to be judged by these two
things: first, by the degree of the evil, which it is like to produce, or
possibly may produce. Secondly, by the degree of the likelihood in it to
produce this evil. That which possibly may occasion or produce a greater evil
then another, is not necessarily the more pernicious; except there be a
proportionable likelihood that it will produce it. Nor is that necessarily the
more pernicious, which is the more likely to occasion or produce evil; unless
the degree of the evil, which it is likely to occasion, be thereafter. But
when the evil or mischief which two several practices possibly may or are
likely to produce, is one and the same; then that is clearly the more
pernicious, which is the more likely to produce this evil. First then it is
clear, that to live as if there were no Christ, may very possibly occasion men
to think, that indeed there is no Christ, as well as to profess in words,
that there is no Christ. So that in respect of the evil (at least in that
particular, which is now in consideration) which both the one and the other may
produce; there is no difference between the two practices. If then there be as
great a likelihood, that to live as if there were no Christ, (as viz. in
Adultery, Theft, Deceit, etc.) will produce the evil mentioned, as to profess
in words, that there is no Christ; then is the former every-whit as pernicious,
as the latter. The degree of a likelihood to produce evil (in that kind we
speak of) is to be estimated by some such rule as this; that which is as apt
or likely to corrupt the minds or judgments of men, with the evil of the
error, has the same likelihood in it to produce the evil: and that which
has the greater aptness in this kind, has the greater likel^hood. Now that
method or means of corrupting the minds of men with errors, which is more
plausible and tempting, and more complying with the flesh, is more apt and
likely to produce the evil, then another, which is less plausible and
tempting in this kind. If so, then for men to live as if there were Sect. 59.
no Christ, is more pernicious, and likely to mischief the souls of others,
then to say, or profess in Words that there is no Christ. For first, examples,
are more insinuating, and tempting, and apt to gain upon men, then doctrines,
or bare assertions, or arguings of things are, Peter speaks of some husbands,
who may be won by the conversation of the wives, when they cannot be gained by
the word 1 Pet. 3. 1.
. And if examples on the right hand be more operative and persuasive in this
kind, then doctrines of the same kind; certainly examples on the left hand,
are not behind. He spoke both reason and experience, who said: Tardius
irritant animos demissa per aurem, Horat.

Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus --
What by the ear is let into the mind,
Ingageth little; but it soon inclines
By what the eye presents --


Secondly, this great error, that there is no Christ, being presented Sect. 59.
and recommended to the sensual hearts of men for a truth, with those sensual
accommodations of present pleasures and profits (as it is in the example of
Adultery, Drunkenness, Deceit, etc.) comes upon terms of more advantage to
gain entertainment with men, then when it comes only in a sound of words, or
in the dry notion of a doctrine. Yea, the truth is, that the great error we
speak of, that there is no Christ, would be of little, or no accommodation to
the flesh (and consequently there would be no great danger of its infection)
did it not contribute toward that peaceable liberty for the practice of sin*
which the flesh or sensual part of men so ardently wishes and desires.
Therefore when it comes unto the soul visibly attended and accompanied with
that retinue of carnal gratifications, which it in part as well begets, as
maintains; the very sight and beholding of these, pleads, and procures
acceptance for it, in the eyes of the carnal judgments, and fleshly minds
of men, and awakens and invites the foolish heart to intertaine it. Thus we see
how in-Orthodox these Anti-Congregationall zealots are, in the main pillar of
that Answer which now we oppose, Sect. 60.
being (as has been said) this; That the open and public profession of
errors, is more pernicious, then the practice of sins in a like kind and
degr^e. O England, who has bewitched these, and many others of thy Teachers,
that they should so seldom see, or at least, speak the Truth, as they do! But

Secondly, because in the sequel of this Answer, they strike again at that
dis-junctive expression in the Queries, either imprisonment or death, as very
injurious to the Ordinance, when the opinion queried about, is by the Ordinance
only threatened with imprisonment; and Gangrena her self; who is loath to be
out at any game of frowardness or folly, is partaker with them of this un
clerk-like, (yea, unmanlike) exception; Gang. 3. par.
besides, what has been already said for the full justification of it with
men, who have no soft places in their heads, nor hard in their hearts; I here
add, that howsoever -- Lucis tam dira cupido Virgil.

(as the Poets expression is) i. e. such an uncouth or dismal desire of life,
may possibly inthrall or bewitch Gangrena, and her lovers, that a prison above
ground, and a prison under ground, may seem very un-synonomous, and as far
distant one from the other, as the East is from the West; yet to ingenuous and
freespirited men, there is no such great difference between them. Nay, unto
many dispositions, yea, unto all men of solid understanding, present
imprisonment in the chambers of death is many ways more desirable, then
perpetual imprisonment, or for term of life, under the hand of our common
Jaylors; especially upon those terms of misery and extremity, which the far
greater part of those suffer and endure, who are imprisoned by men. So that in
case the expression in the Queries so often quarrelled, had been conjunctive,
imprisonment and death, and not dis-junctive (as now it is) imprisonment or
death, there had been no such capital injury or offense committed against the
Ordinance: how much less, the dis*junctive being every ways, as well in
appearance, as in truth and substance, innocent? But ears, must be horns, when
Lions will.

Their fourteenth Answer, comes not ^eere their fourteenth Sect. 60.
Argument by sixteen foot, at least. Their Major in this Argument, is this:
None ought to urge a truly faithful and conscientious Sect. 61.
Minister to publish contrary to what he is persuaded of, nor to threaten him
with death or imprisonment, if he shall declare himself otherwise. To this they
are pleased to Answer, That this Major is not universally true. Their reason:
For though no Minister that is truly faithful and conscientious, may publish
any thing, when he ^^ persuaded it is an error; yet if any such Minister has
first published any dangerous error, to the dishonor of God, and the
mischief of souls, he may be justly urged to make reparation for the evil
which he has caused, by publishing the contrary Truth: and may, if he shall
refuse, be threatened with imprisonment, and even of death. They that can
reconcile this reason unto the cause, which it undertakes, may do it, if they
please: I confess I cannot. For is there so much as a face, or the lightest
stricture of an appearance of any thing in it, to prove, That a truly
faithful and conscientious Minister, may be urged, or threatened with
imprisonment or death, to publish contrary to what he is persuaded of, etc. If
he be persuaded of Truth, in that which is contrary to what he has published,
he shall not need, being truly faithful and conscientious, to be urged, much
less threatened with imprisonment or death, to make reparations by the
publishing of it. His faithfulness and conscientiousnesse will of their own
accord lead him hereunto. If he be not persuaded, both the Quer^e and the
Argument are still where they were, both un-answered.

Whereas in the sequel of this Answer, they cite that of the Apostle, Sect. 61.
Gal. 5. 12. I would they were even cut off that trouble you, to prove, that
he, that shall still persist to publish dangerous errors, may be threatened
with death (I suppose they mean, and cut off by death also) I answer, first,
that certainly though they let Paul alone with his own words, yet they
exchange meanings with him. For he does not here speak of cutting off by the
sword of the Magistrate, which is by death; but by the sword of the Church*
which is by excommunication. Chrysostom, with whom Calvin agrees in his
notion, conceives that the Apostle in his expression of cutting off, alludes to
circumcision, which was made by abs^ission: and wishes, that as they
distracted the Church by preaching and urging the Doctrine of Circumcision, or
cutting off, so themselves should be cut off. Now that cutting off, which was
by circumcision, was not to the death, or destruction, but to Sect. 62.
the benefit of the circumcised. Mr. Perkins calls the passage in hand, an
imprecation or curse pronounced by Paul upon the false Apostles, and moves
this question upon it; Whether we may not curse our enemies as Paul did? To
which he answers negatively, No: his reason: For we have not the like spirit to
discern the persons of men what they are: and our zeal for Gods glory, is
mixed with many corrupt affections, and therefore to be suspected. So that his
judgment is, not only that no argument can be drawn from this Scripture for
the death or imprisonment of any teachers of errors, or troublers of Churches
in that kind; but not so much as for any imprecation, or wishing of evil
against such. Luthers interpretation of the place differs not much; who
expounds the Apostles malediction or imprecation (as he calls it) against the
disturbers of the Church, in the nature of an Anathema, and makes this to be
the sense of it, that God would not guide or prosper either their Doctrine, or
their doings. Recte igitur facit Paulus, quod perturbatores ^llos maledicit,
and pronunciat sententiam eos esse Anathema, cun omnibus quae sunt, docent, and
faciunt, quodque imprecatur eis ut ex^i^dantur ex bac vita, and precipue ex
Ecclesia, hoc est, ne Deus gubernet and fortunet Doctrinam and omnes actiones
eorum, Luther ad Gal. 5. 12.
Musculus understands the place clearly of excommunication. I would they were
cut off (says he) But from whence? Even from the body of the Churches of
Christ, into which they had infinuated themselves, as if they had been members
of them; whereas indeed they were pernicious pests. They who are cut off, are
abalienated from all communion and fellowship therewith, etc. It is true he
speaks afterward of cutting off by the Christian Magistrate: but his Text,
according to his own interpretation of it, administers no ground at all unto
him so to wish. Nor indeed does he wish any such cutting off as this, but upon
this ground or supposition, that the Churches of Christ have no other means
whereby to be rid of those unworthy teachers and Pastors, whom he judges meet
to be cut off; which yet they ought to have, yea and might have, if they did
not willingly suffer themselves to be deprived of it; and then they should
stand in no need at all of the strong hand of the Magistrate for such a purpose.

Whereas they add, that Christians in former ages submitted to Sect. 62.
suffer, with profession, that if they had been Heretics or Blasphemers they
had deservedly suffered; and for proof hereof, allege that of the Apostle
Paul (when he was accused to have offended against the law of the Jews and the
Temple) If I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I
refuse not to dye, Act. 25. 8. 11. they here also commit that iniquity, by
which they still build Sect. 63
their house of High Presbytery; I mean, they misuse the good Word of God. For
is there any thing in the passage they cite* which so much as colors with that
assertion, which they argue from it? (...) (says the Apostle.) i. e. if indeed
I did (or do) injustice, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse
not, etc. Do any of the Heretics, or Sectaries now (as these men are pleased
to call all those, who refuse eandem insanire insaniam, with them) refuse to
suffer, or die, upon such terms as these? Let them produce any one man of
that generation which they so avile, and tread under their feet like clay and
mire, or stones in the streets, who ever refused to suffer for injustice
proportionably to his offense? or to dye, having committed any thing worthy of
death? It may possibly be, that some of them have pleaded their innocence, when
matters of injustice have been laid to their charge: and others have declared
their judgments in opposition to some, who would make what they please, or
what pleases not them, matters worthy of death. But in both these they are so
far from going against, that they follow, the example of the Apostle Paul;
who denied that he had done any injustice, or committed things worthy of death,
as his malicious accusers had traduced and falsely charged him to have done. O
England, when will thy Teachers cease to pervert the straight ways and word of
the Lord! when shall it yet be?

Their Answer to their fifteenth Argument is somewhat faint Sect. 63.
and tender. They speak here as if they cared not much whether they spoke or
no yet they take courage to say, that the public holding of some opinions may
be so prejudicial to the public peace, as may deserve imprisonment, and yet
not deserve excommunication, etc. But their strength is wholly spent with
bringing forth the bare assertion, that they have not left wherewith to cloth
or guard it with any proof. And indeed a thousand such sayings may more easily
be asserted, then any one of them substantially proved. I desire to know what
opinions those are, the public holding whereof may be so prejudicial to the
public peace, as to deserve punishment; and yet not be so prejudicial,
either to the honor of God, or to the proceedings of the Gospel or to the
well being of that particular Church, which ought to take cognizance of them,
as to deserve excommunication. I fear that the public peace is oftener Sect.
63.
prejudicial to the public holding forth of many truths, then the public
holding forth of any opinion whatsoever prejudicial unto that.

Whereas they add, that the Apostle did not call them beloved Brethren, that
at Corinth denied the resurrection, but the rest of the Church that ^^ld the
Truth; except either they will say, that they speak it by Revelation, or else
give some, either Scripture, or reason to prove it; I trust they will give us
leave to judge it Apocryphal, and to number it amongst the transgressions of
their pen. That which follows, is yet of a more ignoble calculation: for they
say, neither were there any such in the Church of Corinth, or Christian
Churches then, that held opinions of far worse consequence, then very many,
or even then any of those errors, which the Ordinance threatens with death.
But first, why, or in relation whereunto, do they tell us this story? would
they have their Reader think, that in saying this (though they could prove it,
which they neither do, nor, I believe, can) they answer the demand of the
Querie? They that are willing to be deceived* may so judge. But the Querie does
not ask, whether there were not in the Church* who publicly held some
opinions of worse consequence, then many of those which the Ordinance threatens
with death; but, then many of those which this Ordinance threatens, either with
imprisonment, or death. But when a shadow will do the deed, what need men take
care for the substance? and when half answers will serve the turn, such as
are complete and whole are but superfluities. Secondly, for my satisfaction
about the truth of the assertion, I desire to consult the learning and
judgments, and consciences of these men* whether this opinion, that the bodies
of men shall not rise again after death, which they know was held in the
Church of Corinth* again, whether the denying of justification to be by Christ
alone, which they know was entertained by many in the Churches of Galatia; yet
again, whether to deny that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, which it seems
from 2 John v. 7. was the opinion and doctrine of many in these times; whether
I say every of these opinions, especially the second, be not of worse
consequence, and more destructive to the eternal salvation of men, then this,
that there is no day of judgment after death; which yet is one of the errors
threatened with death by the Ordinance? Sect. 64.


Their Sxteenth Argument (so called) is fraudulently made, and drawn up quite
besides the tenor and import of the Querie; Sect. 64.
and therefore though I cannot undertake simply for the justification of it,
yet is it much more righteous then the Answer made to it: For*

First, this affirms, that those who hold and publicly maintain any of the
opinions, punishable by death in the Ordinance, cannot be so full of grace and
goodness as those of a contrary judgment. An assertion (doubtless) no ways
reconcilable with any sound principle, either in reason or Religion. Yet our
Anti-Querie-men* undertake the patronage and defense of it, by this plea:
Because (say they) they who h^ld, and publicly maintain DAMNABLE heresies,
have no true Grace, or goodness at all. But (for Answer to this) I would know
of these men, what they mean, by DAMNABLE Heresies? For I fear they spread a
net in the darkness of this word, DAMNABLE, to deceive their simple ones* If
by DAMNABLE, they mean that, which is always and inevitably accompanied with
eternal Damnation, there is truth in their reason, but no pertinency at all to
their purpose; unless they be stronger then God, and can do impossibilities:
as (particularly) prove, that all the opinions punishable by death in the
Ordinance, are DAMNABLE in such a sense, i. e. of an absolute inconsistence
with Grace, and forgiveness of sin by God. I fear their touchstone, whereby
they try opinions and heresies whether they be DAMNABLE in this sense, or no*
is but counterfeit and naught, and does but abuse them, and many more with
them. Yet if they will please to give it a name by which we may know it, we
shall be the better able to examine and judge of it. For my part, I verily
believe, that there are very few opinions or heresies (as some men call
Heresy) which are DAMNABLE in this sense. My reason is, because the Scripture
so expressly says, That whosoever believes in Jesus Christ, shall not
perish, but have everlasting life. And if there be no opinion absolutely
inconsistent with such a believing* but only that, which is either formally,
or vertually, contradictory to it; Certain I am, that there are not many
DAMNABLE in the sense now argued upon. Yea, I make much question, whether all
opinions, which are only vertually and by way of implication, contradictory
Sect. 65.
thereunto, be absolutely inconsistent with this believing; and consequently
DAMNABLE (in the said sense.) But if by DAMNABLE Heresies, they only mean,
such opinions or errors, which are of dangerous consequence (especially if they
who hold them* should withal hold all other Errors, which in a consequentiall
way depend upon them) and in this respect are justly and deeply condemnable, or
censurable by men; their reason vanishes into nothing, for want of truth in
it. For many who hold and publicly maintain DAMNABLE Heresies, in this sense,
may have, yea and some (as far as men are able to discern) defacto, have
true Grace and goodness, (as has been formerly asserted in this Discourse)
and might be instanced in many more. But,

Secondly, That which follows in this Answer, is of a far weaker Sect. 65.
constitution, then that which went before. For here they affirm, that they
that hold any of the other opinions punishable by the Ordinance, cannot be so
full of grace and goodness, as they MAY BE who are of a contrary judgment. But

First, The Querie does not make any such ridiculous demand* whether those that
are of a contrary judgment MAY NOT be as full of Grace and goodness, as those
that hold the opinions made obnoxious by the Ordinance. But the purport of the
Querie is this: Whether it be not possible, that these (viz. taken in their
present condition, with all their infirmities, whether in point of opinion, or
practice) may be as full of Grace and goodness, as the other? ( viz. taken and
considered likewise with their respective burtherns in both kinds, as for the
present they walk laden with them.) Now compare the Gentlemen's Answer (in the
words mentioned) with the Question put to them, and you will find no more
sympathy between them, then is between Harp and Harrow.

Secondly, Neither is there any whit more Truth, then pertinency of relation,
in the said Assertion. For certainly they that hold some, yea, or all, the
opinions punishable by the Ordinance, may be as full of Grace and goodness, as
they may be, who are of a contrary judgment, viz. if God will please to
interesse his power for the cleansing of the former from all filthiness, both
of opinion and practice, as well as of the latter. The Opinions punishable
Sect. 66.
by the Ordinance, are every whit as reduceable by the spirit of God, as the
errors held and maintained by men of a contrary judgment: (for I suppose that
they also have their errors, if they be men) and their persons or souls
likewise capable of as great inlargements for, and with Grace from the hand of
God, as theirs.

Thirdly, Whereas they further here say, That those who hold, and publicly
maintain any of those Heresies* cannot be so truly serviceable to the State,
as those of a contrary judgment; because that thereby they even provoke God
against the State, by the dishonor they bring to him, and the mischief they
do to his people; Do they suppose that those of a contrary judgment, amongst
whom it is notoriously known, that there are fornicators, adulterers,
drunkards, deceitful, covetous, oppressors, proud, persecutors, etc. Do they
suppose (I say) that such abomination-workers as these, do not at all provoke
God against the State, or bring dishonor to him, or do mischief unto his
people? For without such a supposition as this, it is evident, that those who
maintain some one, yea, or more, of the heresies (so called) or errors made
punishable by the Ordinance, may be as truly serviceable to the State, as those
of contrary judgment; yea, and this with the full consent of that very reason,
which is here brought to prove the contrary. Or do these men conceive, that
whosoever will undergo the penance of bowing down his neck to the yoke of high
Presbytery, shall hereby obtain Sect. 66.
a plenary remission of all his sins from God; yea, and Do^a^i^tae, qui prae
s^ omnes alios Christian as condemna^ant severitatem censurae in suos
re^ana(...): et in suis ^aetibus h^mi es (...)os, ^^ opt^ o^, Gildo^ia^^s,
Primianosque pa ^^^autur^^. Mart. Loc. Class. 4 cap. 5. ^^ct. 15.
further be made incapable of all further provocation?

These men who are so furiously clamorous against Sectaries and Heretics (in
which bundle of clamor they bind up the names of many that are precious in
the sight of God and good men) do themselves imitate one of the worst strains
that was found in one of the worst kind of Sectaries, (I mean the Donatists)
with the reproach of whose memory and practice they so frequently stigmatize
those who dissent from them. The Donatists (says Peter Martyr) who condemned
all other Christians in comparison of themselves, were very remiss in their
censures of those of their own Sect. and patiently suffered even the most
impure of men in their Assemblies *. And of Eunomius the Heretic it is
reported, that suis sectatoribus quodvis scelus indulgebat. That is, he favored
Sect. 68.
his accomplices or followers in any mischief whatsoever.

Fourthly, whereas they allege, that each of the erroneous opinions punishable
by the Ordinance, has somewhat of visible prejudice Sect. 67.
to the Church and state; and from hence argue, that those who hold and
publicly maintain any of these opinions, cannot be so serviceable to the
State as those who hold the truth in those things, may be; this is a bird of
the same feather, and has been plucked already. Doubtless they who hold the
truth in th^se things, may notwithstanding hold such erroneous opinions
otherwise, and withal be so unworthy beyond the others, in their practices,
and course of conversation; that there may be much more visible prejudice both
to the Church and State in these: yea, in either of them, then in the errors of
the other. But when they add, that the Queree (against which they argue) seems
to infer, that no Law is to be made to afflict or punish those that are
godly, and serviceable to the Commonwealth; they lay a necessity upon me,
either to judge them selfe-condemned in the charge, or else weak beneath the
line of such men, who understand plain English. For the clear truth is, that
there is not so much as the least s^emingnesse of any such inference or
intimation, in the Querie.

In their Answer to their seventeenth Argument, they follow Sect. 68.
their occupation; first, they dictate, and then calumniate. They dictate* that
the Ordinance is not like to discourage (they mean from the Ministry) any,
but heretical and erroneous spirits, who would do mischief in the Ministry,
if they were admitted unto it. By the way, is it not much that Ministers of an
Anti-Congregationall Interest, should speak against those who do mischief in
the Ministry? Therefore (says the Apostle) thou art unexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art that judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self: for thou that judge, do the same thing Romans 2. 1.
. But how do they prove, that the Ordinance is not like to discourage any, but
heretical and erroneous spirits? No otherwise, then by the profound
demonstration of an Authoritative silence. They are n^^i ad imperium, borne to
Sovereignty; and it is an indigne thing to put them upon the servility of
disputing. The rule is, Lex imperet, non disputet: and is it not meet that
Lawmakers should partake of the honor and privileges of the Law? But if they
could content themselves with the office of Dictatours, and not Sect. 69.
entrench upon Satan's employment also of calumniating; it were a very
considerable deduction from that sum of misery, wherewith the nation is now
charged by them. Our Anti Querists have borrowed Gangrena's forehead, and are
not ashamed to say, that it is the Querists calumnious insinuation, that the
common doctrines of the Churches of God in this present age, are but
misprisions and common errors in matters of Religion. Reader, if there be so
much as the quantity of a mo^e in the ^unne of any such insinuation in the
Querie; let them wear the crown of Sagacious and quick-discerning men, and let
the dung hill (meet for slaunderers to sit on) be assigned unto me for my
portion. But if they in the charge have sinned the sin of the dung hill, why
should sin and shame part company? All the Querie can so much as seem to
intimate about this point, is, that men of greatest worth for parts and
abilities, are more likely then other men, to discover the common errors and
misprisions of the present age in matters of Religion. But does he that
supposes there are common errors and misprisions in matters of Religion,
intimate, that the common doctrines of the Churches of God are but misprisions
and common errors in Religion? Or does he that supposes that there is much
base and counterfeit coin abroad, intimate, that the best Silver and Gold are
but counterfeit? Or does he that supposes, that illiterate and ignorant men
are common in the world, intimate, that the wisest and most learned men are but
illiterate and ignorant? Apage calumniarum quisquilias.

In their eighteenth Answer, p. 20. pretending to answer an Sect. 69.
Argument drawn from the parable of the tares, they say, that the parable does
not forbid to pluck up the tares in one field, for fear left others should
pluck up the wheat in another [field] In this doubtless they speak most
truly. For Christ was not afraid, left the plucking up of the tares in this
world, should occasion the plucking up of the wheat in the next world. For the
field, wherein both the wheat and the tares are to grow together, is expressly
said to be the world, i. e. this present world. The field is the world, Matthew.
13. 38. So that our Antagonists thus far, in the point in hand, speak most
substantially for matter of truth; but most childishly, as for matters of
Answer, or reason otherwise. Whereas they add; that the parable forbids to
pluck up the tares, when by the Sect. 70.
same act they may be in danger to pluck up the wheat with it; if they can be
content to have a sober sense put upon their words, (a better, I believe, then
their own) I willingly subscribe unto this also. For they, who by plucking up
that, which they call tares, (and perhaps is so) in one part of the field,
shall, or probably may, occasion or provoke others, to pluck up that, which
they also call tares (and perhaps is not so, but good wheat) in another, may
very properly be said, by the same act to be in danger of plucking up the wheat
also with it. And there is little question (indeed) to be made, but that this
was our Saviors express meaning in those words: lest while you gather up the
tares, you pluck up also the wheat with them Mat. 13. 29.
. i. e, lest by your example, in gathering out the tares in your part of the
field* or, where you have to do, you occasion or excite others to pluck up the
wheat in that part of the field where they have to do: which latter thing, if
it should be done, may justly be imputed to that act of yours in gathering or
plucking up the tares. Our Savior in this Parable expresses himself to be so
exceedingly tender of the lives and liberties of his Saints and faithful ones
(signified by the Wheat) that he prohibits the doing of such an act, which
otherwise, even his servants themselves would judge most necessary to be done,
chiefly because he knew and foresaw, that the doing of it would endanger these,
I mean, the lives and liberties of many of his Saints, He declares himself
willing and desirous, that rather some unworthy men should be spared, then that
their suffering should occasion the causeless sufferings of his Saints, But

Secondly, When they say on, That the tares cannot be meant in Sect. 70.
that parable, ONLY of Heretics or false Teachers; do they not forget
themselves exceedingly, and give away the cause of high-Presbytery at once? He
that shall say, that Abraham did not ONLY beget Isaac, does he not suppose and
grant, that Abraham howsoever did beget Isaac? So he that shall say, that
Christ did not ONLY call Peter and Andrew to be Apostles, does he not clearly
imply, that yet he called these, as well as others to that dignity? In like
manner when our Counter-Querists say, that the tares in the parable cannot be
meant ONLY of Heretics and false Teachers, they plainly and fairly grant,
that yet they are meant of these, as well as of any other sort of wicked men.
Sect. 71.
If so, then must not the Servants of Christ, whether Magistrates or Ministers,
gather them out from amongst the wheat by death, but suffer them to grow
together in the field, i. e. in the world, until the great harvest in the end
of the world: that is, they are to leave them, as for matter of corporal
punishment, to the proceeding of God himself against them at the great day.
Therefore

Thirdly, whereas they attempt to prove their said assertion, by saying, that
by our Saviors own Interpretation, they are ALL those that in the field where
the good seed is sown, are the children of the wicked one, i. e. all those who
being ungodly in heart, do manifest their ungodliness to the view of others;
they do notoriously falsify our Saviors Interpretation, and substitute that
in the stead of it, which is not only contrary to his meaning and word, but
unto reason it self* yea, and to the clear sense and mind of the Scriptures
elsewhere. For

First, Our Savior does not say, that the tares, are ALL the Sect 71.
children of the wicked one; but indefinitely thus: The tares are the children
of the wicked one Mat. 13. 38.
. Now indefinite propositions are not always equipollent unto universals; but
are to be construed, sometimes as particulars, sometimes as universalls,
according to the nature of them, together with direction of other
circumstances, and assertions of the same Authors in which they are found.

Secondly, That our Savior by the tares, does not mean universally, ALL the
children of the wicked one, is evident, because he only speaks of such tares
which were sown amongst the wheat, (i. e. the children of the Kingdom, or of
the Gospel) and sprang up together with it Ver. 25. 26.
. Now there were, and are at this day, ungodly ones, and children of the wicked
one, in such parts or places of the field, where no wheat was ever sown; I mean
in such parts of the world, where the word of the Kingdom (the Gospel) was
never preached.

Thirdly, the tares of which the Parable speaks, are said to have been sown
by the envious man some time after the wheat was sown. Therefore they cannot be
meant, of ALL the children of the wicked one, or of ALL that are manifestly
ungodly, because there were great numbers of these in the field (the world)
even at the time when the wheat was sown, and the world first planted with the
Children of the Kingdom: yea, and long before. Sect. 72


Fourthly, If by the tares should be meant ALL wicked and manifestly ungodly
ones, then ought not thieves, murderers, nor the most desperate kind of
malefactors under Heaven, be cut off from the world by the sword of the civil
Magistrate, but be let alone in their respective ways and practices of
mischief, until the judgment of the great day. For our Savior expressly
orders and enjoins, that the tares, of which he speaks in the parable, be
suffered to grow together [with the wheat] until the harvest Matthew. 13. 30
. If our Anti-Querists whoever they be, thus charge the master of the house,
with the crime of Anti-Magistraticallisme, it is no great matter if they charge
those of his household with it much more.

Fifthly, such wicked and ungodly ones, and such only, are meant Sect. 72.
by the tares in our Saviors parable, the taking away of whose lives, is like
to endanger the lives of his Saints, the children of the Kingdom, and that
more generally. But he said, nay, lest whilst ye gather up the tares, ye
pluck up also the wheat with them Ver. 29.
. Now the cutting of many manifestly ungodly and wicked ones, by the sword of
the Magistrate; as viz. Murderers, Thieves, Traitors, etc. does no ways
endanger either the lives or liberties of the Saints, but rather is a
preservative and security and honor unto them. The reason is, because these
(the Saints) are generally kept by the power of God thorough Faith, as unto
salvation; so from the perpetration and breaking out into such horrid and vile
practices, as these. Therefore when the actors of such impieties as these, are
punished by the Magistrate, the innocence and unblameablenesse of their ways
are set of with the greater luster and commendation. So that

Sixthly and lastly, by the tares in the parable, according to our Saviors
interpretation, is meant only that vein, or sort of evil doers, who serve
the Kingdom of Satan by sowing false Doctrines, by corrupting the purity of
the Gospel, as by spreading Errors and Heresies in the Churches of Christ
amongst the Saints, etc. There are several circumstances in the Parable, which
clearly restraines the sense and interpretation of the tares to false Teachers,
and spreaders of Errors and Heresies. First, false Teachers and corrupters of
the purity of the Gospel, were not found in the world, till some while after,
that the Gospel had been purely and sincerely taught in the world, (as the
tares were Sect. 73
not sown, till some while after the sowing of the wheat) whereas there were
evill-doers of all other kinds in abundance, at this time, and before (as has
been already said.) There were indeed, false Teachers and corrupters of the
truth in the Church of the Jews, before and at the time when the Gospel was
first published in the world, such were the Sadduces, Pharisees, etc. and so
there were Teachers of many vanities amongst the Gentiles in many places. But
the Gospel cannot properly be said to be corrupted with Errors or false
Doctrines mingled with it; first, until the Truth of it was declared and
planted in the world: Nor secondly, by any, but by those who profess it.

Secondly, the tares appeared not, till after the blade of the wheat was sprung
up, yea, and had brought forth fruit Mat. 13. 26.
. Nor were there any false Teachers heard of, who corrupted the Truth of the
Gospel, until the Apostles had planted the Gospel in the purity of it, and
made many proselytes to it in the world, which our Savior elsewhere ( viz.
Joh. 15. 16.) calls a bringing forth fruit. But evil doers in other kinds
there were as many (or rather more) before the wheat had brought forth this
fruit, as afterward*

Thirdly, the enemy, or envious man, who is said to have sown Sect. 73.
the tares, (the Devil) went his way, (as the parable says) when he had done
this work; that is, he did it slily and covertly; he was not seen or observed
when he did it, nor till some while after. Those false Teachers who mingled
Evangelicall Truth with Errors and Heresies, were not suspected for such at
the first, no nor discerned at all by very many professing Christianity, either
first or last, viz. all such* who embraced their errors, instead of truth, and
continued in them. Whereas in Murders, Thefts, Seditions, Rebellions,
Treasons, with many other kinds of impiety, Satan is apparent, and to be
seen (as it were) with open face.

Fourthly, the gathering up of the tar^s, endangered the plucking up of the
wheat also with them. In like manner, if Magistrates or others shall be busy
about plucking up Sectaries, Heretics, Teachers of Errors, etc. they will be
in continual danger of plucking up the wheat also, I mean godly men, and
children of the Kingdom.

First, because many truly pious and conscientious men, children Sect. 73.
of the Kingdom, may easily be drawn into some unwarrantable Sect, or
opinion. Secondly, such opinions as expose those who hold them forth, to the
reproachful names of Sectaries, Schismatiques, Heretics, etc. and in this
respect shall be sentenced, and proceeded against by the Magistrate* as
erroneous and heretical, may well be the sacred Truths of God; and the persons
holding them forth unto the world, the best and faithfullest of his servants;
Examples hereof were frequent in this very Kingdom in the days of Papal
power. Thirdly, and lastly, the very example of one kind of Magistrate
plucking up the tares, as he calls tares, in one place; is very likely to
occasion the like plucking up, by a Magistrate of another spirit in another
place, of such as he calls tares, who yet, very possibly, may be the good
wheat. Whereas if we speak of moral impieties and the workers of these, as
Adulterers, Murderers, Oppressors, Traitors, etc. there is little or no
danger, that the Saints (at least, not any considerable numbers of them) should
suffer by any proceedings of the Magistrate against these, because, First, they
are seldom given up to the committing of such sins as these. Secondly,
because, there are no other practices, whether righteous or unrighteous, that
are any thing like unto these, or wherein there is ordinarily any place for a
mistake, by men of ordinary understanding. Thirdly, and lastly, neither can the
example of any one Magistrate, inflicting punishment upon offenders in any of
these kinds, in reason or likelihood of event, occasion another Magistrate of
what spirit soever, to inflict punishment upon those who are not offenders; in
as much as all Magistrates are of one and the same judgment in this, that
moral misdemeanors, and particularly those that were mentioned, with their
like, ought to be punished.

Fifthly and lastly, the tares are by the order and command of Christ, to be
suffered to grow together with the wheat, until the harvest. But evident it
is, that Christ would not have murders, thefts, adulteries, and other moral
misdemeanors, to be left unpunished by the Civil Magistrate until the last
day; because then, he should carry the sword in vain, and not be Gods Minister
to execute wrath upon such as do evil; and so the Office of Magistracy would
be quite taken away by such an interpretation. Therefore without all
controversy, by the tares are precisely and determinately Sect. 74.
meant, false teachers, and spreaders of errors in Religion (and yet not all
these neither, though now we have not time to distinguish) whom the Magistrate
may suffer to grow with the wheat unto the harvest, and yet have work enough
for his sword, and his Office stand in full force, strength, and virtue, for
the benefit and accommodation of the world.

But our Anti-Querists perceiving this Parable coming against Sect. 74.
them and their bloody Tenet, like an armed man, against whom no resistance is
to be made, they wisely seek to divert the course of it another way; and fain
would persuade the world, that the scope of it rather relates to the providence
of God in the ministry of Angels, then to the duty of the Magistrate (this
certainly is a new light hung out by the Gentlemen Presbyterians.) And because
they could not much confide in such an empty speculation as this, or think that
it would ever pass the judgments of men with acceptance; therefore through
fear they betake themselves to the refuge of this darkness: That there is
some obscurity in all parables to make them suit. And because they would not
willingly be disturbed in their way, by this or any other Parable, therefore
they further give this prudent admonition to their Adversaries concerning
Parables, that they are not to be urged beyond their scope; which they would
have both them and all the world to presume, is never to hurt or to endanger
High-Presbytery. Which also (in effect) they confess, in the words following;
which (the errors, either of their press, or pen, or both, corrected with as
much skill and faithfulness as I can) are these: The scope of which Parable,
that it is not to show the Magistrates duty, may appear further by our
Saviors interpretation and making no application, or [shewing] what men should
do here in sparing any wicked man, but showing what God will do at the day of
judgment, as is MANIFEST to any that will read Christ's interpretation of it.
It seems then, notwithstanding some obscurity in the Parable, yet there is some
light also in it. For whatsoever makes MANIFEST is light. And the truth is,
that there is more obscurity in these few lines of theirs, then is in all the
Parable they speak of. For they tell us twice over (for failing) of Christ's
Interpretation of the Parable; and yet deny that he makes any application. For
my part I understand not how any man can make an interpretation of a Parable,
without Sect. 75.
making some application or other. If their meaning be, that Christ in his
Interpretation of it, did not apply it to the Magistrate, or speak of his duty
in sparing any wicked man, (which they seem brokenly to imply.)

I Answer, It is not necessary for the opening or interpretation of a Parable,
to interpret or apply every particularity contained in it, (...), or in
expressenesse of words: it is sufficient, if such and so many particulars of it
be interpreted, or applied; by the understanding whereof other particulars
also, and consequently the whole Parable, may be understood. Now certain it is,
that Christ has so far interpreted the Parable of the tares, and made
application of so many of the particulars in it, that the residue of it may by
the light of the^e, be clearly understood. So that it no ways follows, that
because Christ did not apply the Parable ( viz. in expressenesse of terms,
or, totidem verb^) to the Magistrate, or show what he should do here in
sparing wicked men; that therefore the duty of the Magistrate in this behalf,
is not clearly and with sufficient evidence of the Truth, held forth in the
Parable.

The former part of their Answer to the Argument under protection. Sect. 75.
consisting of the greatest part of their twentieth page, has been fully
answered in what has been replied to the latter: From whence also it clearly
appears, that the whole tenor and carriage of it, lies quite besides the
spirit, drift, and scope of the Querie. The scope of this, was not to ask,
whether any man ought to neglect a duty, for fear of any inconvenience, one,
or more, greater or lesser, that may possibly attend the performance (which is
all that this part of the Answer makes at) but whether such an act or practice
as is there mentioned, be not likely to to produce that inconvenience or evil,
for the prevention whereof, the Lord Christ has declared himself against the
practice.

In their nineteenth Answer they do nothing less then rage right-downe;
affirming, first, that the minor in their own Argument, is nothing else but the
impudency of the Querist, with whom any Heretic or Blasphemer may pass for a
conscientious man. What? Gentlemen, and give such course language? Christians,
and revile at this rate? Men of conscience, and call that my impudency, which
they inwardly judge to be their own commendation? Sect. 75.
For certainly they judge all these Arguments and Syllogismes to be their
praise and honor, and accordingly in their Epistle to the Reader, they
cunningly, and very effectually crave of him, that which they conceive to be
their due in this kind, by rendering Rog^^* and quidem e^fi^a^ ^s^^^ qui r^dd^^
r^g^^^^ caus^s. Sen.
reasons, upon which they may crave it, viz. the pains they took in the
composing of them; and the hope they have of giving ease and satisfaction by
them to their Readers. But

First, what manner of monstrous beast is this unhappy minor, which thus
affrights these men out of their Christian wits? Alas! it is but this
innocent Lamb, (whether mine or theirs.) The Ordinance in question, is
apparently bent against the faces, if not of the most, yet of a very
considerable part of the best and most conscientious men amongst us. Well, it
seems this Lamb must make a sacrifice: but how, or with what knife do the
Priests slay it? with this: It is false, the Ordinance is only bent against
Heretics and Blasphemers and other erroneous spirits, who will needs,
notwithstanding any admonition, publish doctrines that are hurtful to men's
souls, and the peace of the Church and State. But is not the Lamb yet alive
for all this stroke given unto it? Or is not the bare affirmation of the minor
thus struck at, as Authoritative and Authentic, as the bare negation of the
Answer? If the Anti-Querists know any such difference between themselves and
the Querist, that all his sayings must needs be hay and stubble, and all theirs
silver and gold, they shall do well to inform him of it. He shall presently,
upon the information, if it be competent, make all his sayings to become
homagers unto theirs. But with as much confidence as they seem to rejoice
against the poor minor, as being false, above, and beyond, and without all
question, they soon pull in their horns, and think it best to distinguish, to
cover the nakedness and shame of their denial. But alas! the covering of
the distinction is too scant and narrow for the service, the nakedness of the
denial appears notwithstanding. Of which latter sort (say they, speaking of
those who publish Doctrines hurtful, as they are pleased to term them, to
the peace of the Church and State) if any should be conscientious, the
Ordinance is no ways bent against their faces, as they are conscientious, but
as they are instruments of evil, etc. But

First, whether may not they, who publish Doctrines hurtful to Sect. 76
Sect. 76.
the peace of the Church and State (in a sense) be instruments of good and not
of evil, in so doing? Christ and his Apostles preaching the Gospel, published
Doctrines, that occasioned divisions and distractions both in Families and
States, as we all know. And yet in propriety of speech, these Doctrines
published, were not hurtful to the peace of either, i. e. to the real good,
and due peace of either. They were indeed hurtful and interruptive, of, and
to, that sinful peace wherein they found them; but they who published them,
were never the more instruments of evil. In like manner if there be any
agreement or peace in a Church or State, in any thing which is evil, or
erroneous; they who shall publish Doctrines which may probably occasion the
disturbance of such peace (especially as the degree of the evil, and nature of
the error may be) are not therefore instruments of evil. But miserable is the
condition of that Church or State, which shall punish men, not only truly
conscientious, but instruments also of good unto them, under the notion of
instruments of evil.

Secondly, I desire to engage the consciences of these men, to Sect. 77.
answer me to these four Questions.

First, Whether they do not look upon the publishing of the principles of the
Congregationall Government (and so of that which they call Ana-Baptisme)
whether by way of Doctrine, or of practice, as the publishing of Doctrines
hurtful to the peace of the Church and State?

Secondly, Whether they do not judge the number of those persons amongst us,
who publish such Doctrines as these, either by word, or practice, to be a very
considerable number?

Thirdly, Whether they do not judge far the greatest part of these men to be
truly conscientious? If they shall answer affirmatively (as I know their
consciences will, whatsoever themselves will do) to all these Questions;

I will (as to this point) crave but another Answer to this brief Question,
whether the Ordinance in debate be not bent against the faces of all these men?

Themselves grant in terminis, that it is bent against such, who (in their
sense, for so they must needs be understood) shall publish Doctrines that are
hurtful to the peace of the Church and State; yea, they grant by way of a
clear supposition, that there are of Sect. 78
these who are conscientious (if they should not, their own consciences would
not bear it at their hands) only, they deny, that the Ordinance is bent
against these men, AS they are conscientious. Did ever the Dragon or the Beast,
I mean Rome, either Pagan or Antichristian, bend their bloody Edicts or
persecutions against the Saints, the most conscientious men amongst them, AS
they were conscientious? or in any other respect or consideration whatsoever,
then AS (in their sense) instruments of evil? The most ungodly persecuting
wretch that ever breathed under these Heavens, did never persecute or speak
evil of a Saint, AS a godly, or conscientious man. If themselves were severely
punished, and their livings and estates taken from them, AS false accusers of
their brethren; would it be any ease or gratification to them, that they were
favored and not proceeded against, AS Presbyterians, or conscientious men? But
if such distinctions as these be their bottom grounds and reasons to prove
either majors, or minors false, and to make outcries against them, as being
nothing else but the impudency of the Querist, etc. who can refrain
lamentations and tears over the souls of those, whose dependence is for the
great things of life and immortality, on such men. Whereas they charge the
Querist, as a man, with whom any Heretic or Blasphemer may pass for a
conscientious man; I pass by it, as judging that no man will think it worth
the taking up.

Whereas they engage themselves with so much diligence to Sect. 78.
prove, that Laws must be bent against Instruments of evil, notwithstanding
any conscience they pretend to have; take knowledge, Reader, that it is but a
stale device to delude simple and inconsidering men; usually practiced by
those, who being not able to grapple with an Adversary, in the point in
question between them, hunt counter and follow with great eagerness and
opennesse of mouth a false sent; laying on proof upon proof, reason upon
reason to prove something, which it may be has some affinity, at least in a
sound of words, with the Question in hand, but was never denied, nor intended
to be denied, by their opposer, nor indeed is any matter of controversy
between any; that by this means they may cover their weakness and
insufficiency to deal with their Adversary, from weak and injudicious men, and
seem to carry the day before them with a strong hand. The Counter-Querists
Sect. 79
have taken this Sanctuary, once again, and the third time also, in this their
Vindication: and they do it palpably in this place. For did the Querist ever
deny, or intimate the least inclination in him toward a denial, but that
Laws ought to be bent against instruments of evil, notwithstanding any
conscience they pretend to have. Therefore the labor which they bestow in the
proof of this, they should have done well to have converted some other way;
and particularly, in seeking out a rock* to build their High-Presbytery upon,
which all this while stands upon sandy and loose foundations.

That which they yet add in the close of this Answer, concerning Geneva,
having Laws against Heretics, etc. neither reaches the demand of the Querie,
nor yet the import of their own Argument, pretending legitimacy of descent
from it, It is one thing for a State to have Laws against Heretics; another,
by Laws or Ordinances to strike at great, and very considerable numbers of the
best and most conscientious men amongst them* If those Laws against Heretics
and false Teachers in the State of Geneva, of which they speak, were compared
with the Ordinance whereof we both speak, I believe they would be so far from
justifying it, that it would rather justify them, by being more unrighteous
and unreasonable then they.

In their twentieth Answer, they sing over their old note; affirming, that the
Ordinance is of no such bloody consequence to truly Sect. 79.
pious and conscientious ^en, [as any thing which the Bishops did attempt
against the godly whom they hated] as they presume they have showed. But where,
or to whom, or by what light they have showed it, I am yet to Query. Whereas
they add in the close of this Answer, that the Bishops were cast out for their
lukewarmnesse; do they mean for their lukewarmnesse in attempting the sorrows,
troubles, molestations, of conscientious and pious men? or in procuring
Ordinances and Laws, for the support and strengthening of their Kingdom?
Doubtless their zeal in this kind was very great: though Alexander may
conquer beyond the line of Philips Victories. And I believe, that it was more
their zeal in this kind, then any lukewarmnesse, that was the cause of their
casting out: and (to join with our Antagonists in their Admonition) let others
take heed of the like. Sect. 80.


We shall lightly pass by their 21 Answer, as containing little Sect. 80.
in it, but this bare assertion; That the Ordinance, in the words or intent of
it, gives unto wicked men no advantage or opportunity to accuse the best
Ministers of such things which may touch their lives, or bring much trouble
unto them; but ONLY gives advantage to the best men, to be rid of the worst
Ministers. With what conscience they speak thus, I refer to themselves, and
their own consciences; With what truth, I refer to all unpartiall considering
men to judge. Are the Ministers who walk in the Congregationall way, the worst
of Ministers? For my part, I heartily, and as in the presence of the
all-knowing God, wish they were: and that all those who are of a contrary
judgment to them, had the spirit of their Grace, knowledge, and goodness in
every kind doubled and trebled upon them.

In their 22 and 23 Answer, (p. 24.) they tell us (in effect) Sect. 81.
What the wisdom of the Parliament can, and what their justice and care will
(no doubt) do, for the undoing of all the Ordinance intends to do. For in
case the Parliament will please to undertake, and settle a through and
effectual course, that neither the simplicity of the Jury, nor of the Judge,
nor yet the simplicity, nor duplicity, of any, or all the Ministers of the
Provincial or National Assembly, shall be any prejudice to the lives or
liberties of studious, learned, and conscientious Ministers, or others; it may
very well be presumed, that the Ordinance will have very little to* do, in
point of execution; and that the principal use and service of it will be, to
put the Parliament upon* the trouble of contriving and settling such a course.

In their 24 Answer (p. 25.) they bring forth strange children. Sect. 82.
As first, That the fourth Commandment, does in the words of it, require only
one day in seven, to be kept holy, as a Sabbath, and does not expressly
command the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, etc. If so, then were the
Sabbaths, which the Jews observed, of their own choosing: and how then does God
so frequently call them, His? Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, Exodus 31. 13.
and Nehemiah in his prayer unto God expresses himself thus: And made known
unto them thy Holy Sabbath, etc. Neh. 9. 14. In which words, he does not only
appropriate the Jewish Sabbath unto God, but likewise calls it his holy Sabbath;
i. a day which he has sanctified Sect. 83.
unto himself and his worship; yea and expressly says, that God made it known
unto them (the Jews) i. revealed unto them on which day of the seven he would
be solemnly worshipped by them. See also Levit. 19. 3. 30. Esa. 56. 4. Ezekiel.
20, 12, 13. with other places many. God is not wont to appropriate any thing
unto himself which is of humane election, in, or any ways appertaining unto
his worship; though sometimes he calls many of these things, theirs, to whom he
has given or appointed them. And besides the reason of the Commandment, for
in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth etc. expressly characterizeth that
very day as intended by God for a Sabbath unto them, which they observed. But
the assertion is so empty, and obnoxious, that surely it will fall in the
judgments of men without thrusting.

Secondly, This Answer advances with this Divinity; that within the general
scope of the Commandment, which is the observing of those times, and those
only as necessary to Religion, which God himself appoints, was included the
Jewish Sabbath, or Saturday, before Christ's Resurrection, and the Christian
Sabbath, the Lords day, is now since Christ's Resurrection, included also. But

First, If the Jewish Sabbath was included in the Commandment, or in the scope
of the Commandment, before Christ's Resurrection, how came it to be excluded
after his Resurrection? Has the Resurrection of Christ any such influence upon
the moral Law, as to cause it to eject, or cast out any thing formerly by way
of duty contained or included in it?

Secondly, If the scope of the Commandment, be the observing of those times
and of th^se only, etc. which God himself appoints; then how comes the
observation of the Christian Sabbath, or Lords day, to be included therein;
considering, that according to the Doctrine of this Answer, this day was no
more appointed by God, then any of the other six? Or were all the six days
besides, as well included in it, as this? If so, why are they not as well
observed?

Thirdly, If the Christian Sabbath or Lords day; be now since Sect. 83.
Christ's resurrection included in the scope of the Commandment; I would gladly
know, how, or by what Authority, or by whose act it has been brought within
the verge of this scope, so as to be included in it. If Answer be made, that it
has been brought Sect. 83.
in by the Authority, or act of God; then does he not in this Commandment
only require one day in seven to be kept holy as a Sabbath; but he requires
circumscriptively and particularly which of the seven he will have so kept. If
it be said, that it has been brought in by the Church, or by men, then have
men power to take it out again, and to put in any other of the six in the
stead of it. And how did the Resurrection of Christ contribute any thing
toward the bringing of this day within^ the scope of the Commandment, if it
depended upon the will and pleasure of men? But into the secret of these men's
Divinity in this place, my soul as yet cannot find the way to enter. And

Thirdly (and lastly) do these men substantially prove, that the moral Law
contained in the ten Commandments, is the rule of a Christians life, only by
saying, that the Christian Sabbath, is now included in the general scope of
the fourth Commandment, and that the Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism
and the Lords Supper, are included within the scope of the second Commandment
now? First, they prove not so much as the least hair of their heads amount
unto, of either of their assertions: and yet neither of them lies so near any
known principle either of Reason, or Religion, that they need have feared* the
proverbiall reproof of lighting up a candle to see the Sun, in case they had
bestowed a slender argument or two, upon the clearing of them. But secondly, if
what they affirm in both, were granted, yet their conclusion is not hereby
gained. For only such a Law can properly be called a rule of life to
Christians, which either particularly, or at least sufficiently, prescribes and
regulates all things necessary to be done by a Christian, as a Christian. Now
the general scope of the two Commandments specified, and much more the
Commandments themselves, are so far, either from prescribing, or regulating
either of the duties respectively affirmed to be included in them, that without
particular direction for the performance both of the one and the other,
otherwise; neither of them had ever been practiced by men, notwithstanding the
general scope of the said Commandments, yea and Commandments themselves. I
trust the Anti-Querists themselves do not make any such Law the Rule of their
lives, which neither teaches nor directs them what to do.

To the twenty fifth Query, desiring to know in what sense the Sect. 84.
Sect. 84.
Ordinance makes it an Error, to hold, that a man by nature has free will to
turn unto God; they return this sleeve-lesse and froward Answer: That there
are scarce any words, but a Caviller may pretend of them, that they are to be
understood diverse ways. But good Gentlemen, does the Querist pretend this of
the words in hand? does he not particularly assign, and plainly explicate two
distinct senses wherein the said words may be taken; humbly craving to know^,
which of the two was the sense intended by the Ordinance? But I confess that
in High Presbytery, where Authorativenesse has her throne, to desire a steady
and distinct explication of things, is (constructively) to cavil. However, it
had been no such meritorious strain of ingenuity in these men, having two
distinct senses of a clause ready formed, stated, and presented to their hand,
with a modest desire to know, which of the two was to rule, for them to have
clearly answered either for the one, or for the other: or in case neither of
them had comported with the intent of the Ordinance, to have substituted a
third in their stead. But instead of this, they disparage themselves with this
tergiversation in the procedure of their answer: But the Parliament has so often
declared against Arminian^sme, of which this, (I wonder which, or what?) is a
chief Article, and so (...) our former Parliaments, that no man has any
reason to imagine, that they understand any other thing by that opinion (they
should have done well to have told us what opinion it is they speak of) then
the Arminian freewill, which by the Reformed Churches is generally condemned,
as a pernicious Error. But

First, I wonder how these men come to know, or to presume what the Parliaments
sense is about that Free Will. which is sentenced with imprisonment in the
Ordinance, when as (confident I am) that they have never yet given an account
of their sense therein, either unto them, or any other.

Secondly, I would willingly ask these men, what competent grounds they have,
to think (especially with so much confidence as their words import) that either
the Parliament, or especially the makers of the Ordinance, mean, the Arminian
Free Will; when as, first, it is probable, that they never studied the state of
the Controversy between the Arminians and their opposers, about the point of
Free Will; and so cannot know (at least otherwise Sect. 86.
then by loose and common hear say) what the Arminian Free Will is. And
secondly, inasmuch as many, and those Scholars and Students in Divinity by
profession, who have bestowed some time and study in the controversy, are yet
scarce able to give any sensible account of the difference, or state of the
Question, between the combatants.

Thirdly, I desire of them, that they will please in their Rejoinder, to
relieve my darkness in the point with their light, and clearly inform me,
what themselves mean by the Arminian Free will. I have bestowed some time, and
upon occasion inquired as narrowly as some others, to find out what was the
sense and opinion of Arminius himself, about the bondage, and freedom of the
will: I have likewise consulted the writings of some that are generally reputed
his followers, upon the same occasion. By comparing the Master with some of his
Disciples, I clearly find that there is to the full as great a difference
between the judgments of the one and of the other (in the point now under
consideration) as there is between the judgment of the generality of learned
Divines in England, and Arminius himself. Yea, I profess, that looking lately
into Arminius, on purpose to find some passa^^ or expression, one or more, of
some rank import upon the subject, and I could meet with none, but what with a
fair and reasonable construction of the words, was fully reconcilable with
the judgments and expressions of some reformed Churches, yea and of some of
eminent note and desert, both for piety and soundness of judgment, amongst
our selves. Amongst some of Arminius followers I confess I found it otherwise.
Now then this is the request which I make to these men (and I trust they will
not judge it unreasonable) that they will plainly declare themselves what they
mean by their Arminian Freewill; whether that, which is held and taught by
Arminius himself, or which is maintained by some of his followers; there being
so material and considerable a difference between them?

Fourthly (and lastly) whereas they send us to the generality of Sect. 86.
the Reformed Churches to inform our selves, what Free Will it is, which is
made punishable by the Ordinance with imprisonment, defining it to be that,
which by the Reformed Churches is generally condemned as a pernicious Error.
First, I cannot but judge it unreasonable Sect. 87
in the highest, that the generality of men amongst us should be made obnoxious
to imprisonment, by such an expression in an Ordinance or Law, the sense and
meaning whereof they cannot come to understand, but only by consulting the
writings and all the confessions of Faith, set forth by all the Reformed
Churches respectively. Alas, the far greater number of men amongst us, are
wholly incapable of this information, not understanding the language, wherein
these Confessions of Faith are written.

Secondly, To my knowledge the Reformed Churches themselves do not generally,
at least not universally agree, in condemning the Arminian free will, as a
pernicious Error, but some of them do subscribe and publish that to the world
upon this subject for truth, which others of them condemn for an Error. So
that the Anti-Querists have merely baffled in their Answer, instead of giving
any satisfaction to the Querie, demanding the sense of this clause in the
Ordinance, that a man by nature has free will to turn unto God.

In their 26 and 27 Answer, page 29. though they quit themselves Sect. 87.
with somewhat more fairness and ingenuity, then they do in all the rest, yet
they do not speak distinctly enough to the mind of the Querie, when by
Blaspheming, in the Ordinance, they say, are meant, only such horrible
expressions against God, as cannot with patience be heard by any Christian
ear. In this description, there are sundry particulars of a very doubtful
interpretation. As first, when they define, Blasphemy, by horrible expessions
against God, whether they exclude Christ man, or as being man, from being an
object capable of this Blasphemy. Secondly, what they mean by a Christian ear;
whether the ear of a person, who is Christian indeed, i. e. a true and sound
Believer, or of a Christian at large, and by outward pr^^^ssion only. We know
there is a great difference between the ear of the one, and of the other, in
respect of tasting Blasphemy. If they mean the ear of a sound Christian, a
true Believer, it is a point of no easy decision to determine, who amongst men
are such. If the ear of a Christian at large, I suppose they cannot but know,
that there are many such ears, who can hear any Blasphemy whatsoever, with
patience (whatsoever is meant by it) more then enough. Thirdly and lastly, what
they Sect. 88.
mean, by being heard with patience, whether by Patience, they mean such a
composedness of mind and spirit, which keeps men from all unseemly
deportment or expression of themselves outwardly, in cases of provocation:
(which is the common signification of the word) or else such a temper, by which
a man is indisposed to greeve, or take sorrow upon such occasions, which
usually cause sorrow and grief of heart unto men. Stand we by, either the one
signification of the word, Patience, or the other, the clause, cannot be heard
with pat^^nce, will be found very inconvenient to be put into the definition,
or description of Blasphemy. If we stand by the former, certain it is, that
the more Christian the ear is, the greater Blasphemy will be heard with
patience. The stronger and better built any Christian is, the further he will
be from any unseemly carrage upon any provocation whatsoever. If by the latter,
the sense is altogether uncouth, and no meat either for the ear, or
understanding.

Of like ambiguity, and encumbered with the same difficulties, is their
explication of this clause in the Ordinance, impugning the word of God; this
(they say) cannot reasonably ^e thought to signify less, then such reproaches
against the Truth, or divine Authority of the Scriptures, as are not to be
endured by those that believe them to be the word of God. If this be all that
is meant by the said clause, then men may impugn the word of God (I mean the
Scriptures) in a Scholastique way, by arguments framed against the Divinity of
them, without coming under the dint or stroke of the Ordinance* in case they
r^fraine reproachful expressions.

But suppose these men should give us a clear and a fair sense of these, and
all other expressions in the Ordinance, that are dark and dubious, yet this
would not justify the Ordinance, unless the makers and contrivers of it will
please to ratify them with their subscriptions. For (as the maxim is) Ejusdem
^st ^^rpr^t^ri cujus est condere. They only have power to interpret a Law (
viz. authoritatively, and with such an interpretation, on which a subject may
safely repose) who by a lawful power made it.

Their Argument pretending to the 28 Querie, is framed quite Sect. 88,
besides it; and their Answer, as much besides the Argument. In this Answer,
they first grant, that to say and maintain, that God sees no sin in the
justified, in a sense, is justifiable and true: and yet Sect. 8^
secondly they affirm, that it may be made punishable notwithstanding. The
reason they give, is only this; because in another sense (which they call the
literal, and common) it is a dangerous and pernicious error. But will any man
Christianly disposed, judge it meet, that the saying or publishing, that Christ
is a Vine, or a door, should be made punishable; unless they declare the
particularity of that sense, wherein they make it punishable. But this light
courtesy cannot (it seems) be obtained in the case of Gods seeing no sin in
the justified, of those, who yet would have the world believe, that they have
sufficiently Answered the Queries.

Before they come to Syllogize the twenty ninth Querie, they Sect. 89.
make a sad complaint of it, that it is perplexed, and the sense of it
involved, etc. But I marvel why they should turn Querulists against the
Querist upon occasion of this Query, when as in their Answer to it (setting
aside a gentle evaporation of some folly toward the beginning of it, and a
little fit of frowardness in the end) they are more distinct, and speak more
steadily to the heart of it, then they do to any of the rest in their
respective Answers; yea they have not quitted themselves so like men of
judgment and understanding in all their discourse besides, as they have done
in the sober part of this Answer; which (for their credit) I shall set down in
their own words, and improve a little for their benefit. He (say they) that
has read the Socinian books, whose proper opinion it is, that a man must
believe no more, then by his reason he can comprehend, will easily be
satisfied, that the Ordinance plainly requires, that a man should not refuse
to believe those Doctrines, which are clearly, and certainly, for the matter of
them, laid down in the word of God; as for example, the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and the incarnation of the Son of God* although for the manner of them
he cannot by his reason comprehend them, and NOT THAT A MAM MVST BELIEVE THAT
WHICH HE HAS NO REASON OR GROUND FOR IN THE WORD OF GOD. So then they clearly,
and fairly grant, that the Ordinance does not require, that a man must [or
ought] in point of Religion, believe any thing, but what he has reason and
ground for, in the word of God. From hence then it follows

First, that Reason ought to be every man's leader, Guide, and Sect. 90
Sect. 90.
Director in his Faith, or about what he is, or ought to believe: and that no
man ought to leap with his Faith, till he has looked with his Reason; and
discovered what is meet to be believed, what not. This is sound Divinity
indeed: and few more such principles as this, well digested by these men and
their friends, would make them worthy of that title of honor which they so
much affect, I mean, Orthodox.

Secondly, From the said Grant it follows also, that Ministers ought not to
require their people, to believe any thing (much less every thing) which they
teach, unless they have a reason and ground for it (and those sufficient, for
mortuus hon^^, non est homo; nor is an insufficient Reason, any reason at all,
in this case) from the word of God.

Thirdly, it follows yet further, that neither ought men to receive or
subscribe unto with the hand of their Faith, the determinations or Decretalls
of Synods, Councils, or Assemblies of persons of what capacity or worth soever,
in matters of Religion, unless they have a sufficient Reason or ground from
the word of God, for what they do receive in this kind.

Fourthly, and lastly it follows yet once more from the foresaid grant, that
men ought to make use of, yea, and engage to the uttermost, their Reasons or
their discursive abilities, in all matters of Faith and Religion whatsoever;
and not to swallow any thing by a loose credulity* but to look narrowly upon
every thing with the eye of Reason, before they receive it by the hand of
Faith. All these deductions are of a legitimate and clear descent from the
mentioned grant, and are all of them pregnant, noble* and magnifique Truths.
Only I cannot well understand, why the Gentlemen should grant, that a man must
not, or ought not, to believe, what he has no reason or ground for in the Word
of God, and yet condemn this for an error, that a man ought to believe no
more, then what by Reason he is able to comprehend. For if a man cannot believe
any thing, but what he knows to have a being, nor yet believe the parricular
modus or manner of any thing, unless he knows it to be such, as he believes it
to be; and again, if he cannot know either being, or manner of being* unless
he conceives, or comprehends it in and by his Reason, what either the one, or
the other is (which is a Truth unquestionable) it undeniably Sect. 91.
follows, that a man ought not to believe any thing, either being, or manner of
being, but what by reason he is able to comprehend, i. e. able upon good ground
to satisfy himself, that either the one, or the other, is so, or such, as he
believes them to be.

As to the two instances, wherein they insist, the Doctrine of the Sect. 91.
Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God, affirming, that a man ought
not to refuse to believe them, although for the manner of them he cannot by his
reason comprehend them:

I Answer, First, that as by my reason, I can and do comprehend, and know them
to be incomprehensible, so I believe them accordingly to be. Again,

Secondly, as by my reason, I neither do, nor can comprehend or conceive, the
particular modus or manner of either, so neither do I, or ought I, nor indeed
can I (without running an extreme hazard of an erroneous belief) believe any
thing at all concerning them; save only their incomprehensiblenesse in the
general: or, that they are incomprehensible; which (as was said) I am able by
my reason to comprehend* So then, these two Assertions or Doctrines (well
understood) First, That a man ought to believe no more, then what he has
reason and ground for in the Word of God. And Secondly, t^^^: That a man ought
to believe no more, then what he is able by his reason to comprehend, are but
of an equipollent import; and there is nothing more (much more, nothing more
erroneous) in the one, then in the other.

That toward the beginning of this Answer (yea, there is a piece of a
duplicate of it, in the end of the Answer too) is extremely unreasonable and
obnoxious; wherein they suppose (yea, little less then in terminis affirm)
that they that will be satisfied what the Ordinance means, by making it an
error, to hold, That a man ought to believe no more, then what by his reason
he is able to comprehend, must read the Socinian Books, and there inform
themselves what their proper opinion is. For is it in any degree reasonable,
equal, or just, that such an Ordinance or Law should be made (and that for the
imprisonment, which is, by interpretation, the utter undoing of men, in case of
delinquency) the sense or meaning whereof they are in an utter incapacity to
understand, unless they read such books, which first are only extant in such
a language, which not one of an hundred is able to Sect. 92.
understand; and secondly, are so rare, and hard to be gotten, that for the
space of 13 years and upwards (ever since my coming to the city) though I
have from time to time made a narrow inquiry after them, and laid out in
several places, where I conceived I should be most likely to speed, for some
or other of them, yet could I never to this day procure, either for love or
money (as the saying is) so much as any one of them.

Their groundless mistake, about what the Querist (as they say) would imply to
be the sense of the words in the Ordinance; and their turning of the Querie,
with a wet finger, as if there were nothing material in it, but an heap^ of
words, I pass by and pardon, being content they should be numbered amongst
their infirmities quotidianae incursionis.

In their Answer to the thirtieth Querie they maintain, that Sect. 92.
the Ordinance does express, what it means by obstinacy, when it
threateneth the publishing of such and such doctrines with obstinacy. Their
reason is, because the Ordinance appoints admonition to go before punishment.
But is this an explication of what it means, by obstinacy? Certainly these
grand Assertors of the Ordinance, had quitted themselves upon terms of more
wisdom for the honor of it, if they had plainly g^^^ted, that it had not
indeed made any sufficient explication of it self in that particular. For is a
man to be judged obstinate, who shall do that, though after admonition, which,
his admonition notwithstanding, he judges, and that upon good grounds, to be
his duty to do? Were the Apostles obstinate, for preaching in the na^^ of
Jesus, after that the High Priest, Rulers, and Elders, solemnly met in a
Council, had admonished them; yea, and straightly charged and commanded them,
that they should in no wise speak or teach any more in that Name Act. 4. 18.
. Oh England! awake, (for I fear thou sleep) look about thee, and consider,
how easily, and when thou least think of it, thou may be an obstinate
offender, if men of this spirit should be thy Judges.

In their 31 Answer, they tell a mystical or mistie story; of Sect. 93.
the sense or meaning whereof I am no ways guilty; yet I shall tell it after
them, because some (possibly) may understand it, though I cannot. As some
perhaps (say they) of the Querists friends may be thanked for it (they speak
of that strong opposition insinuated in Sect. 93.
the Querie, between the government established by the Parliament, and that so
importunately desired by the Ministers) who have endeavored to bind heavy
burdens upon others, ever persecuting them for not yielding to those things,
which even the consciences of those that press them, know they cannot, and
believe, they may not, yield unto; so careful and tender are they of their
Brethrens consciences; so is it neither of that kind they would have it, being
no way in favor of there Ind^pendency. For

First, It is the strangest news to me that I have heard many a day, that any
of my friends should deserve thanks, either (...), or (...), for the
opposition they speak of between the two Governments. I cannot believe that
any person, man, or woman, Congregationally inclined, did ever either persuade
any of the Ministers they speak of, to oppose that Government by Presbytery,
which is established by the Parliament; nor yet distill into them any of that
spirit, or those principles, out of which they oppose it. How then should they
be accessory to the opposition?

Secondly, whereas they charge the friends of the Querists yet further, with
endeavoring to bind heavy burdens upon others, ever persecuting them for not
yielding to, etc. this is tidings, yet seven degrees stranger then the other.
If it be true, then is the scandal of Independency ceas^d from amongst us. For
if Independents also endeavor to bind heavy burdens upon others, and to
persecute men for not yielding unto those things, which in conscience they
cannot yield unto then are we all of one mind and of one judgment. and
practice the same things. But

Thirdly. I would feign know, what heavy burdens they are, which the
independents (since they must be so called) endeavor to bind upon others. Do
our Brethren of the Presbyterian interest, call or judge this a heavy* burden
to be restrained from, or not to have their hand strengthened by the
Parliament, or Laws unto, the troubling or molesting of their Brethren, who
dissent in some particulars from them? I know no other burden but this, any
ways endeavored by any of that parswasion to be imposed, or bound upon them.
If they call or count this a burden, better they hurthened with the peace of
men of a better conscience then themselves, then eased or relieved by their
unjust pressures. Sect. 94.


Fourthly, I am yet far more desirous to know, what persecution, they, or any
of their judgment, have suffered from In dependents, for not yeeding to those
things, which even the consciences of those that press them, know they cannot,
and believe they may not, yield unto. If they shall refer me for satisfaction
herein to that which follows in the sequel of this answer, where they speak of
some, who, under the name of Brethren, that have so much cried out against
persecution in their words and writings, have yet attempted and proceeded in
the strangest persecution that ever was amongst professed Christians, to wish
and joy in the imposition of that upon their Brethren, which themselves, who
are for the imposition of it, yet count unlawful to be submitted unto; I must
profess that I am so far from receiving satisfaction hereby in the least, in
reference to that desire, that I look upon the reference, as a sending of me
from the twilight to midnight, to read a dim print; or as an unworthy insulting
over my petition, in giving me a stone, instead of the bread which I defired.
But.

First, Though the persecution they here speak of, be, as they say, Sect. 94.
very strange, yea, as I say, yet more strange, then as they present it; so
strange, that I believe it was never yet attempted, neither in these days, nor
in the days of any of their forefathers, amongst the men they speak of,
professed Christians; yet is it not of that devouring or fiery calculation, of
which many of those persecutions are, which are daily breathed forth by the
lips and pens of many of their Interest, against those who wish them no harm.
But

Secondly, It is not a little strange to me, that they should represent that as
a persecution so STRANGE, as never yet attempted among professed Christians,
when as themselves (if it be persecution) have attempted, yea, and practiced it
in this very discourse. For do they not in their Answer to the second Querie,
p. 6. impose it upon, yea and solemnly charge (which is more then to wish) the
Querists own Church or Congregation, as they regard the honor of God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Authority of the Spirit, by which the Holy Apostle
delivered those forementioned Anathema's, that they put him away from among
them, and deliver him to Satan? and yet do they not withal judge it utterly
unlawful, for the members of a particular Church or Congregation, Sect. 95
to exercise authority over their Pastor, or to proceed to a sentence of
excommunication, especially, against the chief officer, by and of themselves?
Therefore, if to wish or joy in the imposition of that upon their Brethren,
which themselves, who are for the imposition of it, yet count unlawful to be
submitted unto, be so strange a persecution, as they render it; certainly
themselves, and thousands more of their friends, are the strangest persecutours
(and that with the strangest persecution) that ever were. For what joy anh
stamping with the foot has there been amongst the children of high-Presbytery,
for this Answer to the Queries, (as empty as it is) and more emphatically, for
the shameless piece of outrage, committed in that part of this Answer, which
relates to the second Querie, where the said strange persecution is so
vigorously acted.

Thirdly, Till these men shall make due proof, that that Sect. 95.
strange persecution they speak of, has been indeed attempted and proceeded
in by persons interessed in judgment for the Congregationall way; I must look
upon the report and charge (and shall desire others also to look upon them
with the same eye) as Nehemiah looked upon the contents of Sanballats letter,
to which he returned this answer. There are no such things done as thou sdyest,
but thou fainest them out of thine own heart N^h. 6. 8.
. ^ shall not believe without a double voucher, that ever any Idependent, either
wished, or joyed in the imposition of any thing upon their Brethren, which yet
they counted unlawful to be submitted unto. Probatio incumbit affirmanti. But

Fourthly, Whereas they say and grant in Answer to this Querie, that
Presbyteriall Government in the Ordirance, must needs signify that which it
does in other Ordinances of Parliament, that Government which the Parliament
has begun to settle, (and consequently, it cannot signify that Government by
Presbytery so importunely desired by the Ministers, there being so unpleasing a
difference between them) they answer (I confess) with some ingenuitie, and
that which may do good service.

Fifthly and lastly, when they further say, that the Government settled by the
Parliament, is not of that kind they (the Querists friends, they mean,
Independents) would have it, themselves fairly take of that charge of strange
persecution, which (as we heard) they fastened on them; viz. in wishing or
joying in the imposition of that upon their Brethren, which yet they count
unlawful to be submitted unto. For certainly no man wishes or joyeth in that,
which is not of that kind of thing, that he would have; much less in the
enacting, or imposing of it.

In their 32 and 33 Answer, (for here they answer double) they Sect. 96.
except against the Queries: but think ye for what? Surely for a very innocent
offense; viz. for nothing but desiring to know and understand, (and that upon
sufficient account given of such a desire) what the Ordinance means, by
blaspheming the name of God, or impugning the word of God, WILLINGLY AND
PRESVMPTVOVSLY; and further to know, by whom the Admonition is to be given, the
inefficaciousnesse whereof upon the parties admonished, brings their sins and
errors under the dint and stro^e of the Ordinance. Notwithstanding, having
first made a light essay, to justify the Ordinance in her non-explica^ion of
her terms, WILLINGLY, PRESVMPTVOVSLY, by the example of God himself, who made
a Law, Numb. 15. 30. which says expressly, the man that does presumptuously,
shall dye, and yet tell him no more then the Ordinance does, what is meant by
presumptuously; and again, in her concealing her intent about her Admonitour,
from the Apostles bidding Titus reject an Heretic after the first and second
admonition, without describing what h^ means by an admonition, (as if the
Querie had been as simple as the Answer, and made such a demand as this) after
(I say) this light and harmless velitation, wherein the air is beaten,
instead of the Queries; they come to the maine body of their Answer to both the
Queries, which is this: Neither is it any hard matter to understand what it is
to bla^pheme willingly, which can signify nothing else, but a man's own
understanding the words which ^^ speaks, to be reproachful word^ against God,
or she Scriptures, or the Trinity; which (they add) will easily appear,
either by the nature of the words themselves, or at least by his Answer, when
he shall be called in question about it. But

First, I confess that any thing, relating to the prejudice of such Sect. 97.
men, whom we have a desire to make Delinquents and bring under censure, though
never so doubtful, yet will easily app^^^^ to us in this posture. It is the
manner of Gangrena, when she is challenged and charged face to face, with her
shameless and brazenfac'd traducements of worthy and blameless men, being not
able to give any tolerable account of truth in one story of ten which she
reports; It is her manner (I say) tofling out her hand against those that come
to her, with a desire to make that straight, which she has made crook'd, and
tell them over and over, that she has received satisfaction, she has received
satisfaction. And this is all the account and satisfaction, that in any way of
fairness and love, is to be had from her. Certainly she is more beholding to
the impotency of her own desire, to stain the honor of Indepency and her
sons, for that satisfaction she receives about the truth of far the greatest
part of her stories, then to any steadiness or worth of information that is
brought unto her. Dum sibi quisque placet, credula turba sumus.
i. e. Faith is at hand for what we would believe.


And for the two (...), or means of discovery mentioned in the Answer in hand,
to make it easily appear, when a man's own understanding judges the words
which he speaks to be reproachful against God, or the Scriptures, they are
very ambiguous Oracles; and hard is the condition of that man, whose life or
liberty shall be suspended upon their Answer, especially as the consulters, and
judges of this Answer may be. But

Secondly, Suppo^e we have a piece of a tolerable answer to the Query, about
what is meant by the word, WITTINGLY, yet I presume they will not say, that we
have any thing like an Answer, concerning the intent of the word,
PRESVMPTVOVSLY. For what? will they vest the prerogative of God in the makers
of the Ordinance; and plead, that because he commands, without explaining,
therefore they may warrantably do the like? Besides, though God did not
explain many things of difficult interpretation in the letter of his Laws,
given unto the Jews; yet was there ^ittle or no danger of committing any error
in judgment, or doing any thing unjustly by reason of such difficulties,
because (as was formerly said) the mind of God in all doubtful and difficult
cases, was ready to be communicated unto them without any danger of mistake, by
the standing Ordinance of his Oracle among them. If the makers of the
Ordinance, and those that are to judge men upon occasion of the Ordinance; had
any such Ordinance as this, any such Oracle to consult in difficult cases, as
that amongst the Jews, well might we bear generalities and ambiguities of
terms in their Laws. But alas! their Oracles are flesh, and not spirit; and
ap^ to put more affection, then judgment, into their Answers. And besides all
this; there is little question to be made, but that the sense and import of the
word PRESVMPTVOVSLY, was fixed, and known to be determinately one, amongst the
Jews, when the Law mentioned was given by God; whereas now it is volatile
amongst us, and is sometimes here, and sometimes there, and sometimes no man
knows where; as appears by that passage cited from Mr. Prynns pen in the Query.
So that the Divine Parallel insisted upon, does no ways relieve the Ordinance
in that straight, whereinto it is brought by the Querie about the word,
PRESVMPTVOVSLY. But

Thirdly and lastly, we have a mere nullitie instead of satisfaction, Sect. 98.
about the person by whom the Admonition mentioned in the Ordinance, is to be
administered; as likewise about those other material circumstances, which the
Querie touches upon. I must crave leave to represent the words of the Querie,
that so the emptiness of the Answer may more fully appear. Thus then the
Querie, modestly, in as much as the said sins committed contrary to a^monition,
are so severely punishable by the Ordinance; by whom is it intended that this
admonition must be given, to bring the said sins under the di^t and stroke of
the Ordinance? whether by a Magistrate only, or by a Minister; and that either
in his public Ministry, and in general, or in private, and in personal
address? or by any man, of what rank, or quality soever? To all these
particulars, we have an Answer given, which does not so much as touch* no, nor
yet so much as face any one of them. Whether it be worth the transcribing or
no, we shall bestow the courtesy upon it. This then is their Answer, [to a
question not put to them] And for the word, Admonition, it may be asked him
[the Querist] whether he will object against the Apostle, for bidding Titus
reject an Heretic after a first and second Admonition, without describing
what he means by Admonition. But good Gentlemen, the Querist was not
troublesome unto you, with desiring to kvow, what the Ordinance means, by the
word, Admonition; but from whom, and according to what manner of
administration, it must be received by him, who by walking contrary to it,
shall become a Delinquent against the Ordinance. Are not the Queries
substantially answered, and to admiration (at least) yea, and to the utter
downfall of Independency, by such Answers as these? But, nunquam sera est ad
bonos mores via; and it may be the reere of their Answers will be more
masculine, and make atonement for the front and maine body, which have turned
the back, and not the face, upon their enemies. Let us therefore pass on, to

Their 34 Answer. In this they tell us, that the Ordinance declines Sect. 99.
not the punishment of Blasphemy, as appointed in the New Testament, whereof
they annex this close demonstration: for though excommunication be not settled
by the Parliament in any case, yet blasphemy is expressly by the Ordinance of
Parliament punished with suspension, which is in order to excommunication, (or
delivering up unto Satan) and when excommunication comes to be settled, there
is no question but blasphemy shall be so punished. But in the mean time, the
present question is not, how Blaspemy is like to be punished, when the
Parliament shall come to settle excommunication; but whether, not any Ordinance
of Parliament, but the Paper Ordinance which occasioned the Queries, does
Christianly or reasonably, in declining the punishment of Blasphemy expressly
appointed by God in the New Testament, and to prefer a punishment mentioned
only in the Old, etc. It seems by their Answer, that they yield the said
Paper-Ordinance guilty of the crime queried, by asserting the honor of the
Parliament, as having done in part, and intending further to do Christianly
and reasonably, in making Blasphe(...) punishable with Excommunication, or
delivering up unto Satan; which is the punishment expr^sly appointed by God
for this sin in the New Testament; whereas the said Paper-Ordinance, in
opposition to the Ch^istian intentions of the Parliament in this behalf, makes
it punishable with death. There is no way for them to wash their hands of the
prevarication, but by professing themselves to be Erastians, and of their
judgment, who by delivering up unto Satan, will have nothing else to be
meant, but cutting off by death by the civil Magistrate. And yet neither would
this be any proper salve for the soar; unless they will further shame
themselves with this explication; that when they say, that Blasphemy is
expressly by the Parliament punished with suspension, in order to
Excommunication, or delivering to Satan, they mean, in order to cutting off
by the Magistrates sword with death: and thus reconcile the Old Testament and
the New, touching the punishment appointed for Blasphemy in the one and the
other.

Secondly, When in the sequel of this Answer, they affirm, that that general
sentence of not bearing the sword in vain, and being a Minister of God, a
revenger of wrath to him that does evil, not only allows, but commands a
Magistrate to make a Law for punishment of Blasphemy even with the civil
sword; and that according to this Querists own conscience, unl^sse he will
dare so far to blaspheme, as to say, that a Blasphemer is not an evil doer.
First, the Querist and his conscience are so far from the Blasphemy of this
new model, I mean of saying, that a Blasphemer is not an evil doer, that he
judges (and not without some ground) that himself judges a Blasph^mer to be
an evil do^r in an higher degree, then the Cata. Querists themselves. And yet
secondly, neither he, nor his conscience know any competent ground to think,
that the general sentence they speak of, does any ways command a Magistrate
to make a Law for punishment of Blasphemy with the civil sword. He has
formerly given a free and large account of his judgment and sense of that
S^ntence, in his d^fence of his seventh Querie.

And whereas they pretend, that the New Testament mentio^s ^^ particular civil
punishment at all* because it speaks not at all unto ^i^ill Magistrates, who
were then ^ll generally Pagan, etc. I answer, that if they think that
Magistrates have any whit the more power for being Christians, or the less,
for being Pagans; or that the duties of Magistrat^s, are either any ways
multiplied to a greater, or contracted to a smaller number, by any difference
whatsoever in the persons in whom it is vested, their thought is not
commensurable with the truth. That which belongs to a Magistrate, as a
Magistrate, belongs unto any, unto every Magistrate whatsoever: and that which
belongs unto a Christian, as a Christian, belongs unto every Christian
whatsoever. It is a weak conceit to imagine that Paganism should excuse any
man from any duty whatsoever appropriate to that relation or office which he
suste^nes. Sins are not wont to excuse one another. So then Pagan Magistrates
lying under the Law of Magistracy, as well as Christian, there is little
question to be made, but that what the Apostle speaks to or of, either in
regardof their office, duty or place of Magistracy, he speaks unto both. But

Thirdly, When they leave their own occupations of making Sect. 100.
Answers, and instead hereof turn Querists, and make Questions, they do not
quit themselves workmen-like in their new trade. For here they demand* Will
this Querist offer to say, that it is neith^r reasonable nor Christian to
punish that detestable wickedness with death now, which is mentioned, 1 Cor.
5. 1. because the New Testament does not express the punishment of death, as
due to it, which the Old did, Levit. 20. 11. Or if he can allow himself to be
so impudent, will he allow no punishment at all for murder, or adultery,
because the New Testament mentions no civil punishment for such wickedness?
what is there in either of these Queries, to strain the Quer^sts pen in giving
answer, more then there would be in these (in case I should propose them to
them) to put either them, or their wits or their consciences, to it, to find
an Answer; will they say, that it is lawful for the major and stronger party
of Professors in a State or Kingdom, though the worse, to tread and trample
the minor or lesser part under their feet, though the better? Or if they can
allow themselves to be so impudent, as to assert this, will they allow those
that are trodden upon, no recompense from Heaven for their unjust sufferings,
because the Laws of men make no provision for their satisfaction in such a
case? Would the Gentlemen take it well, if I should address my self unto them
in two such Queries as these; though I believe I should not put them to the
charge of many thoughts to return an Answer to them? But to these Queries, the
Querist answers freely and plainly; that he judges it very reasonable and
Christian to punish, not only that particular wickedness about which they
Querie, with the punishment appointed by God in the Old Testament which is
death, though the New Testament expresses no such punishment, ^^ ^ue to it,
but murders also, adulteries, and all other sins and misdem^anors whatsoever
committed against the Law and Light of nature, with civil punishments
answerable to their natures and demerits respectively, whether by death, or
otherwise. Only he desires to add two things for the further explication of
himself upon the case. First, that he deemeth it not equal, or of any fair
consistence with the light of nature, that two several punishments, not only
distinct, but opposite in their natures, both of them the highest and greatest
in their respective orders and kinds, should be decreed by one and the same
Authority to be inflicted for one and the same sin, or offense. Secondly,
that he judges it most reasonable and Christian, that when any sin, whereof
there are many kinds and degrees, some against the light and law of nature,
others not; shall by a Law be made punishable with any civil punishment,
especially with death; that that, both kind and degree of this sin, against
which the severity of this Law is intended and bent, be particularly named,
described, and set out in the letter of this Law.

That wherewith they close this Answer, themselves say, that it was before
mentioned in the case of the seducer to Idolatry; and I like wise desire to
refer the Reader for his satisfaction about it, to what has formerly been
argued upon this case.

There is little or nothing, either in their Argument upon, or Sect. 101,
in their Answer to, the 35 Querie, of the spirit or purpose thereof. The
Reader may please to compare them. Only they speak comfortably in their
Answer, (if they would make it good) when they tell us, that though the Querist
would feign suppose congregations; which belong not to a Parish Church; yet our
Laws ^now none such. Long may our Laws, and Lawyers too, enjoy the happiness
of this ignorance; and know no other congregations then those which belong to
Parish Churches. I confess that could I have presomed so far of the Ordinance,
that it had taken no knowledge of any Congregations, but such, well might this
Querie have kept company with things that are not.

Nor is their 36 Argument framed to the Querie. However in Sect. 102.
their Answer they dissemble it, and smite the Querist with their Censorian
mace, for saying, that doubtless it is not lawful to teach Children, or
whosoever, to pray, unless we can reasonably judge them capable of our
Instruction in this kind. I thought such a saying as this had been innocent
enough, to escape the Inquisitors office. But so officious (^t seems) they are
that they must have a saying to ^^: and their saying is this. Although this
Querist is so con^^dent, as to say, Doubtless it is not lawful (by the way,
Doubtless, does not always import confidence, but sometimes rather an allay
thereof) yet he not only therein contradicts the general practice ^^th of our
Divines and Christians, who began to teach children to pray, as soon as they
begin to speak or understand, but opposes Christ himself* who justified the
childrens crying Hosanna to the son of David, when it cannot reasonably be
thought they understood so much of him, as to have learned how to pray, etc.
Reader, can thou think that these men understand the nature of a
Contradiction? I fear they are better at the practice, then the Theorie, of
Contradictions. But, if thou have ploughed with these Gentlemen's Heyfe^, I pray
thee help me to find out their riddle. The Lord Christ says, (speaking of
those that cried Hosanna to him) I tell you, that if these should hold their
peace, the st^nes would ^rie Luke 19. 40.
. Now suppose the persons of whom our Savior speaks, had been defective in
the service, and so the stones had supplied this defect, and cried (as he says
they would have done) as they did; can it not reasonably b^ thought, that our
Savior would have justified these stones, in such a seuse, and upon such
terms, as now ^e justified the other? And in case he had done this, justified
the stones in crying Hosanna; can it reasonably be thought, that this fact of
his, would have justified those, that should have gone about to teach stones to
pray? or have contradicted the assertion of those, who should notwithstanding
affi^m it to be unlawful, to go about such a work, as to teach stones to
pray? But

Secondly, I wonder upon what ground, or engagement of their reasons, they
should say, that it cannot reasonably be thought that they understood so much
of him as to have learned how to pray. Those that are called (...) Mat. 21* 15.
(the place cited by them) which in this place is commonly translated* children
(else where, servants) are Luke 19. 37, 39. called (...), disciples; which
doubtless argues more then a probability, that they understood (or at least
were capable of understanding) so much of Christ, as to have learned (in some
measure at least) how to pray. Besides, the word (...), though sometimes it
signifies ^ young child, yet more frequently it signifies a child of some
growth and (...)ature capable of instruction, etc. sometimes (as was said) a
young man, or servant; the diminutive, (...) being more frequently used to
signify a little, or young child. So that there is very little in the word,
children, to countenance these men, in their assertion.

Thirdly, Nor does that testimony cited from David, Psalm. 8. 1. Sect. 103.
Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained praise, by which
they say that Christ justified the Childrens crying Hosanna, any ways attest
their notion. For first, certainly those that were able to cry Hosanna, were
neither Babes nor Sucklings, (in the literal and strict signification of the
words.) Secondly, neither by this testimony did Christ intend so much to
justify the act of the children, as the wisdom, and power of God in the
dispensation. As when Babes and Sucklings show forth the praise of God (in
David's sense) this act of theirs (such as it is) does no ways commend or
justify them, but only the gracious providence of Ipsi quidem muti sunt, sed
mirabilis Dei providentia, qua t^ ipsis reluet, instar est sonorae et
magniloquae facu^iae.
God about them. They (says Calvin upon the place, as cited by Matthew,
speaking of these Babes and Sucklings) are mute and dumb: but the wonderful
Providence of God which shines forth in them, is instead of a sounding and
stately eloquence.

Thirdly, The place in the Psalm, is more generally understood in a
metaphorical sense, by expositors; and doubtless was no otherwise cited, or
applied by our Savior here, viz. then as a Scripture holding forth and
attesting this providentiall method, course, and practice of God; to make the
meanest and weakest of his creatures, bountiful contributors unto his praise
and glory, Fourthly, (and lastly for this) in case God should desire
extraordinary praise and glory from children not yet capable of Instruction, or
learning how to pray, the officiousness of men in attempting to teach them how
to pray, would rather be injurious unto, then any ways comporting with, this
his desire. For whatsoever he in this case shall work in an extraordinary way
for his praise or glory, in, or upon, or for, such children; the effect and
fruit hereof will in all likelihood, be attributed (atleast in part) to the
seemingly-pious endeavors of those, who taught them to pray, though to no
purpose, at least with no effect.

Fourthly, and lastly, Whereas they avouch it the general practice both of our
Divines and Christians, that they began to teach children to pray as soon as
they begin to speak, or understand; if instead of the disj^nctive, or, they
had put, the conjunctive, and, I should rather have believed them. If they know
some, either Divines, or Christians (though the opposition, or distinction, is
not very lovely) who teach their children to pray as soon as they begin to
speak, whether they understand or no; I know others, that judge such a practice
little less then the taking of the Name of God in vain, and in that respect
forb^^re it. So that howsoever the practice is not so general, as these men
seem to import. And to me it seems still unreasonable (nor do I know how to
help it, but by a surrender of my judgment into the hands of unlawful Lords)
that men should bestow their time and labor in teaching or instructing such
subjects, in any knowledge, skill, or faculty whatsoever, which they cannot
reasonably judge to be capable of their Instructions.

In their 37 Answer, they suppose two great Suppositions, Sect. 104.
which I believe that seven y^ers study of all the Divines in the world, will
hardly make good. As first, that themselves, and men of their party, are
i^gaged in the Truth in all things, or all opinions whatsoever mentioned in the
Ordinance. From hence they argue and conclude themselves, to be more ^eet and
competent Judges in such cases, which may, or shall fall out about any the
points in the Ordinance, then any persons whatsoever, who in their judgments
stand undeclared about them. The second is like unto it, and is this, that not
only many, or most of the things mentioned in the Ordinance, but all of them
are clearly enough determined in the Scripture, to warrant the consciences of
those that are instructed in their doctri^es, to punish those that persist to
publish and maintain any thing contrary to them. We never had ^uch a prospect
of high Presbytery in her exaltation, as we have from the tops of these two
mountains. But,

First, It seems that a very low degree of cleernesse in the Scriptures (I
fear, doubtfulnesse and obscurity it self) will warrant the consciences of
these men, to crush their opposers, and all those that shall stand in their
way, being upon their full speed toward their ^ase, honor, and other
accommodations in the world. He that supposes gain to be godliness, 1 Timothy
6. 5.
will find Scriptures in abundance cl^^r enough (as these men count cleernesse)
to warrant his conscience in the practice of covetousness, unmercifulness,
and oppression without end. It is a thing of most dangerous consequence, when
men have put the stumbling blocks of their iniquity before their faces, to go
and a^ke counsel of the Lord Ezekiel. 14. 3, 4.
*

Secondly, Suppose the Scriptures be clear enough to warrant the consciences of
these men, to hold themselves with the Ordinance in the points and doctrines
countenanced therein; yet what cleernesse have they in these, more then
darkness it self, to warrant them in the punishing of those, who are
contrary-minded unto them, especially in some of these? Certain I am, that
they have produced nothing in this discourse, which has the least glimmering
of any cleernesse in this kind. But*

Thirdly, When they express themselves indefinitely, thus; clearly enough, to
warrant the consciences of those that are instructed in those Doctrines, to
punish those* etc. do they intend to interesse all their proselytes, tagge and
ragge, without exception, when once they have imparted the Doctrines of the
Ordinance unto them* in a warrantablenesse of power, to punish those that
persist to publish any thing contrary to them? Do they warrant the consciences
of the profane and rude multitude to become their auxiliaries in persecuting
and molesting their conscientious Brethren?

Fourthly, whereas they determine, that in every point, whether Sect. 105.
clearly, or not clearly, determined, men's being already engaged in the Truth,
does not make them unmeet, but rather more meet to be judges in such cases
(viz. then those, who as yet stand undeclared; for so the Querie) no
considering man (I suppose) can concur with them in their determination. The
end of judging and deciding controverted opinions in Religion between party and
party, being first the uniting of their judgments; and secondly, (if it may
be) the uniting them in the Truth; evident it is, that those who are looked
upon by one of the parties, as professed enemies to their judgment, and
engaged on the contrary side, are like to prove but mediators of small value
to comprimize between them, and those who dissent in judgment from them. Their
very engagement on the contrary side, cannot in reason but be looked upon as a
very great disadvantage to what they shall speak or argue, be it for the
Truth. Topicall arguments from a friend, or a person no ways engaged or
declared against men, are wont to go further, and to do more in swaying the
judgments of men, then seven demonstrations from a professed and known enemy.

Fifthly, and lastly; whereas they yet add* that if they be supreme
Magistrates, who are already engaged for the Truth, they have Authority from
God to appoint subordinate Judges, viz. such who are also already engaged in
the same Truth; First* I desire to know, for what end these subordinate Judges
should be appointed? what shall their work or employment be* Only to tell men
with Authority and power, and an iron Scepter in their hand, that they are the
men that are Orthodox and know the Truth; and to give sentence of imprisonment,
death, or the like* against all those* who will not think as honorably of
them, as they do of themselves? The truth is, that all the work and service
that such Judges can do by virtue of this their deputation, being truly
interpreted, amounts to no more. Secondly, I would learn from these men, whose
learning (it seems) teaches them the confidence of being engaged in all
Truth, where God has given any Authority to supreme Magistrates, suppose
engaged in the Truth, to appoint subordinate Judges, to determine and judge
amongst the people, what is, or shall be, or must be Truth, and what not,
Certain I am, that if God has given any such Authority or power to supreme
Magistrates engaged in, or for, the Truth; he has given the same to
Magistrates of like supremacy, though engaged against the Truth. The Authority
and power of supreme* Magistracy is uniforme, standing and fixed (at least in
respect of God) as the abstracted natures and essences of things always are;
nor are they capable of any variation, either dextrorsum, or sinistrorsum,
either sursum, or deorsum, by any qualification whatsoever, whether on the
right hand, or on the left, in the persons invested with it. But of this before.

The Gentlemen have but one opportunity more (in this Discourse) to gather up
the credit, which they have scattered hitherto. Let us see how learnedly they
take their leaves.

The truth is, that in their Answer to their last Argument, they Sect. 106*
quit themselves more unworthily, then in any of the former; (except happily in
the second; when, it seems, they dealt by their credits and consciences both,
as those that stoned Steven, did by their garments, when to expedite themselves
for the work, they laid them down at a young man's ^eet, whose name wa^ Saul*
Act. 7. 58. etc. 22. ^0.
. Their minor proposition in this Argument, is this. God has given no
authority to civil Magistrates or others, either in the Old or New Testament,
to make an Exposition of any clause in the Law, controverted between men of
equal worth, a matter punishable with imprisonment or death. This proposition
(say they) is not true: but have they not said it to the shame and confusion of
their pens for ever? or can they find a fourth man under Heaven, that is
possessed but of the ordinary interest of a man, willing to venture his
reputation with theirs, in such a crasie bottom, as this? But let us see how
and with what coards, they under-gird their vessel, for fear of falling in
pieces.

First, they say, the minor is not true; unless any man can prove, that there
neither is, nor ever was, any authority in any Civil Magistrate (for if not in
them, then in no others) in any matter of Religion. But,

First, does the truth of any one proposition, depend upon any man's ability, to
prove another to be true? Certainly, the minor, which they deny, may be true,
though no man can prove, either that which they propose, or any other
proposition whatsoever. The truth of propositions is independent; though the
manifestation or proof of this truth, be not.

Secondly, what truth, or color of Truth, is there in that hypotheticall; If
not in them, then in no others. Was there no Authority in the Apostles about
matters of Religion? or were they Civil Magistrates? Or if their meaning be,
that in case Magistrates have no Authority in matters of Religion, then have
they none in other matters; the connection is still as loose and wild as
before; and not so much as an eye of a consequence in it. There is every whit
as much sense and reason in this: If a man has no gold, he has no silver: Or
in this, If a man has not four legs, he has not two. But let us go on
with them, and see how they prove the necessity of proving that which they
propose, to prove their minor untrue.

Forasmuch (say they) as there is no one point in Religion, but has been
controverted by one or other, who have had as much learning and gravity, as
others of the contrary opinion, and by men of as much PRETENDED piety and
conscience in their way, as others, except that of the Deity it self. But,

First, How do they prove, that there is no one point in Religion but has
been controverted by ^^^ or other of equal learning and gravity, with th^se of
the contrary opinion? Nay, they had been worthy to lose all their Interest of
Authority, if they had so much as attempted to prove or argue such a position
as this. For confident I am that all the learning, wit, memory, books in the
world, are not able to prove it. For f^^st, who knows how many points there are
in Religion, but only he that numbers the stars in the firmament of Heaven*
and knows the account of the Sands upon the Sea shore: Therefore to say, There
is no one point in Religion, but has been controverted, (except that of the
Deity) is the saying of men that know not what they say* Secondly, who has
weighed in a balance the learning and gravity of men, so exactly, as to be
able to say, these and these men are equal in both; but only he that has
weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance Esa. 40. 12.
.

Secondly, whereas they add, and by men of as much PRETENDED piety and
conscience in their way* as others; they go on the other side of the way, and
baulk the Query, which does not speak of any PRETENDED learning, gravity,
piety, conscience, etc. but of such which are so in reality and Truth.

Thirdly, Not only the generality of their Rule, but even the restraint, or
exception it self which they make, is just matter of exception. For certainly
the point of the Deity it self, has been controverted amongst Philosophers;
and the names of some who maintained the negative, as Di^gora^ and others, are
to this day upon record in many writers.

Fourthly, To say that there is ^^^ ^^ point of Religion but has been
controverted, etc. is, not only a saying incapable of any due probation by
men, but of an extremely improbable, and importune import. For who can lightly
imagine, that ever it was controverted between any, whether men ought not, as
far as is possible, to have peace with all men; or again, whether a man
ought to love his neighbor as himself, with twenty and ten more of like
consideration, which might soon be added. But,

Fifthly, and lastly, suppose all that has been opposed hitherto in this
answer, were admitted for Truth; what tittle, letter, syllable, word, sentence,
is there to be found in it, which so much as looks toward a proof of that
conclusion, against which it pretends; viz* that God, neither in the (...), not
in the New Testament, has given any (...) to the ^ivill (...) to ^^k^ a^
exposition of any clause in the L^^, cantravented (...) men of equal worth,
parts, pi^^ie, etc. a matter (...)i ^ab^e ^ith (...) or death * This ass^^t^on,
which is the mi^^^ donied by them, may well laugh at all the opposition that
has been (...) against it hitherto, in the face to scorn. But though he that
went before* was not H^^tor, yet he that follows, may be Achilles. Well, let
us look him in the face, howsoever. His physiognomy is this.

Yet itis ^^id^n^ that in the Old Test(...)ent, God comm^nded to punish with
d^^^h, false Prophets, and (...) to Idolatri^, and ^acrificers to Mol^ch; who
all brought th^s^ greatest matters of R^^igion to ^^ contr^verted points. High
Presbytery, has all this while been beholding to Blasphemers, false Prophets,
and seducers to Idolat^ie under the Old Testament, for the support of his cause
and Kingdom. Here (it seems) Blasphemers are discharged from the service, and
Sacrificers to M^lech entertained in their st^ad. But let ^^ see how the cause
prospers upon this new recrute of the Army, which maintains it. All these,
false Prophets, Seduc^rs, etc. Sacrificers, etc. brought those greatest matters
of Religion to ^^ controverted points.

First, How shall we do for an Antecedent, to that Relative, THOSE? Here is a
serving-man, that wants a master. What great, or greater, or greatest matters
of Religion, are THOSE, which were brought by the Por^or^ spoken of, to be
contr^verted points?

Secondly, How do these Gentlemen prove* or how does it any ways appear,
that the wicked persons they speak of, brought any of of the greatest matters
of Religion to be controv^rted points* Or if they did, or could prove this; Yet,

Thirdly, They have a worse crow to pull still, then that; which i^, to prove,
that they brought such matters* the greatest matters of Religion, to be
controverted points, between Priest and Pr^est, Scribe and Scribe, between
le^^ned, grave, pious, and consciencions men ^n both sid^^. I hope they will
not go about to untie the knot wi^h this di^^onourable finger; a^^er ^^ false
Prophets* Seducers to Id^^^ri^, Sacri^^cers to M^l^eh, for learned, (...)
conscientious men; or of equal worth, parts, learning, judgment, conscience,
with those Pries^^ and Scrib^^, who were of greatest ^^^inencie in these, and
opposed them in their judgments and ways. If they will affirm this, they
will do it at the utmost peril of high Presbytery, which is not like to
thrive after such a defense. If they will not affirm it, let them confess
that they have said nothing hitherto to the purpose, or point in Question. But
it may be they will yet dig deeper, and find the threasure at last. They
work on, thus.

But more then this, (we have need of more, or else we are like Sect. 107.
to have nothing) Deuteronomy. 17. 12. he expressly commanded, that even in all
controverted points, he that would not stand to the sentence of the Judge, or
of the High Priest, should be put to death. Reader, be pleased but to run over
with thine eye, that entire passage of Scripture, from which these men break
ofF a few words to serve their turn; and thou will be tempted (at least) with
a jealousy, lest they be men, who make no scruple at all to build up the
honor of their cause, with the dishonor of the Scriptures. (Read Dent. 17.
from the beginning of verse 8. to the end of the 12. verse.) For,

First, Whereas they say, he expressly commanded, that EVEN in ALL controverted
points, he that would not stand, etc. the tenor of the Scripture (as to this
point) speaks thus: If there arise ^matter too hard for thee in judgment,
between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
being matters of controversy within thy gates: then shall thou arise, and get
thee up into the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
Is a matter of controversy, between blond and blood, between stroke and
stroke, plea and plea, [about these] ALL, EVEN ALL, controverted points? Or is
great A, ALL, EVEN ALL the letters of the Alphabet?

Secondly, Are matters of controversy between blood and blood, etc. matters of
controversy between Priest and Priest, Scribe and Scribe, about the exposition
of some clause in the Law? (which are the only matters queried in the Querie.)

Thirdly, Nor does God in this passage of Scripture, expressly command, without
caution and limitation, that even in this controversy it self, he that would
not stand to the sentence of the Judge, or High Priest, should be put to death;
but only then, when the Priests, the Levites, and the Judge, should give
sentence, or inform them, according to the Sentence of the Law Deuteronomy. 17. 11.


Fourthly, Nor does God here, either expressly, or so much as by intimation,
command that any man in what matter of controversy soever, should be put to
death, simply for not being willing or content to stand to the sentence of the
Judge, or of the High Priest, but only for doing presumptuously; and this, in
not harkening unto the Priest, that was then to stand to minister before the
Lord his God, or unto the Judge, ver. 12.
i. e. (as the words will well bear) for contemning or affronting either the
Priest or the Judge, in their sentence; or reproaching it as unjust, without
any consideration had upon it. But in no reasonable construction of the word,
can he be said to do presumptuously, who upon a respectfull and mature
consideration of an opinion, or sentence given, and with expressions of
reverence and honor toward him that either holds the one, or gives the other,
is not able to bring his judgment or conscience to submit, either unto the
one, as true; or unto the other, as just. And yet,

Fifthly, and lastly, Evident it is, from several expres^ions in the passage
of Scripture we speak of, Then thou shall arise, and get thee up into the
place which the Lord thy God shall ch^s^, v. 8. And thou shall come unto the
Priests, the Levites, and unto the judge that shall be in those days, and
inquire, v. 9. And the man that will do presumpt^ously, and will not hearken
unto the Priests, that ^^andeth to minister there before* the Lord thy God,
etc. v. 12. Sect. 108.
that that sentence of the Priest or Judge, (for the High*Priest, which the
Gentlemen speak of, appears not, at least under that title, in the text)
against which he that should do presumptuously in not harkening to it, was to
be put to death; was only such a sentence, which the Priest did upon inquiry
by Vrim and Thrummim, receive immediately, or however, infallibly, from the
mouth of God himself. And (for my part) if our Inquisitours can give any
satisfying account that the sentence, which they, or any other Judge, shall
award against those, who shall be found Delinquents against the Ordinance,
comes, or is given unto them, upon any such terms, (I mean, by infallible
revelation) from God; I shall think it equal and meet, that he that shall
do presumptuously, and not hearken unto it, should be put to death.

We have now had the soul of this Answer, and have found it mortal; yet what
rejoicing is there in the words following, as if it were crowned with glory. So
far is it (say the men) from Gods not giving in the Old Testament any
Authority to make a controverted point a matter of death, or imprisonment. That
which they say* in these words, is scarce sense; that which (I suppose) they
would say, is not any thing they should say, whether they had a mind, either
to speak Truth, or to their purpose. For, first, God never gave any Authority
to make a controverted point a matter of death or imprisonment, but only a
presumptuous misdemeanour against a Divine sentence, given for the
determination of such a point. Secondly, if he had made a controverted point,
matter of either, yet unless this controverted point, could be proved (which
yet has not been so much as attempted) to have been a point controverted
between Priest and Priest, between learned, grave, pio^s and conscientious men
on both sides, it had been nothing to the point in hand, nor to the import of
the Querie.

The Gentlemen Vindicators draw their last breath in these words: And in this
Answer to these Queries, diverse things have been s^ewed* (but none, as has
been proved, sufficient to prove) that the same Authority belongs to the Civil
Magistrate under the New Testament: which is also generally expressed by Divines
under that phrase of being Custos, the Guardian of both the Tables of Gods Law;
and by the Prophet (Esai. 49. Esai. 60.) under those phrases of being Nursing
Fathers to the Church, and bringing in their glory to it; which must needs
imply using their Authority to suppress th^se dangerous Errors and Heresies,
even by imprisonment or death inflicted, upon the obstinate maintainers and
publishers of them, if no other means will serve. Reader, the common saying is
verified in this Discourse, or Vindication: Qualis vita, finis ita. Such as the
life, such is the death. It has lived hitherto full of affection to the cause
of high Presbytery; but has spoken weakly for it. So now it dies, without any
declining in the one, or raising it self up in the other. But

First, what the meaning of Divines is, in that gener all expression, Sect. 109.
The Civil Magistrate is Custos utriusque Tabulae, the keeper of both Tables,
I confess I do not well understand. If it had been the saying of an Apostle,
I should (I conceive) have judged my self under a deeper engagement, to make a
district inquiry into it, then now I do. The richest and best sense of the
saying, that I know, is this: The Civil Magistrate is the keeper of Both
Tables; that is, is in special manner obliged, by virtue of his Office and
High Place of dignity amongst men, whereunto God has called him, to be a
diligent and exemplary observer and doer of the whole will of God; contained in
both the Tables of his Law. In such a phrase or figure of speech as this sense
represents the saying in, the Apostle says concerning the Magistrate we speak
of, that he is the Minister of God unto thee for good. He is, that i^, by the
engagement of his place and Office, he ought to be a Minister of God unto thee,
for thy good, Romans 13. 4.

Another sense in goodness not much inferior to the former, is this: The
Civil Magistrate is the keeper of, etc. that is, is bound by the tenure of his
place and Dignity, to provide (above the rate of other men) by all means
authorized by God, that all duties commanded, either in the first or second
Table, be performed by all under his jurisdiction. This (I conceive) is most
likely to be the sense, wherein Divines and others so frequently use the
saying. But this sense imports neither duty upon, no^ power in this Magistrate,
to compel men by the sword to be of his Religion (though he be never so
confident that his Religion is true, and the best that is, to be embraced by
men) but only upon this supposition (which with all the artificial dressing
and coloring that has been bestowed upon it, could never yet be made to look
like a Truth) viz. that men really conscientious in their way, and peaceable,
may contrary to their conscience, be forced into another way, by the material
sword. The Magistrate is bound by all lawful means whatsoever to procure the
observation of both the Tables, and to guard every precept in them both,
against all disobedience and contempt from men; but he is not bound to do so
much, as the least hair on his head amounts unto, in any unrighteous way,
though by it he might hope to purchase the perfect observation of all things
commanded in both Tables, by men unto the worlds end.

Secondly, whereas they seek for that bloody Authority which they so much
desire to vest in the Civil Magistrate, in the Prophet Isaiah, and think they
have found it in those expressions, wherein he prophesies that Kings shall be
Nursing Fathers unto the Church, and shall bring their glory to it; I Answer.

First, that Nurses use to administer in milk, not in blood, unto Sect. 110.
their children. Nor does the notion or Relation of a Father, import any thing
more, then care, love and tenderness, toward their children. Now Fathers may
abundantly express themselves toward their own children, in all these,
without beating or slaying other men's Children, who in the same Town, City, or
Kingdom, live peaceably by theirs, and mean them no harm. Musculus (a very
learned and Orthodox Divine) does not understand the Prophecy, or promise of
Kings being Nursing Fathers unto the Church, of the times of the Gospel, or of
any affection which Kings in these days should show unto it (nay, he
professes that he thinks the Holy Ghost would have spoke quite otherwise, had
he intended to speak, or prophecy of th^se Cum cogito qualis sit facta
Ecclesia, postquam Christianos est Principes nacta, ac qui fixed opum
Ecclesiaslicorum fructus, existimo spiritum sanctum, fi de illis loqui
voluisset, long fuisse dicturum alia. Mu^c. in Esa. 49. 23.
but conceives that it was fulfilled in that favor, which Daniel, Shadrach,
Meshach, Abednego, Esther, Zorobabel, Ezra, with many others of the Jewish
nation and Church, found in the eyes of the Kings of Babylon during the
captivity Quemadm^dum olim Moses in aula Pharaonis, ita incaptivitate
Babylonica, Daniel Sidrac, Misa^ Abednego, in aula Regis Babel sunt educati.
Nota est historia Esther, Zorobabelis, Edrae, etc. in quibus sane impletum est
quod hic dicitur, erunt Reges ^utricii tui, etc. Ibid.
; who, as Nurses, and foster* Fathers use to return the Children which they
bring up, unto the Parents, when they demand them, or are desirous to take them
home; so did these Kings* restore these children of the Church unto God their
Father demanding them, when they gave them liberty (with other accommodations)
to return into their own Land. Yea, the Prophet hmiselfe explaines his
prophecy of Kings being nursing Fathers unto the Church, according to the
tenor of this exposition. Thou shall also (speaking unto the Church) suck the
milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breast of Kings, etc. Esa. 60. 16.
See also Esa. 61. 6. So that these nursing Fathers of whom Esa speaks, do no
ways nourish the conceit of these Gentlemen, concerning the Authourity or
power of the Civil Magistrate under the New Testament.

Secondly, For that other expression, and shall bring their glory to it (if it
were to be found in this Prophecy, as I believe it is not) this is more a
stranger to their purpose then the former. For in what Dialect, or construction
of words, can the cutting off, or punishing of erroneous persons, or Heretics
within the Church by Civil Magistrates, be termed, a bringing of their glory
unto the Church? There is (I grant) such an expression in the book of the
Revelation Revel. 21. 24. 26.
; but evident it* is (by comparing this place with Esa 60. throughout) that by
that glory, which the Kings of the Gentiles shall bring unto the Church, is
meant nothing else but their wealth and riches; which are called a man's honor,
or glory, Genesis 31. 1. And of that which was our Fathers, has he gotten all
this glory. Yea, the Exposition is made by the Holy Ghost himself, Esa. 61. 6.
Ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye b^ast
your selves, Besides (as to the place in the Revelation) evident it is, that it
speaks of such an estate or condition of the Church, when it shall be no
ways infested or endangered by Heretics or Erroneous Persons, inasmuch as
the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, intend then to be the Temple of it Rev.
21* 22.
. Thus then ye see how the infelicity of the Greek Proverb is fallen upon these
men (the Vindicators) (...); their Threasure proves but coals. No Scripture
they can address or apply themselves unto for the support of their cause, will
take any pity or compassion on them (in that behalf.) The Queries from the
first to the last stand yet unanswered; yea (I fully believe) unanswerable;
except it be by Answers, made of such water which will quench the iron furnace
of High Presbytery.

FINIS.

