Die Lunae, 31. Martii, 1645.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr Cheynell,
who Preached before the Lords in Parliament, on the 26. of this instant March,
is hereby desired to Print and Publish his said Sermon; which is not to be
Printed or Reprinted, but by Authority under his own hand.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

THE DISCOVERY OF A PVBLIQVE SPIRIT: Presented in A SERMON BEFORE THE
Honorable House of COMMONS at Margarets Westminster, at their Public Fast,
March 26. 1645. By William Good B. D. Pastor of Denton in Norfolk, one of the
Assembly of DIVINES.

Gal. 5. 13. Serve one another in love. Gal. 6. 10. While we have opportunity
let us do good unto all. Nemini dubium est quod ea quae Dei dono accepimus ad
Dei cultum refer d^bea^^^, et in eius opere consumere quae eiusdem sumpsimus
largitate. Salvi^n lib. contra Avatitiam. 1 LONDON, Printed by I. L. for
Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

Die Mercurii 26, Martii. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Sir Roger North, and Mr
Cage do give thanks to Mr Good and Mr Ward for the great pains they took in
the Sermons they preached this day, at the entreaty of the House of Commons, at
St Margaretts Westminster, (it being the day of Public Humiliation) and to
desire them to print their Sermons. It is also Ordered, that none shall presume
to print their Sermons without License under their hands writing.

H. Else. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Do appoint Christopher Meredith, to Print this Sermon, and no man else.

WILL. GOOD.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS in Parliament Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
I Could have drawn many strong arguments from mine own weakness against the
publishing of this Sermon, had not your desire deprived me of my freedom. It
is enough to me, and I hope it will be so to others, that what I do herein, is
an act of obedience to your Commands. The doctrine I have herein pressed upon
others is, that they ought to be serviceable to the Public, which I durst not
confute by concealing my poor and weak labors, after they received the stamp
of your judgment upon them to be in the least measure useful for the
Public good. In this Discourse I now present you with, I have labored
chiefly to discover those Rocks of self-shipwrack which lie hidden in the
waves of Public employments, that in your steering of the Public Ship, you
might not dash your souls against them, and so sink the comforts that out of
all your worthy labors might eternally redound unto your souls. If you seek
Gods honor, God has secured your honor by his own promise. You must not
exspect always to be paid 1 Samuel 2. 30.
in good coin by men, who reap the benefit of your hazards for their security.
Many will deal with you, as beasts do with trees, they get under their shadow
in time of a storm, and when that is over browse and crop the boughs thereof:
But in reference to God, you may safely conclude, as Marcus Antonius did, Hoc
habeo quodcunque dedi. You know what Christ will say to his Church-Samaritans,
Matthew. 21. 40. In as much as ye have done it to the least of these, ye have
done it unto me. I have often sadly wondered, what was the meaning of that
Ballancing providence of our most wise God, who has often made the scales even
betwixt us and our enemies, in this civil War, nor can I find it out, unless
it be this; because the wheels of our Reformation drive so heavily. It is Gods
Great mercy, and your great honor, that so many unprofitable Thorns are
already stubbed up which choked the liberty of the Gospel, yet if now the
Churches field should lie half tilled, we must expect abundance of weeds. The
sooner you can accomplish the planting of a good Ministry, and the giving of
just encouragement to those that labor in the Vineyard, and that a Government
with Scripture warrant may be fully executed, the sooner you may expect to
bring the Ship of the Commonwealth into the harbor of a happy Peace.

That you may so manage all your employments in the Public service, as may be
most for Gods glory, the speedy redress of our present miseries, and the
comfort of your own souls; is and shall be the earnest and constant prayer of

Your most unworthy servant in the work of Christ, WILL. GOOD.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Honorable House of Commons at their late solemn
monthly Fast, March 26. 1645.
Act. 13. 36. For David after he had served his own generation, by the will of
God fell on sleep.
THe children of God, who in their lives have had a special care to honor
God, God has had a special care to honor their memories in future times;
according to that promise, 1 Samuel 2. 39. And hence it is that Moses many times
in Scripture, for honors sake, is called the servant of God. Abraham is thrice
called the friend of God 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. Isa. 41. 8. Jam. 2. 23.
. Daniel is styled a man greatly beloved Dan. 10. 11.
. And Job is recorded to be a perfect man and upright, and none like him in the
earth, Job 1. 8. And so David here being often spoken of in this Chapter,
before the mention of him is dismissed, the Holy Ghost leaves this Character of
honor upon his name, in the words of my Text* David served his own generation.

There is some difference in the reading of the words of my Text amongst
Interpreters. Some affixe these words [by the will of God] to the former
clause, and read them thus: David in his own generation having served the will
of God. Others leave them to the latter words, and read them thus. Vatablus.
Calvin. Lorinus. Erasmus.
David by the will of God, fell on sleep. I shall follow the latter reading in
the handling of them, as being most agreeable to the context; which appears
thus. This verse is part of Saint Paul's Sermon which he preached at Antioch, to
prove that Jesus Christ was the true Savior of the world. And having proved
Christ to be risen again, and to be alive, by that prophecy of David; Thou
shall not suffer thy holy One to see corruption, verse. 35. Lest any one should
take this to be understood in a full sense of David; he preventeth that by
saying, That David by the will of God died, and saw corruption; as the words
following in this verse declare. David may be said to have died, and to have
seen corruption, by the will and determinate counsel of God, for two reasons.
First, because this is the statute Law of God, for all men once to die, Heb. 9.
27. Secondly, because his death and corruption leaves this Prophecy an evident
proof of Christ's resurrection.

My purpose is not to speak of the latter words of the Text at all, but of
these only; David, after he had served: or, having served his own generation.

Two words here require some explication; we must inquire what is meant by
served; and what by generation.

First, what is meant by served: And to see this, we will borrow light from the
history of David's life. In the second of Sam. 23. David is called the sweet
singer of Israel; being the Penman of that precious Model of divine truth, the
Book of Psalms, 2 Samuel 6. He brought back the Ark of God unto his City; he
took care of the preservation, and observation of the Laws of God: thereby to
propagate the true Religion. 2 Samuel 8. We read that David subdued the common
enemies of Israel, and put Garrisons in their Cities, for the safety of the
Commonwealth; and executed judgment and justice to all the people. Thus David,
both as a King and as a Prophet, was a glorious instrument in his lifetime, of
advancing the good of Church and Commonwealth* This was David's service.

Secondly, What is meant by generation. By generation, is meant the men of his
generation; and two things are implied by it: First, the time of his service,
which was the time of his natural life; there are times of suffering for the
bad, and times of reigning for the good, hereafter: but no time of serving but
in this life. Secondly, here is the latitude of David's service; it was not
swallowed up in the gulf of self, nor confined within the narrow verge of his
own family: it was not private, but public service, extended to all, upon
whom by virtue of his calling he could have any influence; all that were of his
own generation.

In the words thus explained, the point of doctrine clearly observable in them
is this.

Such as are truly godly, according to their abilities and callings, Doct.
are serviceable for the public good of Church and Commonwealth in the times
they live in.

For the full and clear manifestation of which truth, I will observe this
order in the handling of it.

First, I will show that the godly have served. Secondly, why. And thirdly, how
we ought to serve our own generations.

First, men of gracious spirits in all Ages have been serviceable to their
generations; active for the public good according to their abilities and
places.

Righteous Noah spent many years, and bestowed much cost, in building an Arc
to preserve the Church; and such a stock of men and beasts as might recrute the
earth, which was wholly to be laid waste by an universal Deluge.

Godly Joseph having the disposal of Egypts plenty, provideth not only for
the famine of Egypt, but of Canaan also; he storeth up bread for his father
Jacob, and his family; and obtains a Gos^e^ for the people of God to inhabit
in.

King 2 Chronicles. 17. 8. 12, 13.
Iehosaphat as soon as he was invested with the Crown of Judah, abolished
Idolatry; sent Levites to teach the people the Law of God throughout all the
Cities of Judah, and sent his Princes with them to countenance their work: he
built storehouses, and fortified the Cities with strong works and men of war.

Good Josiah brake down the Altars of Baalim, stamped to powder the graven and
the molten Images, renewed the Covenant before the Lord; and kept the Passover
with that exactness, that the like had not been kept in Israel from the days
of Samuel 2 Chronicles. 34. 4. 32. 2 Chronicles. 35. 18
.

Saint Paul improved the rich treasury of gifts to the uttermost for the good
of others; who though he were free from all, not engaged to any; yet became all
things to all men, that he might gain the more, 1 Cor. 9. 19.

The like might be showed of Zerubbabel, Nehemiah, Daniel, and diverse others
recorded in Scripture. But in a case so evident let these suffice.

Secondly, the next thing to be inquired, is, the reason why godly men are so
sollicitous for the public good.

The first Reason hereof is, because Christ has charged this Reason 1.
duty on every member of that body whereof he is the head, 1 Cor. 12. 25. The
members should have the same care one of another, that the members of the
natural body have. The eye sees not, the foot walks not, the hand works
not for it self; but the whole body: so in the body spiritual, that member
that indevoureth not the benefit of the whole body, is no more a member of it,
then a wooden leg, or a brazen hand is of the body natural, Phil. 4. 2. 5.
Look not every man on his own things, but on the things of others. When we
once give up our names to Christ, we are no longer our own, nor that we have
ours: we are then listed for the public service, and receive our charge, Gal.
6. 10. Do good unto all men, as ye have opportunity.

Secondly, because this is the end why God bestows such talents Reason 2.
upon his people, wherewith they may be serviceable to the public. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. Honor
the Lord with thy riches, Pro. 3. 9. The good servant in the Gospel is known
by this, that having received ten talents, with the employment of these he
gained other ten. Whatsoever we receive from God, we take it but by a Letter of
administration, to employ it according to the mind of the Donor, for public
uses. If we have power, and the Commonwealth be not secured; if we have gifts,
and the Church of God be not edified; if we have riches, and the poor be not
relieved, the naked clothed, the distressed comforted; Christ Jesus will never
own us for his, Matthew. 25. 35.

The Heathens by the law of nature had thus much Divinity, as to know they
were bound to improve their parts and endowments for the common good: and
therefore it was a Law in Athens that every one when he came to the age of a
man, should take an oath whereof this was part, that he should do his uttermost
endeavor to leave the Commonwealth, whereof he was a Member, in a more
flourishing estate then he found it. The Egyptians had a Law that every one
should give up his name and trade to the Governors of the Commonwealth, that
they might be able to take an account of him what benefit he brought to the
Commonweal he lived in. [ Omnes autem cives cum ad aetatem adolescentiae
pervenissent, conceptis verbis iurabant. Pugnabo prosacris, prosanctitatibus,
sive solus, sive cum multis, e^itar ne patriam meam tradam posteris deteriorem,
sed multo magis florentem. -- Monstri atque prodigii simile sit aliquem in
repub. sine publico fructu versari. Aegyptiorum lex magnopere approbanda est,
qua singuli cogebantur nomina et arts suas apud moderatores reipublicae
profiteri, ut operis deinde sui rationem reddere cogerentur. Osorius Lusit.
deregis institutione. lib. 7.]

Thirdly, public service is most for the glory of God. If I Reason 3.
be a Father, says God, Mal. 1. 6. where is mine honor? The more we love God,
the more we honor him: now God is most honored by public actions. First,

Because public actions are most examplary. Ten thousand torches will not give
so much light as one star in the firmament; Those that are exalted stars in
the firmament of earthly power, if like that star in the East they lead to
Christ, thousands will be induced to follow by their example. As Soon as
Constantine the Emperor was converted, and became a Christian, all the Roman
Empire became Christians also. As Soon as the king of Nineveh repented, all the
city turned from their evil ways, Jonah 3. 10.

Secondly, because Public persons have opportunity to do most good: their
wisdom, justice, piety and zeal, make thousands happy. Magistrates and
Ministers are the great wheel of a Kingdom, and if they move in the Sphere of
true Religion, and the power of godliness, all the lesser wheels must out
wardly at least conform to their motion. A good father may make a good family,
a good minister may make a congregation good, but a good Magistracy, and a good
ministry may make a whole Kingdom good.

Thus I have showed you why the godly serve their generation: now I come to
show how this service must be performed. And this I shall give you in two
particulars.

First, how the persons must be qualified, and secondly, in what manner they
ought to act.

First, how the persons must be qualified.

Those things that are requisite in good servants to their masters, are
requisite in such as rightly serve the public.

First, good servants are obedient to their masters just 1 Qualification, Piety.
commands, and none are fit servants for the public, but such as are obedient
to Gods commands, such as have a true interest in God through the Covenant of
Grace in Jesus Christ; All godly men are serviceable, and none but godly men
can be truly serviceable to their generation.

Without true Grace, we can neither act thoroughly, comfortably, nor succesfully
for God. First,

Not thoroughly. Many acts of this service are higher then we can be carried,
either by the hopes or helps of Carnal reason. Sometimes it will be necessary
to employ all, adventure all, expend all we have, and upon this very condition
Christ gives admission into Gospel Service, Luke 14. 33. but this, a wicked man
will never come up unto for God. The world is his. All which by his own
Principles he cannot leave, but be undone. And therefore as the king of Navarre
said to Beza, That he would lanch no further into the Sea of Religion then he
might be sure to return safe into the haven: so these will accompany a good
Cause as far as they can carry their worldly profits and contentments with
them. But Grace that does elevate the heart above all the fears and flatteries
of the World, that might any way stop us in that service God calls us to. Hence
Saint Paul, Phil. 4. 13. I can abound, and I can suffer want, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me. Gods people fear not to make
Beneficence their Patrimony, because they have the best Assuring house in the
World for their adventures, the promises of God. Their hopes of heaven make
them willing to sacrifice all they have on earth in Christ's cause. Heb. 10. 34.
They took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing in themselves, they
have in heaven a better and more enduring substance.

Secondly, wicked men they cannot act comfortably, that is, acceptably. The
prayers, much more the cares of unregenerate men are an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 28. 9. God may use unregenerate men to do good offices to his
Church, yet this will bring no true comfort to themselves, because they seek
not Gods glory in what they do.

God made use of Cyrus to deliver his people out of captivity, and to repair
the decayed estate of the Church and Commonwealth of the Jews,* Ezra 1. Of
Balaam to bless his people. Of Nebuchadnezzar to command all Nations *
Countries and Languages, to worship the God of Daniel. Of Hiram to prepare
timber for the building of his Temple. Of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor to
enjoyne the Senate of Rome to make an Edict that they should be burnt quick
(...). Justin Martyr. Apol: 2. pr^ Christianis.
, that accused a Christian because of his Religion. But all these were but like
Noah's carpenters, that built an Arc to save others, while they were destroyed
with the flood.

Thirdly, wicked men cannot do public service so succesfully as the
faithful: they have no right to Gods promises, which are only made to those
that are in Christ, to those that are sanctified and in covenant with God. They
cannot call in Gods wisdom to direct them, nor Gods goodness to assist them,
nor Gods power to strengthen them in great undertakings, as the children of God
may do. A petition preferred to a Prince would not speed, when of necessity the
petitioner must subscribe himself a Traitor to his Majesty.

The country of Tire and Sidon, having need of Herod's favor made suit to
Blastus his chamberlain, that was gracious with him. And Themistocles being to
make a great request to Philip king of Macedon, took with him young Alexander
Philips beloved son. We can only then speed with God, when we can by faith
take Jesus Christ with us to be our intercessour.

And hence it is, that one Moses can do more with God, then a thousand
Pharaohs, one Eliah more then a thousand false prophets, one Abraham more then
a thousand Sodomites. They that would do much with God, must be men of much
faith and holiness in the sight of God.

Secondly, good servants are such as know their masters 2 Qualification,
Knowledge of affairs.
business, that so they may leave nothing undone, which their duty calls for. So
good public servants must be such as acquaint themselves with the true state
of those affairs they are trusted with, that so they may be always ready to
perform those offices that public necessity will impose upon them.

Nehemiah enquires exactly of the state of the Church and Commonwealth of
Judah, by Hanani and others that came from thence. Nehemiah 1. 2. And Joseph
examined his brethren very strictly concerning the affairs of his father
Jacob, and his family, when they were sent to Egypt, Genesis 45.

There is no such way to get on the bowels of compassion and to oil the hinges
of all our abilities, and to make us act to purpose for the Public, as to be
well verst in the calamities of the times, and to read often over the book of
Sions lamentations. We must know the wounds of Church and State, and be able
to search them, before we have either skill or will to heal them.

Thirdly, good servants love their Masters. And that we 3 Qualification, Love.
may rightly serve the Public, we must get a tender affection to the good of
Church and Commonwealth in which we live. There may be many tall Cedars in
Church or State, yet if they do not bear this fruit of the Spirit, Love, they
more shadow then shield the plants that grow under them, and do but cumber the
ground they stand on. There is nothing will be at so much pains and cost, and
therefore nothing makes a man so serviceable as Love, 1. Cor. 13. 4. Love
endures all things, is bountiful, seeks not her own, nothing will adventure
like Love, Cant. 6. 8. Love is stronger then death. The Ancients were wont to
paint Love with many Crowns upon the head, because this rules all our
affections, and commands all we have. The good Centurion in the Gospel, builded
the Jews a Synago gue, a pious and a costly work: the reason is given in
those words before, He loved our Nation, Luke 7. 5. David did many excellent
and glorious services to the Church of God, and the reason was his Love, Psalm.
16. 2. All his delight was in the Saints that were on the earth. A greater work
then the Creation of the world, was man's Redemption, and the cause of this was
Love, John 3. 16.

Love is that which will never be bribed to desert the Ne immortalitatem quidem
contra rempub. acceperim.
Public, as Tully though but a Heathen could say, I would not accept of
immortality for a reward, to bring any detriment to the Commonwealth,
Public service many times meets with the most grating ingratitude of any
other, as a Heathen told his son, that much desired to have a public
employment, he took him and showed him the antiquated plancks of a
weather-beaten ship, and said, Thou must look to be contemned like one of
these. If therefore you think to bear up your spirits in public service, you
must get much love to the public good.

Fourthly, good servants are courageous to preserve and 4 Qualification,
Courage.
defend what their Masters commit unto their charge. When David kept his
fathers sheep, he fought with a Lion and a Bear, 1 Samuel 17. 34. And so
public servants must be men of courageous spirits.

Courage is a grace of God whereby we are enabled to perform such actions as
are full of difficulty and danger, and such for the most part are actions of
public concernment. The Prophet Zachary compares them to the levelling and
making plain of mountains, Zach. 4. 7. in the 91. Psalm. v. 13. they are
compared to the treading on the Lion and the Adder. And therefore when God set
Iehoshaphat about the Reformation of the Church of Judah, it is said that his
heart was lifted up or encouraged in the ways of God, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. his
heart was raised above the fear of any opposition.

When Joshua was called to fight the battles of the Lord, God gave him this
Commandment over and over, 1. Josh. 6. Be strong and of a good courage, and
verse 7. Only be strong, and very courageous. That spirit only is fitted for
public service, that dares encounter with any difficulties or dangers in the
world.

Musculus approved himself to be of a courageous spirit, upon an accident that
put him to the trial. Abrah. Musc. in narrat. de vita patris.
A Nobleman one Reinard that much loved him, knowing that he was gone abroad
to preach in a village, disguised himself, and taking many of his horsemen
with him, came rushing in at the Church door, and in a threatening manner bad
him come out of the pulpit. Musculus desired he might have leave to finish his
Sermon, and then he would go whither they would carry him; he then went on
without any sign of fear, exhorting the people to constancy in the Faith;
when the Sermon was ended, the Nobleman embraced him, and admired his courage,
which indeed was fit for his employment. Eusebius Samosetanus was of the like
spirit, who, when Constantius threatened to cut off his right hand, because he
would not subscribe to an unlawful thing as he desired, he held up both his
hands to the messenger that was sent to him, and told him he should take them
both rather then he would do it g Hist. Mag. cent. 4. c. 10.
.

Fifthly, good servants are wise in ordering their masters 5. Qualificatio^.
Wisdom.
affairs to the best advantage; so public servants must be men of wisdom.
When Moses was to direct the children of Israel in the choice of Governors, he
says, Deuteronomie 1. 13. Choose ye wise men and known among your tribes. And
when our Savior sent out his Apostles, he bade them Be wise as Serpents,
Matthew. 10. 16. This is required in all Magistrates. Psalm. 2. 10. Be wise O ye
kings, be instructed ye that are Judges of the earth.

This wisdom is, First, to discern betwixt good and evil. It is a woeful
thing in any, to call evil good, or good evil, Isai. 5. 20. When this is but
the peoples sin, you may see the fruit of it, Ier. 4. 20. Destruction upon
destruction, the whole land is spoiled; and why? ver. 22. My people is foolish,
they have not known me, they have no understanding; they are wise to do
evil, but to do good they have no knowledge. Now if ignorance of good and
evil be so dangerous in any, much more in Rulers; and hence it is, that
Solomon says, Woe to thee, O land, Eccles. 10. 16. when thy King is a child,
and Proverbs 28. 16. The Prince that wants understanding is also a great
oppressor. Rulers have the power of rewards and punishments, which are the
greatest outward means to draw a people either to misery or happiness. These
have power to enact laws, to be other men's rules, and if these set up
iniquity by a law, how will this hasten the destruction of such as shall obey?
the laws, by which Christ must be crucified, and Barabbas released,
prognosticate a desolation, and therefore God was exceedingly pleased with
Solomon's choice, and Solomon happy in making that choice, when being called
unto the Kingdom of Israel, and being bidden to ask what he would, he said,
Give thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may
discern betwixt good and bad, 1 Kings 3. 9.

Secondly, the wisdom requisite in public persons, is to act seasonably,
Matthew. 24. 45. He is a faithful and wise servant that gives the household
meat in due season. Opportunity is the wind and tide to carry on all
affairs, and makes that feazable, which at other times is not possible to man.
When Daniel understood by Books, Dan. 9. 2. That the seventy years of
Jerusalems desolation were accomplished, he presently set his face unto the
Lord God to seek deliverance by prayer and supplications, with fasting and
sackcloth and ashes. A wise heart, as Solomon says, Ecclesiastes 8. 5.
discerns both time and judgment.

Thirdly, this wisdom is, to act orderly, that is, to file businesses for
dispatch, according to their weight, necessity, or consequence: to prefer the
public before the private, to build Gods house before we build our own, to
secure the roots of happiness, (Religion and Laws) before the branches, as
peace, and wealth, and case, and plenty, and the like; If the public ship of
common safety perish, no man can ever save his own cabin. Thus you have the
qualifications of the persons. Now of the manner of their acting. This in two
things. First,

We must serve the public sincerely, that is, herein seeking primarily the
glory of God, and the advancement of the public, more then our private
benefit, which may be involved in the public interest. This is Gods rule, 1
Cor. 10. 31. Do all to the glory of God. No actions please God, wherein our
chief aims are not at his glory, and he that acts not thus, acts not as a
Christian.

Actions may be Morally good, such as the virtuous actions of the Heathen were,
good for the matter of them, as the acts of Fortitude, Magnanimity, Compassion,
or actions about Religion, as meditation, reading, hearing of the word, and
prayer; but none are Theologically good, warranted by Gods word, or pleasing to
God, but such as proceed out of love to God, and intend especially his glory.
Such actions only are the true fruits of Gospel grace, and Christian
obedience, according to that rule of our Savior, John 7. 18. He is true that
seeks the glory of him that sent him.

Though our public actions be never so specious and beautiful, yet God
looks at them as painted flowers that have no sweetness, and empty shadows, if
this be not their end, if we do but make the public a stalking horse to our
own advancement, and use it but as the Creeples did the poole of Bethesda to
cure their own sores, we are but like Israel, Hosea 10. 1. Israel is an empty
vine, and brings forth fruit unto himself.

Secondly, we must serve the Public thoroughly, faithfully, or zealously, that
is, with all our abilities, according to our places and callings; As David set
himself with all his might to build the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29. 2. God requires
that our All should be sacrificed for the managing of his Cause, and promoting
of his Glory, Mat. 10. 37. If Christ call for our time, our strength, our
estates, our parts, our labors, our graces, our prayers, our lives, for the
maintaining of his Gospel, Cause, and Honor, we ought to yield them.

Two Arguments there be that make this plea of God for our All to be employed
in his service, unanswerable.

First, Dominus dedit, The Lord has given us all we have, What have thou that
thou have not received at his hand? and then it is all the reason in the world,
that God should be served of his own.

Secondly, Dominus auferet, the Lord will take away his blessings, if he cannot
be served with them. This Argument is used by God himself, Hosea 2. 9. Ye have
bestowed them upon your lovers, Therefore I will take away my Corn, and my
Wine, my Oil and my Flax which I have given you. If any blessings thou have
are thought too good to be employed in the Public service, for the honor of
God, certainly they are too good to be enjoyed by thee, to be spent upon thy
lusts. It is a soul-destroying sin, to be all for wealth, or all for honor,
or all for pride; but to be all for God, that is our duty to improve our All,
for the public good of Church and Commonwealth, according to Gods command.
This is the service we ought to do unto our own generation.

Thus I have cleared the point of doctrine, and showed you both that, and why,
and how we ought to serve our own generation. I come now to make Application
hereof unto our selves. And first,

We may from hence take an estimate of our Spiritual 1. Use. Of trial.
condition what it is. Godly men are serviceable, sincerely, thoroughly,
faithfully, zealously serviceable to their generation: we may then judge by
this whether we be godly men or no. This is a question fit to be discussed at
all times, betwixt God and our souls, but especially in these times, when
almost every man's godliness, (what ever his profession or actions be) is put to
the question by others, and that upon this very point, whether he be truly
faithful, truly serviceable to the public good or no.

Three sorts of persons may here be discovered to be ungodly men.

First, such as are enemies to the public good, such as by secret plots, or
open violence, subvert the happiness of that Church and Commonwealth in which
they live. Valerius said of Varus, that he came poor into the rich Province of
Syria; but at his going out, he went away rich, and left the Country poor.
Such as this Varus, they are the Mothes and Cankers of the public prosperity,
and their reward shall be answerable. Their feet shall rot, their eyes shall
consume in their holes, and their tongues shall consume in their mouths, Zach.
14. 12.

Secondly, such are ungodly men, as be no friends to the public. Some there
be that are like the Star Mercury, of which Astronomers say, that it is either
well-affected or malignant as it stands in Conjunction with other stars. Some
on purpose will not know or own Christ's cause, like rich men that will not know
their poor kindred for this reason, because they shall cost them nothing.

Neutrality in reference to the cause of Christ, is certain enmity to Christ
himself. The Logic of the Scripture makes but two divisions of all the men in
the World, Mat. 12. 30. our Savior tells us he that is not with me, is against
me.

There be some that so mind earthly things, that what condition soever the
Church and people of God are in, like Gallio they care for none of these
things; some are so intent upon their private profit, as they will take no time
to consider of the public weal; and as these take no care of Gods cause, so
God does usually leave them without his protection; and it fares with them, as
it did with Archimedes in Syracusa. Syracusa was besieged by the enemy, but
Archimedes being a Mathematician, continued making of figures, and drawing of
lines, and would contribute nothing to the public defense, and when the enemy
brake in, a soldier knocked him in the head as he was making figures in the
dust.

Thirdly, such are ungodly men as are friends, but not through, nor sincere
friends unto the public, such are wishers and woulders, that would bless the
public exceedingly, if it would be done with good words, they would serve God
willingly, if he would be content with such service as costs them nothing. But
when the cause of God, or the Commonwealth calls for payments, adventures,
such as hazard the emptying of their private fullness, then they murmr, and
repine, and wish for their old Religion, like those, Jere. 44. 17. then they
would gladly make a Captain and go back again into Egypt. These are no godly
men.

And further, It is possible that men may bestow both pay and pains, and be
great agents in promoting the affairs of Church and Commonwealth, and yet for
want of right aims in their undertakings, if they be weighed in the balance
of the Sanctuary, may want some grains of the weight a godly man must have. It
is possible to be very diligent in a public office, as Jacob was in keeping
Labans sheep, the drought Genesis 31. 40.
consumed him by day, and the frost by night, and yet this was not for Labans
sake, there were certain ringstraked among the flocks, and there was a
beautiful Rachel, that were his chief Loadstones in that hard servitude. There
will be no comfort to our souls, or clear evidence of the truth of Grace drawn
from the height or weight of public services, if undertaken chiefly for
private ends. Public services done with a public spirit, wherein we serve
not our selves so much as God, nor seek our own so much as the public good,
is only that which will make up the Character of a godly man.

But we are still in the dark, what it is todo public service with a public
spirit: and now when we are necessitated to so many public employments, it
would be a good refreshing to our hearts, if we could read in this service the
stamp of true grace set upon our souls.

I beseech you therefore, attend to these few signs which I shall give you for
the trial of our sincerity, whether we aim chiefly at Gods glory, or no, in
our public undertakings.

This I will premise as a foundation, That there is no outward service
whatsoever, be it never so Great, Specious or Honorable, that of it self can
be an infallible Argument of a sincere and public spirit, 1 Cor. 13. we may
give all our goods to the poor, and our bodies to be burnt, and yet want true
love to God. This may be done for private ends, and such are below the glory of
God. It is a very hard matter to do any greater outward public service then
some of the Heathen have done [ Eumolpus bellum Athenis intulisset: et fuit
Oraculo editum, Athenas victrices fore, si quisquam se neci pro salute patriae
devoveret. Aglauros sese ut patriam periculo liberaret, ex muro praecipitavit.
Osorius de institut. Regis. et discip. lib. 7.] When Eumolpus made war with
the Athenians, the Oracle delivered this to the people, That if any would offer
himself to death for the safety of his Country, the Athenians should get the
victory: hereupon Aglauros cast himself headlong from the top of a high wall,
that he might deliver his Country. There must be a right inward Signs of a
public spirit.
frame of the soul, as well as outward service, to demonstrate a public
spirit, which to discern, you may consider these Symptoms.

This is a sign of a right frame of heart, or a public spirit, Sign 1.
when we so dispose of our selves in our employments, that we may be in a
better capacity to carry on Gods designs, then our own, and to advance the
Public more then our own interests, when we having a subsistence, do
willingly embrace a call to an employment, wherein we do more good to others,
though with less profit to our selves; rather then a place wherein we can do
less good to others, though with more profit to our selves. Public spirits
delight in their work more then their wages, but self-ended men love their
wages better then their work. You may see the copy of a private spirit in
Ephraim, Hosea 10. 11. where it is said, Ephraim is as a heifer that is taught,
and loves to tread out the Corn. Heifers among the Jews were used in two
services, one was to plow, and the other was to tread out the Corn, now
plowing was a hard labor, and the beast that did this, had but ordinary
keeping, but they that trod out the Corn had plentiful feeding with their
labor, for it was a Law, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that
treads out the Corn. Ephraim therefore that drove his own designs, and not
Gods, is compared to this heifer, that loved that work best that had the best
wages.

Public spirits are ambitious of doing great things, but not of having great
things for themselves, especially at such times as the Commonwealth is at a
low ebb, and many godly are pinched with great wants. God speaks by way of
reproof to Baruch, for desiring much in times of common calamity, Jer. 45. 5. I
am now, says God, pulling down what I have builded, and plucking up what I
have planted; Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not.

Solomon left us a good President of a public spirit 1 Kin. 3. 9. who when he
might have asked what he would, 1 Kings 3. 9.
asked wise and understanding heart, to discern betwixt good and bad, and to
judge the people. His main care was to be able to do his duty aright in his
place, he did not desire riches, or honors, or Prerogative: men of public
spirits when they are called to employments, make matter of duty their main
care, they are more sollicitous how to please God in doing the duty of their
calling, then to please themselves with the honors or profits of their places.
While private spirits wrestle with men, and strive who shall have the most
honor, and greatest command, gracious spirits wrestle with God by prayer for
ability to execute Gods command, and discharge their duties in the places they
are in.

Secondly, it is a sign of a sincere and public spirit, when Sign 2.
God in any undertaking makes us succesfull, if then, we give all the glory of
our successes unto God. Thus did Samuel, 1 Samuel 7. 12. when the Philistines
came out to battle against Israel, and the Israelites were afraid, Samuel
offered Sacrifice and prayed for them, and God discomfited the Philistines by
thunder, Samuel set up a stone in that place, and called it Eben-Ezer, saying,
Hitherto the Lord has helped. Thus the glory of the victory was all given to
God. When Paul and Barnabas came to Lystra, Paul healed one that had been a
creeple from the womb, and when the people saw it, they began to cry up Paul
and Barnabas for gods, and would have done sacrifice unto them, but when they
perceived that by the peoples admiration of them, the glory due to God, (whose
power had wrought that miracle) began to be attributed to them, they rent their
clothes out of indignation, and cried, We are men of like passions with your
selves. Acts 14. 14, 15.

God will not, and the godly will not, give the glory of his workings to any
other but himself. As showers upon a dunghill make it grow full of weeds, so
great mercies great deliverances, great victories make evil men ambitious,
proud, and insolent. But as the rain upon a fruitful field makes it abound
with plenty of Corn; so great mercies to the righteous make them more abound
in the praises and love of God.

Thirdly, it is a sign of a public spirit, when we are Sign 3.
deeply affected with, and vigorously active for the redress of others
miseries, in which we have little, or no share our selves. When Isaiah by the
spirit of Prophecy did foresee the calamities that the Persians would bring
upon Judah, he lamented exceedingly, saying, Look away from me, I will weep
bitterly, labor not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of
my people, Isaiah 22. 4. When Daniel foresaw the miseries that Antiochus would
bring upon the Jews, he sainted, and was sick certain days, Daniel 8. 27.
Nehemiah, though in great prosperity himself, having a place of honor in the
court of Artaxerxes, then the greatest Monarch in the earth: yet when he heard
of the desolations of his brethren, in the land of Judah, sat down and wept,
and fasted, and prayed certain days unto God for their deliverance. This may
speak much comfort unto those that mourned twenty years ago, for the removal
of Germanies calamities, but they that never brought water to quench the flames
of Christendom till the fire broke out in their own houses, may question
whether the common cause, or their own private interest is the great wheel of
their motion. Terentius that was Captain of the Guard to Adrian the Emperor,
gave a remarkable testimony of a public spirit, who putting up a petition to
the Emperor, that the Orthodox Christians might have a Temple by themselves,
to worship God in apart from the Arrians, the Emperor tore his petition and
threw it down, and bade him ask something for himself, and it should be granted:
but he modestly gathered up the pieces of his petition again, and told him, If
he could not be heard in Gods cause, he would never make any request for
himself.

Fourthly, this is a sign of a public spirit, when in all our Sign 4.
our undertakings we act by the rule of Gods word, and that only, equally, and
fully. First,

Only, when we labor the advancement of the Church or Commonwealth only in
ways approved by God; Peace to as many as walk according to this rule, Gal.
6. 16. Thou shall not do evil that good may come thereof, is a Rule that
holds in all actions whatsoever; aiming at a right end, and using of lawful
means, are never to be separated in any undertaking. Gods glory can never be
intended sincerely in that action, which is carried on by sinful means,
though it seem never so much to hold out the advancement or benefit of the
Church or Commonwealth. First, because God is more dishonored by the
commission of one sin, then the greatest sufferings of the creature. Secondly,
because the use of sinful means to effect Gods work, is plainly to deny Gods
attributes, his infinite power, wisdom, goodness, and faithfulness, as if he
were not able in his own way to bring his own ends to pass. It was a good
work which Asa did when he endeavored the defense of his kingdom against the
enemies thereof, yet because he called in unlawful help, God tells him he had
done foolishy, intimated that his heart was not perfect, and said that from
thenceforth he should have wars, 2 Chro. 16. 9. Jeroboam made a more easy
and a more cheap religion then God appointed to establish his new erected
kingdom; but it was because he sought his own honor and not Gods, 1 Kings 12.
28. to 31.

Secondly, as public spirits act only; so likewise, equally, universally by
Gods rule. They make conscience of doing one thing as well as another, even
every thing, within the compass of their calling and abilities, that tends
to the advancement of the Public. Artaxerxes was convinced that Gods work
must be thoroughly done, when he gave that command to his Treasurers, Ezra 7.
23. whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be diligently done for
the house of the God of heaven; for why should there be wrath against the
Realm of the King and his sons? Sincere reformers of the Church will not leave
the work until every thing in religion is refined and established according to
the pattern. Every duty God commands has the stamp of his glory upon it, and
he that does one duty for Gods glory sake, will do all that God calls him to. If
one part of the body sweat, and the rest be cold, it is a Symptom of
unsoundnes, as Physicians say: To be zealous in one particular of Gods ways
and worship, and not in all, is a certain sign of an unsound heart. The
Prophet Jeremy says of the Israelites, Ier. 32. 23. They had done nothing of
all that God commanded them to do. Now it is evident they did hear Gods word,
kept their Fasts, offered Sacrifices, and many other things; but God valueth
these as nothing, because they did not all things he commanded, their
partiality did manifest those things which they did, to be done with
hypocritical spirits. Iehu his heart was not right, and this is given as the
reason of it; He was very zealous to destroy the posterity of Ahab, and the
worship of Baal, yet he kept up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, 2 Kings 10. 29.
Saul his heart was not right, because his execution of justice wanted its due
Latitude, when he spared Agag, and the chief of the spoil.

It is a sign of uprightnes in matters of justice, when the direction of the
Prophet Amos is perfectly observed, Amos 5. 24. Let judgment run down like
waters, and justice as a mighty stream. First, let judgment be like water,
which is pure and cleansing: laws must be good, such as may cleanse away all
the oppressions of a land. Secondly, justice, the execution of these laws must
be like a mighty stream, which admits of no stop in the course of it, it must
extend to all, and neither fear nor favor, nor cousin, nor brother, nor bribe
make any diversion of it.

Thirdly, public spirits act by Gods rule, fully, that is, they come up to
the rule, in the height of their courage and self-denial for God. They
undertake and go through with that they are called to, notwithstanding any
hazards or dangers in the way. When S. Paul was called to be the Apostle of the
Gentiles to preach Christ unto them, he objected not the persecutions he might
expect, but presently went about his work, without any carnal reasonings
against it, saying, I conferred not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. 16. This is
the Character the holy Ghost sets upon Caleb, Numb. 14. 24. And he followed God
fully; he was a man of another spirit, that is, a right public spirit, that
obeyed every command of God, and carried on his cause with any peril to
himself; the strong walls, and the great Anakims in the land of Canaan could
not deter him from making war against them, when God called his people to this
service. Those that come up to Gods rule must be willing to sacrifice their
dearest worldly comforts for Gods honor. A public spirit will teach us to
set light by our ease, our wealth, our honor, our friends, our life, to
manifest our love to God in great undertakings for his glory. When there was no
other way of deliverance visible for Gods people, but for Hester to lay her
life at the stake; yet she forthwith resolves to make an adventure, saying
only; If I perish, I perish, Hest. 4. 16. Vriah would not own his family
comforts, or take his ease at home, while Ioab and the Ark of God was in the
field, where he might do better service, though it was with the peril of his
life. By these examples we may see what it is to come up to Gods rule fully in
public service.

I have now in some measure withdrawn the curtains, and removed the veil
from our deceitful hearts, I now desire that you all, especially such as have
the highest employments for the Public, may now take a serious view of your
Proinde hoc consilium -- -- quidnam illud sit quod Christianum facit? Luther
Ep. ad Christian. Argentin.
own hearts, and truly consider what spirits you are of. Let me entreat you for
your own comfort, to apply these few rules to your own lives, and try your
public actions by this touchstone of sincerity, and then ask your
consciences that question, which Luther commended to the Christians of
Argentina, to be the first and last question in their Disputations, which was
this: Whether have I that by which I may know that I am a Christian, or no?

A second use we may make of this point, is of exhortation, and first in
general to all. If it be every godly man's duty to serve his generation, then
let me exhort you every one to be forward and zealous in this work at this
time, when the Commonwealth is in so sad, so bleeding a condition, by reason
of a Kingdom-sincking civil war, and the Church so out of order by those
wide divisions and distractions that are among us.

Chrysostom to move compassion, and to quicken up our dead hearts to works of
mercy, advises this as a good way, Namely, to go to the Lazar-houses or
Hospitalls, where some are lame, some blind, some maimed, some wounded, these
sad spectacles of humane misery, if any thing, will put our hearts into a
melting frame. The most places of this Kingdom, are now such Hospitalls, where
we may see war and desolation, poverty and palenes, and garments rolled in
blood, where we may hear the woeful groans of dying men, and the bitter
lamentations of children for their parents, and parents for their children,
because they are not. And who then would not be a Samaritan to help on the
cure of such a wounded Kingdom, that has any bowels in the world?

But perhaps some will say, What should we do? we are in no such places of
authority as have a calling to make up public breaches. I answer, there is
no member in Church or Commonwealth so mean, but has some talent to serve his
generation withal. Some have wealth, some wisdom, some authority; but all
have parts, or grace, or strength, or time, or prayers to serve the public
with. If thou be of the meanest form of Christians, and have small worldy
endowments, yet there be two ways to make thy services very useful to the
Public, and comfortable to thy self.

First, the less power thou have with men, labor to have the more power with
God, and then make use of that, David did more with his sling, then Goliath
could do with his spear, because he went against his enemy in the Name of the
Lord: Israel were as much beholden, for their safety, to Aaron and Hur that
held up Moses hands, as the men of war that fought their battles.

Secondly, thou may make thy Little, Much, with much Love, which will be
much Comfort to thy Soul; God accepts not only the will and the deed, but the
will for the deed, and they that have much will to do, though little doers, are
of great account with God. The rich men in the gospel, of their abundance, no
doubt, cast in abundance into the treasury of God, and yet our Savior says of
the poor Widow that cast in but two mites, she cast in more then all.
Vincentius Ferrer reports a story of one Sophia a gracious woman in
Constantinople, who, when there was a Church in building there, a cart laden
with stones, and drawn with oxen, for the building of it, came by this woman's
house, the cattle by reason of the heat of the weather began to faint, and
stayed at this woman's door, which she perceiving, went and fetched some hay to
refresh the oxen, which she did with so much affection to the work in hand,
that after the Church was built there was found written over one of the doors
in golden letters, Sophia built this Church. The truth of this sto- Sophia me
fecit.
I leave to the author, but this is unquestionably true, Though we cannot do
much service to Sion, yet much love to Sion will do much good unto our selves,
Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love
thee. It is further observable out of these words of David, that he puts prayer
for the Church, and love of the Church both together, and not without cause.
The best argument to prove we bear much love to the Church of God, is to be
much in prayer for it. Of all the means we have to serve the Public with,
there is none so effectual as this of prayer: Luthers own experience made him
think there was a kind of Omnipotency in it. Ask, and it shall be given you,
Matthew. 7. This promise receives no other limitation but this, what, and when it
shall be good for you to receive. Prayer charms the wrath of God, opens and
shuts his hands, extorts mercies, removes judgments, and never will away
without its errand.

As David said of Goliahs sword, when Ahimelech told 1 Samuel 22. 9.
him there was none but that, Give me that, there is none like unto it: So say
I of prayer, whosoever is to deal with an enemy, can find no such conquering
weapon as prayer is. Alexander the bishop of Constantinople had many disputes
with Arrius the heretic, but never could silence him; at length he spent an
whole night in prayer to God, beseeching* him to vindicate his own truth: the
next day after as Arrius was coming to the conference, a pain took him by the
way, and going aside to ease himself, he voided his bowels together with his
excrements, and so died. Marcus Aurelius, having had experience of the power of
the Christians prayers that were in his army, wrote to the Senate of Rome, to
permit the Christians to have their liberty, and gave this reason for it, He
would have no such weapons a^ the Christians prayers to Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
pro Christianis.
be used against him. (...).

Before I pass from this duty, and precious privilege of prayer, I desire to
engage both my self and you, to the more frequent and zealous exercise of it,
by showing some of the excellencies of prayer that may remain as indeleble
Characters upon our hearts of the benefit thereof.

First, we can undertake nothing either of public or private concernment with
comfort without prayer. The blessing of all our actions depends on this, and we
are commanded to endeavor the supply of all our wants by prayer. Gal. 4. 9. In
every thing, by prayer and supplication with thankesgiving, let your requests
be made known unto God.

Secondly, there is no blessing that is good for us to enjoy, but in Gods time
prayer will obtain it, 1 John 5. 14. If we ask any thing according to his
will he hears us: this is that golden Key that can open the locks of all the
treasuries of Gods mercies; and remove all the impediments in heaven and in
earth, that stand in the way of our happiness. That which prayer cannot bring
to pass, no other means in the world will ever be able to effect. As Sampsons
conquering strength lay in his hair; so the most prevailing strength of a
Christian lies in his prayers. The greatest blessings and deliverances we have
hitherto had, have been the births of prayer. How many dangerous Plots against
us have been discovered and prevented? how many victories gotten? how many
impediments removed, and great works done toward the happy settling of this
Church and State, to many of which, we have contributed little or nothing but
our prayers?

Thirdly, Church-worke, the perfecting of the work of Reformation, is
especially the work of prayer: when Daniel understood that Gods time was come
for the reparation of his Church, he sets most earnestly upon this work of
prayer, Dan. 9. 17. saying, Now therefore, O Lord, hear the prayer and
supplication of thy servant, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary
that is desolate, for the Lords sake. God will do his Churches work, and make
her glorious; but not without his peoples prayers. The heathen round about
shall know that I build the ruined places, and plant that was desolate, I the
Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. I will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of Israel to do it for them. When God speaks of the glorious times
the Church should enjoy, he then promises to hear the prayers of his afflicted
Saints, Psalm. 102. 16, 17. When the Lord shall build up Sion, he shall appear
in his glory; he will regard the prayer of the destitute, he will not despise
their prayer.

Fourthly, there is no prayer made to God but brings a blessing; either that we
ask, or else that which is better for us.

If we cannot pray the Kingdom into peace, and the Church into a perfect
reformation in our days, yet we shall pray our souls into heaven.

Now what I have here spoken of prayer, must be understood of holy Jam. 5. 16.
, humble 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
, faithful Jam. 1. 6.
, fervent Jam. 5. 16.
, constant waiting prayer Isa. 62. 6, 7. and 32. 18.
; made in the Name and mediation of Jesus Christ Joh. 14. 14.
, ^^to God.

I now come to the duty of the day. What I am now teaching, and you hearing, we
are all now professing, that all other endeavors for the public good, are of
little consequence, without earnest prayer to God for his blessing upon them.

We are all this day called to pray for the kingdom, and to wing our prayers
with faith, fasting, mourning for our sins, and reformation of our lives.

O that God would be pleased, of his free grace to help us rightly and
spiritually to perform this days duties, and then all other services for the
good of Church and Commonwealth would be more successful.

We must remember we are to pray for a kingdom, the cries of whose sins are
exceeding loud, and will be too hard for cold and formal, but especially for
sinful prayers. Oh that we could present God with the sacrifice of prayer,
from hearts truly broken, and in deep sense and abhorrence of all our former
sins! we can do no such service for the Kingdom as this would be.

Surely our prayers would have been more prevailing, if God could have said to
none of us as to those, Isa. 29. 13. You draw near unto me with your mouths,
but your hearts are far from me. When ye fast, ye fast for debate, Isa. 38.
4. With your mouth you show much love, but your hearts run after your
covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31.

Consider, Prayer and Fasting are the Kingdoms plasters, but woe be to us, if
through formalitie, or want of reformation of our lives, we turn those
plasters into poison, and make the sores of the Kingdom the more to gangrene.

Beloved, I beseech you trifle not with God this day; take not his Name in
vain; get your hearts broken your spirits afflicted for your own and Englands
sins; let no burden in the world be so heavy to you as sin. Accept of the
punishment of your iniquities, and covenant strictly to obey God in all his
ways, for the time to come: we are sure our sins among others, have multiplied
the Kingdoms sores; how then should we strive with God, that our sighs, our
tears, our prayers may be the Kingdoms cures?

You have long had two beautiful children at the birth; Peace, and
Reformation; but there was never yet strength to bring forth, because the right
midwives have not been used; unfeigned faith, and true repentance.

Thus much in general. I now come, honored Senators, to a particular
exhortation unto you: Godly men have ever been serviceable to their
generations.

Be you then exhorted, worthy Patriots, courageously, wisely, sincerely, and
thoroughly to serve your own generation. You have better opportunities then
ever any Parliament of England had before you, to be effectual means of the
happiness both of Church and Commonwealth. Remember you must give a strict
account unto the King of Kings, of that price that is put into your hands.

Labor to do public service with public spirits; let no false Bias upon
your hearts, rob you either of the comfort, or success of your great
adventures, of your long and unparalleld labors in the public cause.

It is the greatest honor, and happiest privilege in the world, to be
employed for God and the good of others. Public service done with an upright
heart for Gods glory, is the best seed that can be sown, and will return the
most plentiful Harvest of temporal and eternal happiness. If this be your
wisdom sincerely to improve all your talents for the glory of God and the
Public good; Solomon tells you length of days are in her right hand, and in
her left hand riches and honor, Pro. 3. 16. God tells the Jews, when they had
laid but the foundation of the Lords Temple, From this very day I will bless
you. Thou shall build me a House, says God to Solomon, 2 Samuel 7. 15. And I
will establish the Throne of thy Kingdom for ever. Riches and Honor, both are
the reward of Public service. Jehoiadah was honored because he had done good
in Israel, 2 Chro. 4. 16. This leaves the sweetest perfume in the world upon
our names unto posterity. What honor will be like this, when it shall be read
out of the Records of this Parliament; Such a man was a David, a Josiah, a
Nehemiah, a Zerubbabel unto his generation in the time he lived in?

You see what happiness it is to be sincerely and succesfully serviceable to
the Public. Now that you may be thus serviceable to your generation, I desire
to present you with some Scripture directions and I have done.

First, undertake public service with personal Reformation, get a sure
interest in Christ. Jacob was called Israel, because as a Prince he had power
with God, when he wrestled with him by prayer Genesis 32. 28.
. Labor all to be such Isreal's, and then there is no work will be too hard
for you. The greatest natural parts will not fit men for public service, the
sweetest showers that fall into the salt sea, become brackish like it self.

Secondly, the work ye would do with men, do it first with God by prayer,
lie in with God in all your undertakings for wisdom to direct, and blessing to
effect that which you endeavor for the Public good. Except the Lord build
the house, their labor is but lost that build it. Be able to say with Asa in
all your enterprises, a Chron. 14. 7. Let us build these Cities, and make about
them walls and towers, gates and bars, etc. for we have sought the Lord.

Thirdly, in your Public service let your chief care be, to advance
Religion, to perfect the work of Reformation, and set up the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ. The Commonwealth is the kingdoms ship, but Religion is the fraught
that makes it rich, and though other ships preserve their fraught, yet this
fraught preserves the ship. All the happiness in the world without true
Religion, will but make a Paradise without a Tree of Life. Religion is the
honor, strength and security of a Nation. Iehoshaphat first reformed the
Church, made provision for the instruction of the people in the true knowledge
of God, and he and his people had riches and honors in abundance with peace,
2. Chron. 17.

In reference to Religion there are four things lie before you to be done. I
would but be your remembrancer.

First, let encouragement be given to the Reformation of the Universities. And
in that where there be fit and able Leaders already found to carry on the work,
it will be your honor and comfort to provide such maintenance for them, that
they may be Resident. Posterity will as much bless your memory for this, as
any piece of Public service, being that which is most likely to make a
thriving Reformation.

Secondly, go on to make good your resolutions of preserving and settling a
comfortable maintenance for godly Ministers. There be some that under the name
of Reformation, would strip the Ministers of the Gospel stark naked of their
settled means, but what shall be their ruin if this be their Reformation? There
were many Persecuters which killed both Preachers and Professors of the Gospel;
But none so ill as Julian, of whom it was said, Occidit Presbyterian; others
killed the Ministers, but he killed the Ministry, because he took away all the
means appointed for their maintenance. Contemptible means will soon make the
persons of Ministers contemptible, and the contempt of their persons, will like
a gangrene soon draw on the contempt of their doctrine, and they that contemn
Aaron will soon rebel against Moses also.

Thirdly, go on to carry out all the rubbish out of the House of God. I doubt
not but your souls abhor that bloody tenet to the souls of men, That it is the
duty of the Magistrate to tolerate all Religions. You have carried out the dust
behind the door, and this opinion would bring all the mire in the streets into
the House of God again. Cambyses had a lust to marry his sister, and his
Counselors told him there was no law whereby to do it: But withal they told
him there was a law that the Kings of Persia might do what they list, and by
this he might marry his sister. What is it that shall be unlawful, if this be
lawful for every man to make a law, and religion for himself?

Fourthly, use what means you can to cure division, this is a mortal disease
in Church or State. A kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. Is there
no balm in Gilead for this?

Some means I shall propound in general to all: and first, In times of storms
Mariners take down their sails. There be four sails we ought all now to pull
down, The sails of Pride, Jealousy, Self Ends, and uncharitable Censures.

Secondly, we are now studying Primitive Ordinances, Primitive Truth,
Primitive Discipline, let us all likewise practice Primitive Love.

Thirdly* let us strive to live up to our knowledge in our practice, that we
may be more like Christ. Two pictures, the more like they be to their
original, the more like they will be to one another, and this will be a way to
have more Love, because likeness is the ground of Love.

Fourthly, as Constantine in the Council of Nice, when Constantinus in Synodo
Nicena libellos recipiens querelarum plenos, quos ei de privatis injuriis
obtulerunt Episcopi, eos ne legendos sibi esse putavit, sed continue flammis
tradidit. Ruffin. li. 1. c. 2. Socrat. li. 1. c. 5.
he had received several Books from several Bishops, containing matter of
private complaint one against another, he took them presently and cast them
into the fire to end the controversy: So let Christians make a law of Oblivion
for bypast controversies, and so they may the more easily accord for the time
to come.

If these means will not prevail; Two things lie upon you Honorable and
beloved to perform.

First, Take care that our Covenant be kept inviolate. Dionysius said he would
leave a Kingdom to his son Vinculis adamantinis firmatum.
strengthened with bonds of Adamant: Our Covenant is the most adamantine bond
to preserve our Church; and now we have sworn it before the most high God, let
us take heed how we break or slight it; for if we do, we must expect that God
will lengthen out his Commission to the sword to revenge the quarrel of it,
Levit. 26. 25.

Secondly, in differences of opinions, let there be neither unlawful liberty,
nor unchristian pressure. Put some stop by your authority to the growth of
errors, that are destructive to the power of godliness, and let not this suspend
your Sanction, because some that broach them pretend to godliness. An enemy the
more like he is to a friend, the more dangerous, a Wolf is not the less, but
the more dangerous, when he is in Sheep clothing. A Heretic is by some
compared to the beast Hyaena, that counterfeits the Shepherds voice, that so he
may the more easily seduce the sheep to their destruction. It was said of the
Israelites that there was a quantity of the golden calfe in all their sins and
punishments. I may so say of corrupt discipline, there has been a dram of
this in all the sins and punishments of England: and now it must be your care,
that neither corrupt discipline, nor want of a discipline warranted by Gods
word, may become a National sin, but that we may have such a hedge about
the Vineyard, as will preserve Truth and Peace.

You have made a blessed Progress already in the work of Reformation; Go on
till you have accomplished all that is to be done for the House of God, that by
serving your own generation, you may lay the foundations of happiness for
those generations that are still to come.

FINIS.

